
 GLOBAL ORGANIZED 
CRIME 

 Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series 
 American Families in Crisis, Jeffrey S. Turner 
 Animal Rights, Clifford J. Sherry 
 Campaign and Election Reform,  Glenn H. Utter and Ruth Ann 
Strickland 
 Climate Change, David L. Downie, Kate Brash, and Catherine 
Vaughan 
 Corporate Crime, Richard D. Hartley 
 DNA Technology,  David E. Newton 
 Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue 
 Education in Crisis, Judith A. Gouwens 
 Emergency Management, Jeffrey B. Bumgarner 
 Environmental Justice, David E. Newton 
 Gangs, Karen L. Kinnear 
 Gay and Lesbian Rights, David E. Newton 
 Globalization,  Justin Ervin and Zachary A. Smith 
 Identity Theft, Sandra K. Hoffman and Tracy G. McGinley 
 Lobbying in America, Ronald J. Hrebenar and Bryson B. Morgan 
 Modern Sports Ethics,  Angela Lumpkin 
 Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and James 
Clay Moltz 
 Obesity,  Judith Stern and Alexandra Kazaks 
 Policing in America, Leonard A. Steverson 
 Renewable and Alternative Energy Resources, Zachary A. Smith 
and Katrina D. Taylor 
 Rich and Poor in America, Geoffrey Gilbert 
 Sentencing, Dean John Champion 
 Sexual Crime,  Caryn E. Neumann 
 U.S. National Security, Cynthia A. Watson 
 U.S. Social Security, Steven G. Livingston 
 U.S. Trade Issues,  Alfred E. Eckes, Jr. 
 Waste Management,  Jacqueline Vaughn 
 For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit 
 www.abc-clio.com. 

 Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital 
issues in today’s society, such as genetic engineering, pollution, 
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and 
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly 
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting 
point for research by high school and college students, scholars, 
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople, 
activists, and others. 
 Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an 
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical 
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies, 
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index. 
 Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will 
find the information they need to have a better understanding of 
the social, political, environmental, and economic issues facing 
the world today. 

This page intentionally left blank 

 GLOBAL ORGANIZED 
CRIME 
 A Reference Handbook 
 Mitchel P. Roth, PhD 
 CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES 
 

 Copyright 2010 by ABC-CLIO, LLC 
 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior 
permission in writing from the publisher. 
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
 Roth, Mitchel P., 1953–
 Global organized crime : a reference handbook / Mitchel P. Roth.
  p. cm. —  (Contemporary world issues)
 Includes index.
 ISBN 978-1-59884-332-3 (print : alk. paper) — 
ISBN 978-1-59884-333-0 (ebook) 1. Organized crime—Handbooks, 
manuals, etc. 2. Transnational crime—Handbooks, manuals, etc.
I. Title. 
 HV6441.R678 2010
 364.106  —  dc22   2010000107
 14 13 12 11 10  1 2 3 4 5 
 This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook. 
 Visit www.abc-clio.com for details. 
 ABC-CLIO, LLC 
 130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911 
 Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911 
 This book is printed on acid-free paper    
 Manufactured in the United States of America 

vii
 Contents 
 List of Tables , xv
 Preface , xvii
 1 
Global Organized Crime: A Brief History , 1
 Introduction , 1
 Piracy, 2 
 History, 2 
 Economic Factors, 3 
 Definition , 4
 Piracy in the 21st Century, 5
 Piracy Then and Now, 7 
 Background, 9 
 Globalization , 9
 Defining Organized Crime , 10
 Transnational Crime: Definitions and Types , 12
 Mafia , 12
 Structures of Organized Crime Groups , 14
 Major Global Organized Crime Activities , 16
 Slavery and Human Trafficking , 16
 Structures of Human Trafficking Operations , 19
 Human Trafficking versus Human Smuggling , 20
 Coyotes , 21
 Snakeheads , 22
 Illicit Drug Trafficking , 22
 Weapons Trafficking , 27
 Conclusion , 29
References, 30

viii Contents
 2 
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions , 35
 Introduction , 35
 Circumstances and Conditions , 36
 Failed States , 36
 Corruption , 37
 Political Officials , 37
 Police , 39
 Tribalism and Ethnicity , 40
 Civil Wars, Political Transitions, Regional Conflicts , 41
 Organized Crime and Terrorism , 45
 Borrowed Tactics , 48
 Organized Crime Hybrids , 50
 Intersecting Activities , 50
 Narcoterrorism , 52
 Diamond Smuggling , 54
 Counterfeiting , 55
 Nuclear Smuggling , 57
 Other Types of Criminal Activities , 58
 Money Laundering , 58
 Hawala , 59
 Offshore Banking and Shell Corporations , 60
 Controlling Money Laundering , 61
 Electronic Money Laundering , 62
 High-Tech Crimes , 63
 Nigerian Advance Fee Fraud , 65
 Music Piracy , 66
 Gang Structures , 67
 Russian Mafiya , 67
 Drug Cartels , 67
 Export Syndicates , 69
 Crossing the U.S.–Mexico Border , 70
 Prison Gangs and Street Gangs , 71
 Law Enforcement , 72
 International Cooperation , 72
 European Union , 74
 Barriers to International Law Enforcement , 75
 Language , 76
 Varying Laws and Jurisdictions , 77
 Technology , 77
 Policing Cyberspace , 78
 Conclusion , 78
References, 80

Contents ix
 3 
Global Organized Crime Groups , 89
 Italian Organized Crime Groups , 89
 The Sicilian and Italian-American Mafias , 89
 The Americanization of the Mafia , 92
 Camorra [Naples, Italy] , 94
 ‘Ndrangheta [Calabria, Italy] , 94
 The Corsicans , 96
 Russian Organized Crime (ROC) , 97
 Mexican Drug Cartels , 99
 Juarez Cartel , 100
 Sinaloa Cartel , 101
 Tijuana Cartel [Arrellano-Felix Organization] , 101
 Gulf Cartel and Los Zetas , 102
 Guadalajara Cartel [Amezcua-Contreras Organization] , 103
 Mara Salvatrucha (MS-13) [Central America, Mexico, 
United States] , 104
 Asian Organized Crime Groups , 105
 Triads [China] , 105
 Big Circle Boys [China] , 108
 The Green Gang [China] , 109
 Tongs and Chinese Street Gangs [United States and 
Canada] , 109
 Yakuza [ Japan] , 111
 Organized Crime Groups in Other Regions , 114
 Jamaican Posses [Caribbean, United Kingdom, United 
States] , 114
 Nigerian Gangs [Africa] , 116
 Hells Angels [United States, Western Europe, Canada, 
Australia] , 117
References, 119
 4 
Chronology , 125
 5 
Biographical Sketches , 149
 Global Organized Crime Figures , 149
 Juan Carlos Ramirez Abadia , 149
 Jose Miguel Battle , 149
 Viktor Bout , 150
 Klaas Bruinsma , 151
 Tommaso Buscetta , 151
 Ibrahim Dawood , 152
 Pablo Emilio Escobar-Gaviria , 153

x Contents
 Don Vito Cascio Ferro , 154
 Gregorio Sauceda Gamboa , 154
 Osiel Cardenas Guillen , 155
 Joaquin Guzman , 155
 Vyacheslav Ivankov , 156
 Daut Kadriovski , 156
 Yoshio Kodama , 157
 Luciano Leggio , 157
 Heriberto Lazcano , 158
 Arturo Beltran Leyva , 158
 Charles “Lucky” Luciano , 159
 Semion Mogilevich , 159
 Manuel Antonio Noriega Moreno , 160
 Cheng Chui Peng , 161
 Ze’ev Rosenstein , 161
 Khun Sa , 162
 Charles Ghankay Taylor , 162
 Tu Yueh-sheng , 163
 Crime Fighters , 163
 Harry Anslinger , 163
 Thomas Dewey , 164
 Giovanni Falcone , 164
 Rudolph Giuliani , 165
 Walter Maierovitch , 165
 Cesare Mori , 166
 Giuseppe Petrosino , 166
 Joseph D. Pistone , 167
 Enrique Camarena Salazar , 168
 Researchers , 168
 Howard Abadinsky , 168
 Jay S. Albanese , 169
 Pino Arlacchi , 169
 Ko-lin Chin , 170
 T. J. English , 170
 Cyrille Fijnaut , 170
 James Finckenauer , 171
 Robert J. Kelly , 171
 Letizia Paoli , 172
 Kip Schlegel , 172
 Joseph Serio , 172
 Louise Shelley , 173
 Federico Varese , 173

Contents xi
 Klaus von Lampe , 174
 Michael Woodiwiss , 174
 6 
Data and Documents , 175
 Facts and Statistics on Organized Crime , 175
 Defining Organized Crime , 176
 Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act 
(1970) , 176
 United Nations Convention against Transnational 
Organized Crime (2000) , 179
 Categories of Transnational Criminal Offenses , 181
 Drug Trafficking , 182
 Potential Worldwide Heroin Production, in Metric Tons, 
2002–2006 , 182
 Estimated Andean Region Coca Cultivation , 184
 Estimated Amounts of Illicit Drugs Transiting or Produced 
in Mexico and Seized, 2000–2006 , 184
 Gangs Affiliated with the Sinaloa, Gulf, Juarez, or Tijuana 
Cartels , 185
 The 20 Largest Cocaine Seizures Ever Reported , 186
 Drug Seizures in the Central Asian Region, 2005–2006 , 186
 International Opium Convention of 1912 , 188
 Harrison Narcotics Tax Act of 1914 , 189
 Marijuana Tax Act of 1937 , 191
 The Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 , 192
 The Merida Initiative, 2008 , 193
 Weapons Trafficking , 195
 Inter-American Convention against the Illicit 
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, 
Ammunition, Explosives and Other Related Materials, 
1997 , 195
 U.S. Senator Richard Lugar on Weapons Trafficking, 
2009 , 198
 End User Certificate (EUC) , 199
 Human Smuggling and Trafficking Legislation and 
Statistics , 201
 Human Trafficking and Smuggling Definitions , 201
 United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of 
Refugees, 1951 , 201
 Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in 
Persons, Article 3, Supplementing the UN Convention 
Against Transnational Organized Crime, 2000 , 202

xii Contents
 Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea 
and Air, Article 3, Supplementing the UN Convention 
against Transnational Organized Crime, 2000 , 202
 The Council of Europe Convention on Action against 
Trafficking Human Beings, 2005 , 202
 Crackdown on Human Trafficking in 2005 , 203
 Selected Average Costs for Human Smuggling, 2005 , 203
 Services Required by Successful Trafficking 
Operations , 204
 Organized Crime Groups in the European Union 
(2005) , 205
 Council of Europe Convention on Action against 
Trafficking in Human Beings (2005) , 205
 Other Types of Organized Crime , 208
 Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, 2003 , 208
 Gambling Prohibition and Enforcement Act, 2006 , 210
 Money Laundering , 211
 Bank Secrecy Act of 1970 , 212
 Amounts of Money Reported Laundered in the 
Tri-Border Area (TBA), 1992–2001 (USD) , 213
 Combating Organized Crime in the United States , 214
 Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task 
Force (OCDETF) , 214
 U.S. Patriot Act, 2001 , 215
 U.S. Attorney General Michael Mukasey, 2008 , 216
 Quotations , 217
 On Russian Organized Crime , 219
 On Latin American and Mexican Drug Networks , 220
 On Drug Trafficking , 221
 7 
Directory of Organizations , 223
 Academic and Research-Oriented Organizations , 223
 Governmental Organizations , 227
 Law Enforcement Organizations , 236
 Nongovernmental Organizations , 244
 Investigative Roundtable on Organized Crime , 246
 8 
Resources , 249
 Print Resources , 249
 African Organized Crime , 249
 Asian Organized Crime , 249
 Canadian Organized Crime , 252

Contents xiii
 European Organized Crime , 253
 Globalization and Organized Crime , 255
 Italian Organized Crime , 259
 Law Enforcement , 263
 Maritime Piracy , 264
 Organized Crime and Related Issues , 265
 Organized Crime-Terrorism Nexus , 271
 Outlaw Motorcycle Gangs , 272
 Russian and Soviet-Era Organized Crime , 273
 Trafficking and Criminal Networks , 274
 Nonprint Resources , 276
 Videos , 276
 Web Sites , 282
 Glossary , 287
 Index , 293
 About the Author, 308

This page intentionally left blank 

xv
 List of Tables 
 6.1  Potential Worldwide Heroin Production, in Metric Tons, 
2002–2006, 183 
 6.2 Estimated Andean Region Coca Cultivation , 184
 6.3  Estimated Amounts of Illicit Drugs Transiting or Produced 
in Mexico and Seized, 2000–2006 , 185
 6.4  Gangs Affiliated with the Sinaloa, Gulf, Juarez, or Tijuana 
Cartels , 186
 6.5 The 20 Largest Cocaine Seizures Ever Reported , 187
 6.6 Drug Seizures in the Central Asian Region, 2005–2006 , 187
 6.7 Crackdown on Human Trafficking in 2005 , 203
 6.8  Amounts of Money Reported Laundered in the Tri-border 
Area (TBA), 1992–2001 (USD) , 213
 6.9 OCDETF Regions , 214

This page intentionally left blank 

xvii
 Preface 
 O
ver the last 20 years the world’s organized crime groups have 
adapted to the changing forces of globalization, the rise of the 
Internet, the collapse of the Soviet Union, the dismantlement 
of Yugoslavia, and the end of apartheid—events that were unimagi-
nable at the beginning of the 1990s. This book was written with 
the intent of moving beyond the outdated explanations and histo-
ries of organized crime and to place these groups within the con-
text of the 21st century. After the attacks on September 11, 2001, 
America’s law enforcement agencies at every level of government 
transferred most of their resources and attention toward fighting a 
“war on terror.” As a result most organized crime activity since  9/11 
has continued virtually unimpeded. What’s more, the distinctions 
between terrorist groups and organized crime networks have be-
come increasingly blurred as each form of criminality borrows 
strategies from the other. With many terrorist groups losing their 
state sponsors in the aftermath of the collapse of the Soviet Union, 
they have turned toward criminal activities to finance their opera-
tions and in many cases have begun to look more and more like 
traditional organized crime groups. 
 Like the legitimate global economies that they mimic, a paral-
lel illicit underground economy has developed, taking advantage 
of the same opportunities as its legitimate counterparts. Although 
global organized crime seems to be a rather new phenomenon, a 
brief history of this criminality in Chapter 1 demonstrates that pi-
rates in the 17th century and slave traders even earlier were actually 
their forefathers in spirit and nature. Global organized crime has 
not manifested itself in a vacuum, but is the result of many different 
forces that challenge governments, police forces, and populations. 
 It has been more than eight years since I became a monthly 
instructor at the International Law Enforcement Academy (ILEA) 

xviii Preface
in Roswell, New Mexico. During that time I have taught class 
modules on transnational organized crime and the challenges it 
presents to police organizations. My students are usually high-
ranking police executives, who come from such disparate parts of 
the world as Central Asia, Sub-Saharan Africa, China, Indonesia, 
and Latin America. What have become increasingly clear in these 
classes are the participants’ growing concerns over global organized 
crime issues. What was once mainly a domestic issue has morphed 
into a hydra-headed problem that now seems insurmountable to 
police forces hampered by jurisdictional restraints and other barri-
ers. This book was written with many of their concerns in mind by 
offering a research guide to those seeking to learn more about the 
process of globalization and its concomitant impact on organized 
crime. 
 Chapter 1 provides an introduction into the history of global 
organized crime. It examines two of the oldest examples of this phe-
nomenon, slavery and sea piracy. This chapter traces the economic 
factors that led to the problem of piracy on the high seas and then 
contrasts piracy today with times past. It also seeks to define orga-
nized crime, transnational crime, and globalization, while examin-
ing the various structures of organized crime groups. Finally, it 
discusses major global organized activities such as human traffick-
ing, drug trafficking, the illicit weapons trade, and the differences 
between human smuggling and trafficking. 
 Chapter 2 examines various problems and controversies re-
lated to global organized crime. It first looks at the circumstances 
and conditions that create failed states and how these states provide 
safe havens for crime networks. It also examines the problems of 
corruption at various levels of government and within police forces. 
In addition it looks at the nexus between terrorism and organized 
crime. Among the topics covered related to this issue are how the 
groups borrow tactics from each other and how many global orga-
nized crime groups have begun to resemble hybrid organizations. 
Both types of groups also engage in similar criminal activities, in-
cluding diamond smuggling, counterfeiting, and even narcoterror-
ism. Other types of criminal activities discussed include money 
laundering, high-tech crimes, advance fee fraud, music piracy, and 
the problems presented by offshore banking and shell corporations. 
Also in the chapter is coverage of various organization structures 
including the Russian Mafiya, drug cartels, prison gangs and street 
gangs, and activity on the Mexican-American border. Finally, it 
looks at the law enforcement response including such themes as 

Preface xix
problems of cooperation between countries, jurisdictional conflicts, 
and barriers to law enforcement and policing cyberspace. 
 Chapter 3 examines a variety of organized crime groups whose 
activities are global or transnational in scope. Distinctions are made 
between the American and Italian versions  of the Mafia. Italian 
groups examined also include the ‘Ndrangheta and the Camorra. 
Russian organized crime, the Corsicans, Mexican drug cartels, 
MS -13, Jamaican posses, Chinese Triads, Tongs  and street gangs, Ni-
gerian gangs, the Japanese Yakuza, and Hells Angels all get their due 
as well. 
 Chapter 4 is a chronology of the key events   surrounding the his-
tory of global organized crime. Chapter 5 offers a series of biograph-
ical portraits divided into three groups: global organized crime 
figures, crime fighters, and researchers. Chapter 6 is  devoted to 
documents, facts, statistics, and government documents related 
to global organized crime. 
 Chapter 7 provides information on a wide range of organiza-
tions devoted to organized crime issues, particularly on the trans-
national level. Chapter 8 offers a guide to print and electronic 
resources including book and journal article reviews, journals de-
voted to global organized crime issues, reviews of movies and doc-
umentaries that illustrate the subject, and a number of helpful Web 
sites devoted to organized crime. Finally, the book concludes with 
a glossary of key terms used in the book. 
 Although the author puts words to paper, in the end no one 
writes a book alone, for there is typically an editorial process to en-
sure that the objectives have been met. I am indebted to Mim Vasan 
for bringing me into this process and to my former editor Lauren 
Thomas, as well as my current one, Jane Messah. Finally, without 
the support of my wife, Ines Papandrea, and daughter, Erica, I would 
not have been able to lock myself away for hours on end in order to 
finish this project, and it is to them that I dedicate this book .  

This page intentionally left blank 

1
 1 
 Global Organized Crime: 
A Brief History 
 Introduction 
 It has been more than a decade since former FBI Director Louis J. 
Freeh targeted global organized crime as a priority threat to na-
tional security, defining it as “a continuing criminal conspiracy 
having a firm organizational structure, a conspiracy fed by fear and 
corruption” (Freeh 1996). As trade and travel restrictions between 
countries disappear and world economies become increasingly in-
terdependent, so do international crime syndicates. In the clamor 
attributable to globalization, cyberspace, and the information super-
highway, organized crime continues to defy definition. Organized 
crime groups, according to a variety of theories and definitions, come 
in all shapes and sizes. What has become increasingly clear from 
the global perspective is that today’s groups do not conform to the 
traditional paradigm exemplified by the Italian Mafia. Rather, or-
ganized crime groups have evolved into amorphous enterprises, 
shifting from one activity to another, depending on geopolitics and 
changing markets—both legitimate and illegitimate in nature. The 
1990s witnessed a global transformation in political and economic 
life as well as the ascendance of revolutionary technologies that 
were now in the hands of ordinary civilians. In the post-Cold War 
world technologies, such as the Worldwide Web, and advances in 
telecommunications and transportation erased once-secure borders 
in most regions of the world. 
 Organized criminal activity can be found throughout most of 
the historical record. Preindustrial societies in China, Italy, and Japan 

2 Global Organized Crime
gave rise to groups such as the Triads, Yakuza, the ‘Ndrangheta, and 
the Sicilian Mafia. Organized piracy, highway robbery, and banditry 
were some of the most obvious precursors to today’s global orga-
nized crime problems. Sea piracy and the trade in humans, usually 
in the form of slaves, are the earliest examples of organized crime 
on a multinational or global scale; in fact the slave trade has been 
described as the “world’s oldest trade” and can be traced back to 
the third millennium, and the trafficking in women at least to the 
beginning of the Christian era (Chanda 2007). 
 Piracy 
 History 
 As long as seafarers have engaged in commerce on the high seas, 
groups have existed who desired to steal their goods by any means 
necessary. Phoenicians, Vikings, and pirates, like today’s Somalian 
pirates off the coast of East Africa, have ranged the oceans since the 
Roman era. In the enormous archives of such lore, these men have 
been referred to as  pirates, privateers, corsairs,  and  freebooters,  to name 
only a few. The quantity of names is not unlike the modern attempts 
to affix a proper name to organized crime groups using nomencla-
ture such as  mafia, syndicate, cartel, mob, rackets, and  gangs.  
 By the Middle Ages piracy was already an ancient occupation 
for some men (and a few women). As oceanic trade increased over 
the centuries, so did the volume of piracy. With the expansion of 
global markets during the commercial expansion of the 16th and 
17th centuries, pirates, too, expanded their trade routes, following 
the plunder trail from the Old World to the New. Sometimes Euro-
pean competition for trade monopolies led to war between nations 
on the high seas as the British, French, Dutch, and Spanish carved 
out empires in the Americas. These wars were often marked by un-
conventional warfare and the use of piracy (Karraker 1953). 
 The tendency by recent scholars has been to divide the halcyon 
years of piracy, or the “Golden Age of Piracy,” into three distinct 
eras lasting from 1650 and 1730. Most pirates between 1650 and the 
1680s were Protestant “sea dogs” from England, northern France, 
and the Netherlands, who typically targeted ships from Catholic 
Spain. Beginning in the 1690s, Captain William Kidd and others 
moved their base of operations into the Indian Ocean and built a 

Piracy 3
pirate enclave on the island of Madagascar. The third and most fa-
miliar era, however, was the 10 years between 1716 and 1726, an 
age filled with larger-than-life characters such as Edward Teach 
and Bartholomew Roberts (Rediker 2004). This is the era that is so 
entrenched in the popular culture, featuring Long John Silver of 
 Treasure Island,  the black flag of the  Jolly Roger,  and the notorious 
Blackbeard. During this decade there were an estimated 2,000 to 
4,000 pirates representing a host of ethnicities and races. Together 
and separately they disrupted trade in what was then considered 
a “strategic zone of capital accumulation,” referring to the West In-
dies, North America, and West Africa (Rediker 2004). 
 An examination of piracy’s so-called Golden Age between 
1650 and 1730 offers up some striking parallels with global orga-
nized crime activities in the 21st century. Both pirates and slave trad-
ers exhibited a number of the characteristics consistent with modern 
organized crime, including the use and threat of violence, having a hi-
erarchical structure, the use of strict rules and regulations, engaging 
in entrepreneurial activities, the corruption of officials, and profit 
motivation. Other criteria, however, such as monopolization of a 
particular criminal activity, longevity, racketeering and infiltration 
of legitimate business, restricted membership, and self-perpetuating 
leadership reflect more complex and urbanized societies. 
 Geographically, piracy took place on a global scale. Illegal pi-
rates as well as state-sponsored ones, called privateers, had vast 
economic incentives to participate in the looting of cargoes of gold, 
jewels, grain, and even wine and drugs. The import and export mar-
ket for such items was usually heavily restricted; thus in order for 
the smuggling system to flourish, it needed the willing participa-
tion of corrupt officials and greedy merchants, especially when it 
came time for the pirates to launder their ill-gotten lucre. 
 Economic Factors 
 Between 1651 and 1696, the English Parliament passed a series of 
Navigation Acts. These were designed to control what goods were 
allowed into the English colonies in North America. By stipulating 
that no goods could be imported into England or her colonies un-
less on British ships manned by British subjects, it meant a number 
of luxury items from other countries were now prohibited. Orga-
nized gangs of smugglers, pirates, and black marketeers were only 

4 Global Organized Crime
too happy to challenge these barriers for the right price. The Navi-
gation Acts were to 17th-century organized piracy and smuggling 
what alcohol and drug prohibition was to the 20th century. Colo-
nial Americans resented the British monopoly on both shipping 
and trade and had no compunction about trading with pirates, 
establishing in effect with them an unrestricted market for cheaper 
goods, undercutting legitimate markets in the process. One Navi-
gation Act in 1663 mandated that virtually all European products 
bound for the colonies must be landed in England first and then 
reloaded on English ships for the conclusion of the voyage. Ul-
timately added customs duties pushed up prices on a number 
of essentials. Portuguese salt, Irish and Scottish horses and linens, 
and wines from the Madeira and the Azores were just some of the 
products that were marked up and in the process created a healthy 
smuggling economy (Hoffer 2000). During alcohol Prohibition in 
America between 1920 and 1933, politicians and officials alike were 
either unwilling or unable to enforce the 18th Amendment prohibit-
ing the manufacture and sale of alcoholic beverages. Likewise colo-
nial officials and entrepreneurs in the New World were drawn into 
the orbit of the smuggling system. So, although colonial governors 
were expected to enforce the Navigation Acts, more often than not 
they participated in the smuggling and corruption behaviors that 
exemplified organized crime more than 200 years later. By the 18th 
century, smuggling and black markets were a way of life in Amer-
ica. One estimate suggested that five-sixths of the tea consumed in 
most colonies had been smuggled in (Williams 1961). 
 Definition 
 Similar to attempts to define organized crime, an exact definition 
of piracy universally accepted over time and between places has 
eluded academics, government officials, and law enforcement over 
the centuries. During the preindustrial era most pirate organiza-
tions lasted only as long as their captains, with few demonstrating 
any pattern of leadership continuity. They did share, however, a 
number of attributes with modern international syndicates—cor-
rupting officials, operating sometimes with state support, and sell-
ing stolen lucre to legitimate businessmen in a type of premodern 
money laundering system. 
 During the last several decades a broad definition of piracy has 
emerged that equates it with the taking of property with violence 

Piracy 5
on the high seas. In 2005, the International Maritime Bureau, which 
is a clearinghouse for piracy data, defined piracy as: “Any act of 
boarding or attempting to board any ship with the apparent intent 
to commit theft or any other crime and with the apparent intent 
or capability to use force in the furtherance of that act” (Walters 
2007, 10). 
 Piracy in the 21st Century 
 No form of global organized crime illustrates the continuum of 
organized crime past and present like the ancient crime of piracy. 
Few observers would disagree that we are in a new “golden age” 
of piracy; however, technology has changed many of the pirate’s 
tactics and strategies. During the first decade of the 21st century, 
pirate syndicates received millions of dollars in ransom for crews 
and ships. In contrast to their ancient forebears, today’s pirates 
have access to high technology, bases in failed nation states, po-
tential alliances with transnational terrorists, and a global economy 
dependent on secure commercial shipping. When the world’s news 
organizations focused on the Indian Ocean face-off between an 
$800 million U.S. Navy destroyer and a handful of pirates in a life-
boat in April 2009, it became apparent that even the world’s super-
power had few options when confronted with low-tech pirates on 
the high seas (Mazzetti 2009). This incident was the first time in 200 
years that pirates had captured a U.S. vessel for ransom (Gettleman 
2009). In the infancy of the American republic, President Thomas 
Jefferson sent Marines to the shores of Tripoli to free sailors taken 
hostage by the Barbary pirates (today’s Morocco, Tunisia, Algeria, 
and Libya). 
 Most suggestions for countering piracy have revolved around 
sea marshals, SEAL snipers, and punitive expeditions to destroy pi-
rate strongholds. In 2009, however, U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert 
Gates explained that what created the pirate business off the coast 
of Somalia was a malfunctioning government faced with anarchy. 
Although the country has a national government, the Transitional 
National Government, it controls little territory. For centuries pirate 
networks have exploited ungoverned voids. Three hundred years 
ago, however, nation states operated without the restrictions that 
accentuate complex international law. Nation states and their na-
vies were unimpeded in their hunt for pirates while today’s world 
is a tangled mess hampered by jurisdictional and sovereignty is-
sues, and human rights laws. 

6 Global Organized Crime
 Ocean-going piracy is most prevalent on the fringes and coasts 
of the world’s failed and failing states. Somalia, on the east coast 
of Africa, has not had a stable government for more than 20 years. 
In 2008, more than 90 vessels were attacked, more than one-third 
successfully. Ransoms have harvested millions and millions of 
dollars. 
 Each year some 20,000 merchant ships opt for the shortest 
route from Asia to Europe by taking the Suez Canal (Meyer 2008). 
Unfortunately for them at some juncture of a round trip through 
the canal, they will have to pass through the most active pirate free-
booters who ply the waters of the Gulf of Aden between Yemen and 
Somalia (Keath and Quinn 2008). 
 In December 2008, Somali pirates accepted a ransom for a 
Ukrainian ship bearing tanks and other heavy weapons. In that year 
alone pirate attacks off the coast of Africa had risen 75 percent over 
the previous year (Gutterman 2008). Although there have been no 
substantiated connections between pirates and Islamic militants in 
Somalia, what worries Western nations most is that this plundered 
cargo in the form of weapons might be removed and sold to hard-
line Islamic extremists. Fears of the Talibanization of the region by 
armed groups, where no stable government has ruled for more 
than 20 years, is a constant concern. 
 Piracy is considered the biggest moneymaker in Somalia, 
which  The Economist  referred to as Africa’s most failed state in 2008, 
when pirates plundered an estimated $30 million of cargo for ran-
som ( Economist,  Nov. 22, 2008). The impact on global world trade 
has been felt in a number of ways. Ransoms mean higher insurance 
premiums and delays for customers as more ships opt for the lon-
ger path around the Cape of Good Hope. This in turn means lower 
revenues for the Suez Canal and another variable to be taken into 
account by the oil exporting nations and their markets. 
 In a failed state such as Somalia, there is no lack of recruits for 
pirate life. Armed with rifles and rocket-propelled grenades, small 
groups of pirates have been able to hijack sophisticated sea craft 
the size of multiple football fields and carrying cargoes in the tens 
of billions of dollars. 
 What distinguishes today’s pirates from earlier incarnations is 
that they use minimal violence against hostages and rarely steal 
cargoes, preferring to wait for ransoms. The hijacking of the Saudi-
owned tanker the Sirius Star—as long as an aircraft carrier—ex-
emplifies the global transnational scale of modern shipping and 

Piracy 7
piracy. Built in South Korea, flying the Liberian flag, and with a 
multinational crew counting citizens from Great Britain, Poland, 
Croatia, Saudi Arabia, and the Philippines, the tanker carried $100 
million worth of crude oil when it was captured in November 2008. 
Spurred by the world oil markets, it was still an audacious attack 
that was noteworthy for several reasons. It was the largest ship ever 
attacked and officials were notably surprised that such low-tech 
pirates could operate so far out at sea. Typically working within 
200 miles of the coast of East Africa, this attack took place 450 nauti-
cal miles from the port of Mombasa, Kenya. By all accounts it was 
a highly organized attack in which several high-speed inflatable 
rafts containing four to six gunmen were launched from a mother 
vessel (Daraghi and Sanders 2008). When the pirates reached the 
ship, it seemed like a scene out of Hollywood as they threw lad-
ders with grappling hooks onto the ship’s rails before making a 
beeline for the bridge in order to capture the vessel’s nerve center 
and engine room. But instead of swords and pistols they carried 
modern automatic weapons. 
 As for the pirates themselves, they are much less organized 
than in previous eras. Their access to modern communications tech-
nology, however, is probably more important than sheer numbers 
and structure. Experts assert that the pirates were merely “foot sol-
diers” who were paid a previously agreed on fixed amount. Ransom 
negotiations were conducted by middlemen conversant in English 
who have access to satellite phones. In case a ship is held for a long 
period, the middlemen may put together a group of investors who 
raise cash for supplies and other costs that will be recouped with 
interest once the ransom is paid (Houreld 2008). 
 Despite all attempts to tar all pirates with the same brush, as 
disorganized and amateurish, this still belies the fact that a sophis-
ticated criminal network operates somewhere behind the army of 
poorly trained buccaneers. One Kenyan maritime official has even 
compared the pirates to an incarnation of the American Mafia, as 
some extensive and wealthy organization buttressed by high-level 
informants inside various East African governments (Axe 2009). 
 Piracy Then and Now 
 One of the most obvious characteristics of organized crime groups 
today is the willingness to use violence in pursuit of their opera-
tions. Pirates played a role in creating their sinister image by the 

8 Global Organized Crime
way they dressed, sometimes treated prisoners, and flew the skull 
and crossbones (but there is no evidence anyone was ever forced 
to walk the plank!). 
 What few original pirate rules and regulations that survive re-
veal a number of parallels with modern organized crime groups. 
Pirates, for example, described how to divide up plunder, choose 
officers, and enforce discipline, as well as what behavior would be 
tolerated (Rediker 1987). By agreeing to these rules, new members 
cemented their loyalty to the pirate subculture. Rules that most 
closely parallel the rules of traditional organized crime groups are 
intended to preserve harmony in the pirate crews and confedera-
tions by specifically detailing how to resolve quarrels and by pro-
hibiting gambling, cowardice, desertion, drunkenness, and certain 
disrespect to female hostages. In like fashion modern criminal syn-
dicates from the Mexican Mafia and the Aryan Brotherhood to the 
Chinese Triads, Russian syndicates, and the Italian Mafia adhere to 
distinct rules and regulations, with well-understood prohibitions 
against substance abuse and mistreating women. Some modern 
crack houses in America’s inner cities even post rules and potential 
punishments on their walls. In other organizations there are often 
unwritten rules that are meant to maintain discipline, such as not 
fighting among themselves. In some pirate crews, new members 
were expected to swear an oath over a Bible to obey the rules, not 
unlike the initiation ceremonies of the Neapolitan Camorra, the Ca-
labrian ‘Ndrangheta, and the Sicilian Mafia. 
 Piracy flourished for decades in the New World because of 
the complicity of colonial politicians, business merchants, and the 
colonies themselves. Modern criminologists have asserted that 
for piracy to flourish it needed the corruption of officials, customs 
agents, and the merchant class (Mueller and Adler 1985). In fact 
corruption sometimes existed at every level of the fledgling colo-
nial economies. Merchants dined with pirate captains, governors 
sold special government commissions to pirates that allowed them 
to plunder enemy ships, customs officers were bribed, and leading 
citizens sold pirates rum, weapons, and provisions. One observer 
even commented on how politicians and merchants in 1699 ob-
structed the efforts of honest officials along the Atlantic seaboard. 
Others point out that the “pirate industry” was the foundation for 
the economic prosperity in some colonies. In 2009, corruption con-
tinues to flourish, facilitating the growth of global and international 
crime syndicates. This is just the latest chapter in a continuing saga 
that has been playing out around the world for centuries. 

Background 9
 Background 
 Globalization 
 One leading authority suggests that since the word  globalization first 
appeared in the dictionary “its meaning has undergone a massive 
transformation” (Chanda 2007). In reality globalization is a process 
that has been at play for hundreds if not thousands of years. By 
most accounts it refers to the trend of increasing integration and in-
terdependence of the world’s nation-states. The reality of a shrink-
ing world dates back at least to 1519 when the Portuguese explorer 
Ferdinand Magellan became the first person to circumnavigate the 
world and establish the first global linkages, initiating trading on a 
global scale. In previous eras continental trade was conducted by 
transportation relay chains using camel caravans, mule packs, and 
small boats. Magellan’s voyage, however, confirmed, if not demon-
strated, the vast potential of linking continents and trading powers 
more quickly and profitably by larger and faster ships. The devel-
opment of oceangoing transportation had been a work in progress 
for centuries. The Phoenicians on the east coast of the Mediterra-
nean (present-day Lebanon) were among the first merchants whose 
seafaring skills facilitated the expansion of a trading network across 
the Persian Gulf and the Mediterranean. Subsequently, Greek mer-
chants during the first millennium  bce  established settlements 
throughout the eastern Mediterranean and Black Sea coasts in such 
numbers that the island of Sicily and southern Italy became known 
as “Magna Graecia” or Greater Greece, and by the first century  ce , 
the Roman Empire had reached the Red Sea, opening the door to 
trading with India (Chanda 2007). 
 In the wake of Magellan’s circumnavigation, other innova-
tions followed, cutting sailing times even further. The rise of steam 
power at the end of the 18th century provided the next big jump in 
oceangoing technology. Although the invention of the first reliable 
maritime chronometer was a huge step forward (telling navigators 
where they were in open sea), it was not until the introduction of 
steamships in 1780 that there was any great noticeable reduction 
in time and increased speed after 1,700 years. Shortening sailing 
time intensified contact and produced higher trading volume. Over 
the next century, vessels became larger and their turnaround times 
diminished. It was only natural that legitimate and illicit entrepre-
neurs would make their fortunes at each step of globalization—
sea pirates, slave traders, and human traffickers—and contraband 

10 Global Organized Crime
smuggling would join more legitimate business factions in the rush 
for wealth created by the new global economies. 
 Until the 20th century, global organized crime was mostly 
centered on the same activities of the previous centuries. When it 
came to global communication and transportation, few significant 
innovations before the 20th century would have stimulated new 
opportunities for international organized crime outside of simple 
cross-border criminal activities that involved myriad smuggling 
operations. What set the stage for global innovation was the pas-
sage of new legislation in the 1910s and 1920s, particularly in the 
United States. The passage of the Harrison Narcotic Act in 1914 was 
the culmination of years of crusading against opiates by mostly 
Western powers. As international regulations were put into place to 
police the supply of opiates, organized drug trafficking syndicates 
emerged to supply whichever drug just happened to be in demand. 
As more countries jumped on the drug prohibition bandwagon, 
such as Great Britain in 1920, with the passage of the Dangerous 
Drugs Act, drug trafficking became even more global in scope. By 
the 1920s, American gangsters such as Arnold Rothstein were send-
ing agents to Europe and Asia to purchase opium to smuggle back 
to the United States. The period of alcohol prohibition (1920–1933) 
in America also stimulated the growth of international liquor smug-
gling operations including the illegal importation of alcoholic bev-
erages from England by sea, rum-runners from the Caribbean, and 
cross-border smuggling from Mexico and Canada. 
 By the 1980s, globalization was making its impact on the evo-
lution of crime syndicates as many began to take advantage of the 
incredible advances in communication technologies. Together with 
easier international travel and expanded world trade, criminal or-
ganizations in developing nations (as well as developed ones) 
found it easier to branch out of local and regional crime to target 
international victims and develop criminal networks with more 
prosperous countries. During the past two decades, global orga-
nized crime has been one of the main beneficiaries of the advances 
occasioned by globalization, which has found its expression in the 
numerous transnational smuggling networks ranging from human 
trafficking and smuggling and weapons and drug trafficking to 
computer crime and counterfeiting operations. 
 Defining Organized Crime 
 To create laws to effectively combat organized crime on national 
and international levels, it is necessary to have a mutually accepted 

Background 11
definition that distinguishes organized crime from other forms of 
criminality. The lack of consensus has hindered international law 
enforcement for generations. Indeed, for more than a century, aca-
demics, journalists, government officials, and criminal justicians 
have debated the meaning of “organized crime.” Attempts at ar-
riving at a definition can seem like “tilting at windmills,” as no 
definition can simultaneously address present and future forms of 
criminality. For American policymakers, the findings of the Presi-
dent’s Commission on Organized Crime in 1986 during the Reagan 
administration marked a major step toward moving away from the 
traditional Italian model of organized crime. Scholars, journalists, 
and public officials were forced to reevaluate their understanding 
of organized crime in the United States as a host of emerging crime 
groups received prominence in the federal report, ranging from Ja-
maican Posses, Asian gangs, and Russian Mafiya to outlaw motor-
cycle gangs and prison gangs. 
 Before the 21st century organized crime definitions revolved 
around a number of central characteristics such as the nature of the 
offenses committed, the numbers of individuals involved, and the 
longevity of the criminal enterprise. During the 1990s, the trans-
national aspects of organized crime became more broadly empha-
sized as global organized crime syndicates emerged as one of the 
most challenging issues facing law enforcement before the Septem-
ber 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. 
 Before the 1990s, most organized crime definitions revolved 
around central characteristics such as the nature and severity of of-
fenses committed, the numbers of individuals involved, and the en-
during nature of the enterprise. A major step forward was taken in 
2000 when the United Nations Convention against Transnational 
Organized Crime (Article 2) defined organized crime broadly “as 
a structured group of three or more persons existing for a period of 
time and acting in concert with the aim of committing one or more 
serious crimes or offenses in accordance with this Convention in or-
der to obtain, directly or indirectly, a financial or material benefit” 
(United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 2000). International rep-
resentatives at the 2000 meeting, however, could not arrive at a con-
sensus on a definition or a list of criminal acts, but decided to adopt 
a broad definition of organized criminal groups and not limit its 
attention to hierarchically structured “mafia-type organizations.” 
Reflecting the changing nature of global organized crime activity, of-
ficials began to focus more attention on loosely organized criminal 
groups who committed serious crimes that were transnational in 
nature (United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Sept. 2002, 4–5). 

12 Global Organized Crime
 In September 2003, the United Nations Convention against 
Transnational Organized Crime was signed into law three years 
after first being introduced. Over the years most countries had 
developed their own definitions as to what constituted transna-
tional organized crime. For the first time, however, the new Con-
vention offered a singular legal definition that was acceptable to 
most countries (Fijnaut and Paoli 2004). 
 Transnational Crime: Definitions and Types 
 Transnational crime has blurred the distinctions between domes-
tic and foreign affairs because criminals exert global impact today. 
Operating from countries around the world they have been able 
to create international ties including in the United States. Accord-
ing to the 2000 United Nations Convention on Transnational Orga-
nized Crime, transnational refers to offenses that involve at least 
two countries. This can occur in a variety of combinations. For ex-
ample it would be considered transnational in nature if the criminal 
acts were committed in more than one country or if much of the 
planning and supervision of the activity comes from one country 
but the crime itself is committed in another one. It would also fit 
the rubric if the crime was committed in one country but it had an 
impact on at least one other country as well (United Nations Office 
on Drugs and Crime 2000). 
 The United Nations has identified 18 categories of transna-
tional offenses typically involving actors and activities affecting 
more than one country. These categories include money launder-
ing, terrorist activities, theft of intellectual property, art and cul-
tural objects, illicit arms trafficking, aircraft hijacking, sea piracy, 
insurance fraud, computer and environmental crime, trafficking in 
persons and human body parts, illegal drug trafficking, fraudulent 
bankruptcy, infiltration of legal business, and corruption and brib-
ery of public or party officials (UNODC 2000). 
 Mafia 
 The term  mafia  has been used to describe a number of different 
forms of international organized crime, such as in the case of the so-
called Russian, Sicilian, Asian, and Albanian mafias. In most cases 
there has been a tendency to view these groups as the products of 
underdeveloped and disordered social systems. More recent aca-

Background 13
demic investigations suggest that groups like the Italian Mafia are 
produced by societies on the brink of modernization and embroiled 
in economic transformation and turmoil. At the same time, how-
ever, these developing societies have not quite arrived at the point 
where they have created a legal apparatus capable of protecting in-
dividual property rights and settling business disputes between its 
citizens. The notion that mafias materialize during times of “rapid 
but flawed transitions to [a] market economy” has been supported 
by recent studies on Japanese and post-Soviet organized crime 
groups (Varese 2006, 411–412; Gambetta 1993). 
 Scholars and officials have long grappled with trying to ex-
plain the public’s identification of the Italian people with the mafia 
and organized crime. The term  mafia has been bandied about so 
much it has lost most of its original meaning. Words such as mafia, 
syndicate, cartel, mob, rackets, gang, and so forth have been used 
interchangeably over the past century and have only obscured the 
meaning of the term  mafia.  One historian noted that “Mafia is the 
only word in the Sicilian dialect to be incorporated into all of 
the world’s languages” (Smith 1995, 7). Perhaps no other five-letter 
word conjures up more images, misconceptions, and misguided 
ethnic stereotypes than the Italian word  mafia.  Any discussion of the 
etymology of the word begins on the island of Sicily, strategically lo-
cated at the crossroads of Mediterranean civilization. The island has 
been ruled by a succession of conquerors over the past millennia. 
Arab, Roman, Byzantine, Norman, Catalan, French, Greek, Aus-
trian, and Spanish armies have all targeted the island for its com-
mercial and military opportunities. 
 The word mafia has not been found in an Italian dictionary 
before the 1860s (Fentress 2000). There is no agreed upon or simple 
definition for the word or a consensus as to its murky origins. But 
this has not stopped it from being routinely applied to a wide range 
of criminal behaviors and enterprises. Organized crime scholars 
use the term to refer to traditional organized crime groups that 
originated on the island of Sicily and then imported certain tradi-
tions to America during a wave of late 19th-century and early 20th-
century immigration. Over time two variations of the Italian Mafia 
evolved according to the different social and economic conditions 
of the Old and New Worlds. The American and Sicilian versions 
of the Mafia remain distinct, with members linked on occasion by 
personal relationships and associations. Although both permuta-
tions share some tendencies, the American version has long oper-
ated mostly in the underworld, on the periphery of society, while 

14 Global Organized Crime
its Sicilian counterpart has inextricable links with the region’s up-
perworld (see Chapter 3). 
 Structures of Organized Crime Groups 
 If there is any international agreement on the structure of orga-
nized crime in the 21st century, it is that organized crime groups are 
adaptable and flexible in nature, capable of assuming chameleon-
like qualities to take advantage of whatever opportunities exist to 
make money. In the United States beginning in the 1950s, a number 
of organized crime hearings were conducted at the federal level 
to grasp the true nature of this criminal enterprise. Both the Kefau-
ver Hearings (1950–1951) and the McClellan Committee Hearings 
(1963–1964) contributed to the stereotypical view of the modern 
Mafia in which organized crime operated as a hierarchical structure. 
Other conferences and committees on organized crime brought to-
gether America’s leading authorities throughout the 1960s and 
1970s. The President’s Commission on Organized Crime in 1986, how-
ever, diverged from previous investigations by expanding the defi-
nition well beyond the well-worn Italian Mafia stereotypes. The 
Commission broadened the government’s interpretation of the of 
the organized crime problem by moving beyond the parameters set 
by the earlier investigations. Moving beyond the parochial view of 
the Italian Mafia as synonymous with organized crime, it expanded 
its emphasis to include outlaw motorcycle gangs; prison gangs; and 
Chinese, Vietnamese, Japanese, Cuban, Colombian, Irish, Russian, 
and Canadian criminal networks. 
 Organized crime groups, according to myriad theories and 
definitions, come in all shapes and sizes. It is clear that one shape 
does not fit all, and today’s groups are much more fluid, flexible, 
and pragmatic than past examples, with few regards to restricting 
membership by ethnicity and other criteria. According to a 2002 
report by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the global 
investigation of organized crime is seriously hampered by a pen-
chant for focusing on the “more visible and prominent groups” such 
as the Russian gangs and the Italian Mafia, while often ignoring the 
less traditional organized crime networks that are more adaptable 
to the world of globalization, such as Nigerian fraud rings, high-
tech crime rings, or Eastern European sex trafficking networks 
(United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, September 2002, 6). 
These groups are often amorphous, with an ever-changing cast of 

Background 15
actors and structures that are less recognizable and more dynamic 
in organization. 
 One survey of 40 selected organized crime groups in 16 
countries in 2002 has contributed to a better understanding of the 
changing nature and structure of 21st-century organized crime. The 
survey revealed five types of structures exhibited by prominent 
groups. At the most basic level are smaller groups or  rigid hierarchies 
 of up to 20 members with one boss, who engages in one main crimi-
nal activity and confines its operations to only one or two countries. 
These groups apparently use less violence and corruption and have 
made little inroads in infiltrating the legitimate economy. Next in 
ascending order are  devolved hierarchies,  with up to 50 members and 
a hierarchical command structure. They are often engaged in two 
or more types of activities in from three to four countries. These 
gangs might occasionally use violence and corruption, have some 
political influence at the lowest levels of government, and have 
some investments in the legitimate marketplace. Unlike rigid hier-
archies, the devolved hierarchy sometimes cooperates with other 
criminal syndicates in its home country. Moving up the food chain 
of structure is a third type, which is referred to as a  hierarchical con-
glomerate. Groups at this level have from 50 to 100 members, op-
erate extensively internationally, have political influence in higher 
corridors of power, and operate in conjunction with crime syndi-
cates in other countries. Its structure is more sophisticated and runs 
the gamut from an “association of organized crime groups” often 
under the leadership of a central hierarchy. Violence and corrup-
tion are considered essential ingredients in their criminal opera-
tions and there is an extensive overlapping of legitimate and illicit 
activities while operating in at least five different countries. What 
also distinguishes this model is that its organization is ethnic, or 
family-based, with core membership coming from the same ethnic 
group, region, or country.  Core criminal groups  typically have more 
than 100 members and have some of the same features as the hi-
erarchical conglomerate. What differentiates them are their higher 
involvement in international geopolitics, particularly their ability 
to influence politicians in foreign countries. The highest form of 
structure is referred to as an  organized criminal network.  It is more 
difficult to describe this type of network, which is its strength. It is 
defined by the activities of its main players who often collaborate 
on criminal schemes in different types of alliances depending on 
the job and the required skill-sets. An individual in this structure 

16 Global Organized Crime
achieves one’s position according to one’s skills and ability to earn 
(UNODC 2002, 19). 
 Major Global Organized 
Crime Activities 
 International crime syndicates have long counted drug traffick-
ing, human smuggling and trafficking, and weapons smuggling 
among their most lucrative activities. In the 21st century coun-
terfeiting technologies, the Internet and cyberspace have become 
mainstays as well. The process of globalization has opened and ex-
panded markets that have reshaped and revolutionized the busi-
ness of organized crime. Organized crime groups in India and South 
America, for example, have been connected to human organ traf-
ficking, whereas others have found profits in smuggling endan-
gered species, forged airplane parts, fake pharmaceuticals, and 
various counterfeit consumer products. New illicit global networks 
have emerged in recent years dealing in such niche products as 
human organs, endangered species, hazardous wastes, and stolen 
art all operated with the same method used in better known rackets 
such as stolen cars, illegal logging, and cigarette smuggling, but 
without the same scrutiny and media coverage. 
 By most accounts some of these groups have been shifting 
their attention from the mainstays of drugs and arms trafficking to-
ward human smuggling and trafficking, activities with high profits 
but less risk of draconian punishment as in the case of weapons 
and drugs. Most crime experts assert that what is most attractive 
about the human trade is the fact that there is an unquenchable 
thirst for immigration around the world, leading to a continuous 
flow of profit. Globalization is often blamed for influencing the 
movement of people from poorer countries to richer ones. Poverty, 
despair, war, and civil crisis continue to play a central role, as do 
the economic dislocations that have followed the collapse of com-
munism. 
 Slavery and Human Trafficking 
 Ancient Athens and Rome were known for their slave markets. In 
antiquity no less a figure than the Greek philosopher Aristotle de-
fended the practice, commenting “humanity is divided into two: 

Major Global Organized Crime Activities  17
the masters and the slaves” (Chanda 2007, 215). Although slavery 
is an ancient tradition that probably predates the written record, 
by the 15th century it had become a global enterprise, albeit a legal 
one. Slavery had for the most part disappeared from the European 
continent for almost a millennium before reemerging in the 16th 
century. What increased the demand was the tremendous demand 
for slaves in the New World. Spain was the first European power 
to permit the transfer of slaves, but was quickly followed by Portu-
guese, Dutch, French, and British slave traders. In 1672, the King of 
England granted a charter to the Royal African Company permit-
ting it to sell slaves; by the end of that century the slave trade was 
regarded as a legal and desirable branch of commerce. 
 By the mid-1800s, no branch of the contraband trade was as 
widespread as the international trafficking of African slaves. Al-
though the legal traffic had been abolished by Great Britain in 1807, 
there was still an enormous demand for slaves in the United States, 
Brazil, Cuba, India, and the Arab world, and the trade continued. 
There seemed to be no end to the supply of slaves, with more being 
exported from Africa in the 1830s by either illegal British traders or 
non-English vessels after the trade was banned by British authori-
ties than in the average years of the previous centuries (Chanda 
2007). 
 In the aftermath of the emancipation of slaves in the 1860s, the 
United States attracted the largest number of legal immigrants dur-
ing what historians call “the first golden age of globalization” in 
the 19th century (Ruggie 2000). By the late 19th century, slavery was 
outlawed in most places in the world, but middlemen found no 
shortage of hopeful and vulnerable would-be migrants to prey on 
for profit. The emergence of inexpensive and faster mass travel in 
the 1970s brought new opportunities for human traffickers to de-
liver cheap and often bonded laborers to employers in countries 
thousands of miles away (Picarelli 2007). 
 Over four centuries close to 12 million slaves were forcibly ex-
tracted from Africa and taken to the Americas (Ashcroft 2001, 70). 
Modern estimates suggest that this figure pales when compared to 
the modern trafficking of humans. It has been estimated that over 
the past decade, almost 30 million women and children were traf-
ficked in Southeast Asia alone (Naim 2005, 88). Most international 
governments concur that the number of people illegally crossing 
borders today, often in coerced conditions, has no precedent in 
human history. Moises Naim cites one United Nations study that 
suggests 4 million people are trafficked and smuggled each year for 

18 Global Organized Crime
a value of between $7 and $10 billion. Other figures suggest this is 
only the tip of the iceberg. The FBI now estimates Mexican human 
traffickers are earning between $6 and $9 billion each year (Naim 
2005). 
 Today, the smuggling and trafficking of humans generates 
huge profits for global organized crime groups and is one of the 
unforeseen results of the process of globalization. Although it is not 
yet as profitable as the global drug trade, according to Moises Naim 
in some cases it is “the fastest growing” illicit trade (Naim 2005). 
Values and prices are gauged by the migrant’s wealth and nation-
ality, as well as the incumbent risks of the journey, the degree of 
professionalism of the service providers, and the attractiveness of 
the destination country. 
 Highly populated countries such as China and India emerged 
as the major sources for unfree migration during the 1800s, regions 
where population pressures compounded by the necessity of find-
ing work and food led to an inexhaustible supply of migrants. 
Chinese laborers were sometimes kidnapped, seduced by dreams 
of riches abroad and sold by unscrupulous traffickers. The peak 
of Chinese migration was between 1842 and 1900, when 400,000 
reached the United States, Australia, and Canada; another 400,000 
ended up in the Caribbean and Latin America, and 1.5 million in 
British Malaya, Burma, the Philippines, and Indonesia .  These pat-
terns began to change in 1882 when the U.S. Congress passed the 
Chinese Exclusion Act restricting immigration from China. During 
the first two decades of the 20th century, a number of European 
countries, including Great Britain, France, Italy, Russia, Austria, and 
Germany, began introducing similar onerous legislation restricting 
and regulating who could immigrate to their countries (Chanda 
2007, 167). 
 Compared to the landowners immersed in the earlier slave 
trade in the New World, their modern European and American in-
carnations have turned to illegal immigrant trafficking to cut labor 
costs. In former times slaves were kidnapped from villages and sold 
overseas. Today, willing immigrants in many parts of the world pay 
exorbitant fees to illegally enter Western Europe and the United 
States. By most accounts, what has most contributed to the increase 
in human smuggling and trafficking has been the tightening of bor-
der controls and points of entry in various parts of the world. This 
has increasingly forced refugees into the hands of smugglers (Karr-
strand 2007). 

Major Global Organized Crime Activities  19
 One recent case exemplifies the interconnectedness of global 
cultures and human trafficking. In May 2009, Spanish police an-
nounced they had broken up a smuggling operation that forced 
Nigerian women into prostitution by threatening them with voo-
doo curses. Traffickers had used the common modern ruse of luring 
the women to Europe with promises of opportunities and better 
living conditions, but first they were brought to a voodoo (juju) 
priest. The women were then smuggled from Nigeria to Spain. Once 
at their destination, the victims were forced to prostitute themselves 
to repay debts accrued in the journey or “face the wrath of voodoo 
spirits.” A growing number of observers have noted the increasing 
use of this type of intimidation by traffickers. The ringleaders used 
family members in Nigeria to recruit women who were then trans-
ported to Libya by way of Benin and Niger and then shipped by 
boat to Italy and finally Spain. According to the victims, they were 
informed they owed the traffickers $70,000 upon reaching Spain 
(Burnett 2009). 
 According to the most recent estimates of the Department of 
Homeland Security, the five countries where most illegal immi-
grants in the United States come from and the percentage increase 
of their population from 2000 were Mexico with 6.9 million (+49%), 
El Salvador with 540,000 (+26%), followed by Guatemala with 
500,000 (+74%), the Philippines with 290,000 (+47%), and China 
with 290,000 (+49%) (Hoefer, Rytina, and Baker 2008). 
 Structures of Human Trafficking Operations 
 Although on the face of it, human smuggling is a simple process, 
to be successful and achieve longevity it requires the assistance of a 
number of specialized and skilled individuals. Among the require-
ments are individuals to arrange transportation and proper (often 
counterfeited) documents and travel guides for border crossings 
and to act as chaperones on the journey. Others provide logistical 
support, providing crucial information at different stages of the 
overland journey—bribing guards and officials or providing direc-
tions. Once they reach their destinations, these people often act as 
bodyguards to intimidate victims and ensure they do not run away 
or report the crime; others provide accommodations and food at 
safe houses. 

20 Global Organized Crime
 Human Trafficking versus Human Smuggling 
 The difference between human smuggling and trafficking cases is 
often blurred. The main distinction is based on the level of coercion 
and consent. Some human trafficking cases begin as simple smug-
gling operations, but some time during the process the journey 
might take an unexpected turn when a victim/customer might be 
expected to work forced labor or prostitute themselves to pay hid-
den costs or unforeseen debts. 
 In 2005, at the Third Summit of Heads of State and Govern-
ment, the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Traf-
ficking in Human Beings made a distinction between human 
smuggling and trafficking. Human trafficking is characterized by a 
number of schemes and strategies ranging from recruitment of po-
tential victims to the transportation and harboring as well as receiv-
ing individuals by participants in the trafficking networks. Some 
times victims are coerced through threats or violence to be traf-
ficked; other times they are deceived by fraud and even abducted. 
Once victims are caught in the web of the human traffickers, they 
become vulnerable and usually exploited. Exploitation can include 
prostitution, forced labor, forced removal of organs, and practices 
similar to slavery (Council of Europe 2005). 
 The United Nationals Protocol against the Smuggling of Mi-
grants by Land, Sea and Air identifies  human smuggling  as “the 
procurement, in order to obtain directly or indirectly, a financial or 
other material benefit, of the illegal entry of a person into a State 
Party of which the person is not a national or permanent resident” 
(Surtees 2008, 42–43). It is estimated that of the more than 130 mil-
lion international migrants, close to one-fourth of them are illegal 
or “irregular” migrants, and that at any time at least 4 million are 
on the move (Ghosh 2000; Council of Europe 2005, 37). In the 21st 
century, Western Europe is considered one of their more attractive 
destinations because of its high living standards and job opportuni-
ties, particularly today, as fertility levels are considered below the 
replacement level as the region’s population ages. 
 The tightening of border controls and points of entry in the 
European Union has been a boon for organized smuggling networks. 
Illegal migrants must rely on these operations to reach their desti-
nations. The price is steep. Those from Hungary and Russia head-
ing into Western Europe pay between 8,000 and 10,000 euros each, 
while traveling from China to Italy can cost as much as $13,000 
(Council of Europe 2005, 39). Recent antitrafficking efforts have 

Major Global Organized Crime Activities  21
changed patterns of movement, especially speedboat routes on the 
Adriatic. As a result, most immigration takes place overland, tak-
ing advantage of open borders offered by the Schengen Agreement 
in Europe and the North American Free Trade Agreement on the 
Mexican-American border. 
 Coyotes 
 Coyotes are the Mexican permutation of the human smuggler. 
Smugglers have participated in the illegal smuggling of immi-
grants, often desperate refugees from Mexico and Central America, 
into the southwestern United States for generations. In Arizona 
alone, this black market business is estimated to bring in between 
$1 and $2 billion each year. In 2005, Arizona officials estimated that 
1 million illegal immigrants passed through the state, with daily 
rates approaching 3,000 and 4,000. In 2006, Phoenix area investiga-
tors placed the number of coyotes in the region at more than 1,000 
(Wagner 2006). In earlier years it was relatively easy for someone 
to cross the border illegally without much assistance into Texas and 
Arizona. This all changed, however, in the 1990s as officials took no-
tice and clamped down on illegal immigration. This in turn drove 
prices up and attracted professional criminals to the business. Vari-
ous operations became streamlined and professionalized, creating 
veritable crime syndicates that adopted modern surveillance and 
communications systems. Prospective customers are known as 
 goats, furniture,  and  pollo,  or chicken (Wagner 2006). Costs have risen 
to between $1,200 and $2,500 to be guided across the border (Wagner 
2006). The new breed of organizations have scared off the small time 
“mom-and pop” smuggling operations. Today, most of the smug-
glers are Mexican nationals. Each smuggling ring has members 
responsible for specific duties—recruiters, guides, drivers, drop-
house managers, cooks, and guards; others are document specialists 
and money collectors. After undocumented immigrants arrive on 
American soil, they are usually brought to drophouses while the 
coyotes collect the cash, arrange transportation, and fend off other 
smugglers who would steal their clients for ransom. In recent years 
the coyotaje business has undergone a facelift, as increasingly more 
women have risen to the top of smuggling operations. In 2006 alone, 
more than 3,400 women coyotes where arrested for smuggling un-
documented workers along the southwestern American border 
(Nunez 2007). Prospective smugglers looking for a criminal career 

22 Global Organized Crime
will often select humans over drugs and weapons because the pen-
alties in the United States are lighter. 
 Snakeheads 
 The Chinese use the term  snakehead  or  shetou  to denote those who 
specialize in human smuggling. When it comes to human smug-
gling, the Chinese have a distinct tradition from other countries 
(Keefe 2006). Unlike forced migration or human tracking, human 
smuggling is considered a voluntary but usually illegal activity. A 
significant number smuggled abroad come from a tiny patch of 
southern China about the size of Delaware. It is estimated that of the 
55 million Chinese who relocated overseas, 85 percent originated 
from the Fujian province (Keefe 2006). Although Chinese immi-
grants have traveled to the United State since the mid-19th century, 
the modern snakeheads emerged in the 1960s and 1970s, when 
citizens fled the mainland to the British colony of Honk Kong for 
a number of reasons including “push” factors such as political re-
pression and Chinese policies of sterilization and forced abortion, 
as well as “pull” factors of American capitalism. As a result of this 
migration, New York’s Chinatown increased 10-fold by the 1980s, 
from 20,000 to 200,000. Sometimes the new migrants were called 
“$18,000 men,” signifying the costs of that era (Keefe 2006). The pe-
riod between 1988 and 1993 saw “the largest influx of illegal Chi-
nese in the country’s history” into America. One study suggests that 
snakeheads earned $3.5 billion in the mid-1990s from this trade 
(Keefe 2006). Further demonstrating the global orientation of orga-
nized crime today is one curious syndicate made up of Fujianese 
and Mohawk Indians who smuggled thousands of refugees through 
the sovereign reservation that lies between the United States and 
Canada. According to Patrick R. Keefe, the network brought in 
$175 million in one two-year period (Keefe 2006). 
 Illicit Drug Trafficking 
 Individuals have used narcotics for medicinal, recreational, and re-
ligious purposes for millennia. As early as the 18th century, Span-
ish officials were taxing and selling the coca leaf to pay for New 
World expansion; however, the global drug trade can be traced 
back at least to the 1840s. When it comes to global narcotrafficking 
networks, few today could approach the power of Great Britain in 

Major Global Organized Crime Activities  23
that era. In 1773, the British East India Company gained control of 
India’s Bengal opium fields. Although the British were eager to 
trade for Chinese tea, silk, rice, and other commodities to feed the 
growing demand for the products at home, the Chinese found few 
products that they were interested in purchasing in return. There 
were few reports of opium addiction in China before 1800. When 
China attempted to ban the trade of opium, the British went to war, 
insisting on exporting it to China from its colonial possessions in 
India, to pay for tea and silk, sparking the Opium Wars, the first war 
of globalization. Over the next century the British inundated China 
with opium, creating a serious problem among users with little if 
any familiarity with the drug. China’s subsequent defeat by the 
British in the 1842 Opium War forced the country to accept free 
trade of opium within its borders. 
 The passage of the Harrison Narcotics Act in 1914 criminalized 
the nonmedical use of opium, morphine, and coca derivatives in 
the United States. Other international treaties followed, putting in 
place restrictions and regulations. But almost as soon this new sys-
tem was in place, organized drug trafficking syndicates emerged to 
supply whichever drug happened to be in demand. By the 1920s, 
one U.S Treasury Department commented that “the peddlers ap-
peared to have established a national organization, smuggling in 
drugs through the Canadian and Mexican borders” (quoted in 
Lunde 2004, 28). Other countries soon followed the United States 
onto the drug prohibition bandwagon. In 1920, Great Britain passed 
the Dangerous Drugs Act, which targeted access to cocaine, mor-
phine, opium, codeine, hashish, and barbiturates for nonmedical 
purposes. This was followed by the criminalization of cannabis 
in 1928, almost a decade before the United States followed suit 
in 1937. 
 The passage of the U.S. Opium Exclusion Act in 1909 opened 
up new opportunities for global organized crime trafficking. By 
most accounts it was the Jewish gangsters who first saw the poten-
tial and soon organized a smuggling network from the leading 
supplier of the day, China; this was followed by the building of 
laboratories to dilute and package the narcotics for resale and form-
ing distribution networks to get the product to addicts. The profits 
could be enormous. For example in 1923, a kilo (2.2 lbs) of pure her-
oin cost $3,000 at its Chinese source. Once it was cut and divided 
into 15,500 multigrain capsules, it returned a profit of $300,000 
(Volkman 1998). In the 1920s, mobster extraordinaire Arnold Roth-
stein moved into the narcotics racket. The profits were irresistible 

24 Global Organized Crime
at a time when a pound of raw opium could be bought for $1,000 
and refined to earn 150 times that amount (Volkman 1998). Roth-
stein was soon sending his agents to Europe and Asia to purchase 
opium and smuggle it into the United States. 
 World drug production and consumption increased in the 
1960s, fueled by the rise of international drug trafficking and fa-
cilitated by growing globalization and world trade and improved 
means of transportation and communication. Further facilitating 
its growth were the combined “demand pull” of youth populations 
from developed nations and the “supply push” provided by the eco-
nomic difficulties of a number of source countries and the discovery 
of the lucrative drug trade by various warlords, insurgency groups, 
and organized crime groups (Chawla and Pietschmann 2005). 
 Nothing illustrates the transnational or global nature of orga-
nized crime in the 21st century more than the drug war on the Mexi-
can border with the United States. Drug trafficking in Mexico is 
estimated to employ 150,000 people (Booth and Fainaru 2009). A 
number of drug gangs—what some have branded as cartels—bat-
tle for dominance of the trade routes into the United States from 
border towns adjacent to California, Arizona, and Texas. Most have 
diversified their organized crime activities to include kidnapping, 
weapons and human trafficking, and smuggling. U.S. officials face 
the Herculean task of stopping the flow of weapons and bulk cur-
rency south of the border; Mexico faces an uphill battle trying to 
stem the flow of drugs and humans smuggled into the United 
States. According to the most recent National Drug Threat Assess-
ment Report, Mexican drug trafficking networks represented “the 
greatest organized crime threat to the United States” while linking 
the Mexican cartels to drug trafficking operations in close to 230 
American cities (NDIC 2009, 45). What worries U.S. officials most 
is the drug violence on the Mexican border crossing into the South-
western border states as the bloody drug war continues with rival 
gangs battling for dominance and to expand operations. 
 Officials assert that cocaine trafficking is the leading drug 
menace to the United States. While the availability of cocaine fluc-
tuates, as does its price, the demand remains strong throughout the 
world, and new markets continue to open as living standards and 
incomes rise in developing countries. Despite a number of interna-
tional efforts and strategies and cooperative efforts between North 
and Latin America, the drug gangs are quick to adapt to rapidly 
changing conditions and barriers. The gangs closest to the United 
States on the Mexican border are in the best position to react to 

Major Global Organized Crime Activities  25
changing conditions. Many of these conditions are elucidated in 
the aforementioned 2009 National Drug Intelligence Center report, 
including the impact of coca eradication programs in the Andes, vio-
lence between competing drug cartels, improved border controls, 
large seizures of cocaine, and the opening of new markets over-
seas (NDIC 2009, 1). Some observers have even suggested that for-
eign markets offer the most potential as a result of the shrinking 
value of the U.S. dollar. 
 The opium poppy has been used for at least 4,000 years. The 
Sumerians of the Fertile Crescent referred to it as did Homer in 
the  Iliad.  The poppy probably came to China from the Middle East 
sometime in the 7th or 8th centuries, but it was not until the 18th 
century that opium smoking became endemic in parts of the Far 
East and China. 
 Heroin is produced in four major source areas located in South 
America, Mexico, Southeast Asia (the Golden Triangle), and South-
west Asia (the Golden Crescent). Most global heroin production 
takes place in Southwest Asia, especially in Afghanistan; however, 
only a small portion reaches the United States. Most of the heroin 
coming out of Afghanistan or Pakistan is destined for markets in 
Europe and Asia. 
 The trafficking of refined heroin to U.S. ports involved an elab-
orate organizational web of transportation routes, couriers, and 
payoffs. In the years leading up to World War II and the Commu-
nist revolution in China (1949), American gangsters brought heroin 
in from Shanghai; however, the outbreak of war made this unten-
able. The Maoist Revolution was most successful in eradicating 
the scourge from China with draconian suppression. Many drug 
syndicates moved their bases of operation from Shanghai to Hong 
Kong. But the Far East heroin market was shattered by the war and 
its “revolutionary aftermath” and would not return until the 1950s 
and 1960s emergence of Southeast Asia’s Golden Triangle. The lack 
of Asian narcotics during this era “reinvigorated” Middle East and 
Mediterranean drug operations. Most of the heroin business was 
concentrated in the hands of independent operators based in France 
and operating in conjunction with Corsican gangs located in Mar-
seilles. This arrangement began in the 1930s. The so-called French 
Connection was at the epicenter of the heroin drug trade for years. 
Between World War II and the 1960s, Hong Kong and Marseilles 
were the heroin refining capitals of the world; later this activity be-
came more dispersed as opium-heroin trafficking networks from 
Southeast Asia and Europe were reestablished. 

26 Global Organized Crime
 According to the National Drug Intelligence Center, heroin dis-
tribution by Mexican drug trafficking gangs has expanded, fueled 
by rising heroin production in Mexico and decreasing heroin pro-
duction in Colombia. In Southwest Asia its distribution and avail-
ability are less reliable. Some Nigerian criminal networks, however, 
are now distributing Southwest Asian heroin and maneuvering to 
increase their influence on the heroin distribution market. South-
east heroin has become increasingly less available in the United 
States. Today most southwest Asian heroin is smuggled into the 
United States by couriers on commercial flights from Europe, Af-
rica, or Asia. Nonetheless the two primary sources of heroin in the 
United States are Mexico and Colombia. 
 Southwest Asian heroin reaches the United States smuggled 
on commercial flights by couriers from Asian countries includ-
ing India, Pakistan, and Turkey and transits through West African 
countries such as Nigeria and Ghana. By most accounts the couri-
ers usually enter the United States through cities such as Baltimore, 
Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, New York City, Philadelphia, and 
Washington, D.C. It also reaches the United States through the 
southwestern region, especially through Los Angeles, by Afghan, 
Iranian, Pakistani, and Turkish traffickers before being transported 
to drug markets in the eastern states, where the demand is greatest. 
It is also not unheard of for couriers to bring it in on cruise ships, 
through package delivery services, and hidden in containerized 
cargo. 
 During the 1990s, the New Jersey State Commission of Inves-
tigation revealed Nigerian involvement in the global heroin trade. 
The so-called African Connection has become increasingly inter-
connected in the international drug trade as Nigeria emerged as a 
major transshipment point for Southeast Asian heroin heading to 
Europe and the United States. Today, the Drug Enforcement Ad-
ministration regards Nigeria as an indispensable juncture in the 
heroin trade and Africa’s most prominent transshipment point. Ac-
cording to one leading observer of the global crime scene, Nigeria 
now operates heroin labs that process opium brought in from Af-
ghanistan and Myanmar and has also transited through Pakistan, 
Uzbekistan, Thailand, or China. 
 Compared to heroin and cocaine, which are products of plants 
grown throughout parts of Asia and Latin America, methamphet-
amine is a “purpose-made” drug, created in laboratories from chem-
icals found in popular cough and cold remedies. Unlike other drug 
traffickers, meth dealers are subject to government pressure and 

Major Global Organized Crime Activities  27
restrictions on the production of ephedrine and pseudoephedrine, 
especially as only nine factories create most of the world’s supply. 
Methamphetamine trafficking was once the purview of American 
outlaw motorcycle gangs. In the 1980s, a mid-level Mexican cocaine 
runner named Amezcua Contreras saw the commercial possibili-
ties of the meth trade and transformed it into a business. By the 
early 1990s, the Mexican meth trade began taking over superlabs 
in rural California, leading the Mexican press to herald the global 
trafficking network by dubbing the Amezcua brothers “the kings 
of methamphetamine.” The methamphetamine trade required a 
global reach, as most of the precursor chemicals were closely moni-
tored in the United States. It was rather easy for Mexican gangs, 
however, considering the country’s lax internal and border security 
systems, to import ephedrine (the main ingredient) from Mexico. 
By the early 1990s, they were purchasing huge quantities of the 
chemical legitimately from source factories in Germany, India, the 
Czech Republic, and Switzerland. In 1993, one of the brothers per-
sonally traveled throughout Asia searching for factories that manu-
factured ephedrine. In India he discovered sources where he could 
buy it for an eighth of what it cost in Mexico. What the Amezcua 
brothers soon discovered was that the real money was made by 
making the drugs, not retailing the drugs in the traditional world 
of drug trafficking. 
 Being close to the American border gave Mexican gangs a foot 
up on the international competition, as they could adjust quicker to 
trends on the American drug market. They were quick to recognize 
this emerging market and were able to avoid American restrictions 
on the chemicals required by importing it from countries such as 
China and India, and in Europe, and then smuggling it across the 
border into the United States. 
 Weapons Trafficking 
 The expansion of ethnic and regional conflict since the late 1980s has 
made the illegal trafficking of weapons a huge international busi-
ness controlled mostly by organized crime groups. Success would 
be impossible, however, without the complicity of individuals and 
institutions outside the criminal organizations such as national de-
fense ministries, national security agencies, banks, legitimate arms 
dealers, and a number of groups vying for power within particular 
countries. Global organized crime groups became increasingly in-
volved in the transfer of weapons, encouraged in part by conflicts 

28 Global Organized Crime
in the Balkans and the former Soviet Union that left the rule of law 
wanting in the former Communist states of Europe, particularly in 
Yugoslavia and Albania. This situation, combined with open and 
porous borders, the collapse of currencies, and the growth of terror-
ist financing schemes, played a role in the expansion of the weapons 
trade. With the fall of the Berlin Wall, arms brokers became much 
more entrepreneurial. No longer guided by ideological leanings, 
they were motivated purely by economics. As the massive Soviet 
arsenal fell into the hands of the former Soviet Republics, none 
profited more than Ukraine, which became the center of the global 
weapons trade. Economic woes convinced the new states to sell off 
anything for hard currency. It has been estimated that between 1992 
and 1998, more than $30 billion worth of weapons disappeared 
from Soviet arsenals, including helicopters, grenades, mortars, ma-
chine guns, ammunition, and AK-47s. A measure of how lucrative 
this business became was exemplified by the sale of an AK-47 rifle, 
which could be purchased for $20 and resold for $300 (including 
ammunition) (Lunde 2004). Payment was usually made in untrace-
able cash or diamonds. 
 The signing of the Dayton Peace Accords in 1995 that ended 
the war between Serbia and Bosnia was followed by an increase in 
illegal weapons trafficking in that region as former soldiers became 
middlemen for various arms trafficking networks. Using weapons 
smuggling routes that were well established by 1995, traffickers took 
possession of weapons caches, and former enemies entered into 
cooperative agreements. Albanian syndicates have proved particu-
larly adept at war profiteering, playing an integral role in the clan-
destine arms trade, shipping weapons from Italian and Spanish 
ports to Adriatic harbors for transshipment to Bosnia and Serbia. 
 Weapons are often trafficked illegally to countries with strict 
laws from countries awash in weapons. The United States probably 
has more legal outlets selling weapons than any other country not 
currently embroiled in domestic warfare. More than 6,600 licensed 
American gun dealers are located on the 2,000-mile border with 
Mexico (Will 2009). Today the vast majority of weapons used in 
drug-related killings in Mexico come from the United States. Mex-
ico sends the United States drugs and people, and the United States 
sends back cash and weapons. The violence on the Texas–Mexico 
border has been fueled by the purchase of automatic weapons from 
American gun dealers, mostly in Texas. One gun dealer was charged 
with selling at least 650 weapons, including AK-47 rifles, to “straw 
buyers,” individuals who illegally funnel the weapons to Mexican 

Conclusion 29
cartels, which killed more than 6,000 of their countrymen in 2008 
alone (more than 2,000 over the previous year) (Will 2009). 
 During their heyday in the 1980s, Jamaican Posses acquired 
their weapons in the United States in a variety of ways, ranging from 
raiding gun dealerships, home invasion robberies, hijacking vehi-
cles carrying guns to breaking into military armories (like the Texas 
bandits Bonnie and Clyde did in the 1930s), and stealing weapons 
shipments sent through the mail or shipping systems. Once they 
obtained weapons they sold them on the market with the greatest 
potential for profit. In some cases they ended up in Jamaica, which 
as a result of strict gun control laws, offers a lucrative return on 
each purchase. Likewise, Japan has some of the toughest gun con-
trol laws in the world. The Yakuza gangs operate a lucrative gun 
trade between Japan and the United States, with bullets going for 
up to $15 each. More recently, cheap Chinese weapons have been 
selling for $3,000 each, with U.S. machine guns bringing more than 
triple that amount (Roth 2009). 
 Conclusion 
 The development of early forms of global organized crime was typ-
ically the product of rapidly changing social conditions. For exam-
ple, the onset of the Industrial Revolution in the early 19th century 
in Great Britain and other parts of the Western world led rural peas-
ants to gravitate to the opportunities for better jobs and sustenance 
provided by newly urbanized settings. In addition, developments 
in faster forms of transportation hastened the development of lon-
ger lasting and more efficient crime syndicates that were quickly 
able to adjust to changing markets and “consolidate their power, 
accumulate capital, expand from their original bases, and continue 
to operate in the modern world” (Lunde 2004). Throughout the last 
500 years, each new advance in mass transportation has made it 
cheaper and faster and has given human traffickers new opportu-
nities. Globalization has opened and expanded markets that have 
reshaped the business of organized crime. One expert has opined: 
“Networks with capabilities to move illicit goods across borders 
have diversified into new geographies and added new products 
to their existing ones” (Naim 2006, 3). There are signs that global 
syndicates have been shifting much of their attention from drugs 
and arms trafficking to human trafficking and smuggling, pur-
suits in which profits remain high but the risk of punishment is 

30 Global Organized Crime
much lower. Most crime observers agree that what is most attrac-
tive about the human trade is that there is an unquenchable thirst 
for immigration around the world, leading to a continuous flow 
of profits. Although the trafficking of humans is as old as history, 
world events since the 1980s have conspired to fuel the growth of 
this illicit activity. Many observers cite globalization for influencing 
the movement of people from poorer countries to wealthier ones. 
Poverty, despair, war, and civil crisis all play a central role, as do the 
economic dislocations that followed the collapse of communism in 
Europe. 
 References 
 Ashcroft, Bill. 2001.  On Post-Colonial Futures: Transformations of Colonial 
Culture. London: Continuum. 
 Axe, David. 2009, May 6. “War Is Boring: Amateurish Foot Soldiers 
Belie Sophisticated Piracy Networks.” Available at http://www.
worldpoliticsreview.com/articlePrint.aspx?ID=3710. 
 Bales, Kevin. 1999.  Disposable People: New Slavery in the Global Economy. 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 
 Bay, Austin. 2009, April 17. “Revamp Legal Framework to Resolve 
Piracy Problems.”  Houston Chronicle: B9. 
 Berry, LaVerle, and Glenn E. Curtis. 2003, October. “Africa.” In  Nations 
Hospitable to Organized Crime and Terrorism. Federal Research Division, 
Library of Congress: 2–31. 
 Booth, William, and Steve Fainaru. 2009, May 1. “Mexican Drug Fight 
Nets 60,000 Suspects.”  Washington Post:  A10. 
 Bossard, A. 1990.  Transnational Crime and Criminal Law. Chicago: 
University of Chicago, Office of International Criminal Justice. 
 Burgess Jr., Douglas R. 2008, December 5. “Piracy Is Terrorism.”  New 
York Times: A33. 
 Burnett, Victoria. 2009, May 23. “Spain Links Voodoo to Prostitution.” 
 Houston Chronicle: A25. 
 Chanda, Nayan. 2007.  Bound Together: How Traders, Preachers, 
Adventurers, and Warriors Shaped Globalization. New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press. 
 Chawla, Sandeep, and Thomas Pietschmann. 2005. “Drug Trafficking as 
a Transnational Crime.” In  Handbook of Transnational Crime and Justice, ed. 
Philip Reichel, 160–180. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

References 31
 Chomsky, Noam. 2006  Failed States: The Abuse of Power and the Assault on 
Democracy. New York: Henry Holt. 
 Council of Europe. 2005, December. “Organized Crime Situation Report 
2005: Focus on the Threat of Economic Crime,” Strasbourg, France: 
Department of Crime Problems. 
 Curtis, Glen E., and Tara Karacan. 2002, December. “The Nexus Among 
Terrorists, Narcotics Traffickers, Weapons Proliferators, and Organized 
Crime networks in Western Europe,” Federal Research Division, 
Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress: 1–68. 
 Daraghi, Borzou, and Edmund Sanders. 2008, November 18. “Pirates Seize 
Supertanker in Brazen Open-Sea Attack.”  Houston Chronicle: A1, A12. 
 Economist. 2008, November 22. “Ahoy There!”: 60. 
 Felsen, David, and Akis Kalaitzidis. 2005. “A Historical Overview of 
Transnational Crime.” In  Handbook of Transnational Crime and Justice, ed. 
Phil Reichel, 3–19. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, pp. 3–19. 
 Fentress, James. 2000.  Rebels and Mafiosi: Death in a Sicilian Landscape. 
New York: Cornell University Press. 
 Fijnaut, Cyrille, and Letizia Paoli, eds. 2004.  Organized Crime in Europe: 
Concepts, Patterns and Control Policies in the European Union and Beyond. 
Norwell, MA: Springer. 
 Freeh, Louis. 1996, April 30. “Testimony before House Committee 
on International Relations.” Hearing on Russian Organized Crime. 
Available at http://www.globalsecurity.org/security/library/
congress/1996_h/h960430f.htm. Accessed September 5, 2009. 
 Gambetta, Diego. 1993.  The Sicilian Mafia: The Business of Private 
Protection. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
 Gettleman, Jeffrey. 2006, November 10. “Chased by Gang Violence, 
Residents Flee Kenyan Slum.”  New York Times International: A4. 
 Gettleman, Jeffrey. 2009, April 12. “What Tho. Jefferson Knew about 
Pirates.”  New York Times: 4. 
 Gettleman, Jeffrey. 2009, May 9. “For Somalia’s Pirates, Worst Enemy 
May Be Waiting Back on Shore.”  New York Times: A1, A9. 
 Ghosh, Bimal, ed. 2000.  Managing Migration: Time for a New International 
Regime? Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Gutterman, Steve. 2008, December 1. “Ransom Discussion Nears Deal.” 
 Houston Chronicle: A15. 
 Hagedorn, John M., ed. 2007.  Gangs in the Global City: Alternatives to 
Traditional Criminology. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. 
 Hess, Henner. 1973.  Mafia and Mafiosi: The Structure of Power. Lexington, 
MA: Lexington Books. 

32 Global Organized Crime
 Hoefer, Michael, Nancy Rytina, and Bryan C. Baker. 2007, January. 
“Estimate of Unauthorized Immigrant Population Residing in the 
United States.” Available at http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/
statistics/publications/ois_ill_pe_2007.pdf. Accessed September 3, 
2009. 
 Hoffer, Peter Charles. 2000.  The Brave New World: A History of Early 
America. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 
 Houreld, Katherine. 2008, December 5. “For Filipino Captives, a Kind 
Pirate Isn’t an Oxymoron.”  Houston Chronicle: A19. 
 Kaplan, Robert D. 2009, April 12. “Anarchy on Land Means Piracy at 
Sea.”  New York Times: 9. 
 Karraker, Cyrus H. 1953.  Piracy Was a Business. Rindge, NH: Richard R. 
Smith. 
 Karrstrand, Klas. 2007, May 9–10. “Countering Narcotics and Organized 
Crime in the Baltic Sea Region.” Report from the Silk Road Studies 
Program Workshop, Talinn, Estonia. Available at http://www.
silkroadstudies.org. 
 Keath, Lee, and Jennifer Quinn. 2008, November 19. “Wanted: Some 
Hearties to Police the High Seas.”  Houston Chronicle: A3. 
 Keefe, Patrick Radden. 2006, April 24. “The Snakehead.”  The 
New Yorker  82 (10). Available at http://www.newyorker.com/
archive/2006/04/24/060424fa_fact6. 
 Langewiesche, William. 2004.  The Outlaw Sea: A World of Freedom, Chaos, 
and Crime. New York: North Point Press. 
 Langton, Jerry. 2007.  Iced: Crystal Meth, the Biography of North America’s 
Deadliest New Plague. New York: North Point Press. 
 Lee, Maggy, ed. 2007.  Human Trafficking. Devon, UK: Willan Publishing. 
 Lunde, Paul. 2004.  Organized Crime: An Inside Guide to the World’s Most 
Successful Industry. New York: DK Publishing. 
 Mazzetti, Mark. 2009, April 10. “Navy’s Standoff with Pirates Shows 
U.S. Power Has Limits.”  New York Times: A1, A15. 
 Meiners, Stephen. 2009, March 26. “Central America: An Emerging 
Role in the Drug Trade.”  STRATFOR . Available at http://www.stratfor.
com/weekly/200090326_central_america_emerging_role_drug_trade. 
Accessed March 27, 2009. 
 Meyer, Bill. 2008, November 11. “Tanker capture raises alarm over 
Somali piracy.” Available at http://www.cleveland.com/world/index.
ssf/2008/11/tanker_capture_raises_alarm_ov.html.Accessed October 9, 
2009. 

References 33
 Mueller, Gerhard O. W., and Freda Adler. 1985.  Outlaws of the Ocean: The 
Complete Book of Contemporary Crime on the High Seas. New York: Hearst 
Marine Books. 
 Naim, Moises. 2006.  Illicit: How Smugglers, Traffickers, and Copycats Are 
Hijacking the Global Economy. New York: Anchor Books. 
 National Drug Intelligence Center. 2009.  National Drug Threat 
Assessment.  Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice. 
 Nunez, Claudia. 2007, December 27. “Women Are the New Coyotes.” 
 New American Media. Available at http://arizonasportsfan.com/vb/
showthread.php?t=104452. Accessed January 15, 2008. 
 O’Neill, Siobhan.2007, May 24. “Terrorist Precursor Crimes: Issues 
and Options for Congress.” Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research 
Service. 
 Owen, Frank. 2007.  No Speed Limit: The Highs and Lows of Meth. New 
York: St. Martin’s Press. 
 Picarelli, John T. 2007. “Historical Approaches to the Trade in Human 
Beings.” In  Human Trafficking, ed. Maggy Lee. 26–48. Devon: UK: Willan 
Publishing. 
 Powell, Stewart M., and Clay Robison. 2009, March 19. “U.S. Going on 
Offense at Border.”  Houston Chronicle: A1, A6. 
 Rediker, Marcus. 1987.  Between the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea: Merchant 
Seamen, Pirates and Anglo-Americans. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 Rediker, Marcus. 2004.  Villains of All Nations: Atlantic Pirates in the Golden 
Age. Boston: Beacon Press. 
 Roth, Mitchel P. 2009.  Organized Crime. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson. 
 Ruggie, John G. 2000. “Weaving the Global Compact: Sustaining the 
Single Global Economic Space.” Available at http://www.un.org/Pubs/
chronicle/2000/issue2/0200p36.htm. 
 Smith, Denis Mack. 1995, November 30. “The Ruling Class.”  New York 
Times Book Review: 7. 
 Surtees, Rebecca. 2008. “Traffickers and Trafficking in Southern and 
Eastern Europe.”  European Journal of Criminology 5 (1): 39–68. 
 Turley, Hans. 1999.  Rum, Sodomy and the Lash: Piracy, Sexuality and 
Masculine Identity. New York: New York University Press. 
 United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). 2000.  United 
Nations Convention on Transnational Organized Crime. Available at 
http://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/treaties/CTOC/index.html. 
Accessed September 3, 2009. 

34 Global Organized Crime
 United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). 2002, September. 
 Global Programme against Transnational Organized Crime: Results of a Pilot 
Survey of Forty Selected Organized Criminal Groups in Sixteen Countries. 
Vienna: UNDOC. 
 United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Vienna. 2005.  Transnational 
Organized Crime in the West African Region. New York: United Nations. 
 Varese, Federico. 2006. “How Mafias Migrate: The Case of the 
‘Ndrangheta in Northern Italy.”  Law and Society Review 40 (2): 411–444. 
 Volkman, Ernest. 1998.  Gangbusters: The Destruction of America’s Last 
Great Mafia Dynasty. Boston: Faber and Faber. 
 Wagner, Denise. 2006, July 23. “Human Trafficking Profits Spur 
Horrors.” Available at http://www.azcentral.com/arizonarepublic/
news/articles/0723drophouse-main2.html. Accessed January 15, 2008. 
 Walters, Stephen. 2007, February. “Contemporary Maritime Piracy.” 
 Crime and Justice International:  10–16. 
 Will, George. 2009, March 19. “Drug War in Mexico Is Taking a Toll on 
Border States.”  Houston Chronicle: B9. 
 Williams, Neville. 1961.  Contraband Cargoes: Seven Centuries of Smuggling. 
 Hamden, CT:  Shoe String Press. 
 

35
 2 
 Problems, Controversies, 
and Solutions 
 Introduction 
 Among the most challenging problems for law enforcement in the 
21st century are the globalization of terrorism and crime and the rise 
in information technology-related crime. Constant war and conflicts 
in regions characterized by failed and failing states have only con-
tributed to the problem as law enforcement becomes overwhelmed 
on all fronts. One of the biggest challenges today is cooperation 
between police agencies and government officials across borders. 
There are so many barriers to cooperation among international po-
lice forces that at times the challenges seem insurmountable, par-
ticularly when it comes to variations in technological know-how, 
languages, cultures, criminal justice systems, and historical expe-
riences. In past years any examination of organized crime was con-
ducted along the lines of specific groups and structures, usually 
confined to one or two countries, and in some case revolving around 
transnational criminal networks. In the 21st century, the intercon-
nectedness of the world’s national economies has only complicated 
the understanding of global criminal syndicates. This chapter ex-
amines the impact of failed states, terrorism, tribalism and ethnic-
ity, civil wars, the end of the Cold War, and other issues to offer a 
foundation for a better understanding of the roots of global orga-
nized crime and the challenges in controlling it. 

36 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
 Circumstances and Conditions 
 Failed States 
 Defining a Failed State 
 A  failed state  is typically a nation-state characterized by high lev-
els of crime and violence, endemic corruption, the inability of its 
leader to exercise sovereignty without brutal force, absence of con-
sent of the governed, and an unremitting atmosphere of uncertainty 
and instability. Many failed and failing states, plagued by various 
warlords, criminal groups, and competing governments, become 
havens for international organized crime networks, who take ad-
vantage of areas outside the government’s control. Some observ-
ers suggest globalization has created pockets in the world where 
failed or weak states are left to govern with little economic or po-
litical power, giving rise to domestic organized crime groups who 
operate their own underground economies, providing some form 
of political stability in the region because they are strong enough 
to resist the state. As a result of the economic vacuums created by 
globalization, shell states form fueling the growth of the global un-
derground economy by offering the refuge of illegal trade routes 
for drugs, arms  smugglers, contraband dealers, and human traffic 
(Napoleoni 2003). 
 Failed states appear in a variety of incarnations ranging from 
“high state functioning to complete state failure” (Sung 2004). An ar-
gument can indeed be made that no state has ever been in complete 
control of its jurisdiction, for crime and abuse of state authority exist 
in every society to some degree. For example, the most advanced 
Western nations with prosperous economies have flourishing drug 
markets in impoverished urban centers. When the aspect of eco-
nomic failure raises its head or when there is an unequal distribu-
tion of basic goods and services for subsistence, however, the result 
is often the rise of an alternative or  underground economy.  When the 
government is unable to ensure the availability of goods and ser-
vices, a black market usually emerges. A black market entails activi-
ties hidden from fiscal authorities and involves illicit trade in goods 
and services contrary to government regulations. Its very existence 
predisposes citizens to illegality by training (and conditioning) large 
numbers of citizens in illegal transactions. Most critical to the un-
derground economy are the vice industries and trafficking of illegal 
goods. 

Corruption 37
 Failed States and Global Organized Crime 
 The absence of a strong central government or an effective law en-
forcement apparatus often serves as an open invitation for the relo-
cation of international criminal enterprises. What’s more, organized 
crime groups find sanctuary in countries that are without sustain-
able economic development. And with the absence of central au-
thority, there is little to prevent syndicates from taking advantage of 
the opportunities awaiting them. Close to 50 countries today can be 
considered failed or failing states. Among the most prominent are 
Afghanistan, Iraq, and Somalia, which was recently branded “Af-
rica’s most utterly failed  state” ( Economist  2009). Although each is 
distinct from the other, they share some common ingredients rang-
ing from political  and economic instability, poverty, and rampant 
organized crime activity to civil disorder, terrorism, human traf-
ficking, ethnic conflict, disease, and genocide. Lack of leadership 
is often one of the greatest barriers to fixing failed states. Noam 
Chomsky (2006) defined failed states as those that are unable or un-
willing “to protect their citizens from violence and perhaps even 
destruction.” Often these same states “regard themselves as beyond 
the reach of domestic or international law” (Chomsky 2006). States 
fall into the status of failed states when their central governments 
“cease to offer freedoms, civil rights, criminal and civil justice, per-
sonal safety, and collective security in an efficient and just manner” 
(Chomsky 2006). 
 Corruption 
 Political Officials 
 Organized crime at every level in society has flourished thanks to 
its contacts with legitimate politicians, government officials, and 
business entrepreneurs. In countries from the United States to Co-
lombia, from Liberia to Russia, leading politicians, oligarchs, police 
officers, city political bosses, and military personnel have been tied 
to corruption and organized crime activities. More than 25 years 
ago, one leading expert on corruption noted “presidents, vice presi-
dents, congressmen, senators, governors, and racketeers are impli-
cated in a ubiquitous system of payoffs and favors, back-scratching, 
stealing, illegal campaign contributions, and personal aggrandize-
ments” (Chambliss 1988). At the highest office in the United States, 

38 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
President Ulysses S. Grant’s second term in office set the bar for cor-
ruption and fraud in the corridors of power. One scandal during his 
administration, known as the Whiskey Tax Evasion conspiracy, in-
volved a plot to defraud the government out of millions of dollars 
in tax revenue on distilled spirits in order to raise money to pay for 
the campaign for Grant’s second term in 1872. 
 When it comes to links between organized crime and the urban 
metropolis, no city is as prominent as Chicago, which as early as the 
1860s was regarded as America’s “wickedest city.” Chicago “busi-
nessman” Michael “Big Mike” McDonald was regarded as “the first 
true crime lord” and among the first to recognize the importance of 
the political fix by supporting winning candidates for mayor and 
other offices  during the 1870s (Russo 2001). Chicago’s tradition of 
political corruption continued into the 20th and 21st centuries. No 
city in America is so linked to  corruption (although several others 
come close). Although Chicago’s political hierarchy has not been 
directly connected to any global crime rings, the city is a destination 
and transit point for many international crime networks today. 
 Latin America has its version of the political boss as well—the 
 Coronelismo in Brazil and the  cacique  in Mexico. In 2007, the Wash-
ington Office on Latin America released a report describing selected 
bribes paid by Vladimiro Montesinos of the Peruvian Congress. For-
merly a captain in the army, he was fired for various criminal activi-
ties in the 1970s. He later reinvented himself as  an expensive  defense 
attorney for drug traffickers, politicians, and military officers facing 
fraud charges. One expert reported that while Peru was under Presi-
dent Fujimori, individuals such as Montesinos helped turn the 
country into a “mafia state” (WOLA 2007). Fujimori was sentenced 
to 25 years in prison in 2009 for human rights charges involv-
ing mass murder and kidnappings committed under his admin-
istration in the early 1990s. Investigators have documented how 
Montesinos, despite ties to drug traffickers, served as Fujimori’s 
right-hand man and spymaster while sharing spoils on a range of 
trafficking schemes with top-ranking Peruvian military officers, 
including multimillion kickback profits from various weapons pur-
chases and related procurements, while sharing funds from the 
military pension fund with his cabal (Conaghan 2006, 119). 
 Any discussion of organized crime in Russia must take into ac-
count the persistence of the  krysha,  or “roof,” which operationally 
speaking refers to an organization or individual that can provide 
protection and patronage that is necessary to carry on business or 
government practices (think Boss Tweed of New York City). This 

Corruption 39
system dates back to the organized crime practices of the former 
Soviet Union, when the “state itself started to sell private protec-
tion” (Varese 2001). In the late 1980s, the Soviet Interior Ministry is-
sued an order that allowed Soviet policemen to enter into contracts 
with various industrial concerns, collective farms, and ministries 
to provide security services for commercial establishments. Things 
had gotten so bad for gangsters that one Moscow boss complained: 
“It’s gotten impossible to work; one place the cops are providing 
roofs; somewhere else it’s the KGB” (CSIS 1997). As communism 
collapsed in the wake of Perestroika in 1991, the  kryshas  filled an 
organizational void, leading in effect to one variant of corrupt pa-
tronage replacing another. Few would argue that the Soviet system, 
particularly in its last decades, was being run by a “kleptocracy” of 
Communist  bureaucrats. Some observers  even began to use the 
word  mafiya  when referring to the Communist Party and the State. 
Industrial and agricultural managers were considered part of the 
country’s most powerful mafia networks, as were the directors of 
any business that controlled the exploitation of the nation’s natural 
resources as the distribution and production of goods. Few doubted 
that bribery and corruption were required to move up the Russian 
economic ladder to wealth (Lintner 2003). 
 Police 
 Corruption plagues Mexico’s criminal justice system at every level. 
It is one thing to arrest crime syndicate leaders. It is a greater chal-
lenge to keep them behind bars because of corruption and payoffs. 
In May 2009, for example, 53 prisoners, including at least 11 gun-
men from the Gulf Cartel, escaped from a prison in Zacatecas. At-
tention immediately focused on the prison’s warden, two ranking 
police officers, and 40 jailers, who were subsequently arrested for 
questioning. That same week federal prosecutors in Mexico ordered 
the arrest of the former police chief and former public security di-
rector of Morelos, a state south of Mexico City. They were among 
those sought for providing protection to the Beltran Leyva drug traf-
ficking organization (Althaus 2009). 
 One cannot look at the current drug war on the Mexican-
American border without acknowledging the central role played by 
corruption. According to one recent estimate, 62 percent of Mexican 
law enforcement was on the payroll of drug gangs (Schaan 2009); 
however, no country is immune to police corruption. One recent 
case in the United States illustrates how one corrupt officer can ruin 

40 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
an investigation. In 2002, former FBI Special Agent John Connolly 
was convicted of racketeering, obstructing justice, and making false 
statements to federal investigators. Evidence was introduced in a 
long trial that proved the agent had leaked the proceedings of a 
grand jury investigation to Boston crime  boss James “Whitey” Bulger, 
who was able to escape one step ahead of the law and is now on the 
FBI Most Wanted List. In another related case, a Massachusetts state 
trooper was convicted of obstructing justice after passing on surveil-
lance information to Bulger associates (Nardini 2006). 
 A more recent case, however, probably has more parallels for 
the current situation in Mexico, where it has become almost impos-
sible to tell the good guys from the bad. In 2005, two highly deco-
rated former New York Police Department detectives were indicted 
for moonlighting as hit men for the mob, one of the most sensational 
police corruption cases in department history. They were convicted 
for their roles in eight murders committed between 1986 and 1990. 
According to the prosecution, the two were paid $4,000 a month to 
help the Lucchese crime family (and more if they performed a hit 
themselves). They were accused of committing at least two murders 
themselves after pulling over targeted drivers for traffic stops. They 
were tried and convicted of Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Or-
ganizations Act (RICO) charges that included racketeering con-
spiracy, witness tampering, witness retaliation, and obstruction of 
justice. Because of legal technicalities in the conspiracy case, how-
ever, a judge threw out the case and the defendants were acquitted 
(McGrath 2006, McShane 2006). 
 Tribalism and Ethnicity 
 In certain regions of the world, a high premium is placed on an in-
dividual’s tribal or ethnic background. In Africa, for example, it is 
common for criminal gangs and organized crime syndicates to be 
bound together by these natural affinities. Not surprisingly, crimi-
nal gangs and organized crime groups are often bound together 
by these same built-in loyalties. In the same way, conflict arises be-
tween these gangs that often can be traced back to events that oc-
curred during or even long before colonialism and the members’ 
living memories. For example in November 2006, at least 10 peo-
ple were killed and hundreds of homes torched in a bout of gang 
violence between Kenyan gangs precipitated by a bootlegging dis-
pute exacerbated by tribal rivalries between the Mungiki from the 
Kikuyu tribe, one of the nation’s largest, and the Taliban from Luo, 

Corruption 41
another important tribe (Gettleman 2006). One resident publicly 
suggested that the conflict was more about tribal rivalries than crim-
inal rackets, issues that are too often ignored by foreign observers. 
 In the new millennium, transnational crime syndicates have 
taken advantage of the artificial colonial borders that divide eth-
nic groups in most African nations. According to one study there 
are at least 177 ethnic culture areas in Africa divided by national 
borders. For example, the Nigerian-Cameroon boundary divides 
14 tribes, whereas that of Burkina-Faso divides 21 tribes (Reader 
1998, 575–576). In most of these regions one’s national identity usu-
ally is second place to kinship, ethnic, and tribal links. 
 Transnational crime is facilitated by the migration of popula-
tions  across borders and in the process becomes a factor in a trans-
portation and migration process that transfers illicit and stolen 
merchandise across borders. With the rise in globalization, most 
countries now host immigrant communities within their borders. 
Organized crime syndicates have used this process by creating new 
legal commerce networks to shield deep-rooted trafficking networks 
that control the trafficking of illegal goods between various Afri-
can host nations and their homes abroad. Such relationships have 
been well documented among Chinese, Indian, Nigerian, and Rus-
sian communities in southern Africa, and likewise among Indian 
and Middle Eastern groups in East and West Africa. 
 Civil Wars, Political Transitions, Regional Conflicts 
 As recently as the 1980s, it was a Soviet tradition to downplay the 
existence of organized crime and little effort was directed at fight-
ing it. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, hundreds if not thou-
sands of new criminal groups emerged in Russia to take advantage 
of the latest opportunities offered by the democratization process. 
Scholars trace organized crime in Russia back to the birth of the 
Soviet system itself. By the 1960s, modern syndicates had emerged, 
thanks in part to the state apparatus that “encouraged, facilitated 
and protected it” (Wright 2006, 148). During the Brezhnev regime in 
the 1970s and 1980s, it became clear to an increasingly dissatisfied 
public that the country was being run by a “kleptocracy” of Com-
munist bureaucrats. It became fashionable to brand the corruption 
“Mafiya.” But rather than referring to a monolithic hierarchy, the 
term referred to the daily inequities of life in the Soviet Union exem-
plified by the power structure and the incumbent corruption that 
persisted under the Communist system, where those who controlled 

42 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
certain services or commodities—retail sales managers, mechanics, 
doctors, prostitutes, butchers and so forth—were as likely as any-
one to be branded “Mafiya.” Many viewed the Communist Party 
and State as “Mafiya.” Industrial and agricultural managers were 
considered part of the country’s most powerful “mafia networks,” 
as were the directors of large state ministries and factories—any en-
terprise that controlled the exploitation of its natural resources and 
the production and distribution of goods. Few argued that bribery 
and corruption were required to move up the economic ladder. 
 In the final decades of the 20th century, journalists used the 
term to refer to the emerging crime syndicates and gangs taking 
advantage of the release of price controls that marked the former 
Soviet economy. In 1991, Yeltsin banned the Communist Party. Out 
of the rubble of the Soviet Union emerged 15 new republics. This 
development facilitated the expansion of Russian organized crime 
syndicates who took advantage of the confused state of affairs and 
the shortage of goods as they created a black market that would 
eventually spread to Western Europe and America. As early as 1994, 
the FBI identified Russian gangs operating in a number of major 
U.S. cities. Journalist Robert I. Friedman perhaps put it best when 
he said they “didn’t come here to enjoy the American dream, they 
came here to steal it” (Friedman 2000, xix). 
 Organized crime spreads rapidly in times of political transi-
tion and violence. Prominent examples include the fall of the So-
viet Union, the Yugoslavian conflicts, and the end of apartheid in 
South Africa, all of which took place in the early 1990s. Likewise, 
since the end of the Cold War in the 1990s, there has been a notice-
able increase in the overlapping of politically inspired violence and 
organized crime activity in Latin America, Asia, and Africa. Poorer 
countries in Africa and Central Asia lost Cold War sponsors and 
many then collapsed into low-intensity civil conflicts. Where U.S. 
and Soviets once competed for dominance bestowing weapons on 
friendly governments, weapons traffickers have stepped in to fill 
the vacuum. 
 In 1994, South Africa replaced the policy of apartheid with a 
constitutional democracy. Before this time, the authoritarian na-
ture of what was essentially a police state stemmed the expansion 
into the country by global crime syndicates, although homegrown 
groups flourished. While the security apparatus focused its investi-
gations on political opposition, indigenous organized crime groups 
expanded throughout the country; and in the face of stringent bor-
der controls, organized crime increased significantly by trickling 

Corruption 43
over the borders into neighboring countries. As South Africa be-
came more tourist-friendly, its open border and new trading part-
ners offered new links for criminal syndicates (Gastrow 1999). 
 More than 75,000 people died during El Salvador’s violent civil 
war in the early 1980s. More than a million El Salvadorans fled to the 
United States seeking sanctuary, many settling in Hispanic-friendly 
communities in southern California (USAID 2006). Some of the im-
migrants had served in the paramilitary Farabundo Marti National 
Liberation Front (FMNL) during the conflict and were well versed 
in military weaponry and tactics and the concomitant brutality that 
often went along with it. FMNL and civilian refugees eventually 
banded together to protect themselves from myriad Los Angeles 
gangs, evolving into Mara Salvatrucha, better known as MS-13. 
 According to a number of observers, there were almost 100,000 
private security guards in Guatemala as of 2009, outnumbering the 
police and the army. Most are poorly educated and badly paid. It 
is unknown how many of them turned to crime (O’Connor 2009). 
In 1996, after a 36-year civil war that left thousands dead, Guate-
mala is awash in guns. This combined high unemployment and 
poverty have contributed to the growing drug trade, organized 
crime, and violent crime. With more than 6,000 murders in a coun-
try of 13 million, murder is the leading cause of death for young 
males (Washington Office on Latin America October 2007). 
 The Vietnam War was one of the seminal events of the 1960s 
and mid-1970s. In its aftermath thousands of Asian refugees, mostly 
Vietnamese, immigrated to the United States. Among the émigrés 
were many who had ties to the former South Vietnamese govern-
ment and the U.S. military. Others consisted of corrupt officials, for-
mer military officers, and black market profiteers who had made 
a fortune during the decade long conflict. The first wave of immi-
grants came to the United States directly after the war, with suc-
cessive waves heading for Canada, Australia, England, France, and 
Germany. Recent scholarship suggests that among the unintended 
consequences of this emigration was the transmittal of ancient con-
flicts between the Vietnamese and Chinese to the United States. Vio-
lence resulted as gangs went to war with each other in several major 
cities, most notably Toronto and Boston. In one of the most promi-
nent examples, members of the Chinese Ghost Shadows unleashed 
a barrage of bullets on Vietnamese mourners at the funeral of one 
gang kingpin. 
 A number of African countries suffered through violent civil 
conflicts  since the 1980s. In regions such as West Africa, particularly 

44 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
in Sierra Leone and Liberia, military forces have been forced to turn 
to organized crime activities to fund their armies. Both countries 
are considered failed states, where “chaos is the norm and war is 
away of life.” As a result, the region became a welcoming beacon to 
“non-state actors” such as drug syndicates, criminal organizations, 
and terrorist groups (Farah 2004). Warfare between the Popular 
Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA) and the National 
Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) in Angola, the 
northern Nilotics and southern Bantu tribes in Uganda, the Liberian 
civil war, northern Arabs and southern Africans in Sudan, Moslems 
and Christians in northern Nigeria, and the Mozambican National 
Resistance (RENAMO) and the Liberation Front of Mozambique 
(FRELIMO) in Mozambique, just to name some of the most promi-
nent. These conflicts often facilitated a growing weapons and drug 
trade. According to a 2005 United Nations study, wherever there 
was civil warfare it is difficult to distinguish between organized 
crime and political violence, and armed conflict has actually encour-
aged certain forms of organized crime to flourish under the guise 
of political struggle. The main debate, however, is whether these 
cliques can be considered actual organized crime groups. By most 
accounts few of these groups are hierarchically structured, and most 
seem to be highly flexible and individualistic in their methods. 
 After the death of its leader, Marshal Tito, in 1980, Yugoslavia 
suffered a series of conflicts that would lead to the country’s disin-
tegration in the 1990s and into the emergence of the new countries 
of Serbia, Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Slovenia, and Kosovo. Many 
Yugoslavian gangsters who had fled the country during the Tito 
years moved back to become involved in the wartime rackets. The 
end of the Yugoslavian conflict and humanitarian crisis in 1999 had 
the unanticipated consequence of stimulating the growth in orga-
nized crime activity, including gambling, money laundering, drug 
trafficking, human smuggling, extortion, robbery, and murder. The 
region encompassing the former Yugoslavia, as well as other Bal-
kan nations, contains the countries of Albania, Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
Croatia, Kosovo, Macedonia, Serbia, Montenegro, Bulgaria, Greece, 
and Romania, a region that has been called “the soft underbelly of 
the European narcotics market  ” (Michaletos 2007). Balkan organized 
crime groups can be traced back to the traditional clans of the 15th 
century. Each clan established itself in the different territories and 
controlled most activities in that region. Modern-day organized 
crime in the Balkans is built in part on the structure of the earlier 
family clans and ethnic solidarity (FBI, 2008). In the 21st century, Bal-

Organized Crime and Terrorism 45
kan syndicates have transformed themselves from a hierarchical 
model toward more loosely organized networks. By 2007, most Eu-
ropean investigators acknowledged that Serbian and ethnic Alba-
nian clans controlled the heroin coming north out of Afghanistan, 
weapons smuggled through the Balkans, and prostitutes trafficked 
from Africa to Copenhagen (Fleishman 2006). 
 Until the Yugoslavian conflicts, most of the European drug mar-
ket was supplied with narcotics being brought in through the Balkan 
route, which began in Pakistan, Iran, and Turkey, where the narcotics 
were processed. The road led through Greece; Bulgaria; the former 
Yugoslavian republics of Serbia, Slovenia, and Croatia; Romania; 
Hungary; the Czech Republic; and Slovakia, until reaching final des-
tinations in Austria, Italy, Switzerland, and the rest of Western Eu-
rope. The outbreak of war in the region led Albanian syndicates to 
blaze new paths to Europe in order to avoid the warfare. A southern 
route was inaugurated from Turkey and then through Bulgaria, for-
mer Yugoslavian republics, Kosovo and Albania, to Italy and other 
countries. The northern route went from Turkey through Bulgaria, 
Romania, and Hungary to the Czech Republic, Slovakia, and West-
ern Europe. Once the war ended, the old Balkan route was reestab-
lished; however, the new route for drug trafficking stayed and the 
entire network was expanded by Kosovan Albanians and Turkish 
groups (BIA 2003). 
 Organized Crime and Terrorism 
 Before the end of the Cold War in the 1990s, the labels  terrorist and 
 criminal  were generally clear-cut. Since then the distinction has be-
come less clear. Globalization and the collapse of the Soviet Union 
are among the factors that have increased the links between orga-
nized crime and terrorist groups. With the decline in state sponsor-
ship of terrorism, a number of groups have turned to a variety of 
criminal enterprises that were formerly the domain of organized 
crime syndicates to finance their activities. Scholars began linking 
these two phenomena in the 1970s and 1980s, an era when leftist 
terrorist groups in Latin America forged relationships with drug 
cartels. These relationships were sometimes referred to as narcoter-
rorism. But in the 1990s, Western law  enforcement reported that ter-
rorist groups were increasingly involved in criminal activity around 
the world. For example, as early as 1993, French authorities uncov-
ered evidence that illegal drug sales in Muslim slum areas were 

46 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
under the direction of Afghanistan War veterans with ties to Alge-
rian terrorist groups. 
 Most international organized crime and terrorist groups oper-
ate secretly and usually take sanctuary in an underground network. 
Both use intimidation, ruthlessness, and violence against mostly ci-
vilian targets. They use similar tactics such as kidnapping assassina-
tion and extortion. In both types of organizations, the control of the 
group over the individual is strong. Both use front operations such 
as legitimate businesses or charities to obscure their activities and 
launder money. In any case both types of criminals have to use un-
derground economies and networks to move people, goods, weap-
ons, contraband, and, most important, money. Terrorists use existing 
criminal networks for logistics, including financing activities (Carter 
2004). Some terrorist groups even run banks and create phony (shell) 
companies to launder money, whereas others engage in secret ar-
rangements  and form alliances with organized crime groups ( Ehren-
feld 2003). 
 By the beginning of the 21st century, one study reported that 
at least 30 terrorist campaigns were financed by organized drug 
trafficking groups. For example, Islamic extremist groups such as 
Hezbollah and Hamas have been widely cited for participation in 
complex money-laundering schemes, arms and drug trafficking, 
and intellectual property piracy. A wide range of terrorist groups 
have resorted to global organized crime to finance their activities, 
but its adoption by Muslim extremists has been troubling to most 
devout Muslims. 
 In 2003, one investigation examined countries in Africa, the for-
mer Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, South Asia, Western Europe 
and Italy, and the Western Hemisphere, and in each region research-
ers discovered examples of the confluence of terrorism and orga-
nized crime. The investigators noted that beginning in the mid-1990s, 
it had become clear that both types of organizations had “globalized 
and diversified their operations” (Berry, Curtis, Hudson, Karacan, 
Kollars, and Miro 2003). Little had changed by 2007 when a report 
by Siobhan O’Neil of the Congressional Research Service asserted 
terrorists have turned more and more to crime to fund their activi-
ties. Explanations have varied, but most agree that it is a response 
to dwindling state sponsorship and the rising number of amateurs 
creating “small, semi-autonomous terrorist cells” (O’Neil 2007). Au-
thorities have cited the cocaine, hashish, and heroin drug trade; but 
nothing is out of the question including counterfeiting, bootlegging 
Viagra, and stealing and cutting infant formula. 

Organized Crime and Terrorism 47
 Over the past decade the ideological motives of once doctri-
naire extremist groups have eroded to the point of blurring their 
distinction from organized crime groups. It has become de rigueur 
for researchers to discuss the process by which international terror-
ists and criminals adopt each others’ methods and strategies. Re-
searchers such as Louise Shelley insist the “merger of transnational 
crime, terrorism and corruption is profound,” (Shelley 2003) but 
others such as Raphael Perl of the Library of Congress’s Congres-
sional Research Center insist “it is important to recognize that we 
are dealing with two distinct and separate phenomena” (Perl 2003). 
Nonetheless, terrorist groups have become increasingly pragmatic 
when it comes to financing their organizations using drug smug-
gling, money laundering, and organized fraud. 
 Both groups continue to adapt to the changing geopolitical cli-
mate. Because both need safe havens to operate from, a failed or fail-
ing state is especially seductive. Once upon a time terrorists went 
jurisdiction shopping to see which targets were most vulnerable 
when it came to security. Now they are just as likely to look for coun-
tries from which they can base their criminal operations outside the 
parameters of terrorism. All of these groups share the need for a 
country offering maximum opportunities for survival and expan-
sion for their criminal networks. 
 Researchers across the spectrum have increasingly turned their 
attention to the process by which organized crime syndicates and 
international terrorists adopt each others’ organizational and opera-
tional characteristics. Global terrorist groups have become intimately 
involved in weapons and drug trafficking networks, illegal immi-
grant smuggling, and money laundering—staples of most global or-
ganized crime groups. While the debate continues over the so-called 
terrorism-crime relationship, more recently Shelley and Picarelli 
(2005) devised a multistage process to explain this metamorphosis. 
In the first stage the two groups begin to actively buy and sell ser-
vices from each other, borrowing each other’s methods in a process 
of “activity appropriation.” Both groups in the next stage will begin 
to work more closely together in a symbiotic relationship once they 
mutually recognize their shared methodologies and motivations. In 
some regions such as the Tri-Border area of Paraguay, Brazil, and Ar-
gentina, there is so much overlapping of activities it is impossible to 
distinguish one behavior from the other. What is most likely occur-
ring is that both global organized crime groups and terrorist groups 
are using overlapping networks and often cooperating in various 
enterprises. According to a 2006 FBI study for the Pentagon, this 

48 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
phenomenon is growing because “terrorists and organized crimi-
nals use similar approaches to promote their operations” (quoted 
in Milton 2006). Both rely on an underworld of black markets and 
laundered money, both rely on shifting networks and secret cells to 
accomplish objectives, and both need weapons, false documents, 
and safe hiding places. 
 The amount of money required for a terrorist operation dem-
onstrates the financial resources required. One report suggested 
that Iran’s attempt to establish a “Hezbollah-like network of cells” 
in Iraq costs between $750,000 and $3 million a month for one unit 
of Iran’s Revolutionary Guards (Hennessy-Fiske and Susman 2007). 
Although in this case they have the sponsorship of the Iranian gov-
ernment, most groups do not have this luxury and must rely on 
crime strategies. What is most clear about the convergence of these 
two groups is that terrorists support their activities through what-
ever avenues are convenient and profitable, and can include any 
combination of the following: legal employment, accepting volun-
tary donations, social assistance, or using criminal activities. The 
goals of both often dovetail when it comes to raising money. For 
example, it is easier to traffic drugs through zones of civil conflict, 
and various extremists have discovered that drug trafficking is an 
important source for purchasing weapons, organizing terrorist at-
tacks, and maintaining armed terrorist cells. 
 Borrowed Tactics 
 Organized crime in South Asia runs the spectrum from drug and 
arms trafficking to extortion, money laundering, and kidnapping. 
More recently the links between organized crime and terrorism have 
become better documented, particularly in the region’s urban cen-
ters in India and Pakistan. Since the early 1990s, there have been 
an alarming number of terrorist attacks launched with the partici-
pation of crime syndicates. In 2003, the U.S. Treasury Department 
designated Dawood Ibrahim a “global terrorist” for allowing al 
Qaeda to use his smuggling routes, supporting jihadists in Paki-
stan, and participating in the Mumbai attacks of 1993. 
 Dawood Ibrahim was placed on the list of drug kingpins in the 
U.S. Kingpin Act in 2000. Ibrahim built Mumbai’s most formidable 
criminal syndicate by smuggling black market gold and other com-
modities into India’s closed economy, while steamrolling his way 
into the nation’s Bollywood industry (Kaplan, Fang, and Sangwan 
2005). During the 1980s and 1990s, he was the acknowledged leader 

Organized Crime and Terrorism 49
of the Mumbai underworld, directing a multibillion dollar vice em-
pire involving prostitution, drugs, and gambling. His connection 
to Bollywood ensured no star would refuse his request to appear 
in one of his films. Ibrahim is one of the rare players on the interna-
tional stage who is regarded as both a crime kingpin and a terror-
ist leader. His syndicate was identified as being involved in the 
March 12, 1993 attacks in Mumbai that left 257 dead and more than 
700 injured. The planning and carrying out of the attacks is a graphic 
example of how terrorists and organized criminals cooperate. Ibra-
him and another South Asian syndicate boss, Tiger Memon, re-
cruited members to be trained for attacks in Pakistan. They were 
tutored in the use of variety of weapons, including a potent explo-
sive additive known as RDX (Zaidi 2003). With the collusion of cor-
rupt customs officials, the weapons were landed in ports near the 
target center. 
 The Sicilian Mafia has taken pages from the terrorist playbook 
as well. In 1982, Italy passed a law that would allow authorities to 
confiscate Mafia wealth. Although various threats were made to 
wage war on the Italian state itself, it was not until 1991 that any 
type of agreement could be reached—a decision to strike at the na-
tion’s cultural heritage, such as museums and churches. It was the 
first time in its history that the Sicilian Mafia took such measures 
to cause economic damage by ruining the tourist industry (Dickie 
2004). The explosion of a car bomb outside Florence’s famed Uffizi 
gallery on May 27, 1993 launched the campaign, killing five and 
wounding dozens. This bombing was followed in the summer by 
bombings of two Roman churches and a modern art gallery (Bohlen 
1995). Unlike terrorist groups, which typically claim responsibil-
ity for their actions, the Mafia does not. Links between the attacks 
and the Mafia, however, were apparent from the beginning when 
it was discovered that the device used in the Uffizi bombing was 
similar to others used in Sicily (as well as from information pro-
vided by a legion of informers, or  pentiti ). The bombings ceased as 
the government backed off from its campaign to confiscate Mafia 
wealth. Sicilian crime boss Bernardo Provenzano has been credited 
by most scholars for ordering his followers to desist from attacking 
civilians, policemen, and politicians, and in the process bringing the 
Mafia back from the verge of destruction (Longrigg 2009). He no 
doubt saw the folly of attacking these civilian targets once his pre-
decessor, Toto Riina, was locked up for life for launching the wave 
of violence in the early 1990s that only precipitated a harsher crack-
down by the authorities. What’s more, Provenzano was well aware 

50 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
how these tactics hampered the Mafia’s ability to make money. So 
in essence, an unwritten truce was called in which the Italian gov-
ernment would reduce its Mafia suppression efforts as long as the 
Mafia’s rackets were conducted according to traditional standards 
that basically meant they would only kill each other. 
 Organized Crime Hybrids 
 During its heyday in the 1990s and the first years of the 21st century, 
the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) was a major 
player in the illicit drug trade. Founded in 1966, FARC had a mem-
bership at its zenith estimated to range in the tens of thousands. Dur-
ing the last four decades it has proven to be among the most durable 
and resourceful rebel groups in the world. Over the years it has in-
creasingly taken on a “hybrid” appearance, toeing the line between 
terrorist and organized crime network. Before its recent setbacks in 
2008 and 2009, its coffers were consistently replenished by a variety 
of traditional organized crime activities not limited to kidnapping 
for ransom, extortion (which they refer to as revolutionary taxes), 
and robbery. Drug manufacturing and trafficking, however, has 
been its greatest profit-maker, bringing in an estimated $300 mil-
lion a year (ISVG 2003). Some estimates even placed FARC profits 
at $600 million a year through related protection rackets involving 
poppy growers and by slowly eliminating some of the cartel mid-
dlemen and organizing its own distribution network (Hanson 2009). 
By taking part in the most important stages of the manufacturing 
and distribution process, FARC ensured a steady stream of funds. 
In addition, the group taxes cultivators of coca plants and controls 
manufacturing laboratories. It has been estimated that at one time 
the group made a “tax for peace” profit on any Colombian citizen 
worth more than $1 million. During the administration of President 
Andres Pastrana, FARC consolidated and expanded its activities 
thanks to a number of concessions made by the government, which 
included establishing a demilitarized zone and a crackdown on the 
opposition paramilitary groups (ISVG 2003). 
 Intersecting Activities 
 The majority of modern terrorist groups have turned to organized 
crime activity in one form of another to fund their operations. Ter-
rorist groups need money to operate. During the last 20 years, state 
sponsorship has virtually disappeared and terrorists now count on 

Organized Crime and Terrorism 51
a variety of criminal methods to raise funds including kidnapping, 
extortion robbery, fraud, larceny, smuggling, dealing in contraband, 
forgery, and counterfeiting (Nance 2003). Terrorist groups have used 
criminal activity to fund their operations since at least the 1970s 
when various Leftist groups in Western Europe and the Americas 
used bank robbery, which they called “expropriation,” and other 
forms of armed theft. Since then a number of terrorist groups have 
either adopted organized crime tactics on their own or set up as-
sociations with established organized crime groups. Those con-
forming to the association model include the Albanian mafia with 
the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA), the Colombian cocaine cartels 
with FARC, the South Asian Dawood syndicate with al Qaeda and 
the Sri Lankan Tamil Tigers, and the Central Asian syndicates with 
the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan. 
 One leading expert suggests: “The most illustrative nexus be-
tween a criminal and terrorist group—one in which a mutual rela-
tionship has proven integral to the operation of both entities”—is 
the relationship between the Albanian mafia and the KLA during the 
Kosovo conflict (Makarenko 2005, 132). The KLA emerged in 1996 
out of the conflict in Yugoslavia, with the goal of winning Kosovan 
independence from Serbia. More than 90 percent of Kosovo’s pop-
ulation is ethnic Albanian, so it should be no surprise that there was 
such an affinity between the two groups, especially considering that 
Albanian crime syndicates shared the KLA’s concerns over pan-
Albanian ideals, politics, and terrorism (Mutschke 2000). The links 
between the two groups, however, were forged much earlier fol-
lowing the democratization process that began in 1990. During this 
time of adjustment, the rule of law that had so characterized the 
formerly Communist regime gave way to an environment charac-
terized by criminal syndicates. It was also during this period that 
Albanian drug traffickers were consolidating their control over the 
Balkan heroin-smuggling routes. By the end of the 1990s, the con-
vergence of these groups had become a major concern for law en-
forcement, as the KLA and the Albanian syndicates morphed into 
“a well-oiled arrangement” in which millions of dollars in drug 
profits were funneled to the KLA to purchase weapons. This some-
times was the result of “drugs-for-arms” barter (Makarenko 2005). 
It is estimated that between 1996 and 1999, at least half the funds 
reaching Kosovo came from the drug trade. In 1998, the U.S. State 
Department branded the KLA a terrorist organization after report-
ing that it financed its campaigns with heroin profits and from sup-
port by various Islamic extremist groups. In 1998, Interpol declared 

52 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
the KLA a major player in the trade of drugs for weapons, was trans-
porting US$2 billion worth of drugs into Western Europe each year 
(Mutschke 2000). By the summer of 1999, observers were calling Ko-
sovo the “Colombia of Europe,” as KLA supporters became promi-
nent in the international underworld. What is most probable but 
rarely mentioned is that organized crime groups hoped their par-
ticipation in the campaign would provide them a safe haven in the 
Kosovo region. Despite gaining its independence in 2008, Kosovo 
still is marked by a criminogenic environment characterized by high 
unemployment and industrial decay that have led the population 
to perhaps be a little more tolerant of illegal activities. By some ac-
counts the heroin trade has even revitalized some local economies 
(Roth 2000). 
 Narcoterrorism 
 The term  narcoterrorism  was coined by Peruvian president Belaunde 
Terry in 1983 to describe violent attacks on antinarcotics police by 
the Shining Path ( Sendero Luminoso ) insurgents in Peru. Other Latin 
American countries have borrowed the term, most notably Colom-
bia, in reference to links between drug traffickers and guerrillas. 
There is still a lack of consensus as to what exactly constitutes nar-
coterrorism, with critics suggesting that it connotes “too broad a 
range of activities to be definitive for a particular type of terrorism” 
(Kushner 2003). Some scholars suggest that it refers to all insurgent 
actors involved in the drug trade, whereas others argue the term 
only confuses the issues linking terrorism and drug trafficking. Most 
authorities agree, however, that it refers to a type of terrorism linked 
to the production of illegal drugs. 
 Much of the debate stems from the actors involved. Although 
narcoguerrillas are considered the purveyors of narcoterrorism, the 
question becomes whether some criminal groups are primarily 
criminal syndicates that masquerade as political movements. Dur-
ing the 1980s, Peru was plagued by communist-inspired revolu-
tionary movements such as the Shining Path and Tupac-Amaru 
(MRTA) groups. There was an initial presumption that these move-
ments were legitimate and that their involvement in the drug trade 
was due to their reliance on drug lords who financed their opera-
tions. Out of this relationship grew the notion, promulgated by a 
U.S. government report, of the “narcoguerrilla as an alliance be-
tween drug smugglers and arms dealers in support of terrorists and 
guerrillas” and as an extension of Soviet influence in Latin America 
(Clawson and Lee 1996). More recent scholarship suggests this was 

Organized Crime and Terrorism 53
not the case at all, that in reality these aforementioned movements 
existed not as political movements but as “original, full-fledged cre-
ations of the local drug lords, who set the movements up as armed 
insurrection organizations to help them fight against” the drug erad-
ication campaign set in motion by the president of Peru (Nakamura 
1999, 100). 
 Beginning in the early 1980s, members of Colombia’s Medil-
lin cocaine cartel embarked on a campaign to obtain power and re-
spectability through legitimate channels. Under the leadership of 
Pablo Escobar, however, the cartel took a more deadly turn toward 
violence in order to acquire some type of political legitimacy by 
attacking anyone who attempted to oppose it or enforce the law. 
Many observers link the drug lord’s campaign of terror to the re-
criminations from the 1984 murder of justice minister Rodrigo Lara 
Bonilla, who had the nerve to run against Escobar for a congressio-
nal seat. Up to that time, Colombian President Belisario Betancur 
had been opposed to extradition. In the months leading up to the 
assassination, however, he began to extradite drug traffickers to 
the United States, a most feared destination for crime kingpins. By 
most accounts it was at this point that the cocaine kingpins turned 
to acts labeled narcoterrorism, which included public bombings 
and the targeted killings of judges, policemen, judges, journalists, 
presidential candidates, and anyone viewed as opposition to the 
cartel (Thoumi 2003). Others have suggested that it was just as 
likely that the 1984 Tranquilandia raids, which saw the destruction 
of more than 12 tons of cocaine and millions of dollars of invest-
ments, was the turning point, as it was just two months after this 
that the campaign of narcoterrorism was launched in full force (Lup-
sha and Cho 1999). Throughout the 1980s and into the 1990s, huge 
bombs were detonated in public places and monuments to govern-
ment security such as police stations, leading the new administra-
tion of President Virgilio Barco to declare “an all-out war against 
narco-terrorists” (Thoumi 2003, 206). Today’s depredations by the 
Mexican cartels, replete with brutal torture, beheadings, and tar-
geted assassinations have an eerie resonance to those who covered 
the years of  plata o plomo  (silver or lead) in Colombia, when the Me-
dillin cartel offered judges the choice of taking financial bribes or 
a bullet. 
 Unlike previous crackdowns on the drug syndicates, this new 
strategy proved more successful as the government seized Medillin 
cartel property and arrested and extradited its leaders. Although 
the cartel responded with its own declaration of “total and absolute 
war” and continued its campaign of terror, it also sowed the seeds 

54 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
for its demise, as any support of the once popular kingpin Escobar 
withered away and his foes began to assist the government. 
 Mexican drug cartels have also ratcheted up their use of terror-
ist activities to deter the current crackdown on drug trafficking or-
ganizations by President Felipe Calderon soon after he took office 
in 2006. Latin American cartels had nothing on their Mexican coun-
terparts when it came to violence and intimidation. The Juarez cartel, 
for example, was known for cutting off the fingers of informants and 
making them eat them (Watson 2007). A number of indicators sug-
gest the terror campaign is working, with police resignations and de-
sertion from the military at record numbers. Even the news media 
has been targeted by the gangs, which has led to many papers cen-
soring the amount of coverage they give to organized crime. Fur-
ther evidence of the failure of the punitive crusade against the drug 
trade was the government’s decision in 2009 to pass legislation de-
criminalizing the possession and use of small amounts of mari-
juana and cocaine. 
 Diamond Smuggling 
 It is estimated that three-fourths of the world’s rough diamonds are 
mined in Africa. International syndicates from Russia, China, Italy, 
and Africa are among the many criminal groups taking part in this 
often unregulated business. The trade in untraceable diamonds in-
tersects with organized crime activity and terrorism in a variety of 
ways. For example, rebel groups have turned to this trade to pay 
for weapons and support war plans. 
 In recent years crime syndicates have entered the diamond 
business at different levels. The Sicilian Mafia has established front 
companies to purchase a diamond cutting and polishing license 
and gained a foothold in Namibia’s diamond cutting industry. Any 
participation in this business offers crime syndicates enormous 
money laundering opportunities. Because the Sicilians were laun-
dering dirty money, they had no problem paying up to 30 percent 
market value for rough diamonds. Once these were cut, they would 
be untraceable among the millions of carats of cut diamonds traded 
internationally (Grobler 2007). 
 Al Qaeda followed in the footsteps of other savvy Middle 
Eastern groups, such as Hezbollah, by entering the West African 
diamond trade. Hezbollah had been financing its activities with 
diamonds thanks to the assistance of an underworld of Russian 
weapons traffickers, British mercenaries, retired Israeli military offi-

Organized Crime and Terrorism 55
cers, and Western merchants all eager to play their parts in the dia-
mond trade (Farah 2004). According to a 2003 British human rights 
organization report, al Qaeda spent nearly a decade illegally smug-
gling and trading for diamonds in western Africa (White 2009). It 
initially became involved in the legitimate trade to establish a base 
and contacts in the market. Over time, members began moving most 
of the trade into the underground market. Taking advantage of the 
weak states and regulations of Africa, al Qaeda soon established 
its own international trading network. Although there is still some 
debate about whether diamonds were used to support al Qaeda 
(namely by the 9/11 Commission), in 2002 Belgian investigators ar-
rested an al Qaeda contact on charges of diamond smuggling and 
illegal weapons trafficking following an examination of the suspect’s 
computer and other records that revealed tens of millions of dol-
lars linked to the al Qaeda purchase of diamonds. What perhaps 
was most disturbing was evidence that this was only one part of a 
plot to purchase high-tech weapons in Central America from Ni-
caraguan army contacts, with the assistance of an Israeli weapons 
dealer located in Central America (Farah 2004). 
 Counterfeiting 
 The counterfeiting of various commodities is an integral part of 
organized crime networks that support terrorist groups. An Inter-
pol official has even suggested that “terrorist groups who resem-
ble organized crime groups” are drawn to counterfeiting because 
it is possible to “invest at the beginning of the counterfeiting cycle 
and extract an illicit profit at each stage of the counterfeiting pro-
cess from production to sale, thus maximizing returns” (Noble 2003, 
7). According to a 2000 study by the Global Anti-Counterfeiting 
Group in Paris, at least 11 percent of the world’s clothing is coun-
terfeit (Thomas 2007). A number of other legitimate commodities 
are counterfeited by organized crime groups, including DVDs, CDs, 
cigarettes, alcohol, and even cosmetics. On the surface this activ-
ity might seem harmless. It seems much more malignant, however, 
once one acknowledges that various counterfeit rackets are oper-
ated under the auspices of criminal organizations that also engage 
in parallel activities of drug trafficking, child prostitution, human 
trafficking, and terrorism. Profits from the sale of these goods have 
funded groups connected with Hezbollah, Northern Ireland para-
military organizations, and Colombia’s FARC, to name just a few. 
In fact, some terrorism experts regard counterfeiting as one of the 

56 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
three top sources of funding for international terrorism (Thomas 
2007). 
 In Northern Ireland the most popular counterfeit goods are 
clothes, computer games, CDs, DVDs, cigarettes, currency, and 
vodka. Interpol estimates this activity costs the economy millions 
of dollars each year. Northern Ireland’s police authorities reported 
in 2003 seizing more counterfeit goods than all other UK police 
forces combined, but believe this represents only 5 percent of the 
total market (Thompson 2003). Goods are typically sold door to 
door by salesmen. In one instance a man was stopped at Belfast 
International Airport in June 2003 after debarking a flight from Sin-
gapore with $500,000 USD in counterfeit DVDs (Thompson 2003). 
Counterfeit currency that originated in this region has been found 
throughout the world, including copies of sterling, euros, and dol-
lars. Investigators claim the British sterling’s counterfeited water-
marks and foil strips are almost undetectable. Unlike legitimate 
trade, those that are counterfeited only have to pass limited scrutiny 
(by consumers), with little in the way of safety concerns. Some goods 
are made with harmful ingredients, including cigarettes from the 
Far East that contain harmful fillers along with the tobacco, as well 
as bogus vodka that is watered down with industrial alcohol. 
 By the end of the 20th century, advances in technology had rev-
olutionized and expanded illegal counterfeit networks. For example, 
currency counterfeiting used to be a specialized industry, but the ad-
vent of computers, laser printers, and scanners has expanded capa-
bility to make more passable bank notes. At one time the $100 bill 
was the most frequently counterfeited currency in the world, and 
as a result global markets were awash in them. In response, the U.S. 
Treasury Department redesigned this bill and added a watermark 
and other security devices. In less than a month counterfeit $100 
bills were being reproduced and used successfully in Eastern Eu-
rope thanks to high-resolution color scanners that can reproduce the 
watermarks and colors of fibers in the paper (Taylor, Caeti, Loper, 
Fritsch, and Liederbach 2006). 
 Asia is the epicenter for software piracy, which continues to 
have wide appeal for organized crime groups. Some groups have 
even made the transition from drug trafficking to this type of coun-
terfeiting, as “the profits are high and the risk is very low” compared 
to human smuggling and drugs, where it is difficult to develop 
a legitimate front or cover operation (Gates 2001). A software of-
fice in Silicon Valley, however, has a certain “air of respectability” 
(Gates 2001). 

Organized Crime and Terrorism 57
 Nuclear Smuggling 
 In 2007, a U.S. ambassador proclaimed that “smuggling and loose 
border control associated with Georgia’s separatist conflicts” posed 
a threat “not just to Georgia, but to all the international community” 
(Sheets and Broad 2007, A19). What he was referring to was recent 
intelligence reports that indicated illicit smuggling continued un-
abated in this former Soviet republic as tiny separatist regions broke 
away to “to become lawless criminal havens” (Sheets and Broad 
2007, A19). In one public opinion piece published around the same 
time entitled, “How Organized Crime is a Nuclear Smuggler’s New 
Best Friend,” investigators revealed a number of factors leading 
to a widening access to nuclear materials among criminal groups 
(Shelley and Orttung 2006). Among the more troubling revelations 
were reports tying the influx of drugs through Central Asia and 
Russia from Afghanistan to increased drug abuse among nuclear 
workers in one closed city. What makes this so troubling is the po-
tential for narcotics kingpins associated with organized crime to 
take advantage of vulnerable addicts. Some news reports suggest 
it is possible to gain entrance into a closed city where some nu-
clear sites are located for as little as a $5 bribe. This might not be 
as alarming, except for similar claims made by other investigators. 
One report revealed that “More than one fifth of the 120,000 work-
ers in Russia’s former ‘nuclear cities’—where more than half of all 
employees earn less than $50 a month—say they would be willing 
to work in the military complex of another country” for the right 
place (Naim 2003, 31) Signaling the ongoing relationship between 
immigration, globalization, and international crime, Russian con-
struction companies have hired a large number of undocumented 
workers, some perhaps previously targeted by Islamic recruiters. 
According to another source, a construction foreman at one Russian 
project hired to protect nuclear materials was murdered for refusing 
to cooperate with organized crime (Shelley and Orttung 2006). 
 There is little doubt that the small arms market is a worldwide 
concern. In 1994, German police reported the arrest of a plutonium 
black-marketeer, the fourth such seizure that summer. The year be-
fore, Germany reported 123 known cases of illegal nuclear materials 
trading in that country. The 1994 arrest took place at Munich air-
port, where more than 11 ounces of material was confiscated, mak-
ing it the largest such seizure up to that time. The substance was 
brought by Lufthansa jet from Moscow (Walsh and Boudreaux 1994). 
The illegal market for state-of-the-art weaponry, including nuclear 

58 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
weapons materials, increases each day as criminal syndicates, 
nation-states, and warlords vie for the latest tanks, radar systems, 
and missiles. According to the International Atomic Energy Agency, 
there have been more than a dozen substantiated cases (and prob-
ably many more) of smuggled nuclear-weapons-usable material 
since the mid-1990s. 
 It is unknown how much of the material is available on the black 
market, but there is little doubt that there is a growing demand for 
the products in the interconnected worlds of terrorist and organized 
crime groups (Naim 2003). But it would require a terrorist/criminal 
group to gather all of the scientists, engineers, and other required 
actors to produce a nuclear device capable of approaching the ex-
plosive capabilities of the weapons dropped against the Japanese in 
World War II. Despite a formidable number of challenges, techni-
cal and scientific in nature, it is not out of the realm of possibility 
that terrorists with the assistance of criminal syndicates can acquire 
the materials to create a nuclear explosion. Russia still remains one 
of the best targets for nuclear materials. It has been well chronicled 
how poor security conditions, combined with low salaries and mo-
rale of scientists, present strong incentives for all involved. Other 
scenarios include obtaining nuclear weapons through force, bribery, 
and theft (Kushner 2003). 
 Despite countless doomsday scenarios posited by everyone 
from academics and law enforcement to screenwriters and novel-
ists, “there has never been a single verified case, anywhere, of the 
theft of any sort of nuclear weapon” (Langewiesche 2006, 83). There 
are a number of convincing explanations why terrorists and crimi-
nals have not succeeded in getting their hands on nuclear weapons 
almost 20 years after the fall of the Soviet Union. One of the more 
thoughtful investigators suggests the explanation is rather simple: 
either they are “ignorant, incompetent, and distracted,” or nuclear 
weapons and materials are much better protected than was previ-
ously presumed (Langewiesche 2006). 
 Other Types of Criminal Activities 
 Money Laundering 
 Money laundering is used by organized crime groups around the 
world to conceal the existence of illicit income (as well as its source 
and use). This is often accomplished under the guise of legitimate 

Other Types of Criminal Activities 59
business fronts. According to the International Monetary Fund, be-
tween 2 and 5 percent of the world’s gross domestic product ($500 
billion) consisted of money being fraudulently laundered (Nackan 
and Cooperman 2006). 
 Various sources have been credited with introducing the term 
 money laundering , but it was probably coined sometime in the late 
1920s or early 1930s, when U.S. Treasury agents were tracking Al Ca-
pone. Few homes had running water let alone a washing machine 
in this era, so most took their clothes to the neighborhood laundry. 
Capone’s syndicate apparently controlled hundreds of Chicago’s 
laundries. The business allowed his organization to conceal its illicit 
income from bootlegging and other sources by claiming it as in-
come from his legitimate laundry business—hence the association 
between money and laundering (Lunde 2004). 
 The concept of modern money laundering can be traced back 
at least to the Prohibition era of the 1920s, when American bootleg-
gers flush with cash needed to disguise their profits from the tax 
services. Jewish gangster icon Meyer Lansky’s biographer and oth-
ers credit Lansky as the pioneer of money laundering, tracing his 
involvement back to his days as a “one-man think tank” for Lucky 
Luciano in the early 1930s (Lacey 1992, 4  –5). Using a series of shell 
companies and offshore bank accounts, Lansky made it even more 
sophisticated by transferring profits from New Orleans slot ma-
chines to a Swiss bank account in 1934. He followed with accounts 
in the Caribbean and other lax tax havens. Lansky engineered one 
scheme called the “loan-back,” which exploited the liberal policies 
in the Swiss banking system in the 1960s. Couriers carried cash from 
the United States to Switzerland to avoid tax services. The money 
was deposited in a Swiss bank account, which was identified only 
by a distinct number (a practice now frowned on). Lansky then bor-
rowed back his own money. Once safe in his coffers it was usually 
safe from the taxmen. 
 Hawala  
 Parallel underground banking arrangements have operated along-
side legitimate banking systems for centuries. Underground or infor-
mal banking networks have been variously referred to as alternative 
remittance systems, informal funds transfer systems, and informal 
value transfer systems. Different systems evolved in various parts 
of the world, including  hawala  in South Asia and  fei-ch’ien  in China. 
Informal networks like these continue to operate from Asia to the 

60 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
Americas (McCusker 2006). Of these the most prominent is  hawala, 
which originated in an era marked by substantial long-distance trade 
by sea and by camel caravans. This system played an important part 
in a merchant’s security strategy. Because pirates and robbers were 
always a threat to commodities in transit, traders created a system 
of monetary transfer based solely on trust (and grounded in Islamic 
propriety). This allowed both travelers and traders to conduct busi-
ness in foreign countries without physically carrying currency (Ma-
brey 2003). 
 Hawala  is widely used throughout South Asia and the Middle 
East. Attempting to track funding through  hawala has been com-
pared to trying to catch smoke or “electronic blips as they fly through 
the atmosphere” (Madinger 2006, 391). 
 Because a  hawala  transaction leaves no paper trail, any esti-
mates of the money exchanged in this way is meaningless. It is es-
pecially useful for transmitting funds from and for criminal and 
terrorist activities. These transactions have been compared to wire 
transfers facilitated through banks and companies such as West-
ern Union. The  hawala  system is attractive for both its simplicity and 
convenience. For example, if one needs to transmit money for goods 
in countries hundreds or thousands of miles apart, the process be-
gins with finding an upstanding member of the local Muslim com-
munity. The  hawala  businessman provides a chit receipt for the funds 
being transferred; he then telephones or faxes instructions to a party 
in another country, who is instructed to provide money to the in-
tended recipient, minus his fee. In the end, this system is still simple, 
quick, safe, and effective, with no requirements to save documents 
that can easily be shredded. 
 Offshore Banking and Shell Corporations 
 Any bank located outside the United States is considered offshore. 
Other nations have different laws and regulations in regard to com-
pany formation, with many countries offering extensive secrecy 
provisions, including rules of nondisclosure of company officers, 
shareholders, or owners. Because of their lax requirements, the Isle 
of Man, Panama, Gibraltar, Bermuda, the Bahamas, the Netherlands 
Antilles, Hong Kong, Luxembourg, and Switzerland have been 
among the most popular destinations for those requiring privacy 
in their business dealings (Madinger 2006). 
 Shell corporations  are considered “the mainstay of money laun-
dering schemes.” Shell corporations typically have no assets or 

Other Types of Criminal Activities 61
liabilities and just require a charter to operate. Shell banks have 
been around since at least the 1960s, when the Internal Revenue Ser-
vice discovered a pattern of shell banking institutions opening up 
throughout the Bahamas. Visitors to these “banks” usually found 
an empty office with the name of the bank on the door. Shell banks 
were created expressly for the purpose of concealing the names of 
depositors through means of secret numbered accounts. What re-
ally captured the attention of investigators was that some of these 
were closely associated with gambling interest, union racketeers, and 
underworld couriers from around the world. It did not take long 
before inspectors figured out that much of the money pouring into 
shell banks  were proceeds from  casino  skims  in Las Vegas  and, more 
important, were out of American jurisdiction. Underworld figures 
used these funds to finance gambling operations in the Caribbean 
(Messick 1969). 
 Money reaches the shell banks from the United States by pri-
vate planes, boats, and other means. After money is deposited in 
the shell banks, the funds are redeposited into more substantial 
English or Canadian banks located in the Bahamas. Once the funds 
are secreted into these accounts using the name of the depository 
shell bank, the funds can be either retained in Nassau or forwarded 
with commission to Switzerland for redeposit (Madinger 2006). 
 In 2001, New York’s Federal Reserve Bank estimated that more 
than $800 billion was sitting in Grand Cayman banks (Mathers 
2004). In recent years, however, much has changed. According to 
one observer, “today it’s harder to launder money in Cayman than 
it is in the United States,” noting that once the Financial Action Task 
Force (FATF) dubbed the country the world’s leading noncoopera-
tive country when it came to enforcing money laundering laws, the 
government there responded by introducing new money launder-
ing legislation (Mathers 2004, 159). The FATF was established by 
the G-7 group of industrialized countries in 1989 to fight money 
laundering, and in 2000 it declared 29 offshore jurisdictions to be 
deficient and created a list of the 15 most uncooperative countries 
and territories (Naim 2005). 
 Controlling Money Laundering 
 By most accounts money laundering remained a low priority for 
law enforcement until cash came rolling in during the cocaine trade 
in the 1970s. It did not even become a federal criminal offense per 
se in the United States until the passage of the Money Laundering 

62 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
Control Act of 1986. Before that time prosecutors brought cases 
under a variety of taxation statutes related to defrauding the gov-
ernment. The first meaningful legislation dealing with money laun-
dering was the Bank Secrecy Act in 1970, which mandated a series 
of reporting and record-keeping requirements designed to help 
track money launderers. In theory, it was based on the proposition 
that unusual transactions of currency at domestic financial institu-
tions and unusual shipments of currency into or out of the United 
States might be related to organized crime activity (Powis 1992). Its 
most important requirements forced banks and other financial in-
stitutions to report currency transactions over $10,000 into or out 
of the country on a Customs Form 4790. Over the years the laws and 
penalties have been amended, and in 1990 financial institutions were 
required to obtain identification and maintain records on all pur-
chases between $3,000 and $10,000, including those made with ca-
shier’s checks, bank checks and drafts, traveler’s checks, and money 
orders (Powis 1992). 
 One longtime ruse to get around these requirements was 
through structuring, a process in which large sums are broken down 
into amounts under $10,000 for purposes of conducting transactions 
at financial institutions. During the 1980s, it became a major tool for 
drug traffickers. Better known as  smurfing,  it sometimes involves 
organizations of between 5 and 15 couriers that launder money 
through a series of structured transactions. Large amounts of cash 
are given to small groups within the smurfing organization; the 
groups then travel to various cities where individuals visit a num-
ber of banks buying cashiers checks and money orders for less than 
$10,000. This is done repeatedly until all the cash has been dispersed. 
The checks are then mailed back to the hub city and deposited into 
banking  accounts. At this point it is not necessary to file cash trans-
action reports, as these are required by law only for cash transac-
tions. The cash is often wired to accounts in countries with strict 
bank secrecy laws. Although smurfing is time consuming, labor in-
tensive, and expensive, it is still popular (Powis 1992). 
 Electronic Money Laundering 
 The spread of electronic banking and e-payment systems has been 
a blessing for money launderers. Digital technology has done for 
money laundering  what it has accomplished in the legitimate econ-
omy with online retail selling. Most researchers assert that orga-
nized crime groups are at the forefront of adopting and developing 

Other Types of Criminal Activities 63
technologies to facilitate money laundering. Billions of dollars in 
money transfers are conducted each day through electronic im-
pulses. This method is widely used by banks shipping money to 
each other, stock exchanges, brokerages, commodities dealers, credit 
card companies, money remitters, governments, and wealthy in-
dividuals. Currently the three major electronic funds transfer sys-
tems are CHIPS, SWIFT, and Fedwire, which combined handle 
about $2 trillion in transfer each day (Madinger 2006). Digital tech-
nology allows money to move across the planet at the speed of light. 
By using such a route, criminals have the advantage of jurisdiction 
shopping for countries and regions where transaction regulations 
are less rigorous (Grabosky 2007). Criminal networks use electronic 
money laundering in a variety of ways. Some use legitimate on-
line services such as auctions, where a buyer and a seller can team 
up in order to transfer “phantom” items at a previously agreed on 
price; thus criminal proceeds are transformed into cash as the re-
sult of the sale of a legitimate commodity. Others use online gam-
bling services to create an account with service providers using 
illicit income, and then eventually cashing out the account and col-
lecting funds as winnings. Some have even set up their own tele-
communications  companies  to  commit fraud and money laundering 
(Grabosky 2007). 
 High-Tech Crimes 
 Almost every new technology that has been created has been quickly 
adapted by criminals. Organized crime groups have shown an un-
canny ability to adapt and use the newest technologies that have 
played an integral role in the trend toward globalization. 
 International organized crime groups have joined the infor-
mation technology revolution by recruiting computer specialists. 
Modern members of international crime groups are likely to mon-
itor online chat rooms and newsgroups deciding on who would be 
likely recruits for their syndicates. Besides offering handsome fi-
nancial incentives, there are cases where individuals have been in-
timidated into joining. 
 In April 2005, American and international law enforcement 
agencies cooperated in Operation Cyber Chase, which focused on 
an Internet pharmacy based in India that had been reportedly sell-
ing controlled drugs to thousands of online customers. At the time 
the only requirement for purchasing drugs was a credit card and an 
address. The foreign distributor sold drugs on 200 Web sites and 

64 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
shipped drugs in bulk to cities in the United States, where the drugs 
were repackaged and shipped to customers. As a result of the in-
vestigation, more than 20 individuals were arrested in the United 
States, Canada, and India, and $7 million from banks and almost 
7 million doses of the drug were seized (McAfee 2005). 
 Since the 1990s, global organized crime groups have vastly 
benefited from advances in the worlds of information and high tech-
nology. There is a remarkable continuity between the crimes com-
mitted online today and those from earlier eras. Even if the tools 
are different, the goals and motivations have stayed the same. In 
earlier eras it was common for merchants in immigrant commu-
nities and ethnic enclaves to pay protection money to organized 
gangs under the threat of harm or business disruption. Today or-
ganized gangs are just as likely to threaten the disruption of on-
line business if ransoms are not paid. Bank robbers still rob banks 
and security vans, but the more technologically savvy have found 
it safer and more profitable to hack into a bank’s computer system 
and transfer money using electronic payment systems. Internet ex-
tortion has also proven quite profitable. Also referred to as digital 
extortion or cyberextortion, it involves making specific demands 
of an individual or group of individuals under the threat of either 
physical or economic harm. Although the demands are usually fi-
nancial in nature, some cases involve nonfinancial considerations 
such as sexual favors. But the vast majority have targeted wealthy 
organizations and individuals. 
 Traditional organized crime groups have never lagged far be-
hind innovations in technology by both law enforcement and the 
business world. In 1998, one Mafia family set up a business offer-
ing services to companies to prepare them for the year 2000 (Y2K) 
problem. The consultancy firm had its own Web site and toll-free 
number, and by most accounts had a great solution for the Y2K bug. 
As soon as the company’s programmers got into a client’s financial 
software, they adjusted it so that the company’s funds were redi-
rected to other offshore mob accounts. By the beginning of the 21st 
century, New York’s vaunted crime families were making the tran-
sition to high-tech crime through a number of schemes ranging 
from telephone bill and phone card fraud to counterfeit CDs and 
credit card cloning. The deputy assistant director of the FBI Cyber-
division reported that the American Mafia made $360 million dur-
ing a seven-year period through e-crime by using search engines to 
hack into secure files and pull out credit card details, or by creating 
algorithms to generate “legitimate” credit cards (Richards 2006). 

Other Types of Criminal Activities 65
 Since the beginning of the 21st century, the FBI has been among 
the law enforcement agencies expanding its campaign against cyber 
criminals outside U.S. jurisdiction. More recently the FBI created 
Cyber Action Teams composed of two dozen individuals including 
agents, computer forensic experts, and computer code specialists. 
In 2005, the FBI claimed to have 150 agents dedicated to computer 
crime and related crimes in 56 offices around the world. In 2008, 
the Justice Department consolidated the headquarters and field re-
sources of the FBI’s Cyber Program into a single unit that would 
better facilitate the coordination and investigation of federal crimes 
involving the use of computer systems. But the biggest challenge 
to policing high-tech crime is that many of the crimes take place in-
ternationally. For example, in one case a bank reported a robbery in 
Sweden after customers were infected with a Trojan virus, leaving 
the bank with a 1 million euro loss. The subsequent investigation 
revealed that the Trojan was created in Russia, although this individ-
ual never personally used it; however, he did offer advice on the Web 
on how to use it for a fee. Individuals paid for his expertise and used 
it to attack the Swedish bank. This scenario would require investi-
gators from three different countries (Weinberg 2007). Computer 
crime is difficult to police to begin with, but when multiple national 
police forces are required, the barriers to success are multiplied, as 
the investigation often becomes mired in international red tape. 
 Nigerian Advance Fee Fraud 
 Among the groups who have made the transition to the computer 
age without losing a step are the Nigerian practitioners of the 419 
scam (refers to Nigerian criminal statute 419, which made the fraud 
illegal in 1980). They once depended on fax machines and e-mails 
in their advance fee fraud schemes but now are just as likely to be 
involved in intellectual property crimes such as pirating compact 
discs and computer programs. Anyone who uses the Internet and 
a computer has probably heard from one of these too good to be true 
offers that a large sum of money needs to be transferred to a West-
ern bank account and all that is required is your bank account and 
other personal information. In return the recipient would receive a 
handsome commission. By 2006, the United States had become the 
most lucrative 419 market, with losses reaching $800 million a year 
(Chaudhuri 2007). Despite the Nigerian connection these are truly 
global operations. Most scams begin in Nigeria, the Netherlands, the 
United Kingdom, or South Africa. More recently, India has become 

66 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
the third fastest-growing market for the fraud. In 2006, Indian vic-
tims lost $32 million (almost 10 times the amount of the previous 
year) (Chaudhuri 2007). 
 Music Piracy 
 The introduction of optical discs, including such devices as the CD 
and DVD, has radically changed the landscape of music piracy. Like 
other businesses in the intellectual property sector, the music indus-
try has proved vulnerable to global organized crime networks. Ac-
cording  to the International Federation of the  Phonographic Industry, 
which represents the worldwide recording industry, there is plenty 
of evidence linking this crime to people trafficking, money launder-
ing, drug smuggling, terrorism, and other crimes (IFPI 2004). In 2004, 
it was estimated that the annual sale of pirated music was close to 
2 billion units worth between US$4 and $5 billion. No region of the 
world has escaped this crime. 
 One of the unanticipated results of the Yugoslavian conflicts 
in the 1990s was that increased naval presence in the Adriatic inter-
rupted the traffic in contraband cigarettes from the Balkans to Italy, 
an activity managed by Italian organized crime groups. In cities 
such as Naples, cigarette smuggling had been an important source 
of income for the Camorra over the years. The collapse of this trade 
resulted in a downturn in employment and income for organized 
crime groups. Ever pragmatic, adaptable, and flexible, they found 
profits elsewhere. This coincided with the technological develop-
ment in CD counterfeiting with the introduction of faster and  cheaper 
CD burners. The convergence of these two trends saw the Naples 
underworld move from trafficking cigarettes to music piracy. By the 
turn of the century, it was Italy’s epicenter for this crime, putting out 
70 percent of the country’s counterfeit CDs (  Jane’s Intelligence Review 
 2007). In 2002, Operation Jessica ( FBI investigation) revealed the ex-
istence  of  large-scale  organized  crime involvement in the counterfeit-
ing market, with the leading role played by the Frattasio family. The 
investigation  demonstrated the  extensive involvement in the impor-
tation of the raw materials required (recordable CDs, blank music, 
and video cassettes) from Eastern Europe. Operation Jessica estab-
lished the operational structure that ran the enterprise, featuring a 
pyramidal hierarchy with the Frattasio family members at the top. 
As the counterfeiting empire expanded, it had to create the necessary 
financial structure to pay for raw materials and launder profits. This 
required setting up a number of dummy companies and corporate 

Gang Structures 67
structures that could be used to purchase equipment and raw mate-
rials for music duplication. As the operation expanded, it developed 
links   outside  the  region into northern Italy and east to Ukraine (     Jane’s 
Intelligence Review 2007). 
 Gang Structures 
 Russian Mafiya 
 In an attempt to distinguish the post-Soviet incarnation of organized 
crime from the traditionally accepted Western incarnation, investi-
gative journalist Stephen Handelman is credited with popularizing 
the alternate spelling of mafia, as in  mafiya.  Its use dates back to the 
1970s when the expression was used to refer to corrupt Communist 
Party officials, but since 1991 the meaning has broadened to include 
prominent businessmen and oligarchs who have acquired huge for-
tunes in Russia (Handelman 1995). For more than a decade the term 
was used by officials, experts, and the media to describe Russian 
organized crime; but this only obscures the fact that Russian Orga-
nized Crime is composed of diverse ethnicities and cultures, includ-
ing Ukrainians, Lithuanians, Georgians, Armenians, Chechens, and 
Dagestanis. Many use the term  Russian Mafiya  to allude to mobsters 
in general from the region, whereas others are under the misconcep-
tion that there is some centralized organization with a rigid hierar-
chy that fits under the mafiya rubric. Russian mob experts are of 
the opinion the term is used “for convenience sake.” One Russian 
expert rejects the term, preferring the usage of the term  violent entre-
preneurs , suggesting that the use of the label is “a convenient mech-
anism for putting a disproportionate amount of responsibility for 
the rise in criminal groups on the legacy of communism instead of 
blaming the ill-conceived reform policies of Gorbachev and Yeltsin” 
(Volkov 2002). Nonetheless, there is a growing consensus that the 
term  mafiya  now refers more to a method of operation rather than a 
group, and that its meaning can be found in the countless cases of 
torture, extortion, and murder by a wide range of actors in Russia, 
including politicians, businessmen, and gangsters (Serio 2006). 
 Drug Cartels 
 It has been fashionable to use the term  cartel  to describe mostly drug-
trafficking syndicates from Latin America and Mexico. The Cali 

68 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
and Medillin cartels in Colombia were prominent in the 1980s and 
1990s, but today’s focus has shifted to various Mexican cartels on 
the U.S. border. Economists, criminologists, policymakers, and oth-
ers continue to debate whether Latin America’s drug-trafficking 
organizations constitute true cartels in the economic sense. The best 
definition of cartel refers to a group of independent organizations 
that collaborate to control production, pricing, and the marketing 
of goods by its members. 
 Most  authorities  have  accepted the  cartel  explanation, including 
the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), as well as some 
criminologists who define drug cartels as “independent trafficking 
organizations that have pooled their resources to cooperate with 
each other” (Potter 2008, 184). The DEA insisted that groups such 
as the Medillin and Cali cartels were able to control prices, eliminate 
competition, and avoid arrest through the use of violence and cor-
ruption, while using criminal and legitimate businesses to launder 
drug profits. 
 One critic of the cartel theory argued that the reality behind a 
cocaine trade run by a “handful of massive, vertically integrated car-
tels that restricted production and set international prices” is a mis-
conception and a “longstanding illusion” (Kenney 2007). By most 
accounts, the current view is that the cocaine business from its in-
ception in the 1970s to the present has never been the province of a 
handful of drug cartels in Mexico and Colombia. In the 1970s, sev-
eral independent drug-smuggling outfits in Colombia did indeed 
band together into what some labeled cartels (for want of a better 
term). The leaders of the Cali and Medillin cartels offered the drug 
world a vision and a business strategy. Shipments were organized 
so that if one or more were confiscated, others would surely get 
through. On the other hand, if one trafficking unit was intercepted 
by authorities, only those participants were apprehended. Typically 
they were the source of only limited information because the units, 
like small cells, were isolated from each other and the top kingpins. 
If one suggests that a cartel is “a close, corporate bond between its 
participants, who may engage in concerted efforts to limit the size 
of the market,” however, the opposite is true (Fuentes and Kelly 
1999). Thus, on examining the Colombian cartels, the term more ap-
propriately alludes to a “geographically confined, loose federation 
or coalition of major drug trafficking organizations that have formed 
alliances for the self serving purpose of reducing the risky nature of 
the business” (Fuentes and Kelly 1999, 348). Focusing only on these 

Gang Structures 69
two organizations in Colombia leaves the impression there were no 
others, when in reality there were dozens of smaller cocaine traffick-
ing organizations at work contemporaneously alongside the Cali 
and Medillin syndicates. 
 In the end, despite the demise of the Cali and Medillin “cartels,” 
cocaine is as cheap and plentiful as ever. If these organizations actu-
ally controlled the industry like a traditional cartel, this should have 
at least interrupted its availability at its destination markets. In real-
ity, the Colombian trade was never dominated by monolithic cartels 
but was the result of numerous small, independent enterprises that 
became increasingly diffuse and decentralized after the fall of the 
Cali and Medillin leaders, the Rodriquez Brothers and Pablo Esco-
bar, respectively. Subsequent interviews with imprisoned cocaine 
kingpins lend credence to the cartel myth. Most have debunked the 
notion of a cartel dominating the cocaine trade. As one Medillin as-
sociate put it, “The cartels never existed until they were created by 
the media and the U.S. government” (Kenney 2007, 25). 
 Export Syndicates 
 More recent scholarship examines Andean cocaine trafficking 
networks in terms of  export syndicates,  rather than cartels in the tra-
ditional economic sense, as they do not control raw material produc-
tion and most distribution systems in their main markets; therefore 
these organizations “could not prevent a large increase in coca cul-
tivation and long term decline in coca prices” (Thoumi 2003, 94). 
Functioning as export syndicates, these trafficking networks are 
created to share risks and guarantee lucrative returns on the profit 
for each partner. Thus, they are actually risk-minimizing structures 
created in lieu of the ability to plan production quotas or ensure that 
orders are carried out as planned through several tiers of production 
and distribution. The foremost interpreter of this scheme argues that 
the definition of  cartel  is not applicable because the main actors in the 
production of cocaine are those who gather coca leaves and manu-
facture coca paste, transport it, refine it, and distribute it to main 
markets “tend to be fluid [as] the structure of the industry adapts 
itself to changes in the business environment brought about by the 
activities of law enforcement agencies and other factors” (Thoumi 
2003, 95). So, while there is little doubt that cocaine traffickers would 
like to operate like cartels and control market forces, it is really be-
yond their control. 

70 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
 Crossing the U.S.–Mexico Border 
 After stepping down as CIA director, General Michael Hayden as-
serted that “Mexico ranked alongside Iran as a top security risk to 
the U.S.” (Hawley 2009, A2). The violence on the American bor-
der among the warring drug gangs has led the U.S. Department 
of Homeland Security to begin contemplating a game plan to in-
tervene on the border to combat potential drug violence on the 
American side. In March 2009, however, the Obama Administra-
tion announced that despite the blueprint being worked on to deal 
with the violence, there was no plan to permanently militarize the 
border. If any troops were sent, they would probably be National 
Guard units; however, in the past this has been controversial. Some 
Texas officials claim that law enforcement agencies were poorly 
coordinating their efforts on the border and suggested that there be 
greater border security cooperation among federal agencies (Pow-
ell 2009). 
 U.S. Secretary of  State Hillary  Clinton went on record in March 
2009 admitting that the United States shared the responsibility for 
the violent drug trade on the border citing “our insatiable demand 
for illegal drugs” and “our inability to prevent weapons” from fall-
ing into the hands of Mexican criminals through illegal weapons 
transfers (Landler 2009). This is a remarkable turnaround from the 
previous administration when then Secretary of State Condoleezza 
Rice denied any connection between the expiration of assault weap-
ons prohibition in the United States and drug violence in 2008. Nev-
ertheless, it took until June 2009 for President Barack Obama to sign 
the appropriations measure that released $420 million for the Mer-
ida Initiative in Mexico (Embassy of the United States in Mexico 
2009). Mexican officials were disappointed, however, that Congress 
had cut funding by almost a third from the $1.4 billion originally 
promised for the drug countertrafficking program. Critics suggested 
that the United States was sending mixed signals by not following 
through with its promised funding. 
 The publication of the  National Drug Threat Assessment by the 
National Drug Intelligence Center in 2009, however, put more heat 
on the new U.S. administration to respond to the Mexican drug traf-
ficking organizations, which the report claimed poses “a significant 
threat to our nation” (NDIC 2009, iii). The report further noted the 
ability of the gangs to quickly respond to new law enforcement and 
policy initiatives developed by various counterdrug agencies. What 
worries many in law enforcement is the spiraling violence of urban 

Gang Structures 71
street gangs and their increasing participation in the drug trade in col-
laboration with Mexican and Asian drug trafficking organizations. 
 Prison Gangs and Street Gangs 
 The years between 1946 and 1967 were formative ones for Ameri-
can Outlaw Motorcycle Gangs (OMGs), as larger clubs absorbed 
smaller ones and formal structures were put in place allowing clubs 
to evolve into structured, organized crime groups. A handful of 
OMGs operate on an international basis. Foremost among them 
is the Hells Angels. (The gang dispensed with the apostrophe in 
“Hell’s” many years ago.) Originating in 1947, it opened up its first 
chapter under the Angels moniker in 1948. Over the past 60 years, it 
has opened chapters in a number of foreign countries. As recently as 
2006, the Criminal Intelligence Service Canada described the gang 
as “the foremost organized crime group in the country.” The Angels 
have  a  more  prominent presence  in  Canada than in the United States. 
In Canada they have 32 active chapters and at least 500 full mem-
bers; the largest chapter is in Montreal. Chapters are the foundation 
on which most OMGs are structured. Chapters control geographic 
areas  where  activities  are conducted. Experts  suggest that the Hells 
Angels and other OMGs slid under the Canadian radar screen, tak-
ing advantage of the vacuum in organized crime leadership left by 
Canada’s crackdown on Mafia activities, which reduced any sig-
nificant competition. 
 A number of observers have remarked on the operational simi-
larities between traditional organized crime (such as the Mafia) and 
Hells Angels. For example, the club is divided into two factions, 
with Omaha, Nebraska, the dividing line. Each faction has an annu-
ally elected president, vice president, recording secretary, and trea-
surer. The President of the West Coast faction is responsible for 
chapters on the American and Canadian West Coasts, Alaska, Aus-
tralia, and New Zealand. The East Coast president presides over 
other chapters including those in Europe and South America. 
 Over the past decade law enforcement has observed some 
groups developing international connections that provide them 
with access to wholesale quantities of illegal drugs. In February 
2004, for example, three members of the Dutch Hells Angels were 
killed after the theft of $11 million in cocaine. A subsequent inquiry 
revealed their international ties to Colombian drug dealers. In this 
particular case the drugs were shipped from FARC to Amsterdam 
via a new Hells Angels chapter on the Caribbean island of Curacao. 

72 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
 The Angels have more than doubled their chapters from 45 in 
1980 to more than 108, with the latest located in Manaus in the Bra-
zilian Amazon. Some authorities regard this group as America’s 
major crime export, tracing its membership in 2006 to at least 25 
countries (Marsden and Sher 2006). Members have been linked to 
activities including arson, assault, corruption, gambling, forgery, 
pornography, international white slavery, loan sharking, and car 
and cycle theft, all of which have helped transform them from a do-
mestic motorcycle gang into an international criminal enterprise. 
 Mara Salvatrucha (MS-13) is considered among America’s most 
dangerous gangs. In its early days its membership was restricted 
to Salvadorans, but in the new century the gang boasted members 
from Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Mexico, as well as sev-
eral African Americans. The gang is involved in a host of criminal 
enterprises including car theft; these cars are often traded to South 
American drug cartels for cash. One estimate in 2000 suggested that 
perhaps 80 percent of the cars driven in El Salvador had been stolen 
in the United States. Besides car theft they are connected to extor-
tion, home invasion robberies, polydrug trafficking, and other rack-
ets. MS-13 made the transition from merely another gang culture 
to organized criminal network in a rather short time because of its 
flexibility and willingness to “do any crime at any time” (Domash 
2005, 2). What has made members so difficult to track are their mo-
bility and ability to respond to new police strategies. Investigators 
have noticed how they move from state to state whenever they feel 
the heat of law enforcement. Gang members have been reported in 
Alaska, Oregon, Utah, Texas, Nevada, Oklahoma, Michigan, New 
York, Maryland, Virginia, Georgia, Florida, and the nation’s capital. 
Likewise they gravitate from country to country in Central Amer-
ica. Besides keeping on the move and developing more sophisti-
cated organizational structures, MS-13 members have responded to 
surveillance efforts by changing their gang colors and substituting 
numbers such as “67” or “76” for 13 (Domash 2005). 
 Law Enforcement 
 International Cooperation 
 Organized crime is a common threat to most countries in the 21st 
century. Any crime that transcends national borders creates a num-
ber of challenges for law enforcement around the world. Interna-

Law Enforcement 73
tional cooperative efforts in policing have been frustrated by a num-
ber of obstacles. Transnational criminal activities have stimulated 
cooperative efforts between international police agencies for more 
than a century. It was only in the years after World War I, however, 
that a true organization apparatus was created to further police co-
operation among foreign countries with the creation of Interpol. 
Founded in Vienna in 1923, the International Criminal Police Orga-
nization (Interpol) was disbanded in 1938 and resuscitated at the 
end of World War II. It facilitates coordinative endeavors between 
countries, but it also is restricted. As an international organization, 
its charter prohibits employees to engage in investigations or coor-
dination of a political, military, religious, or racial character. 
 One of the first organized crime investigations and prosecutions 
with international implications was the 1985–1987 Pizza Connection 
case, a cooperative effort by American, Italian, Swiss, Brazilian, and 
Spanish law enforcement agencies that shut down a major interna-
tional drug trafficking and money laundering conspiracy involving 
American and Sicilian criminals. This case,  U.S. v. Badalamenti, illus-
trates the contacts between Old World and New World Italian gang-
sters and what can be achieved when international police agencies 
work together. 
 In the 1970s, the Sicilian Mafia entered into an alliance with 
heroin suppliers in Turkey and established a network of refineries in 
Sicily. They also formed alliances with South American suppliers of 
cocaine before moving into the trade in the United States. The Sicilian 
Mafia came up with an ingenious distribution method known as the 
Pizza Connection, using a nationwide network of pizzerias to market 
drugs and launder money. Beginning in the 1970s, they also entered 
a franchise agreement with American organized crime groups and 
brought in thousands of their own people to work at hundreds of 
pizzerias. Instead of joining the domestic Mafia, however, most re-
ported to Sicilian boss Gaetano Badalamenti. Badalamenti operated 
pizza parlors as fronts for heroin trafficking, establishing a multimil-
lion dollar clandestine operation. Speaking in code and placing or-
ders of heroin in quantities of cheese, tomato paste, and pizza dough, 
they distributed heroin with the help of the Bonanno family, which 
had the strongest ties to Sicily. Although the group was tied domesti-
cally to New York’s Bonanno crime family, the actual operation was 
run by Sicilian immigrants, mostly in the American Midwest, who 
distributed drugs manufactured in Sicily. 
 In this case the FBI and the Italian police used informants and 
undercover agents such as Joe Pistone (Donnie Brasco) to infiltrate 

74 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
the crime syndicates involved, mostly the Sicilian Mafia and the 
Bonanno Family. It also was successful in recruiting high-level in-
formants who provided critical information. Italy’s Anti-Mafia unit 
also convinced one of Sicily’s key organizers to return from South 
America to testify against his associates in the Mafia, and in Latin 
and North America. What made this a triumphant moment for in-
ternational police cooperation, however, was that the many police 
agencies working this case shared information and resources. 
 The Pizza Connection trial began on September 30, 1985. By the 
time it ended 17 months later, it had become one of the longest and 
most complex criminal trials in American history. Of the 22 original 
defendants, 17 were convicted for taking part in the drug trafficking 
conspiracy, 4 pled guilty, and 1 was murdered after the trial began. 
The defendants were all sentenced to long prison sentences. 
 The record of innovative approaches to cooperative law en-
forcement has been mixed. Among the more successful recent in-
ternational investigations was the April 2000 Budapest Project. This 
investigation was led by the FBI-Hungarian National Police Or-
ganized Crime Task Force, which operated out of Budapest, Hun-
gary. Its goal was to dismantle organized crime networks that had 
popped up in Central Europe after the fall of the Soviet Union. 
Among the task force’s first major coups was building a case against 
Ukrainian-born crime kingpin Semion Mogilevich. He was forced 
to flee from Budapest back to Moscow, barely eluding indictments 
charging him with money laundering, securities fraud, and RICO 
conspiracy charges. In the investigation’s early stages, four FBI 
agents partnered with seven elite officers from the Hungarian Na-
tional Police. 
 European Union 
 The European Union (EU) is a treaty-based framework that defines 
and manages economic and political cooperation among its mem-
ber states. The internationalization of organized crime has been in-
fluenced by the strengthening of the EU, with recent steps toward 
lowering border controls between states. Europe is probably the 
most profitable market globally for the drug trade and remains the 
most important organized crime activity of the region’s crime net-
works (Council of Europe 2005). The European Market was created 
in 1993, with the goal of increasing the region’s economic integra-
tion by allowing the free movement of goods, services, people, and 
capital between nation states. This process was designed to create 

Barriers to International Law Enforcement  75
a single space of mobility for EU citizens to travel, work, and live 
in Europe. The unintended consequence of this policy and similar 
schemes such as the 1985 Schengen Agreement (named after the 
city in Luxembourg it was signed in), which removed a number of 
systematic border controls between participating countries, was to 
facilitate smuggling operations of criminal groups’ intent on ex-
panding their operations. Today, 27 countries have full member-
ship status in the EU. 
 The European Police Office (Europol), modeled after Inter-
pol, was established in the Maastricht Treaty on European Union in 
1992. Initially its main focus was on the drug trade. Two years later 
its mandate was expanded to include preventing the trafficking in 
nuclear materials, money laundering, motor vehicle theft, and hu-
man smuggling and trafficking. Europol was ratified by European 
members states in 1996. Its main objective today is improving po-
lice cooperation among member states to combat terrorism and in-
ternational organized crime. Like Interpol, its agents have no arrest 
powers, but are allowed to participate in operations with other po-
lice forces. Europol has enhanced law enforcement cooperation by 
entering into bilateral agreements with a number of non-EU coun-
tries and international organizations including Interpol, the World 
Custom Organization, and the United States. Nonetheless, a num-
ber of problems still exist that have hindered multinational cooper-
ation. Most of these problems involve sharing information (or not) 
with countries that harbor terrorists or organized crime groups. An-
other problem is related to the compiling of statistical data, which 
varies from country to country. This hinders any meaningful re-
sponses to certain crime problems. Most scholars in this field have 
argued for a clearly defined policy governing international police 
cooperation, especially one dealing with the exchange of informa-
tion and operational support (Haberfeld and McDonald 2005). 
 Barriers to International 
Law Enforcement 
 Barriers to cooperation begin at the most basic level—arriving at 
a legal definition of organized crime. It is important to have agree-
ment among countries when legislating against it in bilateral or mul-
tilateral agreements. Recent attempts by the United Nations and 
the EU have gone a long way in this direction. Major challenges to 

76 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
international cooperation among police forces fighting organized 
crime include language barriers, variations in legal traditions  among 
countries, disparity in technological resources, regional conflict and 
civil war, and sharing intelligence. 
 Language 
 Language facilitators are key ingredients in the war on terror and 
organized crime. Any shortage of translators and interpreters can 
hamper international investigations and create an insurmountable 
barrier to effective communication, timely interrogations, and timely 
translation of documents. Language barriers can also impede com-
munications between nations and between interrogators and sus-
pects. Using the EU as a microcosm for examining this issue explains 
the barrier on the regional level. Its almost two dozen member states 
have 20 official languages including Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, 
Estonian, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Hungarian, Italian, Lett-
ish, Lithuanian, Maltese, Slovak, Slovene, Polish, Portuguese, Span-
ish, and Swedish. (Although official EU documents are supposed to 
be published in all the languages, daily routine is dominated by 
English, as the use of French is diminishing.) Of these languages 
only three are considered working languages—French, German, and 
English. (By comparison the United Nations uses six working lan-
guages.) As a result of so many languages, there is always the po-
tential at any given time that hundreds of different interpreters 
might be required to translate all statements into all languages in-
corporated in the EU. For example, a meeting of the EU in 11 official 
languages would require 380 interpreters (Roth and Sever 2005). 
Currently, the EU employs at least 4,000 interpreters. Because of the 
requirements of the language variations, however, it can take up to 
a week for something to be translated into languages of all the mem-
ber states. This often involves the translation first across intermedi-
ate languages because of a deficit of interpreters for some languages. 
This process has led to a loss of information and clarity, and even 
errors resulting from the inherent dangers of multiple language in-
terpretations. (Suggestions have been made to make English the of-
ficial language of the EU, or to make Esperanto a common second 
language.) In one country alone, such as in the case of Estonia, there 
are several native languages. Of the 1.4 million inhabitants, 70 per-
cent speak Estonian and 29 percent speak Russian and a number 
of dialects). Switzerland, with 7.3 million people has 4.6 million Ger-
man speakers, 1.4 million French speakers, and 500,000 Italian speak-

Barriers to International Law Enforcement  77
ers (Davies 2004). In 2004, only 10 of the EU countries were able to 
meet the deadline for the translation of the EU’s notebook into their 
native languages. As a result some of the laws of the EU could not 
be enforced in national courts, as citizens could claim they did not 
understand them. Malta was among the countries affected because 
of a lack of Maltese translators. Even larger countries such as Po-
land, however, could not meet the translation deadline, thereby com-
promising various investigations (Davies 2004). 
 Varying Laws and Jurisdictions 
 Another barrier is the variations in legal traditions and notions of 
criminality around the world. There is no common system of crimi-
nalization, and variations among national substantive criminal laws 
can create obstacles to mutual legal assistance and extradition. As 
it stands, what might be a crime in one nation might not be in an-
other. For example, crimes such as blasphemy and apostasy are 
serious crimes under the Islamic legal tradition. This brings up the 
dilemma of whether a non-Islamic country can be expected to ex-
tradite an individual for these offenses. Obstacles often beckon when 
secular countries cooperate with more religious regimes. It is im-
portant that nations are sensitive to issues of religion and ideology at 
all levels, including law enforcement. Even the difference between 
common and civil legal traditions requires a commensurate recon-
ciliation of disparate legal systems. 
 Technology 
 When it comes to access to modern technology, there is a wide di-
vide between the “have” and “have not” countries; it should be a 
high priority that these countries enter agreements allowing for the 
sharing of access to modern crime-fighting technologies. One of the 
weaknesses in most international conventions and agreements is 
that they are more focused on judicial cooperation than on police 
cooperation. Without sound systems for regulating the exchange of 
operational police information, transnational crime networks will 
continue to hold the upper hand. Europe has developed a variety of 
cooperative efforts over the years, with Interpol and Europol being 
the most prominent. In the 21st century, it is imperative for police 
forces to cooperate beyond their national borders and jurisdictions. 
Organized criminal activities that transcend national borders will 
always create challenges for law enforcement. First steps have been 

78 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
taken through bilateral and multilateral agreements such as Europe’s 
Schengen Agreement. 
 Policing Cyberspace 
 International law enforcement faces a number of challenges when 
responding to cybercrime, as many of the acts take place internation-
ally. In one case a bank reported a robbery in Sweden after customers 
were infected with a Trojan (computer virus), leaving the bank with 
a loss of 1 million euros. An investigation suggested the virus was 
created by someone in Russia, although the individual never per-
sonally used it. He did, however, offer a Web page with advice on 
how to use if for a fee. Others paid the fee and attacked the Swedish 
bank. This scenario required investigations in three different coun-
tries (Weinberg 2007). If this case had involved the FBI, agents would 
not have been allowed to travel overseas unless they were asked by 
a particular country, and once they did, they would have no special 
powers of arrest, but would be available for technical and investiga-
tion support. In the cyber era, foreign police departments have noted 
improved interaction and reciprocity with the FBI. In one 2006 case, 
the FBI reported breaking up a credit card theft ring involving the 
United States, Poland, and Romania. During the investigation, the 
FBI temporarily stationed agents with their counterparts to help sur-
veillance and information sharing. This contrasts with past practices 
of stationing FBI agents at U.S. consulates and embassies abroad. 
Although there have been a number of successful cooperative ven-
tures, there are still cases that result in conflict and distrust, such as 
a 2002 case in which Russian police accused an FBI agent with com-
puter hacking after the agent downloaded evidence from a seized 
computer in Russia without official approval (Bryan-Low 2006). 
 Conclusion 
 America’s “First War on Organized Crime” was kick-started by the 
late Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy in the early 1960s when 
he resuscitated the Organized Crime and Racketeering Section of 
the Department of Justice, and the Task Force on Organized Crime 
of the President’s Commission on Crime and Administration of Jus-
tice (1967) produced a report heralding the power and organization 
of organized crime in the United States. Ex-Attorney General Robert 
Kennedy was assassinated (in 1968), however, before these initia-

Conclusion 79
tives bore any fruit. Until the 1980s, organized crime was treated as 
a domestic problem in the United States; and the results of most fed-
eral, state, and local organized crime initiatives were rather lack-
luster. The Pizza Connection case (1985–1987) demonstrated the 
reach of global organized crime networks and was a rare victory for 
international law enforcement efforts. Throughout the 1990s, how-
ever, most law enforcement efforts  were  too  narrowly  focused  on 
the usual  suspects  of traditional Italian and Italian American orga-
nized crime. 
 By the early 21st century, other international issues dominated 
the attention of law enforcement, most notably terrorism. It took the 
new U.S. Attorney General Michael Mukasey in April 2008 to turn 
attention from the “War on Terrorism” to the almost forgotten “War 
on Organized Crime.” This was no doubt the result of the global-
ization of organized crime and the obvious links between terror-
ism and organized crime, as Mukasey warned of the rising threat 
from “a new breed of mobsters around the world [that] was infil-
trating industries, providing logistical support to terrorists and be-
coming capable of ‘creating havoc in our economic infrastructure’ ” 
(Schmitt 2008). Because of the transnational challenges of fighting 
these new “hybrid” organizations and networks, the new “war” has 
paid few dividends so far. One of the few victories has been recent 
extradition agreement treaties between Latin America and Mexico 
with the United States that have seen a number of drug kingpins 
transferred to the United States to face more punitive (and certain) 
justice. Others, however, are  always waiting in the ranks to take their 
places. 
 New technologies have played a major role in the trend toward 
globalization. Illicit trafficking networks have reaped rewards from 
these  alongside  legitimate  competitors, allowing them to lower risks, 
increase productivity, and streamline their business. Drug traffick-
ers and pirates, gun runners, and human smugglers have access to 
technologies that aid communication with far-flung gangs around 
the world. Drug dealers are just as likely to arrange deals online or 
even from the anonymity of a cybercafé as they are on a street cor-
ner. Alternatively, they can simply use a disposable cell phone that 
can be tossed in the garbage after a short time. 
 The global nature of computer crimes and the blurring of elec-
tronic borders have led the FBI and other law enforcement agen-
cies to reach out beyond the United States to improve cooperation 
with other agencies around the world. The FBI now ranks cyber-
crime as its third priority behind terrorism and espionage. Most au-
thorities insist that terrorism and cybercrime are not just changing 

80 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
the shape of organized crime, but the way individuals organize to 
commit crimes as well. 
 References 
 Althaus, Dudley. 2009, May 19. “Warden, Jailers Held in Mexico Prison 
Escape.”  Houston Chronicle: A8. 
 Berry, LaVerle, Glenn E. Curtis, Rex A. Hudson, Tara Karacan, Nina A 
Kollars, and Ramon Miro. 2003, October.  Nations Hospitable to Organized 
Crime and Terrorism. Federal Research Division, Washington, D.C.: 
Library of Congress: 1–252. 
 Berry, LaVerle, Glenn E. Curtis, Rex A. Hudson, and Nina A Kollars. 
2002, May.  A Global Overview of Narcotics-Funded Terrorist and Other 
Extremist Groups. Federal Research Division, Washington, D.C.: Library 
of Congress: 1–142. 
 BIA (Security Information Agency). 2003, September. “Albanian 
Terrorism and Organized Crime in Kosovo and Metohija.” Available 
at http://www.kosovo.net/albterrorism.htm. Assessed February 21, 
1008. 
 Bohlen, Celestine. 1995, April 28. “Mafia’s Foes Fear Rome Is 
Falling.”  New York Times, http://www.nytimes.com/1995/04/
28/world/mafia-s-foes-fear-rome-is-faltering.html. Accessed 
September 7, 2009. 
 Bryan-Low, Cassell. 2006, November 21.“To Catch Crooks in 
Cyberspace, FBI Goes Global.”  The Wall Street Journal: A1, A11. 
 Carter, David L. 2004.  Law Enforcement Intelligence: A Guide for State, 
Local and Tribal Agencies, U.S. Department of Justice. Available at 
http://www.cops.usdoj.gov/default.asp?Item+1404. 
 Chambliss, William J. 1988.  On the Take: From Petty Crooks to 
Presidents. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 
 Chaudhuri, Pramit Pal. 2007, March 9. “U.S. to Find Means to Stop 
Spread of 419 Fraud.”  Hindustan Times, http://home.rica.net/
alphae/419coal/news2007.htm. 
 Chomsky, Noam. 2006.  Failed States: The Abuse of Power and the 
Assault on Democracy. New York: Metropolitan Books. 
 Clawson, Patrick, and Renssalaer Lee III. 1996.  The Andean Cocaine 
Industry. New York: St. Martins Press. 
 Clutterbuck, Lindsay. 2004. “Law Enforcement.” In  Attacking Terrorism, 
ed. Audrey Kurth Cronin and James M. Ludes, 140–161. Washington, 
D.C.: Georgetown University Press. 

References 81
 Conaghan, Catherine. 2006.  Fujimori’s Peru: Deception in the Public Sphere. 
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press. 
 Connor, Anne-Marie. 2009, April 25. “More Guards but Less Security 
for Guatemalans.”  Houston Chronicle: A17. 
 Council of Europe. 2005, December. “Organized Crime Situation 
Report 2005: Focus on the Threat of Economic Crime.” Strasbourg, 
France: Department of Crime Problems. 
 CSIS (Center for Strategic and International Studies). 1997. “Russian 
Organized Crime: Global Organized Crime Project.” Available at 
http://www.csis.org. Accessed December 10, 2008. 
 Davies, Ruth. 2004, April 22. “New EU Member States Will Not Meet 
Rulebook Translation Deadline.” MaltaMedia Online Network. 
 Dickie, John. 2004.  Cosa Nostra: A History of the Sicilian Mafia. London: 
Hodder and Stoughton. 
 Domash, Shelly. 2005, March 1. “America’s Most Dangerous 
Gang.”  Police Magazine, http://www.policemag.com/Articles/
2005/02/America-s-Most-Dangerous-Gang.aspx. Accessed 
September 3, 2009. 
 The Economist. 2009, January 10.“Back into the Abyss?” 42. 
 Ehrenfeld, Rachel. 2003.  Funding Evil: How Terrorism Is Financed and 
How to Stop It.  Chicago: Bonus Books. 
 Embassy of the United States in Mexico. 2009, June 25.“President 
Obama Signs Supplemental Budget, Increasing Merida Initiative 
Funding for Mexico to $1.12.” Press Release. Available at http://
mexico.usembassy.gov/eng/releases/ep090626_merida.html. 
Accessed November 4, 2009. 
 Farah, Douglas. 2004.  Blood from Stones: The Secret Financial Network 
of Terror. New York: Broadway Books. 
 FBI. 2008. “Balkan Organized Crime. ” Available at http://www.fbi.
gov/hq/cid/orgcrime/balkan.htm. Accessed December 20, 2008. 
 Fleishman, Jeffrey. 2006, December 10. “Midnight Sun Has a Dark Side.” 
 Los Angeles Times, http://articles.latimes.com/2006/dec/10/world/
fg-mafia10.Accessed September 7, 2009. 
 Friedman, George. 2008, May 13. “Mexico: On the Road to a Failed 
State?” Available at http://www.strafor.com/weekly/mexico_road_
failed_state. Accessed March 27, 2009. 
 Friedman, Robert I. 2000.  Red Mafiya: How the Russian Mob Has Invaded 
America. New York: Little, Brown. 
 Fuentes, Joseph R., and Robert J. Kelly. 1999, November. “Drug Supply 
and Demand: The Dynamics of the American Drug Market and Some 

82 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
Aspects of Colombian and Mexican Drug Trafficking.”  Journal of 
Contemporary Criminal Justice 15 (4): 328–351. 
 Gastrow, Peter. 1999. “Main Trends in the Development of South 
Africa’s Organized Crime.”  African Security Review 8 (6): http://
www.iss.co.za/pubs?ASR?8No6?MainTrands.html. 
 Gates, Dominic. 2001, August 13. “FBI Busts Four Alleged Software 
Pirates.”  Industry Standard, http://www.pcworld.com/printable/
article/id,57883/printable.html. 
 Gettleman, Jeffrey. 2006, November 10. “Chased By Gang Violence, 
Residents Flee Kenyan Slum.”  New York Times International: A4. 
 Ghani, Ashraf, and Clare Lockhart. 2009.  Fixing Failed States: A 
Framework for Rebuilding a Fractured World. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
 Grabosky, Peter. 2007.  Electronic Crime. Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Pearson. 
 Grobler, John. 2007, March 23. “Mafia Linked to Namibian 
Diamonds.”  The Namibian. http://dusteye.wordpress.com/
2007/03/23/mafia-linked-to-namibian-diamonds. Accessed 
May 26, 2008. 
 Haberfeld, Maria, and William H. McDonald. 2005. “International 
Cooperation in Policing.” In  Handbook of Transnational Crime & Justice, 
ed. Phil Reichel, 286–309. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 Hamm, Mark S., and Cecile Van de Voorde. 2005. “Crimes Committed 
by Terrorist Groups: Theory, Research, and Prevention.”  Trends in 
Organized Crime  9 (2):18–51. 
 Handelman, Stephen. 1995.  Comrade Criminal: Russia’s New Mafiya. 
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
 Hanson, Stephanie. 2009, August 19. “FARC, ELN: Colombia’s Left 
Wing Guerrillas.” Council on Foreign Affairs, http://www.cfr.org/
publication/9272/. Accessed September 4, 2009. 
 Hawley, Chris. 2009, February 23. “On the Border, a Crisis Escalates.” 
 USA TODAY: A1, A2. 
 Hennessy-Fiske, Molly, and Tina Susman. 2007, July 3. “U.S. Says Iran 
Backs Hezbollah Militants.”  Houston Chronicle: A7. 
 IFPI (International Federation of the Phonographic Industry). 2004, 
July 1. “Music Piracy Fighters Gather in Dublin for Global Enforcement 
Conference.” Available at http://www.ifpi.org/content/section_news/
20040701.html. Accessed August 8, 2009. 
 ISVG (Institute for the Study of Violent Groups). 2003, March. 
“Revolutionary Armed Forces.”  Crime and Justice International: 29. 
 Jane’s Intelligence Review . 2007, June 1. “Pirate Gold—Music 
Counterfeiting in Italy.” 1–6. 

References 83
 Kaplan, David E., Bay Fang, and Soni Sangwan. 2005, December 5. 
“Paying for Terror.”  U.S. News and World Report 139 (21). Available at 
http://www.usnews.com/usnews/news/articles/051205/5terror_10.
htm. Accessed January 23, 2007. 
 Kenney, Michael. 2007.  From Pablo to Osama: Trafficking and Terrorist 
Networks, Government Bureaucracies, and Competitive Adaptation. 
University Park: The Pennsylvania State University Press. 
 Kouri, Jim. 2008, August 26. “Enforcement Strategy to Combat Threat 
of Organized Crime.” Available at www.canadafreepress.com/index.
php/article/2774. 
 Kushner, Harvey. 2003.  Encyclopedia of Terrorism. Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage. 
 Lacey, Robert. 1992.  Little Man: Meyer Lansky and the Gangster Life. New 
York: Little, Brown. 
 Lal, Rollie. 2005, Spring. “South Asian Organized Crime and Terrorist 
Networks.”  Orbis: 293–304. 
 Landler, Mark. 2009, March 26. “Clinton Says U.S. Feeds Mexico Drug 
Trade.”  New York Times:  http://www.nytimes.com/2009/03/26/world/
americas/26mexico.html. Accessed December 10, 2009. 
 Langewiesche, William. 2006, December. “How to Get a Nuclear Bomb.” 
 Atlantic Monthly: 80–98. 
 Lilley, Peter. 2006.  Dirty Dealing: The Untold Truth about Global Money 
Laundering, International Crime and Terrorism. London: Kogan Page. 
 Lintner, Bertil. 2003.  Blood Brothers: The Criminal Underworld of Asia. 
New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Longrigg, Clare. 2009.  Boss of Bosses: How One man Saved the Sicilian 
Mafia. London: John Murray. 
 Lunde, Paul. 2004.  Organized Crime: An Inside Guide to the World’s Most 
Successful Industry. New York: DK Publishing. 
 Lupsha, Peter A., and Sung-Kwon Cho. 1999. “The Future of Narco-
terrorism: Colombia—A Case Study.” In  Organized Crime: Uncertainties 
and Dilemmas,  ed. S. Einstein and M. Amir, 423–437. Chicago: Office of 
International Criminal Justice. 
 Mabrey, Daniel. 2003, March. “Human Smuggling in China.”  Crime 
and Justice International: 5–11. 
 Madinger, John. 2006.  Money Laundering: A Guide for Criminal 
Investigators.  Boca Raton, FL: Taylor and Francis. 
 Makarenko, Tamara. 2005. “The Crime-Terror Continuum: Tracing the 
Interplay between Transnational Organized Crime and Terrorism.” In 
 Global Organized Today and the Changing Face of Organized Crime,  ed. Mark 
Galeotti, 129–145. London: Routledge. 

84 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
 Marsden, William, and Julian Sher. (2006).  Angels of Death: Inside the 
Bikers’ Global Crime Empire, London: Houghton and Stodder. 
 Mathers, Chris. 2004.  Crime School: Money Laundering—True Crime Meets 
the World of Business and Finance. Buffalo: Firefly Books. 
 McAfee. 2005, July. “McAfee Virtual Criminology Report.” Available at 
http://www.mcafee.com. Accessed March 13, 2008. 
 McCusker, Rob. 2006. “Transnational Organized Crime Cyber Crime: 
Distinguishing Threat from Reality.”  Criminal Law and Social Change 46: 
257–273. 
 McGrath, Ben. 2006, May 1. “Kiss City: The Unmaking of the Mafia 
Cops.”  The New Yorker: 54–65. 
 McShane, Larry. 2006, April 7. “2 Ex-NYPD Detectives Convicted of 
Being Mafia Hitmen.”  Houston Chronicle: A12. 
 Meiners, Stephen. 2009, March 26. “Central America: An Emerging 
Role in the Drug Trade.” Available at http://www.stratfor.com/
weekly/20090326_central_america_emerging_role_drig_trade. 
Accessed March 27, 2009. 
 Messick, Hank. 1969.  Syndicate In the Sun. New York: Macmillan. 
 Michaletos, Ionnis. 2007, April 25. “The Balkans: the Soft Underbelly 
of the European Narcotics Market.” Available at http://www.
savekosovo.org/default.asp?p=5&leader=0&sp=271. Accessed 
October 9, 2009. 
 Milton, Pat. 2006, October 3. “U.S. Worrying about Collaboration.” 
 The China Post, http://www.chinapost.com.tw/editorial/detail.
asp?onNews=&GRP=1. Accessed November 9, 2006. 
 Mutschke, Ralf. 2000, December 13. “Links Between Organized Crime 
and ‘Traditional’ Terrorist Groups.” Testimony to U.S. House Judiciary 
Committee, Subcommittee on Crime. Available at http://www.
russianlaw.org/Mutschke.htm. 
 Nackan, Alan, and Jonathan Cooperman. 2006. “New Directions in 
Fraud Investigation.”  The Secured Lender, 43–46, 68. 
 Naim, Moises. 2003.“The Five Wars of Globalization.”  Foreign Policy 
134: 28–37. 
 Naim, Moises. 2005.  Illicit: How Smugglers, Traffickers, and Copycats are 
Hijacking the Global Economy. New York: Anchor Books. 
 Nakamura, Rodolfo Mendoza. 1999. “The Use of the Shining Path Myth 
in the Context of the All-Out War against the Narco-Guerrilla.” In  Global 
Organized Crime and International Security, ed. Emilio C. Viano, 99–116. 
Aldershot, UK: Ashgate. 
 Nance, M. W. 2003.  The Terrorist Recognition Handbook. Guilford, CT: 
Lyons Press. 

References 85
 Napoleoni, Loretta. 2003.  Modern Jihad: Tracing the Dollars behind the 
Terror Networks. London: Pluto. 
 Nardini, William J. 2006. “  The Prosecutor’s Toolbox: Investigating 
and Prosecuting Organized Crime in the United States.”  Journal of 
International Criminal Justice 4: 528  –538. 
 NDIC (National Drug Intelligence Center). 2009.  National Drug Threat 
Assessment.  Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice. 
 Noble, Ronald K. 2003, July 16. “The Links between Intellectual 
Property Crime and Terrorist Financing.” Text of speech from Interpol 
director. Available at http://www.interpol.int/Public?ICPO/Speeches/
SG20030716.asp. 
 O’Connor, Anne-Marie. 2009, April 25. “More Guards, but Less Security, 
for Guatemalans.”  Houston Chronicle: A17. 
 O’Neil, Siobhan. 2007, May 24. “Terrorist Precursor Crimes: Issues and 
Options for Congress.” Available at http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/
terror/RL34014.pdf. 
 Perl, Raphael. 2003, May 20. “Testimony of Raphael Perl before U.S. 
Senate Committee on the Judiciary.” Available at http://judiciary.
senate.gov/hearings/testimony.cfm?id=764&wit_id=2115. 
 Potter, Gary. 2008. “Drug Trafficking and Organized Crime: The Rise 
and Evolution of International Drug Cartels.” In  Organized Crime: From 
Trafficking to Terrorism, Vol. 1, ed. Frank G. Shanty and Patit Paban 
Mishra, 184  –189. Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO. 
 Powell, Stewart M. 2009, March 13. “Official Use of Guard Is a Last 
Resort.”  Houston Chronicle, http://articles.sfgate.com/2009-03-13/
news/17214937_1_national-guard-border-security-homeland-security. 
Accessed January 4, 2010. 
 Powis, Robert E. 1992.  The Money Launderers. Chicago: Probus 
Publishing. 
 Rashbaum, William K. 2004, February 11. “Officials Say Mob Stole 
$200 Million Using Phone Bills.”  New York Times: A1. 
 Reader, John. 1998.  Africa: A Biography of the Continent. New York: 
Knopf. 
 Richards, Justin. 2006, July 11. “Growth of Cybercrime Is among Top 
Global Threats to Security, Says FBI.”  Computer Weekly, Available at 
http://www.accessmylibrary.com/coms2/summary_0286-15950350_
ITM. 
 Roth, Mitchel. 2000, March. “Organized Crime in the Balkans.”  Crime 
and Justice International: 7–8. 
 Roth, Mitchel P., and Murat Sever. 2007. “Barriers to Police Cooperation 
in the Age of Terrorism.” In  Understanding and Responding to Terrorism, 

86 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
eds. Huseyin Durmaz, Bilal Sevinc, Ahmet S. Yayla, and Siddik Ekici, 
1–16. Amsterdam: IOS Press. 
 Russo, Gus. 2001.  The Outfit: The Role of Chicago’s Underworld in the 
Shaping of Modern America. New York: Bloomsbury. 
 Schaan, Joan Neuhaus. 2009, April 12. “Beware Drug-Cartel 
Corruption.” Houston Chronicle: B10, B11. 
 Schmid, Alex. 2005, January 27. “Links Between Terrorism and Drug 
Trafficking: A Case of Narco-Terrorism?” Available at http://english.
safe-democracy.org/causes/links-between-terrorism-and-drug-
trafficking-a -case of narcoterrorism.html. 
 Schmitt, Richard B. 2008, April 24. “Attorney General Targeting 
International Organized Crime.”  Los Angeles Times, http://latimes.
com/news/nationworld/washingtonc/la-na-crime24apr24. 
 Serio, Joseph. 2006, November–December. “Has the Market Tamed 
the Mafia?”  Crime and Justice International:  47. 
 Serio, Joseph D. 2008.  Investigating the Russian Mafia.  Durham, NC: 
Carolina Academic Press. 
 Shaw, Mark. 2002, September. “Typologies of Transnational Organized 
Crime Groups.” Center for International Crime Prevention, United 
Nations Office of Drugs and Crime. Available at http://www.iss.
co.za/pubs/PAPERS/28?Paper28.html. 
 Sheets, Lawrence Scott, and William J. Broad. 2007, January 26. 
“Smuggler’s Plot in Georgia Boosts Fear over Uranium.”  Houston 
Chronicle: A19. 
 Shelley, Louise I. 2003. “Organized Crime, Terrorism and Cybercrime.” 
Available at http://crime-research.org/library/terrorism_cybercrime.
pdf. Accessed October 10, 2009. 
 Shelley, Louise I., and John T. Picarelli. 2005, Winter. “Methods and 
Motives: Exploring Links between Transnational Organized Crime 
and International Terrorism.”  Trends in Organized Crime  9 (2): 52–67. 
 Shelley, Louise I., and Robert Orttung. 2006, September/October. 
“Criminal Act: How Organized Crime Is a Nuclear Smuggler’s New 
Best Friend.”  Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists: 22–23. 
 Skaperdas, Stergios, and Constantonos Syropoulos. 1995. “Gangs as 
Primitive States.” In  The Economics of Organized Crime, ed. G. Fiorentini 
and S. Peltzman, 61–84. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Sung, Hung-en. 2004, May. “State Failure, Economic Failure, and 
Predatory Organized Crime; A Comparative Analysis.”  Journal of 
Research in Crime and Delinquency 41 (2): 111–129. 
 Taylor, Robert W., Tory J. Caeti, D. Call Loper, Eric J. Fritsch, and John 
Liederbach. 2006.  Digital Crime and Digital Terrorism. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Pearson. 

References 87
 Thomas, Dana. 2007, September 3. “Counterfeits Are Literally 
Terrorism’s Purse Strings.”  Houston Chronicle: B7. 
 Thompson, Tony. 2003, June 15. “Ulster Terror Gangs Links Up with 
Mafia.” Available at http://www.guardian.co.uk/2003/jun/15/
northernireland. 
 Thoumi, Francisco E. 2003.  Illegal Drugs, Economy, and Society in the 
Andes. Washington, D.C.: Woodrow Wilson Press. 
 USAID Bureau for Latin American and Caribbean Affairs Office of 
Regional Sustainable Development. 2006, April.  Central America and 
Mexico Gang Assessment . Available at http://www.usaid.gov/
locations/latin_america_caribbean/democracy/gangs_cam.pdf. 
 Varese, Federico. 2001.  The Russian Mafia: Private Protection in a New 
Market Economy. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
 Volkov, Vadim. 2002.  Violent Entrepreneurs: The Use of Force in the 
Making of Russian Capitalism. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
 Walsh, Mary Williams, and Richard Boudreaux. 1994, August 17. 
“German Police Seize Weapons-Grade Plutonium.”  Houston 
Chronicle: A24. 
 Washington Office on Latin America (WOLA). 2007, October.  The 
Captive State: Organized Crime and Human Rights in Latin America. 
 Available at http://www.wola.org/index.php?option=com_
content&task=sectionp&id=1&Itemid=2&topic_filter=Security+
Policy. Accessed August 4, 2009. 
 Watson, Julie. 2007, April 13. “Campaign of Fear Hits Public Stage.” 
 Houston Chronicle: A19. 
 Weinberg, Neal. 2007, February 1. “Kasperskys on Cybercrime: Don’t 
Blame the Russian Mafia and Why We Need Anti-Anti-Anti-Virus 
Software.” Available athttp://www.,networld.com/cgi-bin/mailto/x.
cgi?pagetosend=/export/home. Accessed March 13, 2008. 
 White, Jonathan R. 2009.  Terrorism and Homeland Security, 6th ed. 
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Cengage. 
 Wright, Alan. 2006.  Organised Crime. Devon, UK: Willan Publishing. 
 Zaidi, S. Hussain. 2003.  Black Friday: The True Story of the Bombay Bomb 
Blasts. New Delhi: Penguin Books. 
 

This page intentionally left blank 

89
 3 
 Global Organized Crime Groups 
 Italian Organized Crime Groups 
 The Sicilian and Italian-American Mafias 
 Although both the Sicilian and American permutations of the 
Mafia share some tendencies and cooperate in the drug trade, they 
operate in different dimensions. More important, the American ver-
sion has long stood on the periphery of society, but the Sicilian ver-
sion has long been a dominant presence in the region’s economic 
and political life. The American and Sicilian versions of the mafia 
remain distinct from one another, linked on occasion by personal 
contacts and business associations. For example, a Sicilian Mafioso 
could not appear in the United States and expect to become a made 
(official) member of a mafia family without the traditional long 
waiting period that used to be required. Conversely, when Lucky 
Luciano was deported from America to Naples, he had no formal 
status in Mafia-related matters in his native country (Stille 1995). 
 Few cases illustrate the international links between the Old 
and New World Italian syndicates better than the infamous “Pizza 
Connection” case of the 1980s when Sicilian and Italian American 
gangsters used pizzerias as a front to dispense almost $1.6 billion 
in profits from heroin sales (Kaplan 2006). The operation was later 
tied to New York’s Bonanno family (which had the strongest ties to 
Sicily of an American Mafia family), but the actual operation was 
largely run by Sicilian immigrants who distributed heroin manu-
factured in Sicily. Both proved to be distinct groups; they were not 
subservient to one another, but simply separate, almost parallel, 

90 Global Organized Crime Groups
factions. The new Sicilians, sometimes pejoratively referred to as 
 zips  (origin of word is obscure), began appearing in the United 
States in the 1970s. Rather than joining domestic Italian America 
gangs, however, they reported to their Sicilian boss Gaetano Bada-
lamenti, who introduced the scheme to use pizza parlors as fronts 
for heroin trafficking. 
 The evolution of Sicily’s Mafia traditions can be traced back 
to an ancient feudal past often obscured by myth and legend. The 
island’s history has been characterized by its conquest by a succes-
sion of rapacious oppressors that included Phoenicians, Carthag-
inians, Romans, Byzantines, Arabs, Normans, Spanish, Austrians, 
and the French. This has resulted in a deeply ingrained distrust of 
foreigners and central authority. In time a Mafia culture developed 
that emphasized traditional Sicilian values such as respect, honor, 
family ties, and  omerta  (code of silence). Although honor and re-
spect were at the heart of the Mafia ethos, profit became the moti-
vation for its existence in the 20th century. What began as bribery, 
corruption, and the extortion of businessmen and the merchant 
class, branched out to international and then global criminal en-
terprises. Nothing illustrates this more than the 20th-century illicit 
drug trade. 
 Most recent scholarship asserts that the Mafia as understood 
in the modern era harkens back to 19th-century western Sicily, a 
period of failed social rebellions and reform efforts. In fact the very 
word  mafia  cannot even be found in an Italian dictionary before the 
early 1860s. There is no simple agreed upon definition of the word  
mafia . Perhaps no other five-letter word conjures up more miscon-
ceptions and misguided ethnic stereotypes than this word that has 
been routinely applied to a wide range of criminal enterprises and 
behaviors. Historian Denis Mack Smith suggests that “Mafia is the 
only word from the Sicilian dialect to be incorporated into all the 
main world languages” (Smith 1995, 7). 
 Scholars and policymakers have long debated the persistence 
of the Sicilian Mafia. For many years it was convenient for Italian 
prosecutors to view the Sicilian Mafia as a single monolithic, hier-
archical organization directed by a commission of top bosses, called 
the  cupola.  According to this model, members expressed their soli-
darity by abiding by unwritten rules based on strict internal disci-
pline, job specialization, and a strong sense of duty and honor. 
 Recent revelations by a series of high-level informants (   pen-
titi   ) have revealed that traditional Sicilian Mafia families do indeed 
operate according to a strict hierarchical structure and with clearly 

Italian Organized Crime Groups 91
defined membership. The Sicilian Mafia is not a monolithic organi-
zation replete with a headquarters and a central leadership. Most 
observers compare it to a loose association of gangs, a relationship 
that most scholars compare to the bundled leaves of an artichoke, 
or  cosche.  Most towns have a family ( cosca ), with larger cities such 
as Palermo having more than one. Families range in size from 15 
to several hundred. These gangs coexist in a state of mutual sus-
picion that occasionally breaks into bloody intermissive warfare. 
Each family claims a monopoly over the illicit activity on its turf 
(Follain 2008). Each family is headed by a Boss ( Capofamiglia ). In de-
scending order follows a Counselor ( Consigliere ) and an Underboss 
( Sotto capo ). Under them are Field Leaders, or  Capodecima  (  head of 
10) who oversee the  Uomini d’onore,  variously referred to as men of 
honor or soldiers. Three or more neighboring families are headed 
by a district boss or  capomandamento,  selected from among the three 
bosses. 
 Contrary to their penchant for secrecy, some Sicilian families 
have risen to prominence because of their involvement in global 
trafficking schemes and campaigns of violence against the state. 
None has earned more opprobrium than the faction out of Corleone 
in western Sicily, 20 miles from Palermo. The so-called Corleonese 
faction made its presence known soon after World War II when 153 
people were murdered on the streets of Corleone between 1944 and 
1948 (Follain 2008). From the 1950s to the present its leadership 
was under three men—Luciano Leggio, Toto Riina, and Bernardo 
Provenzano. Provenzano was finally captured in 2006 after 43 years 
on the run. He held sway over the Corleonese after the arrest of 
Leggio and then Riina. Although Provenzano was complicit in a 
number of high-profile murders, including those of special pros-
ecutors Giovanni Falcone and Paolo Borsellino in 1992, he was 
credited with essentially reviving the Mafia at a time when it was 
losing its political connections. His strategy was to eschew murder 
and become almost invisible outside the parallel economy of Italy’s 
underworld ( Longrigg 2009). Testimony to his success were esti-
mates the year that he was captured that suggested 80 percent of 
Sicily’s businesses were paying protection money in order to sur-
vive. According to one expert, if one combined the profits of the 
major Italian organized crime groups (Sicilian Mafia, ‘Ndrangheta, 
and Camorra), it would come to 42 billion pounds, or 10.5 percent of 
the country’s GDP (Follain 2008, 317). Despite the well-publicized, 
anti-Mafia campaign of the 1990s, any successes that might have 
been claimed have been short-lived. Today the Italian government 

92 Global Organized Crime Groups
has shifted it priorities to fighting urban street crime, terrorism, 
and other forms of organized crime. If one thing is clear in the doc-
ile response of the Sicilian people, it is that they fear the Mafia 
more than they trust the Italian state. 
 An Italian investigation centered in Palermo in 2008 dubbed 
“Old Bridge” revealed attempts at restoring Old and New World 
Mafia contacts revolving around New York City’s Gambino crime 
family ( Hays 2008). A subsequent roundup of 87 suspects in New 
York City coincided with the arrest of 23 suspected organized crime 
figures in Palermo, although the cases were unrelated. Both Ameri-
can and Italian investigators, however, saw signs of efforts to re-
ignite the close relationship between the Gambino family and the 
Sicilian Mafia (Rashbaum 2008). This raid was the biggest since the 
Pizza Connection arrests in the mid-1980s. 
 The Americanization of the Mafia 
 The word  mafia  first entered the American vocabulary (and imag-
ination) soon after the arrival of Italian immigrants in the 19th 
century. Although there is still debate over when the Mafia first 
appeared in America, most accounts lean toward New Orleans 
sometime in the 1880s. Waves of Italian immigrants changed the 
demographics of New Orleans as newspapers and city rumor mills 
worked overtime conjuring sensational accounts of sinister Mafia 
and Camorra activity. The murder of New Orleans police chief 
David Hennessey in 1890, allegedly by Mafia assassins, led to an 
outpouring of rage against Italian immigrants. The purported sus-
pects were acquitted after a trial in 1891. A mob estimated up to 
20,000 strong stormed the jail and killed 11 Italian prisoners, in-
cluding three who had been acquitted, three who had received a 
mistrial, and five awaiting trial (English 2005). It should not be 
surprising that many fellow immigrants fled to other urban cen-
ters, especially New York City. 
 Before 1931, the most prominent Italian crime bosses in New 
York City were Old World bosses from Sicily, often referred to as 
the “Mustache Petes.” Giuseppe “Joe the Boss” Masseria, from 
Palermo, and Salvatore Maranzano from Castellemmare Del Golfo 
were the leaders of two factions competing for dominance of 
New York City’s Italian American underworld. Masseria gunman 
Charles “Lucky” Luciano engineered the murder of his boss and 
then convincingly pledged his fealty to his new boss Maranzano. 

Italian Organized Crime Groups 93
A devotee of Julius Caesar, Maranzano had visions of becoming 
the New World “ boss of bosses” (or  capo di tuti capi ). According to 
his vision “Cosa Nostra” or “Our Thing  ” would be arranged around 
five families led by bosses or “men of honor.” Prospective members 
were expected to take part in an initiation ritual and promise to 
follow a code of silence,  omerta.  Thanks to the machinations of 
Luciano, Maranzano soon followed his nemesis to the grave, 
thereby ending the era of the Mustache Petes. This chain of events 
is considered a watershed event in the history of Italian American 
organized crime, a turning point that marked the emergence of the 
new and modern Mafia. 
 America’s best-known Mafia families are the five in New York. 
The Gambino, Genovese, Lucchese, Colombo, and Bonanno fami-
lies emerged out of the 1931 murders of the Mustache Petes. The 
Chicago version of the Mafia is known as the Outfit; in New En-
gland it is referred to as the Office. Each is structured differently, but 
the New York families come closest to mirroring the Sicilians. The 
organizational structure of Cosa Nostra has been well-chronicled 
with most accounts listing 24 separate gangs or families. Italian 
American Mafia families have a similar hierarchical structure to 
their Sicilian counterpart. This structure was laid out more than 
100 years ago. At the top is the boss, who is assisted by a counselor 
or  consigliere.  Second to the boss is the underboss. In descending 
order are capos, soldiers, and associates. The numbers of each vary 
by organization. The underboss typically is called on to resolve dis-
putes between members, although in more serious cases the boss 
might be called in. The boss appoints the underboss and capos. 
Soldiers, or “made men,” are the lowest level of La Cosa Nostra 
membership. A soldier “makes his bones” and becomes a “made 
member” after proving himself by taking part in a murder (does 
not have to actually be the killer, but must be willing). Associates 
are not actual members of the family but engage in criminal ac-
tivities with the blessing of made members. Virtually anyone who 
has criminal acumen and is an “earner” can become an associate 
without restriction of ethnicity. Membership is restricted to men 
of Italian American descent. It was not too long ago that both par-
ents had to be Italian, but in the modern era one Italian American 
parent is sufficient. What differentiated the Americanized version 
of the Mafia from its Sicilian counterpart was the lack of support 
for a “Boss of Bosses,” although over the years some overly am-
bitious Italian American bosses unsuccessfully tried to claim this 
honor. 

94 Global Organized Crime Groups
 Camorra [ Naples, Italy] 
 The Camorra originated in the prisons of Naples during the 19th 
century. As members were released from jail, they extended their 
reach beyond the walls of prison. During the 1820s, Neapolitan po-
lice were able to document the organization’s policies and rituals. 
In the second half of the 19th century, the Camorra were deeply en-
trenched in the city ’s gambling and theft rackets, as well as extort-
ing cargo loaded at the city’s docks. In response police launched 
a crackdown, arresting many  camorristi,  with other fleeing to the 
New World where they opened branches in New York City and 
elsewhere. Naples is currently Italy’s most violent city, with per-
haps 100 Camorra gangs with between 30 and 40 members, each 
battling for control of various rackets (Saviano 2008). Each gang 
has a hierarchical structure, with a boss at the top and in descend-
ing order capos (captains) in charge of crews of members and as-
sociates. Until the 1970s they favored gambling, loan sharking, 
extortion, tobacco smuggling, and political corruption. They soon 
became more involved in transnational crime through drug traf-
ficking and money laundering. But by the end of the decade, the 
profits from the international drug trade and other global enter-
prises were too much to resist. Tobacco smuggling has been an 
especially lucrative enterprise. Consider that as far back as 1959 a 
case of cigarettes could be purchased in Morocco for $23 and sold 
in Europe for $170 ( Lunde 2004, 75). By taking this trade from the 
Corsicans in the 1960s, the Camorra catapulted to the top ranks 
of European organized crime groups. The publication of Robert 
Saviano’s best-selling book  Gomorrah  in 2006 convincingly revealed 
the ascendance of the Camorra over the past decade. In it the in-
vestigative journalist claims that the Camorra gang network is 
now the most formidable in terms of both power and violence in 
Italy. His revelations now require him to live under police protec-
tion in Naples. 
 ‘Ndrangheta [Calabria, Italy] 
 In 2008, Italy’s anti-Mafia commission reported that the ‘Ndrangheta, 
entrenched in Calabria and far southern Italy was not only “a 
worldwide threat ” but had actually surpassed the power of the 
Sicilian Mafia, both in clout and international contacts reaching as 
far as Latin America, North Africa, Canada, the United States, and 
Africa. According to one spokesperson for the commission, the 

Italian Organized Crime Groups 95
modern ‘Ndrangheta “is the most modern organization” that has 
readily adapted to globalization, controlling much of the import 
of cocaine into Europe (  New York Times 2008). 
 Some observers refer to the ‘Ndrangheta as the “Honored So-
ciety” or brotherhood and have compared it to the Sicilian Mafia; 
however, both have distinct structures. The Sicilian Mafia typi-
cally has some type of understood hierarchy, but the ‘Ndrangheta 
has no single leaders and depends on a number of cooperative 
strategies. Like Sicily, Calabria has a history of resistance against 
government oppression; today it is Italy’s poorest and most crime-
ridden region. 
 The origins of the name ‘Ndrangheta are from the Greek word 
 ‘ndrina,  which refers to “a man who does not bend” (Varese 2006, 
423). The  ‘ndrina  is the basic organizational unit, akin to a Sicilian 
Mafia family. It typically controls a small town and if by chance 
another  ‘ndrina is operating in the area, they would band together 
into a  locale  ( Paoli 2003). Each  ‘ndrina  is autonomous on its own 
turf, with no formal authority above the local boss. Each unit is com-
posed of men from the same family unit, a factor that solidifies 
each  ‘ndrina  and makes it more difficult for outsiders or informants 
to infiltrate its ranks. Several studies in the mid-1990s found that 
 ‘ndrina  had 2.6 percent  pentiti  (witnesses for the government) com-
pared to 6.9 for their Sicilian counterparts ( Varese 2006, 423  –  424). 
One distinguishing feature of the ‘Ndrangheta is that it does not try 
to limit the amount of blood members in the group. Most other or-
ganizations, however, consider this a weakness, as too many blood 
relatives can create cabals within the group or lead to dissension 
among members as a result of favoritism. 
 For more than 50 years ‘Ndrangheta bosses have held annual 
summits called  crimini,  which gives them an opportunity to recount 
that year’s activities in their territories, including murders, kidnap-
pings, and other serious crimes ( Paoli 2003). Bosses have report-
edly attended these meetings from as far as Canada and Australia 
(  Varese 2006). Despite these annual meetings, the gangs are often 
at war with each other as demonstrated by an outbreak of violence 
between members in Germany that left 20 dead, including six at 
one time. The ‘Ndrangheta was thrust into the international spot-
light in August 2007 after the machine gun drive-by killings of six 
men as they left a pizzeria in Duisburg, Germany. Italian authorities 
were aware of the migration of members into Germany and other 
parts of Europe; however, they were slow to warn their counter-
parts in other countries. In this particular incident, ‘ Ndrangheta 

96 Global Organized Crime Groups
members were believed to be attempting to launder money through 
legitimate business far from the prying eyes of Italian law en-
forcement. By 2007, Germany had more than a half-million Italian 
immigrants, second only to Turkey ( Landler and Fisher, 2007). Al-
though most Italian immigrants have assimilated into German so-
ciety, their numbers indicate a strong recruitment pool for crime 
syndicates. 
 Authorities suggest that the ‘Ndrangheta and other Italian 
gangs have taken advantage of crackdowns on the Sicilian Mafia 
since the 1990s and have flourished thanks to the drug trade and 
direct connections with the Colombian cocaine trade. Members 
have engaged in tobacco smuggling, gambling, kidnapping, and 
extortion and have been increasingly turning to legitimate busi-
ness ventures such as construction, restaurants, and supermarkets. 
Beginning in the 1970s, they turned to the international heroin 
and cocaine trade. Members are well respected for their money-
laundering acumen and have been identified in a number of coun-
tries. Today there are an estimated 100 ‘Ndrangheta families with 
more than 5,000 members in Italy and at least 10,000 counting the 
branches beyond Italy. These have been established through im-
migration to Germany, Belgium, Holland, France, Eastern Europe, 
the United States, Canada, and Australia (Varese 2006). 
 The Corsicans 
 In the years between the World Wars, the international heroin 
trade was mainly in the hands of Corsican gangs and independent 
operators located in Marseilles, France. Strategically located in the 
Western Mediterranean, this port city had long been at the center 
of many smuggling operations and by the mid-1930s was among 
the region’s busiest ports. Marseilles provided an ideal transit 
point for ships bringing in morphine base from Turkey and French 
Indochina. During this era heroin labs operated around the clock. 
Their operations, however, came to prominence under the leader-
ship of Corsican crime boss Paul Carbone, who directed the heroin 
trade including most of the heroin entering the United States. Over 
the years this source for heroin became known as the “French 
Connection.” Observers have pointed out the similarities between 
the Corsicans and the Sicilians  — both are clannish islanders sharing 
an Italian dialect. Using their connections in the American under-
world, the Sicilians were the Corsicans’ most reliable customers, 

Russian Organized Crime (ROC) 97
helping transship heroin through Sicily to the United States, often 
packed clandestinely in shipments of typical Italian import items. 
The Corsicans continued to dominate the French underworld until 
the 1950s. After World War II, however, their power was threat-
ened by the growing clout of the local Communist Party. Although 
the political party had little to do with criminal activity, its mere 
presence during the nascent Cold War proved alarming to Ameri-
can authorities (as it did in Italy). The emerging Central Intelli-
gence Agency (CIA from the OSS) developed a strategy to support 
non-Communist Socialists in France. By some accounts, this might 
have included supplying the Corsican gangs with money and 
weapons as long as they harassed and attacked Communist offi-
cials and activists. Ultimately, the Corsicans were restored as lead-
ers of the underworld thanks to American assistance. From the 
late 1940s to the 1960s, Hong Kong and Marseilles were the world’s 
main heroin-refining sites. The largest postwar seizure of narcotics 
took place in New York in 1947 after a Corsican seaman was ar-
rested while leaving a recently docked French vessel with seven 
pounds of heroin. The next month an even larger bust took place 
on another French ship. World War II had virtually stopped the in-
ternational heroin trade, but these busts and others signaled in-
vestigators that the global trade was back in business thanks in no 
small part to the “Corsican connection.” The inexorable expansion 
of the global heroin trade became much more dispersed in the 
1960s as other heroin trafficking groups from Southeast Asia and 
Europe became major players, diminishing the role of the Corsi-
cans (  Inciardi 1992). 
 Russian Organized Crime (ROC) 
 During the Soviet era it was de rigueur to downplay the existence 
of organized crime within its borders. Recent research, however, re-
veals that the foundations of Russian organized crime dates back 
to the Soviet system itself more than 70 years ago. Between the 
1920s and 1990s, Soviet labor camps, or gulags, gave birth to an 
elite criminal fraternity, or  vory-v-zakone,  which lived according to 
a thieves’ law, an unwritten system of rules and behavior. By most 
accounts, modern ROC grew out of this phenomenon, as well as 
various characteristics of the Soviet system itself, exemplified 
by individual high-level officials developing beneficial relation-
ships with these criminals. According to one expert, ROC groups 

98 Global Organized Crime Groups
emerged in the 1960s thanks to a state apparatus that “encouraged, 
facilitated and protected it ” (     Wright 2006, 148). During the Brezhnev 
regime in the 1970s and early 1980s, it became increasingly clear 
that the country was in the hands of corrupt Communist bureau-
crats that some even had the temerity to brand a “kleptocracy.” It 
even became fashionable to call this corruption “Mafiya.” Rather 
than referring to a traditional structured hierarchy, however, it re-
ferred to the day-to-day inequalities of the Russian Communist sys-
tem. According to one Russian journalist, “ We apply ‘mafiya’ to 
practically anything—shops, creative unions, hospitals, diplomats, 
prostitutes, butchers, chess players, cities, regions and republics” 
(quoted in Serio 2008, 13). Nonetheless, the Soviet system did in-
deed institutionalize a culture of thievery as well as an under-
ground economy. 
 In the late 1980s and through the 1990s, the release of price con-
trols and the new free market economy drew thousands of entre-
preneurs and merchants to open shop in Moscow and its environs. 
Many came from distant regions in Central Asia and elsewhere. 
Fledgling businessmen, migrants, and refugees were soon drawn 
into the orbit of developing crime syndicates that were trying to 
control most of the new markets. Savvy crime bosses used the new-
comers to dispense narcotics, counterfeit liquor, and other illegal 
commodities. At the same time the merchants were allowed to en-
gage in their own rackets, as long as they turned over a percentage 
to the crime bosses. It was during this period that the term  mafiya 
was freely used by ethnic Russians in response to rising crime, 
high prices, and a decaying infrastructure as a pejorative label for 
these individuals. The unrestrained use of the term  mafiya, how-
ever, obscured the fact that not all gangs were equal in structure, 
power, and influence, leading to the widespread illusion of one 
monolithic Russian mafiya. 
 In the aftermath of the collapse of the Soviet system in 1991, 
hundreds, if not thousands, of new criminal groups emerged in 
Russia to take advantage of the democratization process. The new 
gangster class included former KGB agents and military defec-
tors, government specialists, and former prison inmates. Russian 
crime syndicates quickly grasped the opportunities of the confused 
state of affairs and the shortage of goods as they formalized a black 
market that would eventually spread into Eastern and Western 
Europe, as well as the United States. Many Russian émigrés landed 
in Israel and the United States where they flourished in coastal ur-
ban areas such as Boston, New York City, Miami, Los Angeles, and 

Mexican Drug Cartels 99
San Francisco. The Russian Ministry of Interior estimated that as 
many as 110 Russian gangs were operating in 44 countries in the 
1990s. One investigative journalist asserted that 30 Russian syndi-
cates were operating in at least 17 American cities (  Friedman 2000). 
Although several powerful criminal organizations emerged, there 
is no evidence that a single gang or group of gangs controls the 
Russian underworld. 
 Among the few syndicates with a recognizable hierarchy is 
Moscow’s largest group, the  Solntsevo,  named after the suburb 
where it was created. In the mid-1990s, it had a reputed 9,000 mem-
bers, although others place the figure much lower (Dunn 1997). 
According to one leading authority, it functions as an umbrella or-
ganization with different crews active in different countries ( Varese 
2001), but it does operate under a supreme council composed of 
12 individuals who are considered the leaders of various factions. 
It meets on a regular basis. Although size estimates vary for this 
group, it runs against the typical ROC group profile that officials 
describe as small in numbers (Serio 2008). 
 More recently observers have argued that ROC is hardly quan-
tifiable. What has never been made clear is what Russian gangs fell 
under the rubric of organized crime, whether the various numbers 
floated about refer to street gangs, mafiya clans, criminal societies 
or associations, or bandit groups. Some scholars have suggested 
that “the Russian underworld is maturing, as larger, more profes-
sional networks” subsume the hundreds of smaller organizations 
and gangs that emerged in post-Soviet Russia (Galeotti 2005, 55). 
 Mexican Drug Cartels 
 Strategically located on the American border, Mexican drug traf-
ficking cartels are in position to quickly react to changing drug 
trends in the United States, where most users reside. Violent war 
between Mexican gangs over the lucrative drug trade is increas-
ingly spilling over the border into the United States, leading to 
bombings with grenades, decapitations, and shoot-outs along the 
almost 2,000-mile border with Mexico. Officials have identified 
230 cities where they operate including Boston, Anchorage, and 
Atlanta. More recently Mexican drug gangs have begun targeting 
the European drug market. Officials cite the weak American econ-
omy, a stronger euro, the ongoing Calderon military campaign, less 
aggressive law enforcement, and more open markets for shifting 

100 Global Organized Crime Groups
their strategies toward Europe (Schiller 2009). Soon after taking of-
fice in December 2006, President Felipe Calderon launched an all-
out anticrime campaign. Calderon has deployed more than 40,000 
troops and federal police throughout Mexico (more than U.S. troops 
in Afghanistan before the surge in 2009) (   Hawley 2009). More than 
10,000 people have died since then. According to the 2009 Justice 
Department’s National Drug Threat Assessment, Mexican drug 
trafficking organizations have spread out across the United States, 
in the process forming alliances with urban street gangs and “now 
represent the greatest organized crime threat to the United States” 
( National Drug Intelligence Center 2009, iii). In March 2009, the 
Mexican government initiated a program that offered $2 million 
rewards for information leading to the capture of two dozen rec-
ognized drug kingpins. Officials have also offered $1 million re-
wards for the capture of less prominent bosses working for the 
country’s six main syndicates. 
 Juarez Cartel 
 During its heyday, the Juarez cartel was thought to have been 
moving 70 percent of the illegal drugs into the United States from 
Mexico. Based in the border town of Ciudad Juarez (on the border 
across from El Paso, Texas), this organization came to prominence 
under the aegis of Amado Carrillo Fuentes (1956 –1997), who was 
known as the “ Lord of the Skies” for his strategy of converting 
Boeing 727 jets into cocaine transports. During the 1990s, the orga-
nization was Mexico’s most powerful drug-trafficking syndicate. 
The Juarez cartel uses regional bases in Guadalajara, Hermosillo, 
and Torreon, Mexico to store drug shipments before transshipment 
to locations along the American border. After Carrillo Fuentes died 
during a botched plastic surgery operation in Mexico City in 1997, 
his brothers took over the gang. Unable to fill the shoes of their 
dead brother, they were replaced by a string of other traffickers, 
none of whom would attain the prominence and success of the 
“ Lord of the Skies.” Testimony to the cartel’s reach into the highest 
level’s of the Mexican government was the case of a former gover-
nor of the Yucatan state, who was convicted of accepting $30 mil-
lion in bribes for police and political protection from the Juarez 
cartel between 1993 and 1999. Sometime in the first years of the new 
millennium the Juarez cartel transitioned into an alliance of three 
drug lords from the border states of Chihuahua, Durango, and 

Mexican Drug Cartels 101
Sinaloa, sometimes referred to as the “Golden Triangle Alliance.” 
In April 2009, Mexican police arrested major Juarez drug kingpin 
Vicente Carrillo Leyva (son of Carrillo Fuentes) while he was exer-
cising in a Mexico City park, in no small part due to the Mexican 
government strategy of placing $2 million rewards for the coun-
try’s top dug traffickers. At the time of his arrest, he was one of the 
two Juarez members on the list (  Reuters  2009). 
 Sinaloa Cartel 
 Based in the Pacific Coast state of Sinaloa, this organization is led 
by Joaquin “El Chapo” Guzman and Ismael “El Mayo” Zambada, 
the two most wanted men in Mexico. The cartel is considered Mex-
ico’s “most important drug trafficking organization” (Althaus 
2008, A12). This region has long been a key location for the culti-
vation of opium poppies for the making of heroin, controlled by the 
Sinaloa cartel. Since 2001, the cartel has been at war with the Gulf 
cartel over control of the strategic border town of Nuevo Laredo. 
By most accounts the Gulf cartel has had an upper hand, with an 
almost two-to-one advantage in gunmen. Nuevo Laredo is key to 
the Mexican-American drug trade, with the city offering extensive 
trade facilities and processing more legitimate cargo than any other 
crossing point along the almost 2,000-mile border between the two 
countries. In the United States the cartel is most active in Arizona. 
Since 2007, more than 750 individuals have been arrested for links 
with the group. The United States has placed a $5 million reward 
for the capture of its leader Guzman (Bogan 2009). 
 Tijuana Cartel [ Arrellano-Felix Organization] 
 Also known as the Arrellano-Felix organization, this cartel has 
been based in Tijuana since the mid-1980s. After the arrest of its 
founder, Miguel Angel Felix Gallardo, in 1989 for his role in the 
slaying of U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) agent 
Enrique “Kiki” Camarena, the organization was divided up among 
family members and subordinates. Unable to control the organi-
zation from prison, Gallardo by most accounts met with his lieu-
tenants and divided the Mexican border crossings among them. 
According to one 2008 report, Sinaloa/Arizona, Laredo/Nuevo/

102 Global Organized Crime Groups
Laredo, and El/Paso/Juarez were turned over to Amado Carrillo 
Fuentes (  Wallace-Wells 2007 ). During the 1990s, the Tijuana cartel 
dominated the flow of cocaine, marijuana, and heroin into Califor-
nia and the West Coast. In 2006, Mexico extradited Francisco Rafael 
Arrellano Felix to the United States, the first time the country had 
ever extradited a major drug kingpin across the border. The Ti-
juana cartel was considered Mexico’s most ruthless and feared 
drug syndicate at one time. After the death and arrest of two lead-
ing Arrellano-Felix brothers in 2002, however, its influence briefly 
diminished. Since then the Tijuana cartel has been linked to hun-
dreds of murders in that city alone, including 840 in 2008. Much of 
the deaths are attributable to the ongoing war between several 
factions within the cartel. In 2009, the U.S. State Department made 
waves when it issued an official travel warning for Americans con-
templating visiting Mexico, including Tijuana, on spring break. 
 Gulf Cartel and Los Zetas 
 Considered Mexico’s bloodiest gang, the Gulf cartel operates out 
of the Mexican cities bordering South Texas and controls narcotraf-
ficking and sales throughout the Gulf Coast region. Based in the 
Mexican border towns of Matamoras, Reynosa, and Nuevo Laredo, 
the cartel’s best known and most feared members work for its para-
military arm known as  Los Zetas.  Many were veterans of Mexican 
Special Forces before deserting to the Gulf Cartel for better pay 
as killers. Dallas, Texas is the Gulf’s most prominent U.S. drug-
distribution destination. The organization is the brainchild of Juan 
Garcia Abrego and now operates in 17 Mexico states. The award-
winning motion picture  Traffic  was reportedly based on his rise 
and fall from power. Arrested in 1996, Abrego is now serving 11 life 
sentences following his extradition to the United States. At his ze-
nith he guaranteed Colombian cartels that their cocaine would 
reach destinations for 50 percent of each load. After Abrego’s ar-
rest, Osiel Cardenas Guillen took charge and was credited with 
luring the original Zetas to his syndicate. They adopted the name 
Zetas in homage to their original leader who was killed in 2002 and 
was identifiable by his radio name  Zeta  ( Lloyd and George 2007). 
Cardenas was arrested in 2003 and has since been extradited to 
the United States. 
 Formerly members of Mexico’s Army elite, a number of Zetas 
joined the drug cartels as hit men in the late 1990s. They were 
among the roughly 120,000 Mexican soldiers who deserted in that 

Mexican Drug Cartels 103
era. Mexican cartels now have a pool of military trained killers to 
draw from (Lloyd 2007). Among the more prominent Zetas was 
Heriberto Lazcano, a former member of the elite Special Forces. 
He was credited as among the first to work for the Gulf cartel as 
enforcers. Since 2006, Los Zetas have become so influential even 
their former handlers are incapable of controlling them. In recent 
years they have expanded their operations as they attempt to con-
trol drug routes and oust traditional cartel leaders (Corchado 2007 ). 
By most accounts, Los Zetas are now a managing partner for the 
Gulf cartel. In May 2009, the FBI warned law enforcement that the 
Zetas had formed a Texas cell on a secluded ranch where it trains 
hit men how to “neutralize” competitors in the United States. This 
has become increasingly necessary to collect debts and spy on com-
petitors. Zetas are also used to protect cocaine and heroin shipments 
bound for Houston where drugs are repackaged and shipped to 
other states (Schiller 2009). They are also active in parts of Guate-
mala, where they are involved in aerial and overland drug traf-
ficking (Meiners 2009). 
 Guadalajara Cartel [ Amezcua-Contreras 
Organization] 
 Founded by the four Amezcua-Contreras brothers in the 1990s, 
the Guadalajara organization specializes in the illegal metham-
phetamine traffic. During the halcyon days of the 1990s, the broth-
ers were dubbed “the kings of methamphetamine.” At its zenith 
the cartel was probably the world’s leading producer of that drug. 
It was able to accomplish this feat by securing huge quantities of 
precursor chemicals from India and Thailand. It was then distilled 
in laboratories on both sides of the Mexican-American border. De-
spite the arrests of the brothers in 1997, the networks continue to 
flourish. The meth business proved especially attractive to Mexi-
can organizations. For years they had moved Colombian cocaine 
for only a percentage of the profits; with methamphetamine there 
was no sharing. So in effect they made the transition from middle-
men to vertically controlling every aspect of the business, from 
production and distribution to sales (Owen 2007). Although the 
Tijuana and Juarez cartels tried to break into the market, the broth-
ers became the most important because they were the first to grasp 
the commercial potential of the trade and were able to quickly 
adapt to the changing conditions of the marketplace, such as mak-
ing the switch from ephedrine powder to pseudoephedrine pills 

104 Global Organized Crime Groups
( precursor chemicals). In 1995, Congress was finally convinced by 
the DEA to control ephedrine in order to disrupt the product of 
methamphetamine. The Amezcuas responded by switching to 
pills; and when this source was unavailable, they found new ones 
in Canada. What distinguished this group was its ability to get 
along with competing drug syndicates, as witnessed by its alliance 
with the Tijuana and Juarez cartels. Most observers trace the suc-
cess and longevity of this organization to an insulated structure 
that recruited relatives, extended family members, and longtime 
friends (DEA 1998). 
 Mara Salvatrucha ( MS-13) [Central America, 
Mexico, United States] 
 Gangs such as Mara Salvatrucha engage in transnational orga-
nized crime involving kidnapping, extortion, trafficking of peo-
ple and contraband, and even assassinations. The success of these 
groups is in part blamed on the American policy of deporting gang 
members back to their countries of origin without notifying the re-
ceiving authorities. A number of transnational gangs originated in 
Los Angeles, organized by immigrants who fled Central America 
during the civil wars of the 1980s. Once exposed to gang life in ur-
ban America, they brought their knowledge of gang culture back 
to Central America. These international links have only helped 
foster gang culture throughout the region ( USAID, April 2006). 
Today MS-13 has an estimated 30,000 to 50,000 members world-
wide, with about 25 percent of them in the United States. It is 
unique among American gangs, as it is involved in drug trafficking 
through Central America and Mexico as well as the United States 
(  Burton and West, 2009). Members have been known to work with 
Mexican Mafia members on both sides of the border. 
 Mara Salvatrucha, better known as MS-13, was named after  
La Mara,  a street in El Salvador, as well as for the Salvatrucha guer-
rillas who fought in the country ’s bloody civil war in the early 
1980s. It has been estimated that up to 100,000 people died in the 
conflict and that perhaps up to 1 million others fled to the United 
States (  Vaquera and Bailey 2004). Many landed in southern Cali-
fornia. Some were veterans who had served in the paramilitary 
Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front and were adept at us-
ing weaponry and explosives. Not long after moving into southern 
Los Angeles with its myriad gangs, the new immigrants organized 

Asian Organized Crime Groups 105
their own gang for self-protection. Gang members are identifi-
able by the blue and white colors of their native flag, and many are 
heavily tattooed on their bodies and faces. MS-13 is no longer a 
purely southern California phenomenon. Investigators have traced 
members from coast to coast. Just as alarming, members have ex-
ported their criminal activities (and recruiting) back to Central 
America. For example, in 2004 Honduras was home to a reported 
36,000 members ( Domash 2005). 
 American law enforcement was in part complicit in the ex-
pansion of MS-13. During the 1990s a number of members were 
deported back to El Salvador, but their connections were not re-
vealed. Once home they reconstituted the gang, with many return-
ing to America. In 2005, the National Drug Intelligence Center of 
the U.S. Justice Department estimated there were between 8,000 
and 10,000 members in the United States and more than 50,000 in-
ternationally (Harman 2005). 
 MS-13 made the transition from gang culture to transnational 
organized crime group in a rather short time as a result of its flex-
ibility and mobility. Members are involved in a variety of criminal 
enterprises including car thefts, which are sometimes traded to Latin 
American drug cartels for drugs. Members have been connected 
to home invasion robberies, extortion, rapes, witness intimidation, 
and carjackings. Drug trafficking tends to include cocaine, mari-
juana, heroin, and methamphetamine. They have also moved into 
other rackets including the taxing of other gangs and even pros-
titutes. 
 The gang has flourished thanks to its mobility and ability to 
adapt to new law enforcement strategies. For example, when it 
feels the pressure in El Salvador or Honduras, it moves its opera-
tions into Mexico. To avoid detection, when gang members notice 
they are under surveillance, they respond by changing colors and 
other subterfuge. 
 Asian Organized Crime Groups 
 Triads [China] 
 Triads have been compared to decentralized cartels made up of in-
dependent gangs that assume similar organizational structures 
and rituals to unite their groups together (Chu 2005). What often 
confounds investigators is that not all Triad societies are Chinese 

106 Global Organized Crime Groups
criminal syndicates and not all Chinese organized crime members 
necessarily belong to a Triad. The term  Triad  is actually an English 
designation derived from the sacred emblem of the Society, con-
sisting of a triangle, with each side representing the three basic 
powers of Heaven, Earth, and Man (  Morgan 1960). Before the return 
of Hong Kong to China in 1997, Triads were often referred to as 
the  Sam Hop Wui  (  Three United Association),  Tin Tei Wui ( Heaven 
and Earth Association),  Hung Mun ( Hung Sect), or more recently 
the  Hak Sh’e Wui  ( Black Society Association). 
 The first Triad Society was founded in 1761. Better known as 
the “Heaven and Earth Society,” it functioned more as a type of 
mutual aid group providing help in an unpredictable frontier re-
gion of China. The name Triad was not coined until 1821, alluding 
to the magic number 3, which, according to Chinese numerology, 
denoted the balance between Heaven, Earth, and Man (Gaylord 
and Fu 1999). 
 As mentioned previously, Triads are decentralized, lacking a 
central body capable of uniting all the groups or giving univer-
sally accepted commands. Triad structure has become increas-
ingly flexible and decentralized over the years, and their initiation 
ceremonies have been simplified. Modern Triads have been able 
to operate quite freely by joining in alliances with high-ranking 
Chinese army members and Communist Party functionaries, al-
lowing them to continue to operate gambling, protection, and pros-
titution rackets. The Chinese government has even used Triad 
member to silence critics and exiles. What’s more they play an im-
portant role in suppressing the unpredictable activities of petty 
common criminals such as thieves and purse snatchers  —both bad 
for business (Lintner 2005). 
 Between 1914 and 1939, almost 300 Triad societies were cre-
ated in Hong Kong (Chu 2005). By 2005, about 50 still existed, 14 
of whom were constantly on police radar including the Sun Yoo 
On, 14K Hau Group, 14K Tak Group, 14N Ngai Group, Wo Shing 
Wo, Wo Hop To, Wo On Lok (Shui Fong), and Luen Ying Sh’e 
(Chu 2005). 
 Chinese Triads became involved in global organized crime 
around 1917, when the British stopped importing opium into 
China, leaving an estimated 150 million Chinese craving a fix (  Mc-
Coy 1992). Triads stepped in to fill the void, effectively passing on 
the opium trade from the British to the Chinese underworld. By the 
next decade Shanghai’s drug syndicates were bringing in 10 tons of 
heroin from Japan and Europe each year. In the 1930s, the Japanese 

Asian Organized Crime Groups 107
had established labs in northern China to produce large amounts 
of heroin. By most accounts, Mao-Tse-Tung was so outraged by 
the Triad drug trade when he came to power in 1949 that it was his 
main raison d’être for driving out the Triads in the 1950s. After the 
Communist victory, Chiang Kai-Shek and his followers and many 
Triad members fled to Hong Kong (under the British), Taiwan, 
and elsewhere. Mao consolidated his victory by executing or im-
prisoning many Triad members, but tens of thousands escaped. 
 Before the Communist victory over Chiang Kai-shek ’s nation-
alist forces in 1949, the Nationalist government secret police and 
Kuomintang ( Nationalist Party) officers played a role in creating 
new Triads to be used against the rising tide of communism. This 
should not be surprising as Chiang Kai-shek was a longtime mem-
ber of the Green Gang and a Triad member, with a background 
that included extortion, armed robbery, and art theft. 
 Most academics and law enforcement officials suspected that 
after Hong Kong was returned to mainland Chinese control in 
1997, there would be a mass exodus of Triad members to Western 
countries. Recent scholarship has found otherwise, however; most 
surprisingly some members have had the temerity to enter Chi-
nese markets (Chu 2005). Officials had expected 90,000 Chinese 
gangsters to flee Hong Kong. Instead “the reverse turned out to be 
true” ( Lintner 2005, 85). Rather than hightail it for Australia, Can-
ada, and the United States, all popular destinations for Chinese 
immigrants, Hong Kong Triads have entered into negotiations with 
new Chinese officials in the former British colony who allowed 
them to continue many of their rackets, albeit unofficially. At the 
same time Triads have made inroads on the mainland, lured by 
the country’s transition from old socialist traditions to the fledgling 
market economy. 
 Triads are currently involved in a variety of activities in Hong 
Kong, including heavily investing in legitimate businesses such 
as bars, nightclubs, restaurants, dance clubs, and even the movie 
industry. At the beginning of the 1990s, the Hong Kong film indus-
try was ranked third behind Hollywood and India’s Bollywood. 
During this era Triads moved in for a piece of the action, coercing 
leading stars to act in their pictures. When peaceful overtures could 
not cajole the stars to participate, threats of violence followed. No 
less a star than martial arts actor Jackie Chan was ordered to par-
ticipate in a film backed by the Wah Ching Triad, which is con-
sidered an American-Chinese organized crime group. When he 
demurred, citing his current obligation to the film  Cannonball Run  II, 

108 Global Organized Crime Groups
the film’s main office in San Francisco was raked with gunfire. The 
Triad next tried to extort $4 million from Chan for the embarrass-
ment he had caused the gang’s leader. Upon Chan’s return to Hong 
Kong, a 14K member came to collect the “debt.” It is unknown 
whether this was ever paid (Dubro 1992; Booth 1999). Nonethe-
less the film industry has been a lucrative industry for the Triads. 
Related rackets include protection schemes targeting film props, 
exposing film, and forcing stars to buy security. They have even 
targeted foreign productions, demanding rent for filming on loca-
tion and intimidating film crews and staff. Triads continue to try 
to monopolize emerging markets as well, including interior deco-
ration and real estate sales. 
 Like other tradition-bound organized crime groups, the Tri-
ads have been going through a transition period. In times past a 
lengthy ceremony and initiation were required to join; new mem-
bers are bound by oral agreements with their Big Brother ( higher 
ranking member). Discipline has also become an issue, with Tri-
ads finding it increasingly difficult to enforce strict discipline over 
new members. In addition it is now easier for members to transfer 
from one Triad to another group. This breakdown in esprit de corps 
has had the unanticipated consequence of making the Big Brothers 
feel less obligated to look after their followers when they encoun-
ter problems (Chu 2005). 
 Big Circle Boys [China] 
 The Big Circle Boys is one of the newest examples of Chinese or-
ganized crime. Also recognized as the “ Big Circle Gang ” and “Dai 
Heun Jai,” it is considered a “mainland (China) based Triad.” It is 
distinct from other Triads because of its membership of mostly for-
mer Red Army guards who had served stints in Chinese prison 
camps. On maps these government camps are identified with a red 
circle, hence the name. Members are known for their brutality and 
knowledge of weaponry and favor activities such as heroin traf-
ficking and jewelry store robberies. Although the Big Circle Boys 
is not technically a Triad, most of its members belong to various 
Triads. In recent years members have expanded their activities into 
Canada, the United States, and South America, where they have 
expanded into credit card fraud, counterfeiting, and trafficking in 
drugs and humans. In the new millennium membership was esti-

Asian Organized Crime Groups 109
mated to be close to 5,000, making it one of the more prominent ex-
amples of Chinese organized crime. One former member claimed 
to have molded a highly organized gang out of the group known 
as the Flaming Eagles, which was involved in international heroin 
trafficking and other crimes (Huston 1995). 
 The Green Gang [China] 
 Once an organization composed mostly of peasants and unskilled 
laborers, the Green Gang made the transition to a criminal organi-
zation at the end of the 19th century, specializing in drug traffick-
ing, extortion rackets, and bribery. Unlike most of the other Triads 
historically linked to Hong Kong and Taiwan, the Green Gang de-
veloped in Shanghai, home to the Great Circle Triad, one of China’s 
oldest and most powerful Triads. Shanghai’s tremendous growth 
since the 1970s has facilitated the rise of the Great Circle Triad and 
other criminal organizations. Green Gang members are expected 
to take secret oaths and promise unwavering loyalty to the gang. 
Members recognize each other through a sequence of signals that 
also broadcast their position with the gang. Signals might include 
the way someone takes a cigarette out of a wrapper or how one 
uses an eating utensil. Any violation of the rules results in severe 
sanctions ranging from kneecapping and bone breaking to sever-
ing an ear or execution. According to one leading expert, the Green 
Gang is China’s “first modern secret society ” and should be con-
sidered the first Triad to become embroiled in the production and 
distribution of such modern narcotics as heroin and morphine 
(  Lintner 2002, 54). 
 Tongs and Chinese Street Gangs [ United States 
and Canada] 
 Tongs are considered the American incarnation of the Triads; how-
ever, one should not equate all tongs with criminal activity. Tong 
members are typically self-employed; there are tens of thousands 
of dues-paying members. The most common form of hierarchy in-
cludes in descending order a president, vice president, treasurer, 
auditor, several elders, and a public relations administrator (Chin, 
Kelly, and Fagan 1994). Only Tong officers and employees are al-
lowed into the decision-making process. Elections for these posi-
tions are held annually or biannually. In any case the vast majority 

110 Global Organized Crime Groups
of Tong members are law abiding and legally employed as work-
ers and merchants. 
 Historically, each Tong had an identifying name and mem-
bership exclusively composed of Chinese immigrants. Some were 
based on the region of China where they immigrated from; oth-
ers were created around a particular job or trade, such as laundry 
Tongs, railway Tongs, and so forth. Not all Tongs operated in a 
single community; for example, the mineworkers Tong had mem-
bers throughout the country. 
 Over time some Tongs expanded their activities to include 
criminal enterprises such as selling opium, prostitution, and mak-
ing usurious loans to Chinese immigrants (a practice that was legal 
in China). Others paid protection to local police to protect gam-
bling and opium dens. Tongs toed the line between the underworld 
and the upperworld (or legitimate world) as they observed their 
civic and legitimate duties in public while conducting rackets out 
of sight. 
 Similar to other criminal societies, over time various Tongs be-
came involved in a variety of criminal enterprises including prosti-
tution, loan sharking , drug dealing , and extortion. Tongs originated 
sometime in the mid-19th century, at a time when the first Chinese 
immigrants found work building railroads and mining gold in the 
American West. Chinese immigrants usually cloistered themselves 
in Chinatowns because of racism, discrimination, and the vagaries 
of immigration policy. Immigrants who were Triad members were 
quick to seize power in the nascent Chinatowns, forming what 
became known as Tongs, which literally translated to “ lodges,” 
“halls,” or “meeting places.” Early Tongs served as self-help orga-
nizations for Chinese newcomers, although law enforcement no-
ticed early on their involvement in such criminal enterprises as 
illegal gambling, prostitution, extortion, and other crimes. In any 
case, Tong leaders would become local powerbrokers and media-
tors to the Chinese communities. New York City and San Francisco 
have the richest Tong traditions, dating back to the 19th century. 
 New York’s Chinatown is the country’s largest, and its most 
prominent Tong is the On Leong Tong (the country’s first). The 
West Coast has a larger number of high-profile Tongs including the 
Hip Sing in San Francisco and the Ying On in Los Angeles. Both 
the Hop Sing and Suey Sing Tongs have Pacific Coast and East 
Coast offices. 
 A new wave of Chinese immigration reached American shores 
after the passage of the Immigration and Naturalization Act in 1965. 

Asian Organized Crime Groups 111
Among them were progenitors of the modern Chinese street gang 
phenomenon who would become inextricably linked to Tongs 
in the late 20th century. Despite their inherent legitimacy, Tong 
leaders have been linked to Chinese-American street gangs from 
at least the late 1960s. Tongs would have a difficult task control-
ling criminal activities without the assistance of Chinese street 
gangs. Many are hierarchically organized. With so many new im-
migrants, Tongs recruit from a ready supply of street criminals. 
Tong bosses usually select an individual tasked with coordinating 
the activities of the Tongs with the street gangs. The  Dai Dai Lo, or 
“Big Brother,” serves as a buffer between the Tong bosses and the 
street criminals, effectively insulating them from direct involve-
ment in criminal activity. Among the more prominent street gangs 
are Ghost Shadows, the Flying Dragons, and others, each with its 
own codes of behavior and loyalty oaths. More often than not these 
gangs are ephemeral in nature, each disappearing or being sub-
sumed by other gangs once they have fulfilled their usefulness. 
Once the street gangs were decimated by informants, killings, and 
arrests, they were deemed superfluous. 
 Once just a coastal big city phenomenon, Tongs and Chinese 
street gangs expanded throughout mostly urban America as cities 
such as Houston, Boston, and Chicago and others became more 
diversified with flourishing Asian communities. 
 In 1966, the Wah Ching street gang emerged and soon domi-
nated the rackets in the Chinatowns of New York City, Los An-
geles, and San Francisco. In 1989, they were severely tested by the 
arrival of Wo Hop To Triad members from Hong Kong. Subse-
quently both groups made concessions, consolidated their power, 
and emerged as a powerful criminal enterprise. Tongs and Chinese 
gangs have combined forces in the United States to control various 
Chinatown rackets including gambling parlors, promoting prosti-
tution, human and drug smuggling, and protection rackets, with 
human smuggling still among their most lucrative activities. 
 Yakuza [  Japan ] 
 Recent scholarship traces the origins of the Japanese Yakuza to the 
late 1700s ( Hill 2005). The Yakuza of the 21st century is a product 
of two distinct traditions, embracing both gamblers ( bakuto ) and 
traveling peddlers and stall keepers ( tekiya ). Both groups were 
suppressed during the Tokugawa era (1600 –1867). Both of these 
terms are still occasionally used to describe Yakuza members. After 

112 Global Organized Crime Groups
World War II a third group was added to the mix called gangsters, 
or  gurentai.  All three of these groups emerged from similar back-
grounds, typically coming from the poor dispossessed classes, de-
linquents, and misfits. The etymology of the word  Yakuza  refers to 
a losing hand of cards, hence its traditional association with gam-
bling rackets. The term was borrowed to also indicate a worthless 
person, a loser, or an outcast. Members seem to relish their image 
as societal rejects much in the way outlaw motorcycle gangs such 
as Hells Angels bask in a similar reputation. 
 After Japan’s defeat in World War II, Yakuza members earned 
a degree of acceptance and respect in Japanese culture. Most car-
ried business cards and even rented office space and did little to 
hide their affiliation. As the economy recovered in the 1950s, crime 
syndicates focused on the new opportunities offered by the in-
creasing number of new clubs, bars, restaurants, and sexually ori-
ented businesses. The Yakuza flourished thanks to alliances with 
politicians at all levels of government, inadequate policing, and 
fear of extreme left-wing activity by students and labor groups. 
The government knew it could count on the vehemently anticom-
munist gangsters to suppress radical activities when called on. 
Yakuza membership peaked at 180,000 in 1963 before declining to 
120,000 by the end of the decade (Hill 2005). During the 1970s, 
larger Yakuza groups expanded their operations after a crackdown 
on gambling rackets, moving into the methamphetamine trade. 
Since the 1970s, Yakuza activities have run the gamut from cor-
porate extortion, gambling, and loan sharking to prostitution, in-
ternational sex tours, money laundering, stock manipulation, and 
pornography. Although they operate throughout Japan, the most 
powerful are located in Tokyo, Kyoto, and Kobe. 
 In the early 1990s, the Yakuza was targeted by the government 
with the passage of the Act for Prevention of Unlawful Activities 
by Boryokudan Members (1992). Since then they have lost much 
of their prestige and respect as a Japanese institution. 
 Today there are roughly 22 Yakuza crime syndicates, with 
85,000 members (Onishi 2008). The Yakuza has traditionally man-
aged protection, gambling, and sexually oriented rackets. Authori-
ties have typically left them alone because they viewed these 
businesses as a necessary part of society. By allowing the Yakuza to 
operate openly, they believed they could keep them under surveil-
lance. The Yakuza’s position in Japanese society has taken a num-
ber of hits in recent years. Just several years ago it would have 
seemed unthinkable to take the Yakuza to court. But in 2008, one 

Asian Organized Crime Groups 113
neighborhood had wearied of the local Donjinkai Yakuza, who 
were situated in a six-story office building in a central commercial 
area of Kurume, Japan. Concerned over factional warfare in the 
area that began in 2006 and had left several dead, 600 residents 
brought a court action against the syndicate. Although residents 
and the Donjinkai had coexisted there since 1986, recent events led 
a group of residents to demand the removal of their headquarters 
from their neighborhood (Onishi 2008). 
 The Yakuza has a fairly complex hierarchy, with most groups 
organized into paternalistic “families” based on the  oyabun-kobun, 
or parent-child relationship. The  oyabun or father figure is the su-
preme boss who offers advice and mentors and protects gang mem-
bers in a paternalistic relationship that treats his minions like his 
children. Every new member is expected to accept this relation-
ship. Until the mid-1980s, it was common for 5,000 youths to join 
each year, about the same number that drop out each year (   Jameson 
1985). In recent years standards for membership have been low-
ered to fill the ranks. Where in times past they could depend on a 
ready supply of prime recruits, today’s members are drawn from 
motorcycle riding hoodlums or street tribes known as  bosozoku. In 
fact in the modern era, it has become routine for the Japanese Po-
lice Agency to make less of a distinction between Yakuza and other 
crime syndicates, preferring to regard them all generically as the 
violent ones, or  Boryokudan  (  Hill 2003). 
 Yakuza members first appeared in America in the early 1900s 
when a major Japanese drug distribution network began selling 
opium-based products and amphetamines to California crime syn-
dicates. In recent years they are most likely to be found in Hawaii 
where they have established links with local crime syndicates, 
partnering activities including weapons and drug trafficking and 
pornography (usually smuggled from America to Japan). Hawaii 
serves as the main American destination in no small part because of 
the large number of Asian tourists and immigrants they can blend 
in with. 
 Yamaguchi-gumi [  Yakuza gang ] 
 Kobe is home to the Yamaguchi-gumi, the country’s largest Yakuza 
gang. Formed in the early 1900s out of syndicates that organized 
labor on the city’s docks, members are recognizable by diamond-
shaped badges that in gangland circles were regarded as signs 
of prestige. The badge is emblazoned with the Japanese charac-
ters  yama  (mountain) and  guchi  (mouth). By the early 1980s, the 

114 Global Organized Crime Groups
Yamaguchi-gumi controlled close to 2,500 businesses, earning 
$500 million each year ( Lunde 2004). It flourished in no small part 
because of its political connections and willingness to innovate and 
diversify. The gang received its best publicity after the 1995 Kobe 
earthquake by offering relief to city residents before the govern-
ment stepped in. In the 1990s, the organization expanded into Tokyo 
despite an agreement by its most powerful adversary, the Inagawa-
Kai, not to do so. To get around the proviso of not opening offices 
there, Yamaguchi-gumi members opened up legitimate businesses 
as fronts and operated without an official gang headquarters. By 
2002, the number of members in formerly sacrosanct Tokyo had 
doubled. Favored activities included loan sharking and real estate 
and construction rackets. 
 Membership estimates range as high as 40,000 today, but num-
bers are probably much lower ( Neill 2009). 
 Organized Crime Groups 
in Other Regions 
 Jamaican Posses [Caribbean, United Kingdom, 
United States] 
 Jamaican gangs adopted the name “posse” as a result of the in-
fluence of the American Western genre popular in the 1950s and 
1960s. They would eventually thrive in the rampant poverty of the 
capital city of Kingston. Most were based on neighborhood bound-
aries and political affiliations. In the 1960s and 1970s, politicians re-
cruited armed gangs to get out the vote and enforce party loyalty, 
and over time they made the transition from simply street gangs to 
crime syndicates. By the 1980s, posses emerged in the United States 
(and as Yardies in Great Britain). When the ruling parties could 
not afford to fund the gangs in the 1980s, they turned to the drug 
trade and other organized crime activities. According to one esti-
mate, there were 10,000 posse members in the United States in the 
1990s, representing 40 different gangs ( Valentine 1995). The major-
ity were located in urban centers. In most cases they adopted the 
names of their hometowns. The Jungle Posse and the Jungle Lites 
Posse, for example, originated in a Jamaican township known as 
the Jungle, where they were known as  Junglelites.  In 1989, some 

Organized Crime Groups in Other Regions  115
non-Jamaican gangs began adopting the  posse  moniker. In response 
some of the real posses began referring to themselves as  massives 
instead. 
 The first inkling of the Jamaican posses in America began in 
the early 1970s when a group was identified dealing marijuana in 
Kansas City. By the next decade posses were fighting indigenous 
American gangs over the drug trade in South Florida. Before long 
they were well established in the United States, and they began mi-
grating from bases in Brooklyn and Miami to smaller cities, where 
they played an important role in the spreading crack cocaine trade. 
The two largest groups were the Shower and Spangler Posses. Few 
organized crime groups had such a well-earned reputation for vi-
olence as the posses in their heyday. 
 The posses’ connection with the crack epidemic of the 1980s 
has been well documented. During his 1986 trial, former Gambino 
family boss John Gotti claimed that one posse leader was “one of 
the first drug dealers to introduce crack to the streets of New York” 
(Gunst 1995, 160). The posses operated out of a vertical structure 
that allowed them to control the sale of crack from its manufacture 
to its distribution, allowing for a higher profit margin. One gang 
specialist suggested that one posse managing 50 crack houses could 
expect a profit of $9 million per month ( Valentine 1995). Some of the 
gangs were vertically structured, which allowed for more flexibil-
ity in controlling costs, some were “multilayered,” and still others 
were structured based on family and kinship ties. 
 Jamaican posses are known for their reverence for high-
powered weapons. Some observers have gone as far as suggest-
ing the roots of their gang activity in the United States coincided 
with earning money to buy weapons to control their neighbor-
hoods back in Jamaica. Weapons are rarely acquired legally. Pos-
ses acquired guns by home invasion robberies, raiding gun shops, 
breaking into armories, and hijacking vehicles carrying weapons. 
Attempts to acquire them through subterfuge include having a 
member set up a residence and acquiring required documentation 
in states where residence requirements are less than 90 days. This 
short-term residency allows the member to purchase weapons that 
can be transported to others states and sold for a substantial profit. 
There is still considerable debate as to whether posses should be 
considered organized crime groups or glorified street gangs. Al-
though some would argue that posses are locally organized syn-
dicates with affiliations that allow them to expand their trafficking 

116 Global Organized Crime Groups
networks, others suggest that unlike organized crime groups, pos-
ses typically operate independently of each other and are less co-
operative with their counterparts than traditional organized crime 
families. 
 Nigerian Gangs [ Africa] 
 Nigerian gangs have been reported in 80 different countries 
( Liddick 2004). These gangs are distinct for their ability to adapt to 
the conditions they find in any country. Congressional Hearings on 
Intelligence and Security reported they launder money in Asia, pur-
chase cocaine in South America, and direct prostitution and gam-
bling rings in Spain and Italy. As the so-called African Connection, 
Nigeria emerged as a leading transshipment point for Southeast 
heroin going to the United States and Europe in the 1990s. In the 
late 1990s, the New Jersey State Commission of Investigation an-
nounced Nigerian complicity in the international heroin trade. The 
investigation revealed a structure that included a “God Father ” 
who directs six smugglers (mules), who transport money and drugs 
into Nigeria from abroad. Usually the operation begins with a ju-
venile or woman being sent to a “Black Magic House” for instruc-
tions on swallowing heroin sealed in condoms. Authorities learned 
that the Nigerians received most of their heroin from Southeast 
Asia; indeed three of every five couriers arrested in Thailand for 
heroin smuggling were Nigerian nationals. In the opening years of 
the 21st century, the DEA regarded Nigeria as Africa’s most impor-
tant transshipment point (Naim 2005). Demonstrating the global 
magnitude of Nigeria’s involvement, the country’s heroin process-
ing labs were handling opium brought in from Afghanistan and 
Myanmar (which also transited through Pakistan, Uzbekistan, 
Thailand, or China). 
 Nigerian crime syndicates appear in a variety of incarnations, 
with most preferring a modicum of organization that might include 
a leader at the top with lieutenants acting under him; in most cases 
the actors are affiliated with government agencies or officials. But 
unlike the traditional monolithic structure of organized crime, some 
authorities claim Nigerian gangs more closely resemble “cell-like 
syndicates,” of three to five core individuals (Nicaso and Lamothe 
2005). Others, however, have identified well-organized structures 
resembling an “old fashioned pyramid of hierarchy” connected 
with criminal operations around the world (  United Nations 2005). 
In any case, as a result of weak money laundering laws and crime 

Organized Crime Groups in Other Regions  117
bosses who often operate with the tacit approval of high-ranking 
officials, Nigeria remains among the major players in global orga-
nized crime networks. 
 Since the 1990s, Nigerian criminals have become identified 
with “419” frauds, or advance fee fraud. The “419” refers to a partic-
ular Nigerian criminal statute—Nigerian Decree 419, which made 
the fraud illegal in 1980 ( Robinson 2000). According to the U.S. 
Secret Service and the State Department, this scam nets hundreds 
of millions of dollars each year. Nigerian fraudsters conduct ex-
tensive research before selecting targets to scam, and almost any-
one with a fax or e-mail can be victimized. The scam is usually 
introduced through a communication purported to be from some 
high-ranking official or luminary who wants to share a fortune 
with the victim, but characteristically requires that he turn over a 
bank address/fax/telex number, bank account number, and other 
information. To show good faith, the mark is expected to send an 
advance payment to guarantee what is really a fictitious money 
transfer. In cases where the response is positive, once the victim 
sends money, communication is typically cut off. Individuals in 
more than 60 countries have been victimized in this way. Until 
2006, the United States was considered the most lucrative market, 
with losses approaching $800 million (Chaudhuri 2007). Most of 
the frauds originate in Nigeria, the Netherlands, the United King-
dom, or South Africa. More recently, India has become the third 
fastest-growing market for the fraud. In 2006, victims lost $32 mil-
lion (Chaudhuri 2007). The United Kingdom comes in second at 
$530 million in losses. 
 Hells Angels [  United States, Western Europe, 
Canada, Australia] 
 In 1983, the U.S. Congress held hearings on organized crime. Most 
of the focus was on organized drug trafficking. What made these 
hearings such a landmark was that the focus had shifted from tra-
ditional Italian American organized crime groups such as La Cosa 
Nostra to the growing clout of outlaw motorcycle gangs (OMGs), 
prison gangs, and street gangs. When it came to international orga-
nized crime, none of these was as prominent as Hells Angels. This 
gang is among a handful of other gangs that have developed inter-
national connections that give them access to wholesale quantities 

118 Global Organized Crime Groups
of narcotics. One 2004 case exemplified the international nature of 
the Hells Angels. In this incident four members of the Dutch Hells 
Angels were killed after the theft of $11 million in cocaine. The sub-
sequent investigation revealed international ties to Colombian 
drug dealers. In this case the drugs had been shipped from the Rev-
olutionary Armed Forces of Colombia to Amsterdam via a new 
chapter on the Caribbean island of Curacao (Marsden and Sher 
2006). 
 The two decades after the return of servicemen from World 
War II are considered the formative years of what would later be-
come outlaw motorcycle gangs. Between 1947 and 1967, major mo-
torcycle clubs absorbed smaller ones or pushed them aside, and 
formal structures were put into place. In the 1960s and 1970s, the 
OMGs, especially Hells Angels, began unprecedented expansion, 
much of it stimulated by the growing drug trade. It was this era 
that saw its members make the transition from mostly drug abus-
ers to major traffickers. What makes these gangs so unique in the 
world of organized crime is their penchant for flaunting their col-
ors and other links to their criminality. They share with more estab-
lished syndicates most of the traditional characteristics including 
operating legitimate businesses as fronts for money laundering, a 
structured hierarchy, drugs and weapons trafficking, sophistica-
tion, secret rules and restricted membership, and others. 
 In 2006, Canada’s Criminal Intelligence Service described the 
Hells Angels as the “foremost organized crime group in the coun-
try, topping traditional Mafia and ethnic gangs” (CBC 2006, 2). 
With 32 active chapters and 500 full members, the Angels are more 
prominent in Canada than in the United States (CBC 2006; Marsden 
and Sher 2006). The largest and most prominent chapter was es-
tablished in Montreal in 1977. In recent years the Angels’ influence 
in Canada has been growing in British Columbia and Ontario 
through its ties with Italian organized crime groups; likewise it 
shows signs of diminishing in Quebec and Atlantic Canada. 
 Many organized crime observers have commented on the or-
ganizational similarities between traditional organized crime and 
the Angels. Hierarchically, the Angels have a Chapter President 
equivalent to a mafia boss and in descending order the equivalent 
positions of both respectively include Secretary/Consigliere, Vice 
President/Underboss, Sergeant of Arms/Caporegima, and mem-
bers/soldiers. 
 If any event demonstrated the transnational reach of the Hells 
Angels and other OMGs it was the so-called Great Nordic OMG 
War between 1994 and 1997, when the Angels fought the rival 

References 119
Bandidos over supremacy of Denmark. During this conflict the 
gangs were involved in hundreds of violent incidents leaving 11 
dead and at least 100 wounded. Experts on OMGs have been un-
able to explain why this country has the highest concentration of 
them in Europe ( Marsden and Sher 2006). Nonetheless, between 
1998 and 2005, both organizations doubled in size. 
 References 
 Althaus, Dudley. 2008, January 22. “Alleged Leader of Powerful 
Mexican Drug Cartel Nabbed.”  Houston Chronicle: A12. 
 Althaus, Dudley. 2009, May 1. “Mexican Drug War Not Slowed by 
Flu Fight.”  Houston Chronicle: A16. 
 Arlacchi, Pino. 1993.  Men of Dishonor: Inside the Sicilian Mafia. New York: 
William Morrow. 
 Bogan, Jesse. 2009, March 30. “Cocaine King.”  Forbes, http://www.
forbes.com/forbes/2009/0330/102-cocaine-king.html. 
 Booth, Martin. 1999.  The Dragon Syndicates: The Global Phenomenon of the 
Triads. New York: Carroll and Graff. 
 Burton, Fred, and Ben West. 2009, April 15. “When the Mexican Drug 
Trade Hits the Border.”  STRAFOR, www.stratfor.com. 
 CBC News Online. 2006, April 10. “Biker Gangs in Canada.” Available 
at http://www.cbc.ca/news/background/bikergangs. 
 Chaudhuri, Pramit Pal. 2007, March 9. “U.S. to Find Means to Stop 
Spread of 419 Fraud.”  Hindustan Times,  http://home.rica.net/
alphae/419coal/news2007.htm. 
 Chin, Ko-lin, Robert J. Kelly, and Jeffrey Fagan. 1994. “Chinese 
Organized Crime in America.” In  Handbook of Organized Crime in the 
United States, ed. Robert J. Kelly, Ko-lin Chin, and Rufus Schatzberg, 
213–244. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. 
 Chu, Yiu Kong. 2005, Spring. “Hong Kong Triads after 1997.”  Trends in 
Organized Crime 8 (3): 5–12. 
 Corchado, Alfredo. 2007, June 11. “Cartel’s Enforcers Outpower 
Their Boss.”  Dallas Morning News, http://www.dallasnews.com/
sharedcontent/dws/news/world/stories/o61107dnintzetas.3a36. 
 Dash, Mike. 2009.  The First Family: Terror, Extortion and the Birth of the 
American Mafia. London: Simon and Schuster. 
 Domash, Shelly Feuer. 2005. “America’s Most Dangerous Gang.”  Police 
Magazine, http://policemag.com/Articles/2005/02/America-s-Most-
Dangerous-Gang.aspx. 

120 Global Organized Crime Groups
 Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA). 1998, June 2. “DEA Confirms 
Arrest by Mexican Authorities of Amezcua-Contreras Brothers.” Press 
Release. Available at http://www.fas.org/irp/agency/doa/dea/
product/pr980602. 
 Dubro, James. 1992.  Dragons of Crime: Inside the Asian Underworld. 
Ottawa, Ontario: Octopus Publishing. 
 Dunn, Guy. 1997. “Major Mafia Gangs in Russia.” In  Russian 
Organized Crime: The New Threat?,  ed. Phil Williams, 63–87. London: 
Frank Cass. 
 English, T. J. 2005.  Paddy Whacked: The Untold Story of the Irish American 
Gangster. New York: Regan Books. 
 Follain, John. 2008.  The Last Godfathers: The Rise and Fall of the Mafia’s 
Most Powerful Family.  London: Hodder and Stoughton. 
 Friedman, Robert I. 2000.  Red Mafiya: How the Russian Mob Has Invaded 
America. New York: Little, Brown. 
 Galeotti, Mark, ed. 2005.  Global Crime Today: The Changing Face of 
Organized Crime. London: Routledge. 
 Gaylord, Mark S., and Hualing Fu. 1999. “Economic Reform and ‘Black 
Society’: The Re-Emergence of Organized Crime in Post-Mao China.” 
In  Organized Crime: Uncertainties and Dilemmas, ed. S. Einstein and 
M. Amir, 119–134. Chicago: Office of International Criminal Justice. 
 Gunst, Laurie. 1995.  Born Fi’ Dead: A Journey Through the Jamaican Posse 
Underworld. New York: Henry Holt. 
 Harman, Danna. 2005, February 24. “U.S. Steps up Battle against 
Salvadoran Gang MS-13.”  USA TODAY: 4A. 
 Hawley, Chris. 2009, February 23. “On the Border, a Crisis Escalates.” 
 USA Today: 1A, 2A. 
 Hays, Tom. 2008, February 8. “N.Y. Raids New Dozens of Accused 
Mobsters.”  Houston Chronicle:  A3. 
 Hill, Peter B. E. 2003.  The Japanese Mafia: Yakuza, Law, and the State. New 
York: Oxford University Press. 
 Hill, Peter B. E. 2005. “The Changing Face of the Yakuza.” In  Global 
Crime Today, ed. Mark Galeotti, 97–116. London: Routledge. 
 Huston, Peter. 1995.  Tongs, Gangs, and Triads: Chinese Groups in North 
America. Boulder, CO: Paladin Press. 
 Inciardi, James A. 1992.  The War on Drugs II.  Mountain View, CA: 
Mayfield . 
 Jameson, Sam. 1985, May 20. “Japan Gangs Not Really Underworld.” 
 Los Angeles Times:  A1, A10. 
 Jonnes, Jill. 1999.  Hep-Cats, Narcs, and Pipe Dreams: A History of America’s 
Romance with Illegal Drugs.  Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press. 

References 121
 Kaplan, David E. 2006, September 8. “Ba-Da-Bing: Return of the Mafia’s 
Pizza Connection.” Available at http://www.usnews.com/usnews/
news/badguys/060908/badabing_return_of_the_mafias.htm?s_
cid=rss:site1. 
 Landler, Mark, and Ian Fisher. 2007, August 16. “German Police Link 
6 Dead Men to an Italian Mob Feud.”  New York Times, http://www.
nytimes.com/2007/08/16/world/europe/16italians.html. 
 Liddick, Donald Jr. 2004.  The Global Underworld: Transnational Crime and 
the United States. Westport, CT: Praeger. 
 Lintner, Bertil. 2002.  Blood Brothers: The Criminal Underworld of Asia. New 
York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Lintner, Bertil. 2005. “Chinese Organized Crime.” In  Global Crime Today, 
ed. Mark Galeotti, 84 –96. London: Routledge. 
 Lloyd, Marion. 2007, June 18. “New Fear in Mexico: Soldiers Fleeing for 
Cartels.”  Houston Chronicle: A1, A9. 
 Lloyd, Marion, and Cindy George. 2007, January 23. “Alleged Mexican 
Kingpins in Court.”  Houston Chronicle:  A1, A8. 
 Longrigg, Clare. 2009.  Boss of Bosses: How One Man Saved the Sicilian 
Mafia. London: John Murray. 
 Lunde, Paul. 2004.  Organized Crime: An Inside Guide to the World’s Most 
Successful Industry. New York: DK Publishing. 
 Maran, A.G.D. 2009.  Mafia, Inside the Dark Heart. Edinburgh: Mainstream 
Publishing. 
 Marsden, William, and Julian Sher. 2006.  Angels of Death: Inside the Bikers’ 
Global Crime Empire.  London: Houghton and Stodder . 
 McCoy, Alfred W. 1992.  The Politics of Heroin in Southeast Asia. New York: 
Harper and Row. 
 Meiners, Stephen. 2009, March 28. “Central America: An Emerging 
Role in the Drug Trade.”  STRATFOR, http://www.stratfor.com/
weekly/200090326_central_america_emerging_role_drug_trade. 
 Morgan, W. P. 1960.  Triad Societies in Hong Kong. Hong Kong: 
Government Press. 
 Naim, Moises. 2005.  Illicit: How Smugglers, Traffickers, and Copycats are 
Hijacking the Global Economy.  New York: Anchor Books. 
 National Drug Intelligence Center. 2009.  National Drug Threat 
Assessment.  Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice. 
 Neill, David. 2009, April 10. “Gangster Boss Who Turned to God.”  The 
Independent World, http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/asia/
gangster-boss-who-turned-to-god-1666851.html. 
 New York Times. “Italy: Calabria Mob on the Rise.” 2008, February 22. 

122 Global Organized Crime Groups
 Nicaso, Antonio, and Lee Lamothe. 2005.  Angels, Mobsters & Narco-
Terrorists: The Rising Menace of Global Criminal Empires. Toronto, Ontario: 
John Wiley and Sons Canada. 
 Onishi, Norimitsu. 2008, November 16. “Neighborhood in Japan Files 
Lawsuit in Bid to Oust Mafia.”  International New York Times:  14. 
 Owen, Frank. 2007.  No Speed Limit: The Highs and Lows of Meth. New 
York: St. Martin’s Press. 
 Paoli, Letizia. 2003.  Mafia Brotherhoods: Organized Crime, Italian Style. 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Phillipp, Joshua. 2008, October 22. “Chinese Associations and Chinese 
Gangs.”  Epoch Times,  http://www.theepochtimes.com /n2 /content /
view/6053. 
 Rashbaum, William K. 2008, February 8. “Dozens Held as Mob Case 
Links Gambinos to 3 Decades of Crime.”  New York Times: A1, A15. 
 Reuters. 2009, April 2. “Mexico Catches Senior Drug Baron from Juarez 
Cartel.” Available at http://www.reuters.com/articlePrint?articleID=U
STRE53154G20090402. 
 Robinson, Jeffrey. 2000.  The Merger: The Conglomeration of International 
Organized Crime. New York: Overlook Press. 
 Saviano, Roberto. 2007.  Gomorrah: A Personal Journey Into the Violent 
International Empire of Naples’ Organized Crime. New York: Farrar, Straus 
and Giroux. 
 Schiller, Dane. 2009, May 20. “Cartel’s Texas Cell Has Its Own Ranch, 
FBI Says.”  Houston Chronicle:  A1, A15. 
 Serio, Joseph D. 2008.  Investigating the Russian Mafia. Durham NC: 
Carolina Academic Press. 
 Smith, Denis Mack. 1995, November 30. “The Ruling Class.”  New York 
Times Book Review, 7. 
 Stille, Alexander. 1995.  Excellent Cadavers: The Mafia and the Death of the 
First Italian Republic. New York: Random House. 
 United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Vienna. 2005.  Transnational 
Organized Crime in the West African Region. New York: United Nations. 
 USAID Bureau for Latin American and Caribbean Affairs Office of 
Regional Sustainable Development. 2006, April.  Central America and 
Mexico Gang Assessment. Available at http://www.usaid.gov/locations/
latin_america_caribbean/democracy/gangs_cam.pdf. 
 Valentine, Bill. 1995.  Gang Intelligence Manual: Identifying and 
Understanding Modern-Day Violent Gangs in the United States. Boulder, 
CO: Paladin Press. 

References 123
 Vaquera, Tony, and David W. Bailey. 2004, November–December. 
“Latin Gang in the Americas: Los Maras Salvatrucha.”  Crime and Justice 
International:  4–10. 
 Varese, Federico. 2001.  The Russian Mafia: Private Protection in a New 
Market Economy. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
 Varese, Federico. 2006. “How Mafias Migrate: The Case of the 
‘Ndrangheta in Northern Italy.”  Law and Society Review 40 (2): 411–444. 
 Wallace-Wells, Ben. 2007, December 13. “How America Lost the War on 
Drugs.”  Rolling Stone, 91–119. 
 Wright, Alan. 2006.  Organised Crime. Devon: UK: Willan Publishing. 
 

This page intentionally left blank 

125
 4 
 Chronology 
 Second  
 Earliest documented pirates are the Phoenicians.
 1500  BC 
 Early Assyrian tablet inscriptions suggest that chariot 
racing was already an established sport. 
 1304 
 England creates Trailbaston commissions to suppress es-
calating organized crime activities in the rural localities. 
 1611 
 Poulterers’ Case lays the foundation for modern con-
spiracy laws that have been so effective at targeting or-
ganized crime activity. 
 1644 
 Modern Triad societies trace their lineage to 1644 after 
the Chinese Ming Dynasty loses its battle to keep Man-
churian invaders from taking over the Ming Dynasty. 
The Manchus (Ch’ing Dynasty) rule China for the next 
268 years. 
  
 This period is the “Golden Age” of piracy on the high 
seas. 
 1661 
 English Navigation Acts create opportunities for pirates 
in colonial America. 
  
 During the reign of Peter the Great a vast network of 
Russian prison camps is created. Hardened criminals 
band together here.
millen-
nium  BC 
1650 –
1725
1682 – 
1725

126 Chronology
1715 –
1725
 
 English gangster Jonathan Wild rises to crime boss 
prominence as the London underworld’s “thief taker 
general.” As the city’s leading thief taker, or bounty 
hunter, thief takers ply the thin line between crime and 
criminality. Thief takers are often powerful criminals 
who are protected from prosecution through bribes and 
graft. In a time before professional police officers, they 
act as the middlemen between thieves and victims. 
While Wild helps breakup competing gangs for re-
wards, he runs his own stable of thieves on the side. 
He is convicted of thief taking and hanged in 1725.
 1735 
 The term  Camorra  first appears in print in reference to 
gambling dens in Naples where a game called  morra is 
supervised by  capos.  
 1773 
 The British East India Company gains control of India’s 
Bengal opium fields. 
 1803 
 German pharmacist isolates the opium alkaloid, which 
he calls morphine. 
 1807 
 Great Britain criminalizes trade in slaves. 
 1812 
 End of feudalism in Sicily by order of King Ferdinand 
leads to emergence of absentee landlords called  gabelloti . 
 1821 
 The term  triad  is first coined, referring to the magic 
number 3, which in Chinese numerology denotes the 
balance between Heaven-Earth-Man. 
 1834 
 Great Britain abolishes slavery in all of its colonies. 
 1839 
 Chinese Emperor’s high commissioner confiscates and 
destroys a large cache of opium, setting off what be-
comes known as the Opium War the next year. 
 1855 
 Cocaine is first extracted from coca leaves. 
 1860s 
 The word mafia is first found in Italian dictionaries. 
 1868 
 The first recorded instance of drug smuggling in the 
United States is reported after a Chinese merchant is 
arrested for smuggling opium for his opium den in 
Manhattan’s Chinatown. 

Chronology 127
 1870 
 More than 70,000 Chinese live in the United States, 
mostly on the West Coast. San Francisco becomes home 
to America’s largest Chinatown and to early Chinese 
organized crime activity. 
 1874 
 Heroin is refined from opium. 
 1875 
 San Francisco passes the first antinarcotics legislation 
in the United States. 
 1878 
 Italian government crack down on Sicilian Mafia marks 
the beginning of the exodus of Sicilian mafiosi to the 
United States. 
 1880 
New York’s Chinatown has 700 residents. 
 1880s 
 Cuban immigrants introduce  bolita,  Spanish for “little 
ball,” to the Tampa area of Florida. 
  
 A Select Committee in South Africa is appointed to in-
vestigate the illegal diamond trade, resulting in the 
Diamond Trade Act in 1882, which is geared toward 
suppressing this illicit trade. 
 1882 
 Chinese Exclusion Act is passed in the United States. 
This is the first federal legislation targeting a specific 
nationality or ethnic group. It is supported in part be-
cause of the association of the Chinese with the grow-
ing opium problem. 
 1890 
 According to some sources, this year is the first time 
the word mafia is printed in a foreign newspaper in the 
 Times of London  in connection with the murder of New 
Orleans police chief David Hennessey. 
  
  According to national census, Italians make up more 
than one-tenth of the population of New Orleans. By 
most accounts, during this period the first major mafia 
family in the New World is established in New Or-
leans. 
 1898 
 China leases Hong Kong and the New Territories to 
Great Britain for 99 years. 
 1899 
 New York City’s first Tong War breaks out over the con-
trol of gambling rackets in Chinatown. 

128 Chronology
 1905 
 New York City detective Giuseppe “Joe” Petrosino 
forms nation’s first bomb squad and the elite “Italian 
branch” investigating Sicilian-America criminals. 
 1909 
 Passage of the Opium Exclusion Act opens up new op-
portunities for syndicated crime in the United States. 
 
 Joe Petrosino is murdered in the garden of Palermo’s 
Piazza Marina, the only NYPD officer killed in the line 
of duty in another country. 
 1910 
 In 30 years, New York’s Chinese population rises from 
700 to more than 10,000. The rise in population is ac-
companied by the growing influence of Tongs and Chi-
nese organized crime in New York’s Chinatown. 
 
International Opium Conference is held at The Hague. 
 1914 
 America’s Harrison Narcotic Act criminalizes the non-
medical use of opium, morphine, and coca leaf deriva-
tives. 
 1919 
 Methamphetamine is first synthesized by a Japanese 
chemist. 
 
 On January 16, the 18th Amendment to the U.S. Consti-
tution is ratified, prohibiting the manufacture, sale, im-
port, or export of intoxicating beverages in the United 
States. On October 27, Congress passes the Volstead Act 
to enforce the amendment, beginning 13 years of alco-
hol prohibition. 
 1920 
On January 16, 1920, Prohibition officially begins. 
 
 Great Britain passes the Dangerous Drugs Act, prohibi-
ting the use of cocaine, morphine, opium, codeine, hash-
ish, and barbiturates for nonmedical purposes. 
 1920s 
 West African immigrants introduce the  numbers game 
to Harlem, New York. 
 1922 
 Mussolini comes to power, chasing many mafiosi over-
seas until 1943. 
1911 –
1912

Chronology 129
 1923 
 The International Criminal Police Organization, or In-
terpol, is founded in Vienna. 
 1924 
 On a visit to Sicily, Mussolini is humiliated by the local 
Mafia establishment. While visiting the small town of 
Piana degli Albanesi (formerly Piana dei Greci), the dic-
tator is chided by the town’s Mafioso mayor, who teases 
Mussolini, who is traveling with a coterie of motorized 
guards. “There is no need for so many police. Your Ex-
cellency has nothing to fear in the district when you are 
with me.” Mussolini is no doubt infuriated by the infer-
ence that he is not in total control of the island. Later 
that year he installs Cesare Mori, formerly police prefect 
of Bologna, as prefect of Palermo. Tasked with purging 
the government of all Mafia-connected bureaucrats, 
Mori suspends most legal protections on the island to 
purge the island of the Mafia. Hundreds of young Ma-
fiosi leave the island for America. Among them are the 
young Carlo Gambino and Joseph Bonanno, who will 
make their marks in the future development of the 
American Mafia. 
 1928 
 Great Britain criminalizes the use of cannabis. 
 1929 
 Chicago’s St. Valentine’s Day Massacre makes Al Ca-
pone a household name, marking the beginning of the 
end for the mob boss. It also advances the movement to 
repeal Prohibition. 
 
 The National Commission on Law Observance and En-
forcement under the direction of George Wickersham 
conducts the first federal attempt to study organized 
crime in the United States. 
 1930 
 Congress establishes Federal Bureau of Narcotics, the 
forerunner of the modern Drug Enforcement Adminis-
tration (1973). 
 1931 
 Murders of New York’s Sicilian crime bosses Salvatore 
Maranzano and Joe Masseria set the stage for the 
“Americanization” of the Mafia in the United States. 
 
 Nevada becomes first state to legalize most forms of 
licensed gambling. 
1929 –
1931

130 Chronology
 1931 
 Capone pleads guilty to tax evasion and is sentenced 
to 11 years in prison, effectively removing him from the 
free world of organized crime after a rather brief period 
as Chicago mob boss. 
 1933 
 Looking for the next big opportunity, Meyer Lansky re-
ports that Havana, Cuba, is becoming a tourist hotspot 
and that the Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista would be 
a compliant partner. 
 
 Prohibition is repealed by the 21st Amendment on De-
cember 5. 
 1937 
 The United States criminalizes marijuana with the Mari-
juana Tax Act. 
 1938 
Interpol is disbanded. 
 1943 
 The Allies invade Sicily. Role of the Mafia in these 
events is still debated but unclear. 
 
 The Christian Democratic Party emerges in Italy. By 
1948, it is in clear control of the government, thanks 
in no small part to the votes from Mafia-dominated 
areas. In the aftermath of this vote, Communist Party 
members are prohibited from holding office. Thanks 
to its support of the Christian Democrats, a new urban 
Mafia emerges. No faction is more powerful than the 
Corleone Mafia, which takes over many of Palermo’s 
rackets. 
 1944 
 On March 2, Louis “Lepke” Buchalter becomes the first 
major gang boss to be executed in the United States. 
 
 The “Vor Wars” or “Bitches War” in Russia pits vari-
ous prison criminal factions against each other. By its 
end, only the most hardcore have survived. 
 1946 
 Interpol is resuscitated after World War II. 
 
 Benjamin “Bugsy” Siegel opens the Flamingo Hotel 
and casino in Las Vegas. Although he is not the first to 
1945 –
1953
(cont.)

Chronology 131
open such an establishment here, he is credited with 
bringing organized crime into the Las Vegas gambling 
rackets. 
 
 Charles “Lucky” Luciano is deported to Italy from the 
United States. 
 1948 
 Hells Angels are established in San Bernardino, Cali-
fornia. 
 1949 
 Communists take over China from the Nationalists, 
forcing the Triad-connected Chiang Kai-shek to move 
his operations from the mainland. 
 
 The Kefauver Hearings, held in more than 14 U.S. cit-
ies, “establishes” organized crime as an Italian phe-
nomenon synonymous with the Mafia rather than a 
product of the American system. 
 1956 
 Interpol adopts its formal name and is now located 
in Lyons, France. 
 1957 
 The Grand Hotel des Palmes meeting in Palermo on 
October 12 lays the groundwork for the international 
drug trade, especially heroin. More important, the 
Sicilian Mafia sets up a 12-member commission known 
as the Cupola, containing the leaders of the Mafia fam-
ilies most interested in the new international drug trade. 
 
 On November 14, New York State police officer Edgar 
Croswell discovers the meeting of organized crime 
kingpins in rural upstate New York at a home in Apa-
lachin, New York. This is a turning point in the Ameri-
can war on organized crime. FBI Director J. Edgar 
Hoover had previously denied the existence of orga-
nized crime in the United States. The sensational reports 
about the meeting force him to finally enter the fray, be-
ginning a campaign of wiretapping and electronic sur-
veillance that sees few victories until the 1980s. 
 
 Mexican Mafia is organized by Hispanic inmates in 
Tracy, California. 
1950 –
1951

132 Chronology
 1959 
 On January 1, Castro’s revolutionary army topples dic-
tator Fulgencio Batista. Among the groups hit hardest 
by the change in administration are the American syn-
dicates that controlled a gambling empire in Cuba, 
thanks to the collusion of the Cuban government. With 
the ascendance of Castro and the Cuban revolution, 
most of those connected to organized crime rackets 
leave the island. 
 
 Outlaw motorcycle gang, The Outlaws, is founded in 
Joliet, Illinois. 
 1960s 
 Establishment of military dictatorships in Latin Amer-
ica stimulates development of organized crime in this 
region by creating institutional conditions criminals 
need to operate freely. While the government pursues 
political repression and hunts subversives, traditional 
criminality receives little attention and operates under 
the government’s radar. 
 1963 
 Murder of President John F. Kennedy is followed by an 
avalanche of books on various conspiracies. Of all the 
theories, the notion that organized crime is involved 
has remained among the most widely believed, but still 
unsubstantiated, scenarios. 
 
 Genovese family soldier Joe Valachi testifies before the 
U.S. Senate, the first American Mafia member to reveal 
mafia secrets in court. 
 
 Seven policemen are killed on June 30 in what has be-
came known as the Ciaculli massacre. In response the 
Italian government launches a major crackdown on or-
ganized crime, passing new anti-Mafia legislation. 
 1965 
 Passage of Immigration and Naturalization Act leads to 
new wave of Chinese immigration to America, includ-
ing future progenitors of the modern Chinese street-
gang phenomenon. 
 1966 
The Bandidos OMG is formed in Texas. 
 
 The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) 
is founded by Manuel “Sureshot” Marulanda. Most of 

Chronology 133
its funding comes from the drug trade, including man-
ufacturing and distribution, as well as by taxing culti-
vators of coca plants and laboratories. 
 1967 
 United States launches first federal Organized Crime 
Strike Task Force in Buffalo, New York. 
 
 President’s Commission on Law Enforcement and the 
Administration Justice Task Force announces gambling 
is the greatest source of revenue for organized crime. 
 1969 
 Mario Puzo’s  Godfather  and Donald Cressey’s  Theft of 
the Nation  are published. 
 1970 
 President Richard M. Nixon signs the Organized Crime 
Control Act, which introduces the Witness Security Pro-
gram (WITSEC) and the Racketeer Influenced and Cor-
rupt Organizations Act (RICO) to the organized crime 
fighting arsenal. 
 
 U.S. Bank Secrecy Act requires currency transaction re-
porting for cash transactions over $10,000. 
 
 The Sicilian War of the Godfathers leaves at least 500 
mobsters and family members, as well as a number of 
public figures, dead as the Corleonese faction emerges 
as the island’s prominent mafia syndicate. 
 1972 
 Turkey agrees to completely ban the opium crop. 
 
 Death of FBI Chief J. Edgar Hoover energizes the Bu-
reau and frees up the required sources to fight orga-
nized crime. 
 1973 
 Calabrian gangs win international prominence after 
kidnapping for ransom J. Paul Getty III, heir to the oil 
billionaire’s fortune. Two million dollars is paid af-
ter kidnappers send one of Getty’s ears to his grand-
father. 
 1975 
 First wave of Vietnamese refugees arrive in the United 
States, Canada, Australia, England, France, and Ger-
many. One of the more unforeseeable results is the 
1971 –
1978

134 Chronology
transferring of conflicts between the Chinese and the 
Vietnamese to America. 
 1976 
 Cocaine kingpin Carlos Lehder purchases part of Nor-
man’s Cay in the Bahamas for use as an airstrip for re-
fueling airplanes delivering cocaine to the United States 
from Colombia. 
 1977 
 New Jersey becomes the second state to legalize gam-
bling after public referendum passes the Casino Control 
Act allowing gambling casinos in Atlantic City. 
 1979 
 Facing 99 counts of fraud, perjury, and misappropria-
tion of funds, and probably 25 years in prison, Sicilian 
banker Michele Sindona, financial advisor to the Vati-
can, goes on the run. 
 1980 
 Cuba’s Marielito boatlift between April 15 and Octo-
ber 31 brings an estimated 125,000 Cubans to America. 
Among them are some of Cuba’s most dangerous fel-
ons who would have been otherwise rejected. 
 
 Yugoslavian leader Marshal Tito dies. With his death 
new party leaders, such as Secretary Slobodan Milo-
sevic, take a more antagonistic stand toward ethnic 
minorities, promoting a brutal brand of Serbian nation-
alism that will result in the explosion of the Balkans in 
the 1990s after the fall the Soviet Union. 
 
 Nigerian Decree 419 makes advance fee fraud illegal. 
 1980s 
 Yardie gangs from Jamaica begin to appear in England. 
Within a short time they make dramatic inroads into 
the cocaine and crack trade. They are linked to their first 
murder in 1987. 
 1982 
 The assassination of general Carlo Alberto Dalla Chiesa, 
a well-respected military commander who had been re-
cently appointed prefect of Palermo to head the cam-
paign against organized crime, leads to a fledgling anti-
Mafia movement on the island led by a consortium of 
lawyers, church officials, and reform-oriented politi-
cians. The burgeoning movement will attain ephemeral 
success with the Palermo Maxi Trials beginning in 1986. 
1975 
(cont.)

Chronology 135
 1983 
 Peruvian president Belaunde Terry coins the term  nar-
coterrorism . 
 
 The white supremacist group known as The Order and 
The Silent Brotherhood begins one of the most profit-
able crime sprees in U.S. history. Following the script 
provided by  The Turner Diaries,  during its one-year spree 
it knocks off armored cars and produces counterfeit 
currency. After the arrest of almost two dozen members 
for racketeering, robbery, counterfeiting, and murder, 
the defendants are tried under the RICO statute, the 
first time it is used in a political case. 
 1984 
 President’s Commission on Organized Crime Hearings 
on Organized Crime of Asia Origin is formed. 
 
 Mafia pentito Tommaso Buscetta reveals the inner work-
ings of the Sicilian and American mafias. This is the first 
testimony by a major figure in the Sicilian Mafia and 
is considered one of the biggest challenges to this phe-
nomenon since Mussolini in the 1920s. 
 
 End of the military dictatorship in Brazil leads to growth 
of domestic cocaine market and development of new 
organized crime groups and the expansion of the Bra-
zilian numbers racket,  jogo do bichos,  and its concomi-
tant involvement in the drug trade. 
 
 Medillin drug cartel is responsible for assassination of 
Colombia’s Minister of Justice Rodrigo Lara Bonilla, as 
well as a subsequent attack on the Colombian Supreme 
Court. 
 
 Jamaican Posse gangs in the United States are linked to 
at least 800 drug-related killings. 
 1985 
 Mikhail Gorbachev is elected president of the U.S.S.R., 
inaugurating a new era of free-market economy. This 
sets the stage for the emergence of numerous crime 
syndicates. 
 
 Sonora cartel kidnaps and murders DEA agent Enrique 
“Kiki” Camarena Salazar in Guadalajara, Mexico. 
1984  –
1987

136 Chronology
 
 U.S. government promulgates the notion of “narcogu-
errillas” as the alliance between drug smugglers and 
arms dealers in support of terrorists and guerrillas. 
 1986 
 Financial advisor to the Vatican Michele Sindona com-
mits suicide in his cell with strychnine. 
 
 On March 11, four of the top leaders of the Chicago-
based El Rukns street gang fly from Chicago to Casa-
blanca, Morocco, and then to Libya, violating travel 
prohibitions at the time. The Libyan government pays 
their expenses after El Rukns convinces Gadhafi that 
they have the ability to carry out a terrorist campaign 
in the United States. The FBI learns of the arrangement 
before it is finalized. In 1986, a 50-count indictment is 
handed down, naming six members of El Rukns as de-
fendants. Four of the defendants are found guilty and 
receive sentences ranging from 80 years in prison and 
a $225,000 fine to suspended sentences. This is the first 
time in U.S. history that citizens have been found guilty 
of planning a terrorist act for a foreign government for 
money. 
 
 Between 1986 and 1988, President Ronald Reagan’s 
Commission on Organized Crime publishes seven vol-
umes of hearings and reports. Its findings are signifi-
cant for broadening the government’s interpretation of 
the organized crime problem by moving beyond the 
parochial view that organized crime is synonymous 
with Italian gangsters. In marked contrast to previous 
investigations, this commission expands the emphasis 
to include nontraditional forms of organized crime such 
as outlaw motorcycle gangs, prison gangs, and Chinese, 
Vietnamese, Japanese, Cuban, Colombian, Irish, Russian, 
and Canadian criminal organizations. 
 
 Money Laundering Control Act makes money launder-
ing a federal offense in the United States. 
 
 In the Commission Case, or  U.S. v. Salerno,  the heads 
of four of New York’s five major crime families and 
other key figures are prosecuted for operating a “Com-
mission,” similar to a board of directors for organized 
crime. On November 19, a jury finds the defendants 
1985 
(cont.)

Chronology 137
guilty of racketeering acts, leading to long prison terms 
and effectively dismantling the upper echelon of New 
York’s Mafia families. 
 
 Palermo Maxi Trials begin after testimony by Mafia 
boss. 
 
 Tommaso Buscetta links hundreds of mobsters to mafia 
activities in Sicily. 
 1987 
 Colombian government extradites Carlos Lehder, one 
of the founders of the Medillin cartel, to the United 
States. Lehder had introduced the then novel idea of 
transporting cocaine to the United States on small 
private planes from transshipment points in the mid-
1970s. 
 
 (Late) 1980s Mara Salvatrucha (MS-13) organizes in 
Los Angeles. 
 1988 
 The investigation of the Bank of Credit and Com-
merce International, better known as BCCI Scandal, 
is launched after its branch in Tampa, Florida is impli-
cated in the laundering of drug money. 
 
 U.S. Congress passes the Indian Gaming Regulatory 
Act, allowing the nation’s sovereign Indian nations to 
open gambling casinos on their reservations. 
 
 The UN Convention against Illicit Trafficking in Nar-
cotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, the so-called 
Vienna Convention, is adopted. It requires signatory 
countries to criminalize the laundering of drug money 
and to confiscate it wherever it is found. 
 1989 
 Collapse of socialism across Eastern Europe and the 
fall of the Berlin Wall open borders between Western 
and Eastern Europe, facilitating the increase in illegal 
smuggling operations. 
 
 In December, a military expedition dubbed “Opera-
tion Just Cause” invades Panama to capture President 
Manuel Antonio Noriega Moreno. 
1986 –
1987

138 Chronology
 
 Pablo Escobar is ranked the world’s seventh richest 
man by  Forbes  magazine. 
 
 Medillin cartel is responsible for bombing of Avianca 
passenger jet, killing 111 people on board, and level-
ing the 12-story headquarters of the National Secu-
rity Forces in Bogotá, leaving 70 dead and hundreds 
wounded. 
 
 The G-7 group of industrialized countries sets up a task 
force to share money-laundering expertise, forming 
the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) in an attempt to 
“spread ‘clean’ financial practices.” 
 1990 
 On January 3, Noriega is flown to the United States for 
trial on eight counts of drug trafficking. 
 1991 
 After laundering millions of dollars in illicit cash, the 
Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI) is 
declared worthless and shut down for good. 
 
 The breakup of the Soviet Union has tremendous im-
plications for global organized crime. When Yeltsin bans 
the Communist Party, 15 new republics emerge, facili-
tating the expansion of Russian organized crime syndi-
cates. 
 
 End of communist rule in Albania leads to social and 
political chaos and collapse of the rule of law. 
 
 Collapse of Soviet Union leads to creation of the Cen-
tral Asian Republics of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajik-
istan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan. Organized crime 
in these countries is shaped by common issues of polit-
ical instability, endemic corruption, and trafficking of 
illegal commodities. Organized crime here is patterned 
more on political cliques and kinship groups. 
 
BCCI officials are indicted. 
 1992 
 Noriega is convicted by a federal court and sentenced 
to 40 years in prison. 
1989 
(cont.)

Chronology 139
 
 Croatia, Slovenia, Macedonia, and Bosnia-Herzegovina 
declare independence, launching bloody conflict that 
will alter the balance of organized crime groups in East-
ern Europe and create new opportunities for them in 
the process. 
 
 Italian magistrates Giovanni Falcone and Paolo Borsell-
ino are murdered. 
 
 Russian mobster Vyacheslav Ivankov enters the United 
States for the first time, claiming on his visa that he is 
involved in the motion picture business. 
 
 The Piracy Reporting Center is established to collect 
and distribute information on marine piracy. 
 
 Japanese government passes the Act for Prevention of 
Unlawful Activities by Boryokudan Members, begin-
ning a major offensive against organized crime and 
forcing hundreds of Yakuza to attempt to rejoin law-
abiding society. With almost 40 percent of them miss-
ing at least a portion of one finger, however, any chance 
at regular employment is thwarted. Subsequently at 
least one doctor develops a specialty of amputating a 
toe and grafting it on to the missing finger part. 
 
 On March 12, Salvatore Lima is assassinated. He is con-
sidered the leading Christian Democratic politician in 
Palermo and is regarded as the “Mafia ambassador” to 
the Italian government. His murder is apparently the 
result of his inability to fix the Maxi Trials that revealed 
the relationships between his political party and Cosa 
Nostra. 
 1993 
 A single European Market is created with the Treaty 
on European Union. Designed to further European in-
tegration by making it easier for goods and people to 
cross European borders, in a parallel way it has been 
used by organized crime groups to create cross-border 
syndicates and expand their operations into new mar-
kets and territories. 
 
 On March 12, a terrorist attack in Mumbai, India, kills 
more than 250 and injures 700. It is now believed that 

140 Chronology
several prominent South Asia crime syndicates were 
involved, offering a graphic lesson on the modern con-
vergence of organized crime and terrorist groups. 
 
 On May 27, Cosa Nostra detonates a huge bomb in front 
of the Uffizi Gallery in Florence, killing five civilians 
and destroying a number of art works. That same day 
two more bombs are exploded in Rome, damaging sev-
eral churches. 
 
 On June 6, a ship named the Golden Venture carrying 
human cargo runs aground on a sandbar 150 yards 
from a New York beach, not far from midtown Man-
hattan and Wall Street. Crew members encourage the 
300 passengers to jump into the 53-degree water and 
swim to shore. Of the 200 who actually jump, at least 
8 drown. This incident leaves an indelible imprint on 
the American consciousness and puts a face on human 
smuggling. 
 
 While on the run from authorities and the Los PEPES 
vigilante group, Pablo Escobar is cornered and killed 
in a shootout on December 2 by members of the Colom-
bian National Police in a middle class Medillin neigh-
borhood. 
 
 Brazil’s most powerful criminal organization, the First 
Capital Command (PCC), is organized at Sao Paulo’s 
Taubate Penitentiary. 
 
 More than 250,000 European cars disappear without a 
trace. 
 
 According to one survey in 1993, 45 percent of the 
Yakuza members are missing at least one finger joint 
after performing  yubitsume, a form of apology that re-
quires the Yakuza to sever a finger joint and present it 
to his superior as a plea for forgiveness. 
 1994 
 The passage of the North American Free Trade Agree-
ment ( NAFTA) opening free trade between the United 
States, Canada, and Mexico leads to unprecedented 
growth for Mexican criminal syndicates as they quickly 
adapt their businesses to advantages wrought by glo-
1993 
(cont.)

Chronology 141
balization. Mexican cartels can now deal with Colom-
bians and other traffickers from positions of strength, 
as they control border crossings into the United States. 
In this way they are able to sell routes to smaller syndi-
cates for exorbitant prices ranging up to 60 percent of 
each shipment’s value. 
 
 Apartheid  in South Africa is ended in favor of a constitu-
tional democracy. As the country makes the transition 
from police state to democracy, criminal organizations 
take advantage of the discontinuity in government by 
creating new alliances with both local and international 
criminal groups as the evolving police force plays 
catch-up. 
 
The FBI opens an office in Moscow. 
 
 Canadian biker war between the Hells Angels and the 
Rock Machine begins. 
 
 Interpol states that “Nigerians are the third largest eth-
nic smuggling groups in the world.” 
 1995 
 After the devastating Kobe earthquake, Yakuza are 
lauded for assisting citizens. 
 
 Russian criminologist Alexander Gurov coins term  Red 
Mafiya,  in reference to Russian-organized crime in Ger-
many. 
 
 Europol is created by the European Union convention 
Council Act on July 26. Its intent is to improve po-
lice cooperation among the member states to combat 
terrorism, drug trafficking, and other forms of illegal 
trafficking. 
 
 Bosnian War ends in December with signing of the Gen-
eral Framework Agreement, better known as the Day-
ton Agreement. 
 1996 
 The U.S. Congress passes the Comprehensive Metham-
phetamine Control Act (MCA), which forces all U.S. 
dealers of ephedrine to register with the DEA. It ex-
tends its restrictions to the transmission of ephedrine 

142 Chronology
and similar chemicals by mail or courier to nonpharma-
ceutical individuals; this covers the sale of powdered 
pseudoephedrine, but not the sale of cold tablets. 
 
 Terrorist group Hezbollah reaps almost $1.5 million 
from cigarette smuggling in the United States. 
 1997 
 On June 30, Hong Kong is returned to China by the Brit-
ish. Many think this will lead to an exodus of Triad 
members from Honk Kong to other Asian countries. 
 1998 
 UN Security Council passes Resolution 1173, a sanction 
against diamonds from Angola, and Resolution 1176, a 
sanction against diamonds from the Sierra Leone rebel 
group Revolutionary United Front (RUF). 
 
 Interpol reports that the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) 
is a major player in the trade of drugs for weapons. 
 
 The leader of the Egyptian terrorist group al Gamaat al 
Islamiyah is arrested for trading guns for drugs with 
Colombian rebels, demonstrating the nexus between 
global organized criminal and terrorist groups. 
 
 Protestant and Catholic paramilitary groups sign per-
manent ceasefire in Northern Ireland. Both groups had 
long participated in organized crime activities to fund 
their operations. 
 
 A Russian Organized Crime Task Force (ROCTF) rec-
ognizes that Russia’s definition of organized crime is 
substantially different from that of the American FBI. 
 1999 
 Noriega’s 40-year prison sentence is reduced to 30 on 
appeal. 
 
 Jaime Gonzalez, nicknamed “The Hummer,” deserts 
the Mexican Army and forms the Zetas, which act as 
enforcers for the Gulf cartel. Until his capture in 2008, 
he directs Zeta operations in Mexico City and seven 
Mexican states out of Reynoso, Mexico. 
1996 –
2001
1996 
(cont.)

Chronology 143
 
 Colombian President announces that “The terrorist 
group FARC has financed its activities with $600 mil-
lion from the Colombian drug dealers.” 
 2000 
 The Budapest Project is an innovative strategy of co-
operative law enforcement. A joint FBI-Hungarian Na-
tional Police Organized Crime Task Force is created in 
Budapest in April and is tasked with focusing on or-
ganized crime groups that had become active in Cen-
tral Europe after the fall of communism. In one of its 
main successes, Ukrainian-born crime kingpin Semion 
Mogilevich flees Budapest for Moscow, one step ahead 
of Philadelphia organized crime strike force indict-
ments charging him and three others with a panoply of 
money laundering, securities fraud, and RICO con-
spiracy charges. 
 
 Mexican presidential election ends decades of one-party 
rule. The transition to democracy is followed by in-
creased violence between the various drug cartels that 
continue into 2009. 
 
 In June a container carrying 58 Chinese asylum seekers 
who were illegally smuggled is found on the Dover 
docks. All 58 are dead. 
 
 UN Convention on Transnational Organized Crime is 
signed in Palermo, Sicily on December 14. It adopts a 
broad definition of organized crime groups. 
 
 UN Security Council passes Resolution 1306, prohibit-
ing all countries from importing rough diamonds from 
Sierra Leone until a certification process is designed. 
 
 The FATF declares 29 offshore jurisdictions to be defi-
cient and labels the 15 worst “non-cooperative coun-
tries and territories.” The G-7 asserts it will blacklist 
the worst offenders from doing business with member 
country banks. Within months the Bahamas, Cayman 
Islands, Cook Islands, Israel, Liechtenstein, the Marshall 
Islands, and Panama make progress toward increased 
compliance by passing new laws and increasing over-
sight of banks. 

144 Chronology
  
 Officials estimate that almost $12 billion in drug money 
was laundered in South America’s Tri-border region 
linking Puerto Iguazu, Argentina; Foz de Iguaçu, Brazil; 
and Ciudad del Este, Paraguay. 
 2001 
 In April Italian authorities arrest members of a Russian 
and Ukrainian criminal syndicate suspected of supply-
ing more than 13,500 tons of weapons to groups fight-
ing in the Balkans. 
 
 The September 11 terrorist attacks put organized crime 
on the back burner as most federal funding is directed 
toward fighting terrorism. 
 
 U.S. Patriot Act becomes law, establishing new tools that 
could be used against terrorists and organized crime 
groups, including new money laundering laws and 
granting extensive powers to the U.S. attorney general. 
 
 A study of organized crime in Northern Ireland links 
more than half of its 78 criminal gangs to either Repub-
lican or Loyalist paramilitary groups. 
 2002 
 The United Nations endorses the Kimberley Certifica-
tion Process for diamonds of uncertain origin. 
 
 According to the Piracy Reporting Center, the Indone-
sian, Bangladeshi, and Indian coastlines are the top 
three sites of reported pirate attacks. 
 
 After long negotiations, China joins the World Trade 
Organization. 
 2003 
 In April two tunnels are discovered running under the 
border between Tijuana, Mexico and Otay Mesa, Cali-
fornia. 
 
 U.S. State Department’s  International Narcotics Control 
Strategy Report  asserts that Bosnia has become a regional 
transshipment point and storage center for the illegal 
drug trade and has become increasingly involved in 
the production of synthetic drugs. 
2000 –
2001

Chronology 145
 
 U.S. Treasury Department designates Dawood Ibrahim, 
formerly India’s most prominent gang boss, a “global 
terrorist” for allowing al Qaeda to use his smuggling 
routes and supporting jihadists in Pakistan. 
 
 The World Health Organization proclaims metham-
phetamine “the most widely used illicit drug after mari-
juana.” The meth trade heats up in Mexico. 
 
 United Nations High Level Panel on Threats, Chal-
lenges, and Change releases a report linking terrorist 
and organized crime groups, noting that they “were 
more interrelated today than ever before.” 
 
 The United Nations Convention against Transnational 
Organized Crime becomes law and finally offers a defi-
nition of organized crime acceptable to most countries. 
 2004 
 Spain’s 9/11 on March 11, 2004, is in part funded by 
the drug trade. Investigations reveal 70 pounds of hash-
ish were bartered for high-velocity dynamite from a 
Spanish crime group. 
 
 The U.S. Secret Service announces it has cracked a 
“global organized cybercrime ring” in  Operation Fire-
wall.  More than 28 individuals are arrested, includ-
ing residents of eight different states and six foreign 
countries. The suspects are charged with identity theft, 
computer and credit card fraud, and conspiracy.  Op-
eration Firewall  began the previous year as a national 
operation but soon expands into a global investigation 
targeting international credit card fraud and identity 
theft. 
 
 The European Union increases from 15 to 25 member 
states. 
 2005 
 Internet use triples to almost 900 million users since 
1999. 
 2006 
 Robert Saviano’s best-selling book  Gomorrah, revealing 
the Camorra’s deadly secrets and forcing the young in-
vestigative journalist to go into hiding, is published. 

146 Chronology
 
 Taking advantage of China’s booming economy, Ma-
cau’s gambling operations takes in over $500 million 
more than Las Vegas between January and November. 
 
 On March 29, former Liberian warlord-turned-president 
Charles Taylor becomes the first African head of state 
to be indicted for war crimes. American investigators 
in 1996 estimated that between 1990 and 1994, Taylor 
brokered close to $75 million a year in financial trans-
actions stemming from his control of Liberia’s natural 
resources, including diamonds, timber, iron ore, and 
rubber. By most accounts, until he stepped down from 
power in 2003, organized crime groups from China, Is-
rael, Russia, South Africa, and the Ukraine operate si-
multaneously with his full blessing in Liberia. 
 
 Toward the end of the year, Mexican president Felipe 
Calderon initiates an aggressive war on drug traffick-
ing by sending in more than 25,000 soldiers and federal 
police to combat the drug cartels. 
 
 After 40 years on the run, Sicily’s top Mafia boss Ber-
nardo Provenzano is captured in April on a farm near 
Corleone. 
 2007 
 ‘Ndrangheta Gang War announces its presence outside 
Italy after six men are killed in drive-by shooting as 
they left a pizzeria in Duisburg, Germany. 
 
 Having lost the 1846 – 1848 war with America, Mexico 
was forced to cede half of its territory to its northern 
neighbor. Partially as a result, the Mexican military has 
traditionally refused most American aid. This did not 
begin to change until the administration of Vicente Fox 
in 2000 – 2006. During the summit meeting on a mutual 
drug-control strategy between Mexican President Fe-
lipe Calderon and President George W. Bush, their co-
operation leads to the Merida Initiative, marking a 
change in the historically tense relationship between 
the two governments. 
 2008 
 Arms dealer Viktor Bout is arrested on March 6 in Bang-
kok, Thailand. 
2006 
(cont.)

Chronology 147
 
 In February, the Italian Parliament’s anti-Mafia com-
mission warns that the ‘Ndrangheta crime organiza-
tion rooted in Calabria and far southern Italy “was on 
the rise worldwide and had eclipsed the Sicilian Mafia in 
power and international reach.” 
 
 Parallel raids in New York City and Palermo, Sicily, tar-
get mob groups in both countries that are trying to 
strengthen their criminal ties. The Italian operation is 
dubbed “Old Bridge.” 
 
 FARC founder Manuel “Sureshot” Marulanda dies of a 
heart attack, the third senior member of the rebel group 
to die in 2008. 
 
 On January 23, 2008, Semion Mogilevich is arrested by 
Russian police in connection with an investigation into 
an alleged $2 million tax evasion scheme. Others sug-
gest the real motive for his arrest is his involvement 
in the clandestine multibillion-dollar natural gas trade 
between Russia and Ukraine. Others have linked him 
to the trafficking in nuclear materials, drugs, prosti-
tutes, precious gems, and stolen art. 
 
 Residential neighborhood in Japan files lawsuit in bid 
to oust the Dojinkai Yakuza syndicate from its six-story 
headquarters in Kurume, Japan. 
 
 In August, U.S. prosecutors bust what they call “the larg-
est hacking and identity-theft ring ever.” Eleven peo-
ple from five different countries (United States, Estonia, 
Belarus, China, and Ukraine) are charged with steal-
ing more than 41 million credit and debit card numbers. 
This case like many others illustrates the changing na-
ture of organized crime, which has become increasingly 
multinational and more technologically sophisticated. 
 
 More than 5,300 murders in Mexico are connected to 
the country’s ongoing war between the drug gangs. Al-
most 90 percent of the 28,000 weapons seized over the 
past two years originate in the United States. 
 
 The November pirate hijacking of a super-tanker 
450 miles off the coast of East Africa is unprecedented. 

148 Chronology
Somali pirates capture the 1,000-foot long Sirius Star, 
owned by a Saudi Arabian company and carrying al-
most 2 million barrels of oil valued at more than $100 
million. 
 2009 
 In late July Mexican marines seize a cocaine-filled sub-
marine 120 miles off Pacific Coast containing almost 
six tons of cocaine valued at between $50 and $100 mil-
lion. 
 
 The U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Ex-
plosives announces that Houston, Texas, is the number 
one origin for weapons later recovered from gangsters 
in Mexico, where they are illegal. By most accounts the 
transactions are arranged through U.S. citizens with no 
felony convictions and are able to pass federal back-
ground checks. 
 
 In March a top Homeland Security official tells Con-
gress that National Guard troops will be dispatched to 
the U.S.–Mexico border to counter drug cartel violence 
only as a “last resort.” 
 
 Russia becomes the world’s largest heroin consumer. 
According to that nation’s head of the Federal Drug 
Control Service, it has become “the world’s absolute 
leader in the opiate trade and the number one heroin 
consumer,” posing a threat to national security. 
 
 Forbes  magazine lists alleged Sinaloa cartel drug king-
pin Joaquin “El Chapo” Guzman as one of the world’s 
richest men. Arrested in 1993, he escaped prison eight 
years later. According to the recent report he is listed as 
tied for 701st place, with a fortune of $1 billion. 
2008
(cont.)

149
 5 
 Biographical Sketches 
 Global Organized Crime Figures 
 Juan Carlos Ramirez Abadia [Chupeta; 
Lollypop] (1963– ) 
 This Colombian cocaine kingpin has been overshadowed by the 
likes of Pablo Escobar and others, but in recent years few Colombi-
ans moved more cocaine than his organization. Abadia, or “Chu-
peta” meaning lollypop in Colombian Spanish, rose to  prominence 
in the 1990s, moving large amounts of cocaine and ordering hits 
on informants and police in several countries. By some accounts 
his Norte del Valle cartel was considered Colombia’s most power-
ful drug cartel in the mid-1990s. Despite recent plastic surgery to 
obscure his identity, Abadia was arrested in August 2007 in Sao 
Paulo, Brazil and charged with transporting tons of cocaine into Eu-
rope and the United States. Authorities attributed his arrest to the 
$5 million reward for information leading to his capture. Much of 
Abadia’s operations had been moved to Brazil, which was becom-
ing an important transit point for Colombian cocaine. Brazilian 
investigators seized weapons and drugs related to his operations 
in six different Brazilian states; in addition they found that the or-
ganization laundered profits from Europe and Mexico by purchas-
ing property, cars, and hotels in Brazil. 
 Jose Miguel Battle (1929–1997 ) 
 The emergence of Cuban organized crime activity on American 
soil dates back to the 1959 exodus of gangsters from Castro ’s Cuba. 

150 Biographical Sketches
The most prominent organization was the “Corporation,” which 
originated in 1964, although its roots date back to the Cuban Bay 
of Pigs fiasco of 1961. By the 1990s, it was among the largest His-
panic crime syndicates in the United States. By 1986, the syndicate 
was led by Jose Miguel Battle, who was then one of Dade County 
Florida’s richest men, with a net worth approaching $180 million. 
Over the years Battle eluded law enforcement by organizing his 
syndicate like a “crime family  ” and relying on individuals known 
as “corrupters” to bribe politicians and other officials to stay out of 
his affairs. In the 1990s, Battle diversified his organization and ex-
panded into territories once ruled by Italian American families. 
The so-called El Padrino or the Godfather had begun his career 
as a police officer in Havana in the 1950s where he made friends 
with Meyer Lansky and Santos Trafficante Sr., connections that he 
would later use to open gambling operations in Florida. He was 
arrested, however, for a string of murders and in 1997 he was sen-
tenced to prison for a parole violations, where he died of kidney 
disease later that same year. 
 Viktor Bout (1967– ) 
 Born in Tajikistan to Russian parents, Bout became the most promi-
nent weapons dealer of the late 20th century, inspiring books and 
the 2005 movie  Lord of War  and earning such sobriquets as “Mer-
chant of Death” and “Embargo Buster.” He began his military ca-
reer as a young man and rapidly rose through the ranks before 
earning a degree in economics from Moscow  ’s Soviet Military In-
stitute of Foreign Languages. 
 Bout was a gifted linguist and was fluent in at least six lan-
guages. A number of sources suggest he was associated with the 
KGB at one time or another. He was on assignment in Angola when 
the Soviet state collapsed, but apparently he did not miss a beat 
with the opening of free trade opportunities. He made his first arms 
deal in 1992 and is estimated to have earned more than $50 million 
between 1992 and 1995 in various weapons transactions. Much of 
his early activities were centered in Sub-Saharan African nations, 
where conflict was the norm in the 1990s. He supplied civil wars, 
coups, and rebellions in Sierra Leone, Congo, Liberia, and the Ivory 
Coast among others. During the 1990s, he counted the Taliban and 
even the United States among his many customers. He finally ap-
peared on police radar screens in 1997 while working out of Bel-
gium but was able to slip out and into the United Arab Emirates, 

Biographical Sketches 151
where he found the accommodations much more to his liking. Af-
ter the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, revelations about his 
association with the Taliban led to arrest warrants from various in-
ternational authorities and the freezing of his bank accounts by the 
United Nations. Bout was arrested in Bangkok, Thailand in a sting 
operation on March 6, 2008, and remains in custody awaiting trial. 
Investigative reporters Douglas Farah and Stephen Braun claimed 
Bout was worth $6 billion at the time of his arrest, most of it held 
in a complicated maze of fronts and ever-changing companies. Al-
though he went out of his way to avoid notoriety, his omnipres-
ence in the weapons trade ultimately led to his demise. 
 Klaas Bruinsma [  De Dominee] (1953  –1991) 
 The leading authorities on Dutch organized crime consider Bru-
insma the “first Dutch godfather.” The scion of a wealthy Dutch 
businessman, he entered the drug trade full-time in 1974, selling 
hashish. After a stint in jail he changed his name to Frans van Arkel 
and immersed himself further in the shadowy Dutch underworld, 
where he formed the “Organization ” with several others, and by 
the 1980s, his activities reached beyond Holland as he began look-
ing for legitimate ventures for laundering his profits. At his zenith 
he commanded 200 men and was regarded as the most prominent 
drug supplier in Europe. He became increasingly erratic after sev-
eral large seizures of his products, however, and soon upped the 
ante by setting his sights on taking over the entire Amsterdam un-
derworld. His schemes included forcing coffee shops to buy his 
slot machines and reaching into the red-light district prostitution 
rackets. His increasingly violent behavior soon caused the organi-
zation to unravel and led his associates and competitors to come 
gunning for him. The Dutch tax authorities were on to him as well, 
but before he could be arrested, an ex-cop hit man working for a 
Yugoslavian syndicate killed him at the age of 37. 
 Tommaso Buscetta (1928 – 2000) 
 The youngest of 17 children, Buscetta was born into a middle-class 
Palermo family. He found his calling in the post-World War II 
Mafia. After a first arrest for bootlegging cigarettes in 1959, he be-
gan traveling extensively to Brazil and the United States. He opened 
a chain of pizzerias in New York City ’s Little Italy as a front for 

152 Biographical Sketches
drug trafficking operations. In 1970, he was arrested as an illegal 
alien and escaped to Brazil. At the end of the 1970s, he was arrested 
and extradited to Italy to serve a sentence for conspiracy and kid-
napping. In 1980, he returned to Brazil under an alias and once 
more became involved in heroin and cocaine trafficking with the 
Sicilian and American mafias. Buscetta made history as the first 
executive-level Mafioso to turn informant, or  pentito.  
 During his subsequent interrogation and trial, Buscetta de-
scribed in rich detail the inner workings of Sicilian Mafia families. 
From an international perspective, Buscetta’s revelations led au-
thorities in America and Italy to reevaluate their understanding of 
organized crime, as well as their methods for suppressing it. 
 Ibrahim Dawood (1955– ) 
 One of eight sons born to a struggling policeman, Dawood rose 
from petty crime to head of the Mumbai underworld. What most 
distinguishes him is his reputation as both a crime kingpin and ter-
rorist leader. By the early 2000s, he was directing criminal syndi-
cates from Bangkok to Dubai from the relative safety of his  Pakistani 
sanctuary. In 2003, the U.S. Treasury Department designated him 
a “global terrorist” for permitting al Qaeda to use his smuggling 
routes and supporting jihadists in Pakistan. He first came to the 
attention of terrorist hunters in 1993 when, along with his brother 
Anis, Dawood masterminded serial bombings in Mumbai that left 
257 dead and more than 700 wounded; however, he had been sup-
porting Islamic extremists with his criminal activities since the early 
1990s. He is considered by many officials “South Asia’s Al  Capone,” 
directing a network of contract killers, smugglers, drug traffickers, 
and extortionists across at least 14 countries. As the leader of his 
“D Company” syndicate, he is considered the most wanted man in 
India. He reputedly built his syndicate by smuggling black  market 
gold and other commodities into India’s closed economy and forced 
his way into the nation’s Bollywood film industry. After leaving 
India he fled to Dubai. He has flourished in Pakistan where he 
maintains a number of legitimate and illegitimate businesses, lead-
ing to his emergence as the “don of Karachi,” where his organiza-
tion made huge investments in real estate and plays an important 
role in the country  ’s parallel credit system business, the  hundi. Some 
have even credited him with having rescued Pakistan’s Central 
bank by floating loans during a financial downturn at one point. 

Biographical Sketches 153
His syndicate has been linked to large-scale drug shipments to the 
United Kingdom and Western Europe. 
 Pablo Emilio Escobar-Gaviria (1949  –1993) 
 By the 1980s, Escobar had become the face of the international co-
caine trade. An admirer of Al Capone, he poured millions of dol-
lars from the drug trade into Medillin, Colombia, building houses, 
new schools, sewers, sports plazas, and health clinics. But he saved 
the best for himself. At his zenith he owned 16 homes in Medillin 
and a country house capable of sleeping 100. To top it off, he had 
a 7,000-acre spread that boasted Colombia’s best zoo. Formerly a 
stealer of tombstones and cars, his talent for subterfuge included 
hiding a landing strip under mobile houses on wheels; residents 
pushed them aside for planes to land and unload drugs before mov-
ing them back on departure. Escobar cultivated his own stable of 
hired killers and pioneered new methods of killing such as put-
ting assassins on the back of motorcycles, which residents observed 
worked well in Bogotá’s perpetual traffic jams. Escobar’s promi-
nence was important to the 1980 ’s Bush Administration “ War on 
Drugs ” by putting a human face on a formerly anonymous enemy. 
During the 1980s and early 1990s, he was among the world’s lead-
ing drug traffickers; and, in 1989,  Forbes  magazine reported he was 
the seventh richest man in the world. Escobar was elected to Con-
gress in 1983, but the following year the United States demanded 
his extradition. The Colombian government had been extraditing 
low-level dealers, but Escobar, capable of waging war on the state, 
was another matter. In the end his decision to wage war on Colom-
bia led to his death and the demise of the Medillin drug organi-
zation. Some estimates suggest his war against the state left 1,000 
judges and officials dead. He also engineered the murders of sev-
eral presidential candidates who favored extradition. Escobar took 
his campaign of violence to new levels in 1989 when he master-
minded the bombing of an Avianca passenger jet, killing all 110 
passengers. Around this time, the United States began sending fi-
nancial aid to the Colombians to cover the ensuing manhunt, mak-
ing Escobar the world’s most wanted man. In 1991, he surrendered 
after an agreement was met in which he would be jailed in a facil-
ity of his own making  — more fashionable resort than prison. From 
there he continued to run his operations and engineer the murder 

154 Biographical Sketches
of opponents. When he found out he was to be placed in a military 
prison, he walked away from his “jail,” leading to a massive man-
hunt by Colombian and American agents. They were soon joined 
by a vigilante group known as LOS PEPES, an acronym for “ People 
Persecuted by Pablo Escobar.” With a large reward on his head and 
a constant manhunt following his every move, he could stay in one 
place only for several hours; and on December 1, 1993, authorities 
traced him from a phone call and he was located and killed in a 
shootout the next day. 
 Don Vito Cascio Ferro (1862–1943) 
 Born in Palermo, Sicily, Ferro became an early international crime 
figure in 1901 when he purportedly visited New York City and ad-
vised Black Hand extortionists on various criminal rackets. He was 
arrested by the Italian American detective Joe Petrosino in 1903, but 
escaped to Sicily. In 1909, Petrosino went to Palermo to investigate 
ties between that city  ’s Black Handers and those in New York, but 
was almost immediately assassinated. Most researchers suggest 
that Ferro was complicit in his death. Despite almost 70 arrests, 
Ferro stayed out of jail and even became a regular on the Palermo 
society circuit. His career ended during the fascist Mafia purges 
in the 1920s, and he died in prison during an Allied bombing raid 
in 1943. 
 Gregorio Sauceda Gamboa (1965– ) 
 A former Mexico state police detective, Sauceda was a top mem-
ber of the Gulf Cartel when he was arrested by Mexican police in 
April 2009. He was just one of more than 20 high-level mobsters tar-
geted by the Mexican government with million-dollar rewards. He 
is considered a founding member of the bloody Gulf Cartel almost 
a decade ago, when he was given control of trafficking through 
Reynosa, near McAllen, Texas, by the cartel’s boss Osiel Cardenas. 
He is also often credited as one of the founders of the Gulf cartel’s 
hit squad, Los Zetas. By most accounts Sauceda was selected as boss 
because of his “ violent character.” Authorities estimate that the Gulf 
cartel trafficked 10 tons of cocaine and 30 tons of marijuana across 
the American border each month. After Sauceda’s arrest, a police 
spokesman admitted that he had headed the gang only for a short 

Biographical Sketches 155
time and at his arrest his own involvement had been drastically re-
duced in recent years. 
 Osiel Cardenas Guillen [ Fanstasma; Ghost; 
El Patron (Boss)] (1968– ) 
 Born in Matamoras, the former federal policeman made the transi-
tion to the drug business, and by the 1990s his network was bring-
ing four to six tons of cocaine across the south Texas border each 
month. Cardenas took over the Gulf cartel in 1996 after the  arrest 
and extradition of its founder, Juan Garcia Abrego. Among his great-
est accomplishments was luring dozens of army deserters known 
as the Zetas. Their function as hit men was critical to establishing 
his organization as one of the region’s most powerful crime syn-
dicates. Cardenas had his first brush with organized crime while 
still in his teens, when he took care of a car for a famous hit man 
known as “the Nice One” for his penchant of letting his victims 
know their deaths were not personal, “just business.” Cardenas was 
convicted of organized crime activities in Mexico in 2003 before be-
ing extradited to the United States, where he was indicted for lead-
ing the Gulf cartel and threatening the lives of federal agents. His 
extradition in 2007 ended the career of one of Mexico’s most vio-
lent drug lords and was considered the most prominent drug traf-
ficker extradited from Mexico. What distinguished Cardenas from 
his fellow kingpins was his unwillingness to build alliances with 
other cartels or to keep a low profile. 
 Joaquin Guzman [El Chapo, Shorty] (1957– ) 
 Born in La Tuna, Sinaloa, Mexico, Joaquin “Shorty  ” Guzman is 
among the preeminent drug traffickers in Mexico today. By most 
accounts he was mentored by Miguel Angel Felix Gallardo, often 
referred to as “ The Godfather  ” and among the country  ’s most leg-
endary kingpins. Guzman, at 5’ 6” is tough to keep behind bars. Ar-
rested in Guatemala and extradited to Mexico in 1993, he  managed 
to escape from a maximum security prison in 2001, driving out in 
a laundry truck. His trafficking strategies have included building 
complex tunnels under the border between Mexico and Arizona 
and, in one instance, reportedly smuggling seven tons of cocaine 
inside cans of chili peppers. In 2009,  Forbes magazine featured him 

156 Biographical Sketches
on a list of billionaires, something that did not sit well with the 
Mexican government. 
 Vyacheslav Ivankov [ Yaponchik; 
Little Japanese] (1938– ) 
 Born in Vladivostok in the Far Eastern Soviet Union, Ivankov was 
given the moniker “Yaponchik  ” or “  Little Japanese” by police for 
his faintly Asian appearance. Ivankov first rose to prominence as 
the leader of the  Solontsevskaya  gang in Moscow in 1980, leading a 
crew of gangsters who, under the guise of police officers, conducted 
home invasion robberies at the houses of wealthy Muscovites. He 
was subsequently arrested and sentenced to 14 years in a  Siberian 
prison. He bribed his way out in 1991 and two years later landed 
in New York City. Ivankov joined the clutch of crime lords attempt-
ing to take advantage of the growing Eurasian drug trade. Con-
troversy has always swirled around Ivankov, with some reports 
suggesting he was sent to the United States by peers to explore 
business opportunities, and others suggesting he was trying to stay 
one step ahead of Chechen and Turkish mobsters. His gang was 
considered the most powerful Russian syndicate in New York City, 
but his career here was short-lived, and in 1995 he was among a 
group of gangsters convicted with wiretap information revealing 
the attempted extortion of a Manhattan investment firm owned by 
Russian-born businessmen. His legacy was mixed, with some re-
garding him as a formidable gang boss, but in reality he was never 
a monolithic crime boss in the tradition of a mafia don; his gang 
was never more than a dozen or so loosely affiliated gangsters who 
engaged in organized crime activities. 
 Daut Kadriovski (1955– ) 
 Born in Macedonia, Kadriovski came to prominence as a heroin 
smuggler in the 1970s, when he operated a network reaching from 
Turkey to Yugoslavia. He used a variety of legitimate businesses as 
a cover to launder proceeds in Germany, Hungary, Italy, and the 
United States. He towed the traditional Albanian line by trying to 
work with only blood kin in other countries. At his arrest in Albania 
in 2001, he was considered the boss of one of Albania’s “15 fami-
lies.” Other countries filed charges against him as well. Because 
Italy claimed him first, he was extradited there in 2002, where he 
was tried, convicted, and sent to prison for 12 years. 

Biographical Sketches 157
 Yoshio Kodama (1911–1984) 
 Throughout his long career, Kodama had a penchant for subter-
fuge. During World War II he reportedly directed an Asian espio-
nage and spy ring. At the same time he used his contacts to line his 
own coffers, providing Japan’s war machine with raw materials 
such as radium, copper, and nickel. Despite projecting an upstand-
ing profile with his connections to the government, he was deeply 
involved in heroin trafficking. By the end of the war, he was worth 
a reported $175 million and had been awarded the honorary rank 
of rear admiral. After World War II, Kodama was sentenced to two 
years in prison by the Allies for war crimes. After a general am-
nesty in 1948, Kodama was released and the U.S. government re-
lied on his diplomatic skills as an intermediary between the allied 
forces intelligence corps (G-2) and the Yakuza. During the next 20 
years, he was able to rally Yakuza thugs for political bosses and the 
Allies whenever   they were needed. His power reached from Ja-
pan into much of Asia, leading one observer to refer to him as “the 
most powerful man” in Japan and another as a “visionary  god-
father.” During his early years Kodama was involved in ultra-
nationalistic activities and was a rabid anticommunist (not  unlike 
most Yakuza members). By most accounts his peacemaking among 
the gangster syndicates was due in part to a perception that war-
ring Yakuza groups could be a national threat to Japan’s anticom-
munist unity. During the 1970s, Kodama earned millions of dollars 
representing the Lockheed aircraft corporation in Japan and estab-
lishing links between politicians and the Yakuza. His implication 
in the subsequent Lockheed scandal in 1976 led to his descent from 
power. Before he could be imprisoned, he was felled by a stroke 
and died eight years later. 
 Luciano Leggio (1925–1993) 
 Born in rural poverty in Sicily, Leggio is considered a transitional 
figure in the history of the Sicilian Mafia. Straddling two distinct 
eras, he came up as a cattle rustler in the feudal countryside and 
participated in the transformation of the Mafia into an interna-
tional player in the developing global drug trade. He originally 
was used as a hired killer for the Corleone family under Michele 
Navarra in the late 1940s and early 1950s. Leggio even kept a pri-
vate ravine on his land to get rid of bodies; however, his boss tired 
of his bloodthirsty protégé. Leggio escaped, and with the help of 

158 Biographical Sketches
two killers who would create their own legacies in Mafia lore, Sal-
vatore Riina and Bernardo Provenzano, proceeded to hunt down 
Navarra and his supporters. Leggio’s ascendance marked a new era 
in the Sicilian Mafia as it moved away from its agrarian roots. By 
the mid-1950s, Leggio was moving into the urban Palermo rackets, 
extorting the booming construction industry and collecting protec-
tion money from virtually every business in his territory. His ability 
to avoid capture over the years earned him the sobriquet, the “Scar-
let Pimpernel of Corleone.” His reputation lost its luster, however, 
when he was arrested in 1974. He would die in prison, but he left 
a legacy of moving the Mafia into global organized crime circles. 
 Heriberto Lazcano [   The Executioner; 
El Lazca; Z-3] (c. 1976– ) 
 Lazcano was born in Veracruz, Mexico, but not much is known 
about this shadowy drug trafficker except that he commands Los 
Zetas of the Gulf Cartel. His recruiting fliers for recruits have been 
posted widely along the border towns, advertising “  The Zetas want 
you, soldier or former soldier. We offer good salary, food and family 
care. Don’t go hungry any longer.” Lazcano joined the military and 
matriculated through the elite Airborne Special Force Group. Af-
ter his unit was sent north to battle the drug gangs, however, he de-
fected along with 30 others to the Gulf Cartel. He took control 
after the two officers ahead of him were killed, and he has molded 
the Zetas into a formidable paramilitary force. 
 Arturo Beltran Leyva (1961–2009) 
 Born in Sinaloa, Mexico, Beltran rose to prominence in 2007 for his 
role in several assassinations and commanding a group of para-
military hit men. During his early years he was reportedly men-
tored by “Chapo” Guzman. By 2005, he was running a formidable 
group of hired guns that included members of the MS-13 street 
gang, as he battled to control border routes in northeastern Mexico. 
After his brother was captured in early 2008, Beltran ordered hits 
on prominent federal officials in the state capital at Culiacan. Sub-
sequent police action led to the capture of some of his killers in 
Mexico City. What troubled investigators was their possession of 
high-powered weapons and grenades, as well as bullet-proof jack-
ets emblazoned with the Spanish acronym FEDA, which stood for 

Biographical Sketches 159
Special Forces of Arturo (    Beltran Leyva). Leyva was killed along 
with three of his gang members on December 16, 2009 after he was 
tracked down at an upscale apartment house and gunned down 
during a 90-minute shootout with elite members of the Mexican 
military. One of the Special Forces marines was killed and later 
buried with full military honors. The next day, gunmen killed mem-
bers of the hero’s family, including his mother. 
 Charles “Lucky” Luciano (1897–1962) 
 Born Salvatore Lucania in Sicily, Luciano became one of the most 
significant organized crime figures of the 20th century. He moved 
to the United States with his family in 1906, earning his first  ar-
rest before the age of 18 for heroin possession. After serving a six-
month sentence, he was released and rose as one of the leaders of 
the multiethnic Five Points Gang, becoming fast friends with fu-
ture Jewish mob luminaries Meyer Lansky and Benjamin “Bugsy  ” 
Siegel. During Prohibition he entered into alliances with a  variety 
of ethnic gangsters, transcending the traditions of the Sicilian Mafia 
that required all members to have Italian-born parents. In 1931, he 
figured prominently in the deaths of the Old World Sicilian bosses 
Joe “the Boss” Masseria and Salvatore Maranzano (the so-called 
Mustache Petes) and is credited with playing an important role in 
the Americanization of Italian American organized crime, which 
saw increased cooperation between different ethnic groups. Under 
Luciano’s guidance, organized crime became more businesslike 
and professional, moving into developing lucrative rackets such 
as construction and narcotics trafficking. In the early 1930s, he was 
targeted by mob-buster Thomas Dewey, who in 1936 engineered 
Luciano’s arrest and conviction for running organized prostitution. 
His conviction was probably the first time a major American or-
ganized crime figure was sent to prison for promoting this crime. 
Luciano was sentenced to from 30–50 years, but later had his sen-
tence commuted and was released and deported to Italy in 1946. Al-
though he was able to run the mob from behind bars, once deported 
to Italy his influence diminished. He died of a heart attack at the 
Naples airport. 
 Semion Mogilevich (1946– ) 
 Born in Kiev, Ukraine, Mogilevich first came under Russian police 
scrutiny in the 1970s. The so-called Brainy Don has an economics 

160 Biographical Sketches
degree and at his zenith was worth more than $100 million. He did 
not hit the upper echelons of international crime until the 1980s, 
when he began purchasing the possessions of Jews immigrating to 
Israel and promising to send them their profits in Israel (which 
never arrived). During the 1990s, he was considered among the 
world’s most feared crime kingpins and was wanted for weapons 
and drug trafficking, as well as several murders. On January 23, 
2008, he was arrested by Russian police while operating under 
one of his six pseudonyms. His apprehension was connected to an 
alleged $2 million tax evasion scheme run in connection with a chain 
of cosmetics stores called Arbat Prestige, whose owner was  arrested 
along with Mogilevich. Other observers, however, have suggested 
that his arrest was probably connected to his involvement in a clan-
destine multibillion-dollar natural gas deal between Russia and 
Ukraine. He has also been linked to the illegal trafficking of a host 
of other commodities ranging from precious gems and stolen art 
to drugs, prostitutes, and nuclear materials. 
 Manuel Antonio Noriega Moreno (1938– ) 
 Born into a poor rural family in Panama City, Noriega rose to the 
presidency of Panama but then fell to becoming the first head of 
state to be convicted of felony charges by the United States. Two 
years after the death of then-President General Omar Torrijos in 
a mysterious plane crash in 1981, Noriega assumed the  leadership 
of the nation, a position he would use until his arrest to become 
wealthy through the international drug trade and other related ac-
tivities. As America’s drug problems got worse in the 1980s, Presi-
dent George H. W. Bush was forced to act, starting by freezing 
Panamanian assets in U.S. banks and then cutting off all military 
and economic assistance to the Central American country. In 1988, 
a U.S. Senate report revealed what many suspected — Noriega was 
in cahoots with the Colombian cocaine syndicates. His doom was 
sealed, however, when the Panamanian strongman proclaimed a 
state of war existed between the two countries the next year. Fol-
lowing the death of an American soldier by Panamanian Defense 
Force troops, American forces invaded the country in “Operation 
Just Cause.” Although its main goal was the arrest and  extradition 
of its leader to the United States to stand trial, thousands of Pana-
manian civilians were killed in the process. On January 3, 1990, 
Noriega was captured and taken to Miami and held there for the 

Biographical Sketches 161
next two years while investigators put their case together.  During 
a trial that lasted more than eight months, 100 witnesses  testified 
in what some called the “drug trial of the century.” In 1992, Noriega 
was found guilty on 8 of 10 charges and sentenced to 40 years 
(  reduced on appeal to 30) in federal prison for his role in money 
laundering and protecting Colombian drug traffickers who were 
using Panama as a transshipment point for bringing drugs into the 
United States. 
 Cheng Chui Peng [Sister Ping  ] (1949– ) 
 Cheng Chui Peng was reportedly born in the small farming village 
of Shengmei. Her father was by most accounts involved in human 
trafficking long before “Sister Peng” rose to prominence as a “snake-
head.” She was arrested in connection with the  Golden Venture smug-
gling case, in which 10 passengers drowned after the ship ended 
up stranded off the coast of Queens, New York, a 17,000-mile voy-
age from China. She was an important cog in a huge smuggling net-
work that included contacts in China, Thailand, Belize, Kenya, South 
Africa, Guatemala, Mexico, and Canada and was credited with set-
ting up the route from China to New York’s Chinatown in the 1980s. 
Her efforts at smuggling undocumented workers into the United 
States reportedly earned her $40 million during a two-decade ca-
reer. Although Ping had little in the way of a formal education and 
knew little English, she was able to become a prominent business-
woman in Manhattan’s Chinatown after immigrating in 1981. She 
was the 23rd person convicted in the Golden Venture case and in 
2005 was sentenced to 35 years in prison. 
 Ze’ev Rosenstein [  Fat Man] (1954–2008) 
 Israel ’s foremost crime boss was born in Jaffa, adjacent to Tel Aviv. 
The son of Romanian Jewish immigrants, “  Fat Man” controlled one 
of the world’s largest international trafficking rings and survived 
at least seven assassination attempts before being killed in 2008. 
Rising from petty jewel thief to international drug smuggler to in-
ternational drug kingpin, Rosenstein had a criminal career that par-
allels the rise of global international crime in the 1990s. During this 
period Israel emerged as a transit point of criminal routes reaching 
from Moldova to Dubai to Southern Florida. 

162 Biographical Sketches
 Khun Sa (1934– ) 
 Khun Sa was born in Myanmar  ’s (formerly Burma) Shan State. The 
offspring of a prince, he was well accustomed to opulence by the 
time he became known as the “Opium King” and the “Prince of 
Death.” In 1960, he formed his militia, the  kakweye, which would 
become the nucleus of his Shan United Army (SUA). Over the next 
10 years, his 1,000-strong army was often embroiled in conflict with 
competitors over the opium trade. Since the transition from de-
mocracy to military dictatorship (as Myanmar  ), Khun Sa has been 
at war with the military. He has claimed that his only  involvement 
in the drug trade has been to finance his fight for the  independence 
of the Shan people. In 1993, he proclaimed himself the leader of an 
independent Shan state, but this has only brought him into con-
flict with neighboring countries. The next year Thailand and DEA 
agents took part in “Operation Tiger Trap,” which led to the  arrest 
of some of his important contacts and successfully sealed the bor-
der against his drug-trafficking network. In 1995, he stepped down 
as leader, vowing to lay down his weapons and leave the drug 
trade. Subsequent negotiations led to his surrender and release 
without trial. He purportedly now lives in Yangon, Myanmar. 
 Charles Ghankay Taylor (1948– ) 
 Born near Monrovia, Liberia, Taylor received a degree in econom-
ics from Bentley College in Massachusetts in 1977 before landing 
a job at the Liberian Consulate in New York City. After several 
scrapes with law enforcement, Taylor fled the United States for 
Libya, where he reportedly studied guerrilla tactics before moving 
on to Cote d’Ivoire and establishing the National Patriotic Front of 
Liberia in 1989 with the intention overthrowing the Liberian gov-
ernment. Taylor came to prominence during a protracted civil war 
using “child soldiers,” better known as “small boy units.” He made 
the transition from warlord to Liberian president in 1997. As war-
lord he controlled Liberia’s diamond-rich regions, as well as timber 
concessions, iron ore deposits, and rubber plantations. Between 1990 
and 1994, he reportedly made close to $75 million a year through 
his tightfisted control of these natural resources. As president his 
control brought in millions more. Before being unseated in 2003, he 
spent heavily on weapons and created a mercenary army to protect 
his interests. International officials traced his banking accounts to 
institutions throughout West Africa, Europe, Panama, and the Ca-

Biographical Sketches 163
ribbean Islands. Authorities suspect he used at least 30 front com-
panies to hide his assets, using couriers to transfer large shipments 
of cash. During his years as warlord and president, he helped de-
stroy two of West Africa’s most prosperous countries ( Liberia and 
Sierra Leone), as he established links with various organized crime 
groups and terrorist organizations. Officials claimed that in 2000 
organized crime groups from China, Israel, Russia, Ukraine, and 
South Africa operated simultaneously in Liberia with the consent 
of Taylor. In March 2006, he was arrested by Nigerian security of-
ficials ands sent to The Hague to stand trial for war crimes. 
 Tu Yueh-sheng [ Big Eared Tu] (ca. 1888–1951) 
 Tu was born into one of Shanghai ’s worst slums and was lured into 
the criminal life while still in his teens, earning a reputation as a drug 
runner and contract killer. He took over a number of gangs and 
became second in command of the preeminent Green Gang by the 
1910s. His wealth was counted in the tens of millions of dollars as 
he held sway over most organized crime activities along the Yang-
tze River in Shanghai, as well as the opium-growing regions. What 
brought his downfall was his opposition to the increasingly power-
ful Communists. Despite using gang members to beat up or kill 
thousands of students and Communist supporters, the Maoist vic-
tory in 1949 forced him to flee for Hong Kong where he died two 
years later. 
 Crime Fighters 
 Harry Anslinger (1892–1975) 
 Born in Altoona, Pennsylvania, Anslinger entered public service 
with the War Department shortly after graduating law school. In 
1926, he joined the Treasury Department. During the early years 
of Prohibition, he attended seminars on international drug and 
 alcohol smuggling. By 1929, he was appointed commissioner of the 
Prohibition Bureau. During the 1920s, the association of the Nar-
cotics Division with the Prohibition Bureau led to public disenchant-
ment with it, in no small part as a result of the bureau’s ineptitude 
and the unpopularity of the Prohibition laws. In 1930, Congress re-
moved drug enforcement from the Prohibition Bureau and created 
a separate agency, the Federal Bureau of Narcotics (precursor to 

164 Biographical Sketches
the DEA), within the Treasury Department. Appointed to lead the 
new bureau (until 1962), Anslinger took a get-tough nonpragmatic 
stance against drug abusers, leading the crusade against marijuana 
that culminated in the Marijuana Tax Act of 1937. During World 
War II, Anslinger claimed (without substantiation) that the Japa-
nese were using an “opium offensive” as part of their strategy to en-
slave conquered countries. The U.S. government was sufficiently 
alarmed to grant him use of the Coast Guard, the U.S. Customs Ser-
vice, and the Internal Revenue Service in the battle against narcot-
ics traffickers. 
 Thomas Dewey (1902–1971) 
 Born in Michigan, Dewey earned a law degree from Columbia Law 
School before entering the legal profession. He rose to  prominence 
in the 1930s when the New York governor appointed him to in-
vestigate organized crime. Between 1935 and 1937, he successfully 
targeted police corruption and organized crime figures and was cre-
dited with restoring the integrity of the New York Police Depart-
ment. He caught the public ’s attention by engineering the demise 
of criminals Lucky Luciano and Dutch Schultz. He became a na-
tional hero and revered racket buster and went on to serve as the 
state governor three times. As New York ’s crusading district at-
torney, Dewey is remembered as America’s quintessential crime-
buster. 
 Giovanni Falcone (1939–1992) 
 The Palermo-born anti-Mafia judge rose from urban poverty to 
iconic status during a career that ended on May 23, 1992, when he, 
along with his wife and three bodyguards, was blown up by a bomb 
hidden on the highway between Palermo and the city airport. Most 
evidence suggests that Corleone boss Toto Riina gave the orders 
for his death. One of the highlights of his career was convincing 
Tommaso Buscetta to return to Sicily from Brazil to testify at the 
Palermo Maxi Trial (and later at the Pizza Connection Trial in the 
United States). Buscetta’s testimony led to the convictions of 340 
mafiosi and associates. Falcone recognized that the success of the 
trial had sealed his demise, publicly stating he knew he would now 
have a price on his head for his victory. Despite the success of the 
trials, over the ensuing years political chicanery at the highest lev-
els of government resulted in most of the convictions being over-

Biographical Sketches 165
turned. Falcone’s murder, and that of his fellow magistrate Paolo 
Borsellino two months later, led to the creation of the  Direzione In-
vestigativa Anti-Mafia  ( DIA) and the passage of a witness protection 
law, which was an overwhelming success as hundreds of  pentiti 
( informers) came forth to testify against the Mafia. 
 Rudolph Giuliani (1944  – ) 
 Giuliani’s controversial career as a public figure   — New York City 
mayor, 9/11 presence, and presidential candidate   —has been well 
chronicled. What is less well known was his role as U.S. attorney 
for the Southern District of New York in leading the so-called Com-
mission case,  U.S. v. Salerno,  against the heads of New York ’s five 
crime families in the mid-1980s. After the former Bonanno  family 
boss had the temerity to publish his autobiography,  A Man of Honor, 
Giuliani famously opined that since Bonanno could profit from 
writing a book on the Commission, he could now indict it. He used 
the 1970 RICO statute to indict more Cosa Nostra members than in 
any previous case. The linchpin to the government case was prov-
ing the existence of the organization. On November 19, 1986, the 
jury found the defendants guilty of all 17 racketeering acts and 20 
related charges involving extortion, labor payoffs, and loan shark-
ing. All of the defendants except one (sentenced to 40 years) were 
sentenced to 100 years in prison. 
 Walter Maierovitch (Unknown) 
 Maierovitch is considered among Brazil’s leading experts on that 
country ’s organized crime problems. He made his mark on the war 
against the Latin American drug trade during his one-year term 
as Brazil’s first anti-drug secretary between 1998 and 1999. He 
had first come to prominence when he assisted Italian magistrate 
Giovanni Falcone in the early 1980s in persuading Mafia turncoat 
Tommaso Buscetta to return to Italy and give testimony during the 
1986 Maxi Trial. Before taking the position of chief of the National 
Drug Office in 1998, he spent almost 30 years as a judge focused 
mostly on prosecuting dirty cops and drug traffickers. Appointed 
to the position by then President Fernando Henrique Cardoso, he 
introduced several measures that were stymied by other govern-
ment officials. According to Maierovitch’s strategy, suspicious plane 
purchases would be tracked. Following the planes, most of which 
were bought in the United States, once they landed in Brazil with 

166 Biographical Sketches
loads of drugs, the aircraft would be seized and the pilots interro-
gated. The Brazilian government, however, decided on a different 
tact, more in line with the American strategy, by allowing Brazil-
ian fighter jets to shoot down planes suspected of narcotrafficking. 
Maierovitch did his best to convince the government his strategy 
offered the better chance of results, and on top of that the govern-
ment could then sell the plane and put the profits into drug rehabili-
tation programs for addicts. Despite the intentions of Maierovitch 
and others, Brazil has become an important center for transnational 
criminal gangs, linking markets in Latin America with Europe, Af-
rica, and North America. 
 Cesare Mori (1880 –1942) 
 In 1969, the authors of the  Crime Confederation  remarked that any 
list of top Italian American organized crime ’s heroes would have to 
rank “ Benito Mussolini at the top” since he unintentionally put into 
motion the exodus of Sicilian Mafiosi to the New World, where they 
would play a role in the creation of the Italian-American version of 
the Mafia. This could not have been accomplished without the work 
of his protégé, Cesare Mori, who has been accorded much of the 
credit for driving the Mafiosi from Sicily to the United States (and 
elsewhere) during the reign of Italian dictator Benito Mussolini. He 
chronicled his war against the pre-World War II Mafia in  The Last 
Struggle with the Mafia,  a book that demonstrated prescience about 
Sicilian organized crime unmatched to that time. Mussolini selected 
Mori as prefect of Palermo and in 1924 ordered him to make quick 
work of the Mafia outside the control of the fascist state. During a 
four-year campaign of torture and other extra-legal methods, he 
obtained hundreds of confessions and elicited false testimony from 
residents. Hundreds were jailed, and probably just as many fled to 
the United States, where many joined Italian American syndicates. 
Mori’s campaign wound up in 1929 with the arrest of the island’s 
most prominent Mafia leader, Don Vito Cascio Ferro. Those Mafiosi 
who had not been arrested or had fled pledged their support to the 
new regime, and for a time the Mafia seemed have been a figment 
of the past  —  that is until the Allied invasion of Sicily in 1943. 
 Giuseppe Petrosino (1860 –1909) 
 Giuseppe “Joe” Petrosino was born in Padua, Italy and  immigrated 
with his family to New York while barely in his teens. Ten years 

Biographical Sketches 167
later he joined the New York Police Department, and in 1905 he 
was tabbed to lead the newly formed Italian Squad, tasked with 
suppressing crime in the Italian community. His background and 
familiarity with his homeland culture and language made him an 
ideal choice. Early on he earned a reputation for his investigative 
skills, sometimes masquerading as a day laborer, blind beggar, and 
even a gangster. During the first five years of the unit ’s operations, 
members made thousands of arrests with hundreds of convictions, 
a number leading to deportations. Much of his efforts were directed 
at cracking Black Hand extortion gangs that preyed on fellow coun-
trymen. In 1909, he received permission to travel to Palermo, Sic-
ily to gather information on Sicilian criminals active in the United 
States. His enemies were waiting for him, however, and he was 
murdered on March 12, 1909, soon after arriving. He is considered 
the first member of the NYPD to be killed outside the United States. 
His funeral in New York attracted more than 200,000 mourners. 
 Joseph D. Pistone [  Donnie Brasco] (1939– ) 
 The grandson of Italian immigrants, Pistone was born in Pennsyl-
vania. He worked as a civilian special agent for the Office of Naval 
Intelligence before joining the Federal Bureau of Investigation in 
1969, first with the Jacksonville, Florida office and then the Al-
exandria, Virginia office. While at the FBI Academy, he studied 
gambling investigation and took undercover and Special  Weapons 
and Tactics (SWAT  ) training. In 1974, he was reassigned to the New 
York City office and used for undercover work. Using the alias 
“Donnie Brasco,” Pistone infiltrated the American Mafia as a deep-
cover agent for six years (1976  –1981), the most successful infiltra-
tion of a mob family (the Bonanno family) by a government agent. 
Posing as a jewel thief he frequented mob hangouts before coming 
to the attention of Bonanno family member. His ruse was so suc-
cessful that he was put up for Mafia membership, but first was 
expected to complete a murder contract. Fearing for his safety, the 
FBI pulled him out in 1981. Over the next few years, Pistone testified 
at mob trials across the United States. Despite the introduction of 
the 1970 RICO statute, government officials did not figure out how 
to use it until the Pistone investigations of the Bonanno family. 
Pistone’s subsequent testimony sent more than 100 gangsters to 
prison. With a half-million dollar mob contract on his head, Pis-
tone resigned from the FBI in 1986 and two years later published 
 Donnie Brasco: My Undercover Life in the Mafia. Surprisingly, rather 

168 Biographical Sketches
than enter the Witness Security Program, he changed his family 
name and moved far away from New York City. 
 Enrique Camarena Salazar [  Kiki   ] (1948–1985) 
 The DEA agent “Kiki” Camarena was probably the best known 
American casualty of the “  War on Drugs.” He was kidnapped and 
tortured to death in Guadalajara, Mexico by cocaine cowboys from 
the Sonora cartel. Born in Mexicali, Mexico and raised in Califor-
nia, he was posted to Guadalajara after joining the DEA, where he 
started a program to monitor marijuana fields on the outskirts of 
the city. His “Operation Miracle” strategy led to a 1984 bust that 
retrieved 20 tons of marijuana. The next year Camarena testified 
before a congressional investigation that drug-related corruption 
reached into the highest branches of the Mexican government. Just 
before the publication of his revelations, however, he was  kid-
napped outside a Guadalajara bar. It was three months before his 
body was found not far from the home of the prominent legislator 
Manuel Bravo Cervantes. As law enforcement arrived to question 
Cervantes, a gunfight broke out resulting in the death of the leg-
islator, his wife, and two children. Pressure from the American 
authorities led to the arrest of a former Mexican policeman who 
confessed to his role in the abduction and murder of Camarena. His 
testimony sent Sonora kingpin Caro-Quintero to prison for 40 years 
(the torture murder took place in his home), while the policeman 
received three life terms. 
 Researchers 
 Howard Abadinsky (1941– ) 
 Howard Abadinsky is professor of criminal justice at St. John’s 
University. He earned his doctorate in sociology from New York 
University. He worked as an inspector for the Cook County, Illi-
nois sheriff for eight years and as a New York State parole officer 
for 15 years. He is the founder of the International Association for 
the Study of Organized Crime and served as a consultant to the 
President’s Commission on Organized Crime. The author of sev-
eral books, including  The Criminal Elite: Professional and Organized 
Crime (1983) and  The Mafia in America: An Oral History (1981), he is 
the author of  Organized Crime,  a textbook now in its ninth edition. 

Biographical Sketches 169
 Jay S. Albanese (1953– ) 
 Jay S. Albanese is professor in the Wilder School of Government & 
Public Policy at Virginia Commonwealth University. He received 
the PhD from Rutgers University School of Criminal Justice. He 
served as chief of the International Center at the National Institute 
of Justice (  NIJ  ), the research arm of the U.S. Department of Justice, 
from 2002–2006. Dr. Albanese is author of numerous articles, and 
10 books that include  Organized Crime in Our Times  (2007  ),  Crimi-
nal Justice  (2008),  Professional Ethics in Criminal Justice: Being Ethical 
When No One is Looking  (2008),  Comparative Criminal Justice Systems 
(with H. Dammer and E. Fairchild ) (2006), and a  NIJ Special Report: 
Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children: What Do We Know and 
What Do We Do About It  (National Institute of Justice, 2007  ). He is 
editor of the books  Transnational Crime  (2005) and  Combating  Piracy: 
Intellectual Property Theft and Fraud  (2009). Dr. Albanese has served 
as executive director of the International Association for the Study 
of Organized Crime, and is a past president of the Academy of 
Criminal Justice Sciences ( ACJS). 
 Pino Arlacchi (1951– ) 
 Arlacchi was born in Gioia Tauro in Calabria, Italy. In 1997, he was 
appointed director general of the United Nations Office at Vienna 
and executive director of the Office for Drug Control and Crime 
Prevention (ODCCP). During the early 1990s, Arlacchi rose to pro-
minence as the senior adviser to Italy  ’s Ministry of Interior and 
helped create the Direzione Investigativa Anti-Mafia (DIA), which 
spearheaded the fight against organized crime in Italy. He played 
an important role in the promotion of the United Nations Conven-
tion against Transnational Organized Crime (2000) that was adopted 
in 2003. In 1992, he was nominated as honorary president of the 
“Giovanni Falcone” Foundation. Falcone, a close friend of Arlacchi, 
was assassinated by the Mafia in 1992. Arlacchi served a  variety of 
positions in Italy’s national government and as a trained sociologist 
has taught at several leading universities. Currently he is professor 
of sociology at Sassari. He has written a number of articles and sev-
eral books about transnational organized crime and is a well-
respected expert on Italian organized crime. His best known work 
includes the books  Mafia, Peasants and Great Estates: Society in Tradi-
tional Calabria  (1983),  Mafia Business: The Mafia Ethic and the Spirit of 
Capitalism  (1986), and  Men of Dishonor: Inside the Sicilian Mafia (1993). 

170 Biographical Sketches
 Ko-lin Chin (1951– ) 
 Ko-lin Chin received his PhD in sociology from the University of 
Pennsylvania and is now a professor in Rutgers University School of 
Criminal Justice. He specializes in street gangs, human  smuggling 
and trafficking, and drug trafficking. Among his many  publications 
are the books  Chinese Subculture and Criminality: Non-Traditional 
Crime Groups in America  (1990),  Chinatown Gangs: Extortion, Enter-
prise, & Ethnicity  (1996),  Smuggled Chinese: Clandestine Immigration to 
the United States  (1999), and  Heijin: Organized Crime, Business, and 
Politics in Taiwan  (2003). His most recent book,  The Golden Triangle: 
from Opium and Heroin to Methamphetamine  (2009), chronicles the 
drug trade in the Wa area of the Golden Triangle where Chin in-
vestigated cross-border drug trafficking along the China-Burma 
border. 
 T. J. English (1957– ) 
 For more than a decade English has investigated the changing face 
of organized crime in America. As a journalist and investigative 
reporter, he has written a string of well-researched and bestselling 
books on various aspects of international organized crime includ-
ing  The Westies: The Irish Mob  (1991),  Born to Kill: America ’ s Most No-
torious Vietnamese Gang and the Changing Face of Organized Crime 
(1995),  Paddy Whacked: The Untold Story of the Irish American Gang-
ster  (2005), and most recently  Havana Nocturne  (2008), an investiga-
tive account of American mob infiltration of Havana, Cuba, in the 
years leading up to the Cuban Revolution. 
 Cyrille Fijnaut (1946– ) 
 Professor Fijnaut teaches international and comparative criminal 
law at the Law School of Tilburg University. His many research in-
terests include organized crime and terrorism, international po-
lice and judicial cooperation, comparative criminal procedure and 
police law, the history of European criminology and of policing in 
Europe, and police and judicial cooperation in the Benelux. He has 
authored, co-authored, and edited 75 books and published hundreds 
of articles in learned and professional journals and edited books in-
cluding (with L. Paoli)  Organised Crime in Europe: Concepts,  Patterns 
and Control Policies in the European Union and Beyond  (2004). He has 

Biographical Sketches 171
also served as an expert for a number of governmental and parlia-
mentary committees of inquiry in Belgium and the Netherlands re-
lated to organized and professional crime problems over the past 
15 years. Since 2005, he has a special chair, sponsored by the Dutch 
State Lottery, on the regulatory aspects of gambling. 
 James Finckenauer (1939– ) 
 Professor Finckenauer has taught at Rutgers University School of 
Criminal Justice since 1974 and is currently distinguished  professor. 
Most of his research and teaching interests have been devoted to in-
ternational and comparative criminal justice issues, transnational 
crime, organized crime, crime policy, and evaluation research. He 
is the author or coauthor of nine books, as well as hundreds of ar-
ticles, chapters, and reports. His most recent book is  Mafia and Or-
ganized Crime: A Beginner ’ s Guide  (2007). He has received  numerous 
awards and is in demand as a lecturer on organized crime issues 
around the world. Finckenauer has served as editor of  The Journal 
of Research in Crime and Delinquency  and  Trends in Organized Crime 
and was past president of the New Jersey Association of Criminal 
Justice Educators, the International Association for the Study of 
Organized Crime, and the Academy of Criminal Justice Sciences. 
In 2008, he served as a U.S. expert for the State Department’s U.S.–
Russia Experts Forum on Transnational Organized Crime, and a 
consultant to the United Nations in developing an Organized Crime 
Threat Assessment Handbook. He is currently working on a proj-
ect studying the trafficking of Chinese women for commercial 
sex work. 
 Robert J. Kelly (1938– ) 
 Kelley is the Broeklundian Professor Emeritus at Brooklyn Col-
lege and the Graduate School of the City University of New York. 
He served on the Manhattan Terrorism Task Force after 9/11 and 
consulted with the Department of Homeland Security ( Northeast 
region) and the National Institute of Justice on Terrorism and 
Organized Crime. Kelly has published numerous articles and 
books on terrorism, organized crime, and social distress, including 
 Encyclopedia of Organized Crime in the United States,  published by 
Greenwood Press in 2000. Most recently he coauthored  Illicit Traf-
ficking,  published in 2005 by ABC-CLIO. 

172 Biographical Sketches
 Letizia Paoli (1966 – ) 
 Letizia Paoli received her PhD in social and political sciences from 
the European University Institute in Florence in 1997. Since the early 
1990s, she has researched and published extensively on organized 
crime, drugs, and illegal markets. During the 1990s, Paoli served as 
consultant to the Italian Ministries of the Interior and Justice, the 
United Nations Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention, and 
the United Nations Crime and Justice Interregional Research Insti-
tute. In 2001, she published  Illegal Drug Trade in Russia,  the first de-
tailed study of illegal drug trafficking in Russia, which was based 
on her research on behalf of the UN Office for Drug Control and 
Crime Prevention. In 2003, she published  Mafia Brotherhoods.  
 Kip Schlegel (1953– ) 
 Professor Schlegel teaches at Indiana University. His research in-
terests include organized crime and the social mechanisms used to 
control it, the jurisprudence of sentencing, and criminal justice plan-
ning and evaluation. Most of his recent research is related to  various 
facets of organized crime including the organization and  enterprise 
of illegal drug distribution. He is the author of  Just Deserts for Cor-
porate Criminals  (1990) and co-editor of  White Collar Crime Reconsid-
ered  (1992). More recently he examined the connections between 
technology and organized crime in an article with Charles Cohen, 
“ The Impact of Technology on Criminality” (2007  ). 
 Joseph Serio (1958 – ) 
 During the months leading up to fall of the Soviet Union, Serio was 
the only American to work in the Organized Crime Control Depart-
ment of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the U.S.S.R. His intern-
ship there was sponsored by the Office of International Criminal 
Justice at the University of Illinois at Chicago. During his tenure at 
Soviet national police headquarters from September 1990 to June 
1991, he conducted research on Soviet organized crime, assisted in 
the preparation of Soviet police documents for international con-
ferences, and developed a network of law enforcement contacts. In 
the course of his research, he had access to police intelligence re-
ports and the Ministry   ’s National Police Academy archives. His re-
search resulted in the document  Soviet Organized Crime,  which has 
been used as a reference by the FBI, the Italian Ministry of Interior, 

Biographical Sketches 173
the Chinese Ministry of Public Security, and other foreign govern-
ments. Between 1993 and 1996, Serio returned to Moscow and served 
stints as a security and media consultant for three years and as a 
consultant in to Kroll Associates, a corporate investigation and busi-
ness intelligence firm. He is the author of the publication  Guide-
lines for Safety and Security in Russia  and most recently  Investigating 
the Russian Mafia (2008). 
 Louise Shelley (1952– ) 
 Professor Shelley is the founder and director of the Terrorism, Trans-
national Crime and Corruption Center (  TRaCC). A leading expert
on transnational crime and terrorism, she currently teaches in the 
School of Public Policy at George Mason University. She is the recip-
ient of numerous grants and awards including a MacArthur Grant 
to establish the Russian Organized Crime Study Centers.  Shelley 
is the author of numerous articles and book chapters on all  aspects 
of transnational crime and corruption and also an editor (with Sally 
Stoecker) of  Human Traffic and Transnational Crime: Eurasian and Amer-
ican Perspectives.  Her research interests include transnational crime 
and corruption, particularly money laundering and illicit  finan-
cial flows, human smuggling and trafficking, national security is-
sues, and the use of information technology by international crime 
groups. 
 Federico Varese (1965– ) 
 Professor Varese is professor of criminology and fellow of Linacre 
College, Oxford. He is the author of a number of book chapters in 
edited volumes, and his articles have appeared in leading journals 
such as  Law and Society Review, Archives Européenes de Sociologie, Low 
Intensity Conflict and Law Enforcement, Political Studies, Cahiers du 
Monde Russe  and  Rationality & Society.  His book  The Russian Mafia 
(Oxford University Press) won the Ed Hewitt prize of the  American 
Association for the Advancement of Slavic Studies in 2002 and has 
been translated into Dutch and Polish. He is also the editor of the 
journal  Global Crime.  His main research interests are the study of 
organized crime, corruption, Soviet criminal history, and the dyna-
mics of altruistic behavior. In 2009, he completed  Mob and  Mobility: 
How Mafias Settle in New Territory,  forthcoming from Princeton Uni-
versity Press. 

174 Biographical Sketches
 Klaus von Lampe (1961– ) 
 Klaus von Lampe is assistant professor at John Jay College of Crim-
inal Justice, Department of Law, Police Science and Criminal Jus-
tice Administration, in New York. He has previously practiced law 
as an attorney, and he has worked as a researcher at Freie Univer-
sität Berlin with a specialization in the study of organized crime. 
His research interests include the conceptual history and theory of 
organized crime; the empirical manifestations of organized crime 
in the form of cigarette smuggling, drug trafficking, and under-
world power structures; and strategic analysis in the area of orga-
nized crime. Dr. von Lampe is the author, coauthor, and co-editor 
of numerous journal articles and books on crime, crime control, 
and crime analysis. He is editor-in-chief of the journal  Trends in Or-
ganized Crime and associate editor of  Crime, Law and Social Change. 
 Michael Woodiwiss (1950  – ) 
 Professor Woodiwiss is on the history faculty of the University of 
the West of England, Bristol. His research interests focus on orga-
nized, corporate, white supremacist, and transnational crime after 
the American Civil War. He has published widely on various as-
pects of organized crime in America. His books include  Crime, Cru-
sades and Corruption: Prohibitions in the United States 1900–1987 ( 1988), 
 Organized Crime and American Power  (2001), and  Gangster  Capitalism: 
The United States and the Global Rise of Organized Crime  (2005). He is 
also co-editor (with Frank Pearce) of  Global Crime Connections: Dy-
namics and Control (1993). 

175
 6 
 Data and Documents 
 Facts and Statistics 
on Organized Crime 
 One of the darker and unforeseen consequences of globalization 
has been the widespread increase in all forms of illegal trafficking 
and smuggling. From the trafficking of weapons and drugs to the 
smuggling of humans and diamonds, no era has been impacted by 
these activities as much as the present one. Fortunately, the inaugu-
ration of the Internet and the information superhighway has been a 
boon to researchers and others tracking the development of global 
organized crime activities through documents and statistics. There 
are countless domestic and international sources for this infor-
mation. The data and documents presented in this chapter re-
flect the sources available from U.S. government agencies, the 
United Nations, regional agreements, and other multilateral con-
ventions. Especially helpful for anyone researching the con-
vergence of organized crime and terrorism are periodic in-depth 
reports prepared under the auspices of the Library of Congress 
Federal Research Division Also useful are the reports issued by 
the Institute for Security Studies (ISS Monograph Series) that ex-
amine trends of African organized crime. The U.S. Department of 
Justice offers detailed reports on organized crime in the United 
States through its Office of Justice Programs Bureau of Justice Sta-
tistics Special Reports. For anyone studying drug trafficking orga-
nizations, annual drug threat assessment reports by the National 
Drug Intelligence Center are a must and are available through the 
U.S. Department of Justice (see http://usdoj.gov/ndic/pubs). 

176 Data and Documents
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime offers a number of 
indispensable sources on global organized crime and is especially 
useful for data gathering. One needs to cast a wide net with all of 
the resource materials available, and these aforementioned sources 
are just the tip of the iceberg. 
 Defining Organized Crime 
 Racketeer Inﬂ uenced and Corrupt 
Organizations Act (1970) 
  The Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO, was 
passed in 1970 as Title 9 of the Organized Crime Control Act of 1970 
(OCCA), revolutionizing the war on organized crime in the United States. 
It was originally intended to allow the government to allege and prove the 
entire history of a criminal organization beyond the normal statute of 
limitations. RICO introduced new racketeering laws that enabled pros-
ecutors to link numerous members of criminal syndicates in a single 
overarching charging document, or a conspiracy. It also established that 
their combined association to commit multiple crimes constituted a pat-
tern of racketeering activity worthy of its stiff sentencing guidelines. 
Although it did not create any new substantive offenses, it did combine 
35 existing offenses under the rubric of racketeering activity. What most 
distinguishes this legislation is it finally offered a definition of organized 
crime that was useful in attacking entire criminal networks. It has been 
most notably used against New York City’s Five Mafia families in 1986 in 
the so-called Commission Case, or  U.S. v. Salerno . The government’s 
case was built on the notion that Cosa Nostra’s commission of crime bosses 
constituted a criminal enterprise, meaning that each was either a mem-
ber or functionary of the commission. The following excerpt is the de-
scription that is the linchpin of any RICO case. Most important is the 
definition of racketeering in which defendants (two or more) can be tied to 
a conspiracy if they committed two or more acts of racketeering in the sup-
port of the organization in a 10-year period. A federal RICO violation car-
ries a maximum penalty of 20 years, which increases to potential life in 
prison if the underlying acts themselves include more serious crimes such 
as murder or large-scale drug trafficking. The following excerpts list the in-
dividual criminal (predicate) acts that lead to a charge of violating RICO. 
Over the years Congress has added more crimes since the original 35. 

Defining Organized Crime 177
 Section 1961. Definitions 
 (1) “racketeering activity” means (A) any act or threat involving murder, 
kidnapping, gambling, arson, robbery, bribery, extortion, dealing in 
obscene matter, or dealing in a controlled substance or listed chemical 
(as defined in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act), which is 
chargeable under State law and punishable by imprisonment for more 
than one year; (B) any act which is indictable under any of the following 
provisions of title 18, United States Code: Section 201 (relating to bribery), 
section 224 (relating to sports bribery), sections 471, 472, and 473 
(relating to counterfeiting), section 659 (relating to theft from interstate 
shipment) if the act indictable under section 659 is felonious, section 664 
(relating to embezzlement from pension and welfare funds), sections 
891–894 (relating to extortionate credit transactions), section 1028 
(relating to fraud and related activity in connection with identification 
documents), section 1029 (relating to fraud and related activity in 
connection with access devices), section 1084 (relating to the transmission 
of gambling information), section 1341 (relating to mail fraud), section 
1343 (relating to wire fraud), section 1344 (relating to financial institution 
fraud), section 1425 (relating to the procurement of citizenship or 
nationalization unlawfully), section 1426 (relating to the reproduction 
of naturalization or citizenship papers), section 1427 (relating to the sale 
of naturalization or citizenship papers), sections 1461–1465 (relating to 
obscene matter), section 1503 (relating to obstruction of justice), section 
1510 (relating to obstruction of criminal investigations), section 1511 
(relating to the obstruction of State or local law enforcement), section 
1512 (relating to tampering with a witness, victim, or an informant), 
section 1513 (relating to retaliating against a witness, victim, or an 
informant), section 1542 (relating to false statement in application and 
use of passport), section 1543 (relating to forgery or false use of passport), 
section 1544 (relating to misuse of passport), section 1546 (relating to 
fraud and misuse of visas, permits, and other documents), sections 
1581–1591 (relating to peonage, slavery, and trafficking in persons),
section 1951 (relating to interference with commerce, robbery, or 
extortion), section 1952 (relating to racketeering), section 1953 (relating to 
interstate transportation of wagering paraphernalia), section 1954 
(relating to unlawful welfare fund payments), section 1955 (relating to 
the prohibition of illegal gambling businesses), section 1956 (relating to 
the laundering of monetary instruments), section 1957 (relating to 
engaging in monetary transactions in property derived from specified 
unlawful activity), section 1958 (relating to use of interstate commerce 
facilities in the commission of murder-for-hire), sections 2251, 2251A, 
2252, and 2260 (relating to sexual exploitation of children), sections 2312 
and 2313 (relating to interstate transportation of stolen motor vehicles), 
sections 2314 and 2315 (relating to interstate transportation of stolen 
property), section 2318 (relating to trafficking in counterfeit labels for 

178 Data and Documents
phonorecords, computer programs or computer program documentation 
or packaging and copies of motion pictures or other audiovisual works), 
section 2319 (relating to criminal infringement of a copyright), section 
2319A (relating to unauthorized fixation of and trafficking in sound 
recordings and music videos of live musical performances), section 2320 
(relating to trafficking in goods or services bearing counterfeit marks), 
section 2321 (relating to trafficking in certain motor vehicles or motor 
vehicle parts), sections 2341–2346 (relating to trafficking in contraband 
cigarettes), sections 2421–2424 (relating to white slave traffic), (C) any act 
which is indictable under title 29, United States Code, section 186 
(dealing with restrictions on payments and loans to labor organizations) 
or section 501(c) (relating to embezzlement from union funds), (D) any 
offense involving fraud connected with a case under title 11 (except a 
case under section 157 of this title), fraud in the sale of securities, or the 
felonious manufacture, importation, receiving, concealment, buying, 
selling, or otherwise dealing in a controlled substance or listed chemical 
(as defined in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act), punishable 
under any law of the United States, (E) any act which is indictable under 
the Currency and Foreign Transactions Reporting Act, (F) any act which 
is indictable under the Immigration and Nationality Act, section 274 
(relating to bringing in and harboring certain aliens), section 277 
(relating to aiding or assisting certain aliens to enter the United States), 
or section 278 (relating to importation of alien for immoral purpose) if 
the act indictable under such section of such Act was committed for the 
purpose of financial gain, or (G) any act that is indictable under any 
provision listed in section 332b(g)(5)(B); 
 Rico Definitions 
  The following excerpt from RICO lists the multitude of definitions enu-
merated by the law. 
 (2) “State” means any State of the United States, the District of 
Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, any territory or possession 
of the United States, any political subdivision, or any department, agency, 
or instrumentality thereof; (3) “person” includes any individual or entity 
capable of holding a legal or beneficial interest in property; (4) “enter-
prise” includes any individual, partnership, corporation, association, 
or other legal entity, and any union or group of individuals associated 
in fact although not a legal entity; (5) “pattern of racketeering activity  ” 
requires at least two acts of racketeering activity, one of which occurred 
after the effective date of this chapter and the last of which occurred 
within ten years (excluding any period of imprisonment) after the 
commission of a prior act of racketeering activity; (6) “unlawful debt   ” 
means a debt (A) incurred or contracted in gambling activity which was 

Defining Organized Crime 179
in violation of the law of the United States, a State or political subdivision 
thereof, or which is unenforceable under State or Federal law in whole 
or in part as to principal or interest because of the laws relating to usury, 
and (B) which was incurred in connection with the business of gambling 
in violation of the law of the United States, a State or political subdivi-
sion thereof, or the business of lending money or a thing of value at a 
rate usurious under State or Federal law, where the usurious rate is at 
least twice the enforceable rate; (7) “racketeering investigator” means 
any attorney or investigator so designated by the Attorney General and 
charged with the duty of enforcing or carrying into effect this chapter; 
(8) “racketeering investigation” means any inquiry conducted by any 
racketeering investigator for the purpose of ascertaining whether any 
person has been involved in any violation of this chapter or of any final 
order, judgment, or decree of any court of the United States, duly entered 
in any case or proceeding arising under this chapter; (9) “documentary 
material” includes any book, paper, document, record, recording, or 
other material; and (10) “Attorney General” includes the Attorney 
General of the United States, the Deputy Attorney General of the United 
States, the Associate Attorney General of the United States, any Assistant 
Attorney General of the United States, or any employee of the Depart-
ment of Justice or any employee of any department or agency of the 
United States so designated by the Attorney General to carry out the 
powers conferred on the Attorney General by this chapter. Any depart-
ment or agency so designated may use in investigations authorized by this 
chapter either the investigative provisions of this chapter or the inves-
tigative power of such department or agency otherwise conferred by law. 
 Source:  http://www.treas.gov/offices/enforcement/teoaf/publications/
18usc1961-1968-rico.pdf. 
   United Nations Convention against Transnational 
Organized Crime (2000) 
  Although it took until 2003 for this Convention to be ratified, it finally 
offered a legal definition of organized crime acceptable to most countries 
and based on only a few criteria in regards to the number of members 
and group structure. 
 Article 1 Statement of Purpose 
 The purpose of this Convention is to promote cooperation to prevent 
and combat transnational organized crime more effectively. 

180 Data and Documents
 Article 2 Use of Terms 
 For the purposes of this Convention: 
 
(a) “Organized criminal group” shall mean a structured group of 
three or more persons, existing for a period of time and acting in 
concert with the aim of committing one or more serious crimes 
or offences established in accordance with this Convention, in 
order to obtain, directly or indirectly, a financial or other material 
benefit; 
 
(b) “Serious crime” shall mean conduct constituting an offence 
punishable by a maximum deprivation of liberty of at least four 
years or a more serious penalty; 
 
(c) “Structured group” shall mean a group that is not randomly 
formed for the immediate commission of an offence and that 
does not need to have formally defined roles for its members, 
continuity of its membership or a developed structure; 
 
(d) “Property” shall mean assets of every kind, whether corporeal 
or incorporeal, movable or immovable, tangible or intangible, 
and legal documents or instruments evidencing title to, or interest 
in, such assets; 
 
(e) “Proceeds of crime” shall mean any property derived from or 
obtained, directly or indirectly, through the commission of an 
offence; 
 
(f) “Freezing” or “seizure” shall mean temporarily prohibiting 
the transfer, conversion, disposition or movement of property 
or temporarily assuming custody or control of property on the 
basis of an order issued by a court or other competent authority; 
 
(g) “Confiscation”, which includes forfeiture where applicable, shall 
mean the permanent deprivation of property by order of a 
court or other competent authority; 
 
(h) “Predicate offence” shall mean any offence as a result of which 
proceeds have been generated that may become the subject of 
an offence as defined in article 6 of this Convention; 
 
(i) “Controlled delivery” shall mean the technique of allowing il-
licit or suspect consignments to pass out of, through or into the 
territory of one or more States, with the knowledge and under 
the supervision of their competent authorities, with a view to 
the investigation of an offence and the identification of persons 
involved in the commission of the offence; 
 
(j) “Regional economic integration organization” shall mean an or-
ganization constituted by sovereign States of a given region, to 
which its member States have transferred competence in respect 
of matters governed by this Convention and which has been 
duly authorized, in accordance with its internal procedures, to 
sign, ratify, accept, approve or accede to it; references to “States 

Defining Organized Crime 181
Parties” under this Convention shall apply to such organiza-
tions within the limits of their competence. 
 Article 3 Scope of Application 
 
1. This Convention shall apply, except as otherwise stated herein, 
to the prevention, investigation and prosecu-
tion of: 
  (a) The offences established in accordance with articles 5, 6, 8 
and 23 of this Convention; and 
 (b) Serious crime as defined in article 2 of this Convention; 
where the offence is transnational in nature and involves an 
organized criminal group. 
 
2. For the purpose of paragraph 1 of this article, an offence is 
transnational in nature if: 
 (a) It is committed in more than one State; 
 (b) It is committed in one State but a substantial part of its 
preparation, planning, direction or control takes place in 
another State; 
 (c) It is committed in one State but involves an organized 
criminal group that engages in criminal activities in more 
than one State; or 
 (d) It is committed in one State but has substantial effects in 
another State. 
 Source:  United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized 
Crime, United Nations, 2000, pp. 1–2. 
   Categories of Transnational Criminal Offenses 
  The United Nations has identified 18 categories of transnational offenses 
whose inception, perpetration, and direct or indirect efforts involve more 
than one country. These include: 
 Money laundering 
Computer crime 
 Terrorist activities 
Environmental crime 
 Theft of art and cultural objects 
Trafficking in persons 
 Theft of intellectual property 
Trade in human body parts 
 Illicit arms trafficking 
Illegal drug trafficking 
 Aircraft hijacking 
Fraudulent bankruptcy 
 Sea piracy 
Infiltration of legal business  
 Insurance fraud 
  Corruption and bribery of 
public or party officials

182 Data and Documents
 Source:   Adapted from G. O. Mueller. 2001. “Transnational Crime: 
Definitions and Concepts.” In  Combating Transnational Crime: Concepts, 
Activities and Responses, ed. Phil Williams and D. Vlassis, 13–14. London: 
Frank Cass. 
 Drug Trafficking 
 People have used narcotics for medicinal, recreational, and reli-
gious purposes for millennia. It was not until the early 1800s, how-
ever, that the global trafficking of opium became an international 
concern. During the 19th century, China made a number of attempts 
to stop the opium trade with India, then a British colony, after le-
gions of addicts were created. Before 1800, there were few reports 
of opium addiction in China. In 1773, the British gained control of 
India’s Bengal opium fields and inundated China with the drug. 
Over the next century this created a serious addiction problem 
among Chinese users unfamiliar with the drug’s propensities. In 
1839, the Chinese confiscated and destroyed a large trove of Brit-
ish opium, setting off the Opium War. A subsequent treaty in 1842 
forced China to accept the free trade of opium within its borders. 
It has been estimated that by 1900 at least one third of the Chinese 
had become users and perhaps 10 percent were addicted. Follow-
ing the 1909 Shanghai Opium Commission and the 1911–1912 In-
ternational Opium Conference held at The Hague, China began to 
suppress domestic cultivation that had led to a dramatic shift in 
the consumption of imported morphine and heroin from Europe 
and to the centralization of the Shanghai Triads over the illegal 
opiate trade, and by the early 20th century the opium trade had 
passed from the British to the Chinese underworld. By the 1920s, 
these syndicates were importing 10 tons of heroin from Japan and 
Europe per year and by the early 1930s, Japanese labs in north 
China were producing large amounts of heroin. The ascension of 
Communist China in 1949, together with punitive laws against 
drug use, ended much of the problem in China after 1949, and the 
trade shifted to Central and Southern Asia and later Mexico and 
Colombia. 
 Potential Worldwide Heroin Production, 
in Metric Tons, 2002–2006 
 Despite a number of initiatives targeting poppy growing and her-
oin trafficking around the world the production of heroin contin-

Drug Trafficking 183
ues to increase in the 21st century, as street prices fall and purity 
increases. As the table demonstrates, Afghanistan continues as the 
major poppy source for the global heroin trade, with Burma (Myan-
mar) a distant second. According to the available sources interdic-
tion efforts seem to be working best in Burma, Laos and Colombia, 
with all registering significant drops in production. However, the 
involvement and support of the Taliban in the opium growing re-
gions of Afghanistan probably account for the recrudescence of the 
problem there.  
 International organized crime networks have persisted in parts 
of Latin America since the early 1960s. The Andean region is home 
to its cocaine trade, enveloping the nations of Colombia, Bolivia, 
and Peru. One recent estimate by the DEA and the Colombian Na-
tional Police estimated that Colombia is home to more than 300 
active drug trafficking groups. Peru and Bolivia have stepped up 
their participation in the refining and trafficking of cocaine as 
Colombia became the world’s premier coca producer. Due in part 
to the stagnation of the American cocaine market in the late 1980s 
cocaine syndicates diversified their markets and products and be-
gan looking for new markets in Europe, the former Soviet Union 
and Latin America. At the same time Colombia became the lead-
ing importer of heroin into the United States. 
TABLE 6.1
Potential Worldwide Heroin Production, in Metric Tons, 2002–2006
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
Afghanistan
150
337
582
526.6
664
Burma
60
46
31.5
36
22
Mexico
6.8
11.9
8.6
8
12.7
Colombia
8.5
7.8
3.8
*
4.6
Pakistan
0.5
5.2
NA
3.8
4.2
Laos
17
19
5
2.7
1
Vietnam
1
NA
NA
NA
0.0
Thailand
0.9
NA
NA
NA
NA
Guatemala
NA
NA
1.4
0.4
NA
Total
244.7
426.9
632.3
577.5
708.5
Source: 2009 National Drug Threat Assessment, DOJ.
*Crime and Narcotics Center did not report for Colombia in 2005.
NA = Not available.

184 Data and Documents
 Estimated Andean Region Coca Cultivation 
 This table shows how Andean coca production waxed and waned 
in the first years of the 21st century but since 2005 cultivation has 
increased in Colombia and Bolivia. Although the United States and 
Colombia launched a joint effort to diminish coca cultivation in the 
late 1990s production increased by 16% in 2007, its highest rise since 
2001. Despite the reduction in coca in Bolivia in the late 1990s, since 
2001 it has increased each year. Some blame recurring political chal-
lenges of having had five different presidents between 2000 and 
2006. Peru has surpassed is coca eradication goals; however, coca 
cultivation continues to increase, especially with the reemergence 
in 2006 of the terrorist group the Shining Path who now protect the 
crops .
 Estimated Amounts of Illicit Drugs Transiting or 
Produced in Mexico and Seized, 2000–2006 
 Despite recent attempts by the Calderon administration, Mexico 
remains mired in corruption as it continues its prominence as a 
major producer of heroin, methamphetamine, and marijuana. As a 
result Mexican gangs control much of the U.S. methamphetamine 
trade, while perhaps half the cocaine enters the U.S. across the 
Mexican border. Table 6.3 illustrates Mexico’s stature at the epi-
center of drug trafficking in the Americas. What is most striking 
Table 6.2
Estimated Andean Region Coca Cultivation
(New cultivation hectares) 
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
Bolivia
23,200
24,600
26,500
25,800
29,500
Colombia
113,850
114,100
144,000
157,200
167,000
Peru
29,250
27,500
34,000
42,000
36,000
Total
166,300
166,200
204,500
225,000
232,500
Source: Adapted from 2009 National Drug Threat Assessment, DOJ.

Drug Trafficking 185
is the amount of drugs transshipped through the U.S. compared 
to the minute quantities seized north and south of the Mexican 
border. References to seizures at the U.S. border include 88 border 
counties in Arizona, California, New Mexico and Texas and occur 
within 150 miles on either side of the U.S.–Mexico border.  
 Gangs Affiliated with the Sinaloa, Gulf, 
Juarez, or Tijuana Cartels 
 Mexican drug organizations flourish along the border competing 
with each other in bloody battles over the illicit drug trade. It has 
been estimated these gangs spend $3 billion each year in bribes for 
protection at all levels of government. As a result these so-called 
cartels are more transnational than ever, often involved in alliances 
with other Latin American syndicates. Table 6.4 notes the various 
American street and prison gangs that have entered into accom-
modations with the Mexican gangs.  
TABLE 6.3
Estimated Amounts of Illicit Drugs Transiting or Produced in Mexico and Seized, 
2000–2006
Illicit drugs
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
Cocaine (metric tons)
Arriving in Mexico for 
Transshipment to U.S.
220
270
270
210
220 – 440
260 – 460
300 – 460
Seized in Mexico
20
10
8
12
   19
21
10
U.S. border seizures
23
20
23
16
    22
23
27
Heroin (metric tons)
Produced
9
21
13
  30
      23
17
N/A
Seized in Mexico
.27
.27
.28
  .31
      .30
.46
.40
U.S. border seizures
.07
.35
.30
 35
      .29
.32
.47
Marijuana (metric tons)
Produced 
7000
7400  
7900   
13,500        
10,400     
10,100
N/A
Seized in Mexico
1619
1839
1633
2248
     2208
1786
 1849
U.S. border seizures
533
1083
1072
1221
1173        
  974
1015
Methamphetamine 
(kilograms)
Seized in Mexico
560
400
460
750
       950
980
600
U.S. border seizures
500
1150
1320
1750                      
2210
2870 
2710
Source: U.S. Government Accountability Office, Appendix I, p. 25, Oct. 25, 2007.

186 Data and Documents
 The 20 Largest Cocaine Seizures Ever Reported 
 Table 6.5 lists the twenty largest cocaine seizures. What is most 
notable is the number that took place in the Eastern Pacific Ocean. 
Interdiction on the high seas has had a number of successes and 
as can be seen has largely been eliminated in the Caribbean. How-
ever this has been replaced by land-based operations controlled by 
Mexican gangs. It should not be surprising then that the largest co-
caine seizure over the past twenty years took place in Mexico.    
 Drug Seizures in the Central Asian 
Region, 2005–2006 
 The so-called Golden Crescent of Central Asia, comprises the moun-
tainous borderlands of Afghanistan, Iran, and Pakistan as well as 
the Central Asian countries of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, 
Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan. While drug trafficking has in-
creased in Iran, Afghanistan, and Pakistan as this region retains its 
prominence in the heroin trade, new interdiction strategies and bet-
ter cooperation between police forces have had more success in 
the other Central Asian countries for the most part between 2005 
and 2006. In fact, at the end of 2007 new strategies had left the 
northern province of Balkh, adjacent to Uzbekistan and Tajikistan 
and 12 others virtually poppy free. However, farmers switched 
from growing opium poppies in favor of cannabis, which pro-
duces both the herb and the resin for hashish. Nonetheless, Af-
ghanistan still supplies the majority of the world’s opium.  
TABLE 6.4
Gangs Affiliated with the Sinaloa, Gulf, Juarez, or Tijuana Cartels
18th Street
Latin Kings
Bandidos
Mara Salvatrucha (MS-13)
Barrio Azteca
Mexican Mafia
Black Guerilla Family
Mexikanemi
Bloods
Mongols
Crips
Nortenos
Florencia 13
Surenos
Gangster Disciples
Tango Blast
Hells Angels
Texas Syndicate
Hermanos de Pistoleros Latinos
Vagos
Source: Federal, state, and local reporting; 2009 National Drug Threat Assessment, DOJ.

Drug Trafficking 187
TABLE 6.5
The 20 Largest Cocaine Seizures Ever Reported
Ranking
Kilograms
Year
Location
1
23,600
2007
Mexico
2
21,000
1989
U.S.-California
3
15,200
2007
Eastern Pacific Ocean
4
15,200
2007
Colombia
5
13,200
2007
Colombia
6
13,200
2004
Eastern Pacific Ocean
7
12,144
2004
Eastern Pacific Ocean
8
11,971
2001
Eastern Pacific Ocean
9
11,720
2007
Mexico
10
11,401
2002
Eastern Pacific Ocean
11
11,323
1995
Eastern Pacific Ocean
12
10,386
2007
Eastern Pacific Ocean
13
9,846
1997
Mexico
14
9,690
1999
Atlantic Ocean
15
9,650
1999
Eastern Pacific Ocean
16
9,267
2001
Eastern Pacific Ocean
17
9,017
2001
Eastern Pacific Ocean
18
9,000
2001
Eastern Pacific Ocean
19
8,895
2000
Chile
20
8,840
2006
Eastern Pacific Ocean
Source: 2009 National Drug Threat Assessment, DOJ.
TABLE 6.6
Drug Seizures in the Central Asian Region, 2005–2006
Opium
Heroin
Cannabis herb
Cannabis resin
Kilograms
2005
2006
2005
2006
2005
2006
2005
2006
Kazakhstan
668
636
625
554
21,732
22,868
284
305
Kyrgyzstan
261
302
259
260
1,983
2,399
131
153
Tajikistan
1,104 
1,386
2,344
2097
1,164
1,305
NA
NA
Turkmenistan
748
2,655
180
201
135
154
18
206
Uzbekistan
107
759
466
537
444
428
9
5
Source: An Assessment of Transnational Organized Crime in Central Asia, 2006–2007.

188 Data and Documents
 International Opium Convention of 1912 
 The 1909 Shanghai Opium Commission was the first multinational drug 
control initiative, bringing together 13 countries in an attempt to curtail 
the illicit trafficking and consumption of opium. However, participants 
only had the power to recommend actions and were not imbued with the 
power to make treaties. The Commission encouraged participating countries 
to enact national legislation that would address this problem domesti-
cally. Between 1912 and 1914, some of the countries sent representatives to 
meetings convened at The Hague. Nonetheless, the 1909 meetings stim-
ulated countries to pass domestic legislation regarding their own drug 
problems and set the stage for the adoption of the 1912 Hague Opium Con-
vention excerpted here.  
  Building on the work of the 1909 Shanghai Opium Commission, con-
ferences held at The Hague between 1912 and 1914 led to the adoption of 
the 1912 International Opium Convention and several other treaties that 
sought to restrict opium production and trade to legitimate purposes only 
(medicinal). The following are excerpts from the act:  
 Article 1 
 The contracting Powers shall enact effective laws or regulations for the 
control of the production and distribution of raw opium, unless laws or 
regulations on the subject are already in existence. 
 Article 2 
 Due regard being had to the differences in their commercial conditions, 
the contracting Powers shall limit the number of towns, ports, or other 
localities through which the export or import of raw opium shall be per-
mitted. 
 Article 3 
 The contracting Powers shall take measures 
 
(a) To prevent the export of raw opium to countries which shall 
have prohibited its entry, and 
 
(b) To control the export of raw opium to countries which restrict its 
import, unless regulations on the subject are already in existence. 
 Article 5 
 The contracting Powers shall not allow the import and export of raw 
opium except by duly authorized persons. 
 Chapter II  Prepared Opium 
 Definition   By “prepared opium” is understood: 

 The production of raw opium obtained by a series of special opera-
tions, especially by dissolving, roasting and fermentation, designed to 
transform it into an extract suitable for consumption. . . . 
 Article 6 
 The contracting Powers shall take measures for the gradual and effec-
tive suppression of the manufacture of, internal trade in, and use of 
prepared opium, with due regard to the varying circumstances of 
each country concerned unless regulations on the subject are already in 
existence. 
 Article 9 
 The contracting Powers shall enact pharmacy laws or regulations to con-
fine to medical and legitimate purposes the manufacture, sale, and use 
of morphine, cocaine, and their respective salts unless laws or regulations 
on the subject are already in existence. They shall co-operate with one an-
other to prevent the use of these drugs for any other purpose. 
 
(a) To confine the manufacture of morphine, cocaine, and their 
respective salts to those establishments and premises alone 
which have been licensed for the purpose, or to obtain infor-
mation respecting the establishments and premises in which 
these drugs are manufactured and to keep a register of them; 
 
(b) To require that all persons engaged in the manufacture, import, 
sale, distribution, or export of morphine, cocaine, and their 
respective salts shall be furnished with a license or permit to 
engage in these operations, or shall make to the competent au-
thorities and official declaration that they are so engaged; 
 Source:  United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. 
 Harrison Narcotics Tax Act of 1914 
  The U.S. government’s “war on drugs” began with the passage of the Har-
rison Act in 1914. Encouraged by the recent opium conferences (1909, 
1912) and by public opinion supporting legislation to curb the use of 
drugs, the U.S. Congress passed the Harrison Act on December 1914. 
The Act imposed licensing requirements on manufacturers, distributors, 
sellers, importers, producers, compounders, and dispensers, requiring them 
to register with the Internal Revenue Service, and to pay a gradually in-
creasing occupational tax. What’s more, these drugs would be legally 
available only for limited medical and scientific purposes. Government 
authorities hoped that by monitoring the flow of opium and coca leaves 
there would be a lasting transaction record. Officials, however, would in-
terpret the Harrison Act as a prohibition against drug addicts obtaining 
Drug Trafficking 189

190 Data and Documents
narcotics through their usual medical channels (physicians and pharma-
cists). Once someone was arrested in possession of narcotics, this was 
viewed as a violation unless the addict could produce a document testi-
fying that the narcotics were obtained legally. Violations could incur a 
maximum five-year jail sentence, a $2,000 fine, or both. The following are 
excerpts from the Act:  
 Chap 1.  —An Act To provide for the registration of, with collectors 
of internal revenue, and to impose a special tax on all persons who pro-
duce, import, manufacture, compound, deal in, dispense, sell, distribute, 
or give away opium or coca leaves, their salts, derivatives, or preparations, 
and for other purposes. 
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled, that on and after the 
first day of March, nineteen hundred and fifteen, every person who 
produces, imports, manufactures, compounds, deals in, dispenses, 
distributes, or gives away opium or coca leaves or any compound, manu-
facture, salt, derivative, or preparation thereof, shall register with the 
collector of internal revenue of the district, his name or style, place of 
business, and place or places where such business is to be carried on: Pro-
vided, that the office, or if none, then the residence of any person shall 
be considered for purposes of this Act to be his place of business. At the 
time of such registry and on or before the first of July annually thereafter, 
every person who produces, imports, manufactures, compounds, deals 
in, dispenses, distributes, or gives away any of the aforesaid drugs shall 
pay to the said collector a special tax at the rate of $1 per annum. . . . 
 It shall be unlawful for any person required to register under the 
terms of this Act to produce, import, manufacture, compound, deal in, 
dispense, sell, distribute, any of the aforesaid drugs without having 
registered and paid the special tax provided for in this section. . . . 
 Sec. 2 That it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter, exchange, 
or give away any of the aforesaid drugs except in pursuance of a written 
order of the person to whom such article is sold, bartered, exchanged, 
or given, on a form to be issued in blank for that purpose by the Com-
missioner of Internal Revenue. Every person who shall accept any such 
order, and in pursuance thereof shall sell, barter, exchange, or give away 
any of the aforesaid drugs shall preserve such order for a period of two 
years in such a way as to be readily accessible to inspection by any officer, 
agent, or employee of the Treasury Department duly authorized for that 
purpose. . . . 
 Sec. 4  That it shall be unlawful for any person who shall not have 
registered and paid the special tax as required by section one of this Act 
to send, ship, carry, or deliver any of the aforesaid drugs from any State 
or Territory or the District of Columbia, or any insular possession of the 

United States, to any person in any other State or Territory or the District 
of Columbia or any insular possession of the United States. . . . 
 Sec. 6  That the provisions of this Act shall not be construed to apply 
to the sale, distribution, or giving away, dispensing, or possession of 
preparations and remedies which do not contain more than two grains 
of opium, or more than one-fourth of a grain of morphine, or more than 
one-eighth of grain of heroin, or more than one grain of codeine. . . . The 
provisions of this Act shall not apply to decocainized coca leaves or prepa-
rations made therefrom, or to other preparations of coca leaves which do 
not contain cocaine. 
 Sec. 9 That any person who violates or fails to comply with any of 
the requirements of this Act shall, on conviction, be fined not more than 
$2,000 or be imprisoned not more than five years, or both, in the discretion 
of the court. 
 Source: Harrison Tax Act of 1914, Pub. L., No. 223, Chap. 1, 38 Stat. 785, 
63rd Congress (1914), pp. 785–790. 
 Marijuana Tax Act of 1937 
  At a meeting of the League of Nations in the mid-1930s, every country 
voted against an international ban on cannabis (marijuana). Most real-
ized how impossible it would be to enforce the law. Federal Bureau of 
Narcotics director Harry Anslinger found that the only way to support it 
at home was through the adoption of a tax law that would place a prohibi-
tive tax on the selling and buying of the drug, and in 1937 it went into 
effect, making the sale and possession of marijuana illegal through federal 
legislation. One of the more deceptive aspects of the law was the fact that 
penalties included five years’ imprisonment, a $2,000 fine, or both—an 
excessive punishment for evading such a small tax. The Act has been crit-
icized for its excessive length (more than 60 pages) and the confusing array 
of required affidavits, depositions, sworn statements, and constant Treasury 
Department police inspections in every instance that marijuana is in-
volved in a transaction. The following are several excerpts from the Act:  
 Sec. 2  (a) Every person who imports, manufactures, produces, com-
pounds, sells, deals in, dispenses, administers, or gives away marihuana 
shall within fifteen days after the effective date of this Act . . . pay the 
following special taxes respectively: 
 
(1) Importers, manufacturers, and compounders of marihuana, 
$24 per year. 
Drug Trafficking 191

192 Data and Documents
  (2) Producers of . . . $1 per year 
 (3)  Physicians, dentists, veterinary surgeons, and other practitioners 
who distribute, dispense, administer, or prescribe . . . $1 per year 
 Sec. 12 Any person who is convicted of a violation of any provision of 
the Act shall be fined not more than $2,000 or imprisoned not more than 
five years, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
 Source: Marijuana Tax Act of 1937, Pub. L. 238, Chap. 553, 50 Stat. 551, 
75th Congress, 1937, pp. 551–557. 
 The Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 
  Intending to regulate the production, trade, and use of narcotic drugs, 
cocaine, and marijuana in one fell swoop, the Single Convention on Nar-
cotics Drugs of 1961 was considered at its time the most comprehensive 
international drug control agreement. It consolidated all the current drug-
control treaties into a single agreement. Almost doubling the number of 
73 who originally signed it, by 1993 144 countries had signed the agree-
ment. The following excerpts are from Articles 35 and 36:  
 Article 35. Action against the Illicit Traffic 
 The parties shall . . . 
 
a) Make arrangements at the national level for coordination of pre-
ventive and repressive action against the illicit drug trade. . . . 
 b)  Assist each other in the campaign against the illicit traffic in 
narcotic drugs; 
 
c) Cooperate closely with each other and with the competent 
international organizations of which they are members with a 
view to maintaining a coordinated campaign against the illicit 
traffic; 
 d)  Ensure that international cooperation between the appropriate 
agencies be conducted in an expeditious manner. 
 Article 36. Penal Provisions 
  
1. a) Subject to its constitutional limitations, each Party shall adopt 
measures as will ensure that cultivation, production, manufacture, 
extraction, preparation, possession, offering, offering for sale, 
distribution, purchase, sale, delivery on any terms whatsoever, 
brokerage, dispatch in transit, transport, importation and 
exportation of drugs contrary to the provisions of the Conven-
tion. . . . shall be punishable offenses when committed inten-

tionally, and that serious offenses shall be liable to adequate 
punishment particularly by imprisonment or other penalties of 
deprivation of liberty 
 Source:  http://www.incb.org/pdf/e/conv/convention_1961_en.pdf. 
 The Merida Initiative, 2008 
  On June 30, 2008, President George W. Bush signed the Merida Initia-
tive (better known as Plan Mexico) into law. It passed Congress as part 
of the Iraq supplemental funding bill. Its passage was controversial as it 
had to be rewritten several times to be approved by Congress as legisla-
tors parried the Bush administration over human rights conditions under 
Mexican President Felipe Calderon’s government. It was hoped that the 
final aid package of $400 million signaled a new era in bilateral coop-
eration in the fighting transnational organized crime on the border with 
Mexico. But many feared that Mexico’s use of a military strategy to fight 
the narcotics trade would only increase drug-related violence and human 
rights abuses. Following is a joint statement issued by the Secretary of 
State, the Secretary of Defense, the Attorney General, the Deputy Secre-
tary of Homeland Security, and the Director of National Drug Control 
Policy of the United States and the Secretary of Foreign Affairs, the Sec-
retary of National Defense, the Attorney General, the Secretary of Public 
Security, and the Under Secretary of the Navy of Mexico, who, together 
with other senior government officials, met December 19, 2008, as the 
Merida Initiative High-Level Consultative Group.  
 Joint Statement of the Merida Initiative 
High Level Consultative Group 
 Presidents Felipe Calderon and George Bush met in Merida, Mexico 
in March 2007 and reviewed the broad range of issues affecting our two 
countries. The Joint U.S.–Mexico Communiqué issued on March 14, 2007 
recognized the threat posed by organized crime and drug trafficking 
to both nations and our shared responsibility to address this threat. 
Moreover, the Presidents reaffirmed the commitment of our two countries 
to establish a lasting partnership to expand and intensify cooperation 
in what we have come to call the Merida Initiative. The Merida Initia-
tive High-Level Consultative Group held its inaugural meeting today to 
discuss progress to date on these critical issues, and to chart a course for 
future cooperation. 
 Since the 2007 Summit in Merida, the Government of Mexico has 
taken bold and unprecedented steps to confront organized crime and 
violence, often at great cost. As his administration enters into its third 
Drug Trafficking 193

194 Data and Documents
year, President Felipe Calderon has reiterated and clearly demonstrated 
his commitment to combat, head-on, drug-trafficking and organized 
crime. The Government of the United States has supported this effort 
by increasing the provision of information and technical assistance and 
by complementary steps to stop the trafficking of illegal weapons from 
the United States, impede bulk currency smuggling across our border, 
reduce the domestic demand for illicit drugs, and combat drug trafficking 
and organized crime in the United States. 
 To provide resources for an enhanced security cooperation 
partnership as set forth in the 2007 Summit, President Bush sought 
funding from Congress for the “Merida Initiative.” The Supplemental 
Appropriations Act of 2008, signed by President Bush on June 30, pro-
vided $400 million to fund training, equipment and other assistance 
under the Merida Initiative in Mexico, an initial installment of a multi-
year, $1.4 billion program of support. On December 3, Mexico and the 
United States signed a Letter of Agreement (LOA) making available the 
first $197 million of this package. 
 Even before the signing of the LOA, Mexico and the United States 
have taken steps to strengthen our law enforcement and security coopera-
tion by accelerating existing efforts and by focusing previously agreed 
upon assistance in areas that will advance the objectives of the Merida 
Initiative. In this regard, we have already: 
 enhanced forensic capabilities, including the inauguration of a new 
forensics lab in Mexico; 
 strengthened ties to investigate cross-border financial flows and 
combat money laundering; 
 expanded collaboration to trace weapons and stop the illegal 
export of arms used by drug organizations; 
 developed technical requirements for the transfer of counter-drug 
aviation assets; 
 increased the number of fugitive apprehensions and extraditions; 
 deployed X-ray equipped vans and radiation monitoring 
technology; and 
 increased intelligence sharing on transnational drug trafficking 
organizations. 
 The breadth and depth of the cooperation between the United States 
and Mexico in confronting transnational organized crime and security 
threats requires new institutional mechanisms to ensure effective coordi-
nation, the timely use of operational intelli-
gence, and the efficient use of resources. Our governments intend there-
fore to establish before the end of 2009, a bilateral follow-up and imple-
mentation mechanism in Mexico City where officials of the United States 
and Mexico will work together to carry out mutually agreed assistance 
projects, monitor results, and revise and update cooperative activities 
under the Merida Initiative . . . 

Weapons Trafficking 195
 We also recognize the importance of close engagement with the 
countries of Central America and the Caribbean in addressing the com-
mon threats emanating from organized crime. A successful Merida Ini-
tiative must have a strong regional and hemispheric component, and we 
intend to explore ways to ensure that our bilateral U.S.–Mexico partner-
ship addresses this dimension. 
 Source: U.S. Department of State, Joint Statement of the Merida Initia-
tive High Level Consultative Group, http://www.state.gov/r/pa/prs/
ps/2008/dec/113368.html, Dec. 18, 2008. 
 Weapons Trafficking 
 Thanks to an increased demand for weapons resulting from the 
expansion of ethnic and regional conflict since the late 1980s in 
places such as Africa, Central America, the former Yugoslavia, and 
the former Soviet Union, the illegal trafficking in weapons has be-
come a huge international business mostly controlled by organized 
criminal syndicates and networks. Their success, however, would be 
rather limited if not for the collusion of institutions and individuals 
outside the criminal organizations such as national defense minis-
tries, national security agencies, legitimate arms dealers, and oth-
ers. Among the following excerpts is a relatively new document, 
or End User Certificate—an attempt to restrict the illicit sales of 
weapons. Its requirement is intended to guarantee the destination 
of weapons shipments. However, the attempt to stem the flow of 
weapons is quixotic in a world awash in wars, weapons, and 
civil conflict. More recently the United States has been targeted 
as a major source for the weapons now wreaking havoc and tak-
ing thousands of lives south of the U.S.–Mexican border. Among 
the documents that follow are portions of the landmark Inter-
American Convention against Illicit Manufacturing of and Traffick-
ing in Firearms of 1997, which has yet to be ratified by the American 
government, more than a decade after signing it. 
 Inter-American Convention against the Illicit 
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, 
Ammunition, Explosives and Other Related 
Materials, 1997 
  These excerpts are from a regional agreement from the Organization of 
American States (OAS). On November 14, 1997, the OAS adopted the 
Inter-American Convention against the Illicit Manufacturing of and 

196 Data and Documents
Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives, and Other Related 
Materials. This is the first multilateral convention designed to prevent, 
combat, and eradicate illegal transnational trafficking in firearms, ammuni-
tion, and explosives. The purpose of this Convention is to prevent, combat, 
and eradicate the illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms, am-
munition, explosives, and other related materials; to promote and facili-
tate cooperation and exchange of information and experience among States 
Parties to prevent, combat, and eradicate the illicit manufacturing of and 
trafficking in firearms, ammunition, explosives, and other related materi-
als. In the statement by Senator Richard Lugar, he insists it is time for the 
United States to finally ratify the treaty in 2009, despite having signed on 
in 1997.  
 THE STATES PARTIES, 
 AWARE of the urgent need to prevent, combat, and eradicate the 
illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms, ammunition, ex-
plosives, and other related materials, due to the harmful effects of these 
activities on the security of each state and the region as a whole, endan-
gering the well-being of peoples, their social and economic development, 
and their right to live in peace; 
 CONCERNED by the increase, at the international level, in the 
illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms, ammunition, explo-
sives, and other related materials and by the serious problems resulting 
there from; 
 REAFFIRMING that States Parties give priority to preventing, com-
bating, and eradicating the illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in 
firearms, ammunition, explosives, and other related materials because of 
the links of such activities with drug trafficking, terrorism, transnational 
organized crime, and mercenary and other criminal activities; 
 CONCERNED about the illicit manufacture of explosives from sub-
stances and articles that in and of themselves are not explosives—and 
that are not addressed by this Convention due to their other lawful 
uses—for activities related to drug trafficking, terrorism, transnational 
organized crime and mercenary and other criminal activities; 
 CONSIDERING the urgent need for all states, and especially those 
states that produce, export, and import arms, to take the necessary mea-
sures to prevent, combat, and eradicate the illicit manufacturing of and 
trafficking in firearms, ammunition, explosives, and other related ma-
terials; 
 CONVINCED that combating the illicit manufacturing of and traf-
ficking in firearms, ammunition, explosives, and other related materials 
calls for international cooperation, exchange of information, and other 
appropriate measures at the national, regional, and international levels, and 
desiring to set a precedent for the international community in this regard; 

Weapons Trafficking 197
 STRESSING the need, in peace processes and post-conflict situations, 
to achieve effective control of firearms, ammunition, explosives, and other 
related materials in order to prevent their entry into the illicit market; 
 MINDFUL of the pertinent resolutions of the United Nations Gen-
eral Assembly on measures to eradicate the illicit transfer of conventional 
weapons and on the need for all states to guarantee their security, and 
of the efforts carried out in the framework of the Inter-American Drug 
Abuse Control Commission (CICAD); 
 RECOGNIZING the importance of strengthening existing interna-
tional law enforcement support mechanisms such as the International 
Weapons and Explosives Tracking System (IWETS) of the International 
Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL), to prevent, combat, and 
eradicate the illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms, ammuni-
tion, explosives, and other related materials . . . 
 HAVE DECIDED TO ADOPT THIS INTER-AMERICAN CONVEN-
TION AGAINST THE ILLICIT MANUFACTURING OF AND TRAF-
FICKING IN FIREARMS, AMMUNITION, EXPLOSIVES, AND OTHER 
RELATED MATERIALS: 
 Article I 
 Definitions 
 For the purposes of this Convention, the following definitions shall 
apply: 
 
1. “Illicit manufacturing”: the manufacture or assembly of fire-
arms, ammunition, explosives, and other related materials: 
 a. from components or parts illicitly trafficked; or 
 
b.  without a license from a competent governmental authority 
of the State Party where the manufacture or assembly takes 
place; or 
 
c. without marking the firearms that require marking at the 
time of manufacturing. 
 
2. “Illicit trafficking”: the import, export, acquisition, sale, deliv-
ery, movement, or transfer of firearms, ammunition, explosives, 
and other related materials from or across the territory of one 
State Party to that of another State Party, if any one of the States 
Parties concerned does not authorize it. 
 
3. “Firearms”: 
 a. any barreled weapon which will or is designed to or may be 
readily converted to expel a bullet or projectile by the action 
of an explosive, except antique firearms manufactured be-
fore the 20th Century or their replicas; or 
 
b. any other weapon or destructive device such as any ex-
plosive, incendiary or gas bomb, grenade, rocket, rocket 
launcher, missile, missile system, or mine. 

198 Data and Documents
 
4. “Ammunition”: the complete round or its components, includ-
ing cartridge cases, primers, propellant powder, bullets, or pro-
jectiles that are used in any firearm. 
 
5. “Explosives”: any substance or article that is made, manufac-
tured, or used to produce an explosion, detonation, or propul-
sive or pyrotechnic effect, except: 
 
a. substances and articles that are not in and of themselves ex-
plosive; or 
 
b. substances and articles listed in the Annex to this Convention. 
 
6. “Other related materials”: any component, part, or replacement 
part of a firearm, or an accessory which can be attached to a 
firearm. 
 
7. “Controlled delivery”: the technique of allowing illicit or sus-
pect consignments of firearms, ammunition, explosives, and 
other related materials to pass out of, through, or into the terri-
tory of one or more states, with the knowledge and under the 
supervision of their competent authorities, with a view to iden-
tifying persons involved in the commission of offenses referred 
to in Article IV of this Convention. 
 Source:  U.S. Department of State, Inter-American Convention against the 
Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunition, Explo-
sives, and Other Related Materials, www.state.gov/p/wha/rls/49907.
htm, January 1, 1997. 
 U.S. Senator Richard Lugar on 
Weapons Trafficking, 2009 
  The following excerpt is from a statement submitted for the record by U.S. 
Senate Foreign Relations Committee Ranking Member Richard Lugar on 
March 30, 2009 at a field hearing in El Paso, Texas on U.S.–Mexico bor-
der violence. It is most notable for taking the United States to task for not 
ratifying the 1997 OAS initiative on weapons control.  
 Since entering office in December 2006, President Felipe Calderon 
has moved to improve security in his country and has recast U.S.–Mex-
ico relations on the basis of equality and mutual respect. The Mexican 
government has committed billions of dollars to combat drug traffick-
ing. . . . In addition, the Calderon government has strengthened law en-
forcement cooperation with the United States, extradited drug suspects 
to the U.S. and made record seizures of cocaine, methamphetamine 

Weapons Trafficking 199
precursors, cash and other assets. The Merida Initiative signed into law 
by the Administration of President George W. Bush is an attempt to seize 
the opportunity created by Mexico’s invigorated anti-crime campaign 
by funding key programs and building stronger cooperation between 
Mexico and the United States. It recognizes that 90 percent of the co-
caine entering the United States transits Mexico and that our efforts to 
combat this drug flow and associated criminal activities depend on a 
partnership with the Mexican government. . . . One area that requires 
more cooperation is arms trafficking. As much as 90 percent of the as-
sault weapons and other guns used by Mexican drug cartels are coming 
from the United States, fueling drug-related violence that is believed to 
have killed more than 7,000 people since January 2008. . . . the Mexican 
government officials I met with consistently relayed their concerns about 
the flow of guns and explosives from the United States into Mexico. 
American Embassy officials confirmed that the U.S. was a major source 
of weapons for Mexican gangs and drug runners, as well. . . . In addition 
to supporting efforts to manage firearms under the Merida Initiative, we 
should consider ratifying, during this Congress, the Inter-American Con-
vention against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, 
Ammunition, Explosives and other Related Materials (CIFTA) . . . signed 
by 33 countries in the Western Hemisphere and ratified by 29. The U.S. 
was an original signer in 1997, but ratification is still pending. 
 Source:  Statement by Senator Lugar for field hearing on “U.S.–Mexico 
Border Violence,” http://lugar.senate.gov/press/record.cfm?id=310624, 
March 27, 2009. 
 End User Certificate (EUC) 
  In an attempt to restrict the sale of weapons, documentation, called the 
End User Certificate, is required that purportedly guarantees the desti-
nation of weapons. A certificate must accompany every shipment, but 
most reports indicate these can be easily purchased from corrupt coun-
tries for a percentage of the eventual profit. The following is an excerpt 
from the instructions on filling out the form (DSP-83). 
 Instructions 
 The Department of State, United States of America, requires that this 
completed form (DSP-83) be included as a part of an application for autho-
rization to export Significant Military Equipment (SME) and classified 
equipment or data (22 CFR §§ 123,10 (d) and 125.21). Failure to submit 
may result in the application being “Returned Without Action” (RWA). 
The form (DSP-83) must be completed by the appropriate foreign persons 

200 Data and Documents
(e.g., consignee, end-user, government) and forwarded to the Department 
of State through the U.S. person making the application. 
 
1. The Applicant, when submitting the form with an application, 
should provide a reference to the application (e.g. transaction 
ID number on the application). The Department of State will 
enter the application number when the form (DSP-83) is sub-
mitted with the application. The U.S. applicant  must  provide 
the application/agreement number when the form (DSP-83) is 
submitted separately from the application. 
 
2. Show the name of the U.S. person submitting the application to 
the Department of State. 
 
3. Show the foreign person that will receive the articles/data for 
end use. A bank, freight forwarding agent, or other intermedi-
ary is not acceptable as an end-user. 
 
4. Show the country in which the articles/data shall ultimately 
receive end-use. 
 
5. Show precise quantities of the articles/data. List each article/
data clearly, giving type, model number, make and (if known) 
U.S. military designation or national stock number. When com-
ponents and spare parts are involved, fully identify the minor 
component, major component and end item in which they will 
be used (e.g. turbine blades for C-34 jet engine for F24B aircraft). 
Give a separate value for each major component. Values must 
represent only the selling price and not include supplementary 
costs such as packing and freight. For additional articles/data 
use an attachment sheet that includes “quantity, description and 
value” and make the last line in the description block “See at-
tachment. The attachment should include the DTC case number 
or a company identifier (e.g. transaction ID number). 
 
6. To be completed by the foreign person who has entered into the 
export transaction with the applicant to purchase the articles/
data for delivery to the end-user. This item shall be completed 
only if the foreign consignee is not the same as the foreign end-
user. 
 
7. To be completed by the foreign person, in the country of ulti-
mate destination, who will make final use of the articles/data. 
  
8. When requested by the Department of State, this item is to be 
completed by an official of the country of ultimate destination 
having the authority to so commit the government of that 
country. 
 Source: End User Certificate Instructions, http://www.pmddtc.state.
gov/licensing/documents/DSP_83.pdf. 

Human Smuggling and Trafficking Legislation and Statistics  201
 Human Smuggling and Trafficking 
Legislation and Statistics 
 The smuggling and trafficking of human beings generates enor-
mous profits for international organized crime. The distinctions be-
tween the two are often difficult to ascertain for law enforcement. 
Internationally accepted definitions are excerpted here. 
 Because subterfuge is the hallmark of smuggling and traffick-
ing networks, accurate figures on the human trade are hard to come 
by. Like prostitution, drugs, and gambling, the illegal movement of 
humans is a victim-participant crime in which secrecy is preferred 
by both victim and perpetrator. 
 Human Trafficking and Smuggling Definitions 
 The following definitions are excerpted from several Conventions against 
human trafficking and smuggling between 1951 and 2005. Definitions 
cover a range of related activities. Because there is often overlapping in 
an individual’s status, however, law enforcement is often confused as to 
where to relegate individuals according to various international and na-
tional statutes.  
 United Nations Convention Relating 
to the Status of Refugees, 1951 
 Asylum  is not legally defined, but is generally regarded to mean the 
protection provided by a country to refugees in its territory. It means 
at the least, not forcibly returning people [ asylum seekers ] to territories 
where their lives or freedom would be threatened. Not all people seek-
ing asylum meet the definition of a refugee.   Refugees , are persons who, 
owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted for their race, religion, 
nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion, 
are outside their country of nationality and unable or unwilling (because 
of fear) to seek protection from that country. 
 Source: United Nations, http://www.unhcr.org/protect/PROTECTION/
3b66c2aa10.pdf. 

202 Data and Documents
   Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking 
in Persons, Article 3, Supplementing the UN 
Convention against Transnational Organized 
Crime, 2000 
  People Trafficking  is recruiting, transporting, transferring, harboring or 
receiving persons for the purpose of exploitation; by using or threaten-
ing force, coercion, abduction, fraud, deception, or abuse of power against 
them; or by giving or receiving payment or benefit to those who control 
them. 
 Source: Adapted from Article 3,  Use of Terms,  http://www.uncjin.org/
Documents/Conventions/dcatoc/final_documents_2/convention_%20
traff_eng.pdf. 
   Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, 
Sea and Air, Article 3, Supplementing the 
UN Convention against Transnational 
Organized Crime, 2000 
 This protocol refers to human smuggling as the “Smuggling of mi-
grants.” It defines it as “the procurement, in order to obtain, directly or 
indirectly, a financial or other material benefit, of the illegal entry of a 
person into a State Party of which the person is not a national or a per-
manent resident.” 
 Source: Article 3,  Use of Terms,  http://www.uncjin.org/Documents/
Conventions/dcatoc/final_documents_2/convention_smug_eng.pdf. 
 The Council of Europe Convention on Action 
against Trafficking Human Beings, 2005 
 At the Third Summit of Heads of State and Government, the Council of Europe 
Convention on Action against Trafficking Human beings defined  trafficking in 
human beings  as  the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harboring or 
receipt of persons, by means of the threat or use of force or other forms 
of coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power 
or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving payments or 
benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control over another 

Human Smuggling and Trafficking Legislation and Statistics  203
person, for the purpose of exploitation. Exploitation shall include, at a 
minimum, the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of 
sexual exploitation, forced labor or services, slavery or practices similar 
to slavery, servitude or the removal of organs. 
 Source: Quoted in Council of Europe. 2005.  Organised Crime Situation 
Report 2005: Focus on the Threat of Economic Crime. Strasbourg, France: 
Council of Europe, p. 32. 
   Crackdown on Human Trafficking in 2005 
 This table reflects the fact that no region in the world is immune 
to human trafficking in the 21st century. Despite gaudy numbers 
reflecting prosecutions and convictions, most human trafficking is 
unreported and goes unnoticed, in part because of the initial ac-
quiescence of the victims and their ultimate powerlessness once 
they reach a destination. 
   Selected Average Costs for Human Smuggling, 2005 
  The following costs charged by human smugglers demonstrate the allure 
that Western Europe has for those seeking to migrate from China, South 
Asia, North Africa, and Eastern Europe. Both Western Europe and North 
America remain at the top of the destination lists for most people seeking 
better opportunities and a better life. Unfortunately, once many arrive at 
their destinations they find that one’s dreams are often trumped by reality. 
TABLE 6.7
Crackdown on Human Trafficking in 2005
Region
Prosecutions
Convictions
New laws against human 
trafficking
Africa
194
58
12
East Asia And Pacific
 2580
2347
5
Europe and Eurasia
 2598
1984
12
Middle East
 112
104
3
South Asia
 964
214
0
North and South America 
170
59
9
Source: U.S. Department of State, 2006 Trafficking in Persons Report, http://www.thefreelibrary.com/
Analyze+the+chart.a0161855548.

204 Data and Documents
 North Africa to Spain: 4,000 euros (2000 more for false identity 
papers) 
 Hungary/Russia to Western Europe: 8,000–10,000 euros 
 Slovakia to Italy: 3000 to 4000 euros 
 Serbia and Montenegro to Western Europe: $1,000USD 
 Croatia to Western Europe: 500 euros 
 China to Italy: $13,000USD 
 South Asia to Spain: 6,000 euros; double that with false identity 
papers 
 Source: Adapted from Council of Europe. 2005.  Organised Crime Situation 
Report 2005: Focus on the Threat of Economic Crime. Strasbourg, France: 
Council of Europe. 
 Services Required by Successful 
Trafficking Operations 
  Successful trafficking operations require the assistance of numerous in-
dividuals with various skills, much like a typical transnational organized 
crime group. It is easier to understand why those being smuggled are 
required to pay such high prices when the logistics and humanpower re-
quired by an organization is broken down into the various services that 
the smugglers provide.  
 Arranging transportation and proper documents 
• 
 Providing transport or counterfeit documents 
• 
 Acting as a guide to people crossing borders 
• 
 Serving as a chaperone on the journey 
• 
 Providing information at various stages of the border, such as, 
• 
“How do you cross the border?” 
 Arranging logistics such as bribing guards and officials 
• 
 Supervising victims at destination 
• 
 Providing accommodations and food 
• 
 Acting as security or bodyguard to intimidate victims 
• 
 Source:  Adapted from Rebecca Surtees. 2008. “Traffickers and Trafficking 
in Southern and Eastern Europe: Considering the Other Side of Human 
Trafficking.”  European Journal of Criminology 5 (1): 47; also adapted from 
International Labour Organization—International Programme on the 
Elimination of Child Labour. 2005.  Child Trafficking — The People Involved: 
A Synthesis of Findings from Albania, Moldova, Romania and Ukraine. 
Geneva: ILO-IPEC, ix–x. 

Human Smuggling and Trafficking Legislation and Statistics  205
   Organized Crime Groups in the European 
Union (2005) 
  The following list of organized crime groups exemplifies how once local or 
regional organized crime groups have morphed into global organized crime 
networks thanks to the opportunities provided by 21st century globaliza-
tion. This is particularly true for exemplars from North Africa, China, and 
the world of outlaw motorcycle gangs.  
 Indigenous organized crime groups still pose threat to EU.
• 
Italian Mafia-type OC groups are particularly dangerous for 
• 
their ability in infiltrating the public and economic sectors. 
 Lithuanian groups forge alliances with international OC 
• 
and rapidly expanding all over the EU; extremely skilled in 
currency counterfeiting. 
 Dutch OC groups are specialized in drug production and 
• 
trafficking. 
 German OC groups are involved in types of crimes that require 
• 
a vast network of international connections. 
 Russian and other former Soviet Union OC groups are 
• 
involved in all types of crime; highly sophisticated in area of 
financial crime, fraud and money laundering. 
 Turkish OC is mainly involved in heroin production and 
• 
trafficking in EU. 
 Chinese OC groups are well established in EU, and are 
• 
involved in illegal migration, trafficking of human beings, and 
non-cash payment fraud. 
 Moroccan groups are major provider of cannabis to EU drug 
• 
market and are also involved in human trafficking and illegal 
migration. 
 Outlaw motorcycle gangs are present in Nordic countries, 
• 
Germany and Belgium and are expanding activities into other 
EU member states. 
 Source:  Adapted from Council of Europe. 2005.  Organised Crime Situation 
Report 2005: Focus on the Threat of Economic Crime. Strasbourg, France: 
Council of Europe, 49–50. 
 Council of Europe Convention on Action against 
Trafficking in Human Beings (2005) 
  The Council of Europe has been at the forefront in the battle against 
human trafficking. As Western Europe became the destination of choice 

206 Data and Documents
for illegal and legal migrants from around the world, it was incumbent on 
the European community taking the lead in establishing ground rules to 
suppress the problem. What’s more, it has become clear that many victims 
of sex trafficking come from Council of Europe members States. During 
the first years of the 21st century, members of the EU reported an increase 
in organized crime involvement in the smuggling of persons.  
 Article 1—Purposes of the Convention 
 
1. The purposes of this Convention are: 
 a.  to prevent and combat trafficking in human beings, while 
guaranteeing gender equality; 
 
b.  to protect the human rights of the victims of trafficking, 
design a comprehensive framework for the protection and 
assistance of victims and witnesses, while guaranteeing gen-
der equality, as well as to ensure effective investigation and 
prosecution; 
 
c.  to promote international cooperation on action against traf-
ficking in human beings. 
  
2. In order to ensure effective implementation of its provisions 
by the Parties, this Convention sets up a specific monitoring 
mechanism. 
 Article 2—Scope 
 This Convention shall apply to all forms of trafficking in human beings, 
whether national or transnational, whether or not connected with orga-
nized crime. 
 Article 3—Non-discrimination Principle 
 The implementation of the provisions of this Convention by Parties, in 
particular the enjoyment of measures to protect and promote the rights 
of victims, shall be secured without discrimination on any ground such 
as sex, race, color, language, religion, political or other opinion, national 
or social origin, association with a national minority, property, birth or 
other status. 
 Article 4—Definitions 
 For the purposes of this Convention: 
 
c. The recruitment, transportation, transfer, harboring or receipt of 
a child for the purpose of exploitation shall be considered 

“trafficking in human beings” even if this does not involve any 
of the means set forth in subparagraph (a) of this article; 
 
d. “Child” shall mean any person under eighteen years of age; 
 
e. “Victim” shall mean any natural person who is subject to traf-
ficking in human beings as defined in this article. 
 Chapter II—Prevention, co-operation and other measures 
 Article 5—Prevention of Trafficking in Human Beings 
 
1. Each Party shall take measures to establish or strengthen na-
tional co-ordination between the various bodies responsible for 
preventing and combating trafficking in human beings. 
 
2. Each Party shall establish and/or strengthen effective policies 
and programmes to prevent trafficking in human beings, by such 
means as: research, information, awareness raising and educa-
tion campaigns, social and economic initiatives and training pro-
grammes, in particular for persons vulnerable to trafficking and 
for professionals concerned with trafficking in human beings. 
 
3. Each Party shall promote a Human Rights-based approach and 
shall use gender mainstreaming and a child-sensitive approach 
in the development, implementation and assessment of all the 
policies and programmes referred to in paragraph 2. 
 
4. Each Party shall take appropriate measures, as may be neces-
sary, to enable migration to take place legally, in particular 
through dissemination of accurate information by relevant of-
fices, on the conditions enabling the legal entry in and stay on 
its territory. 
 
5. Each Party shall take specific measures to reduce children’s 
vulnerability to trafficking, notably by creating a protective en-
vironment for them. 
 
6. Measures established in accordance with this article shall in-
volve, where appropriate, nongovernmental organizations, 
other relevant organizations and other elements of civil society 
committed to the prevention of trafficking in human beings and 
victim protection or assistance. 
 Article 8—Security and Control of Documents 
 Each Party shall adopt such measures as may be necessary: 
 
a. To ensure that travel or identity documents issued by it are of 
such quality that they cannot easily be misused and cannot read-
ily be falsified or unlawfully altered, replicated or issued; and 
Human Smuggling and Trafficking Legislation and Statistics 
207

208 Data and Documents
 
b. To ensure the integrity and security of travel or identity docu-
ments issued by or on behalf of the Party and to prevent their 
unlawful creation and issuance. 
 Article 9—Legitimacy and Validity of Documents  
 At the request of another Party, a Party shall, in accordance with its in-
ternal law, verify within a reasonable time the legitimacy and validity 
of travel or identity documents issued or purported to have been issued 
in its name and suspected of being used for trafficking in human beings. 
 Source:  Council of Europe, http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/EN/
Treaties/Html/197.htm. 
 Other Types of Organized Crime 
 Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, 2003 
  Diamond smuggling has plagued Africa since they were first mined in 
the 19th century. In the 1880s, a Select Committee in South Africa was 
appointed to investigate the illegal diamond trade, resulting in the Dia-
mond Trade Act in 1882, which offered punitive measures and doubled 
the police force to suppress impulses toward illicit trafficking. More re-
cently, in 2003, African governments accepted the Kimberley (South Af-
rica) Process Certification Scheme, which was geared toward preventing 
the trade in diamonds to fund conflict, hence references to conflict or blood 
diamonds. Recent research, however, suggests that although it makes it 
more difficult to smuggle diamonds from rebel-held regions to interna-
tional markets, the trade continues due in no small part to weak diamond 
controls in some diamond-producing countries. Experts estimate that the 
illicit trade in diamonds in Sierra Leone represents almost 20 percent of the 
total trade. As a result the illegal diamond trade continues to fund terrorist 
groups and facilitate the laundering of money by criminal syndicates. The 
following are several excerpts from the Kimberley legislation including 
parts of the preamble and definitions:  
 PREAMBLE PARTICIPANTS, RECOGNISING that the trade in 
conflict diamonds is a matter of serious international concern, which 
can be directly linked to the fuelling of armed conflict, the activities of 
rebel movements aimed at undermining or overthrowing legitimate 
governments, and the illicit traffic in, and proliferation of, armaments, 
especially small arms and light weapons;  FURTHER RECOGNISING  

Other Types of Organized Crime 209
the devastating impact of conflicts fuelled by the trade in conflict dia-
monds on the peace, safety and security of people in affected countries 
and the systematic and gross human rights violations that have been 
perpetrated in such conflicts;  NOTING the negative impact of such 
conflicts on regional stability and the obligations placed upon states by 
the United Nations Charter regarding the maintenance of international 
peace and security;  BEARING IN MIND that urgent international ac-
tion is imperative to prevent the problem of conflict diamonds from 
negatively affecting the trade in legitimate diamonds, which makes a 
critical contribution to the economies of many of the producing, pro-
cessing, exporting and importing states, especially developing states; 
 CONVINCED that the opportunity for conflict diamonds to play a 
role in fuelling armed conflict can be seriously reduced by introducing 
a certification scheme for rough diamonds designed to exclude conflict 
diamonds from the legitimate trade ; RECALLING that the Kimberley 
Process considered that an international certification scheme for rough 
diamonds, based on national laws and practices and meeting inter-
nationally agreed minimum standards, will be the most effective sys-
tem by which the problem of conflict diamonds could be addressed; 
ACKNOWLEDGING the important initiatives already taken to ad-
dress this problem, in particular by the governments of Angola, the 
Democratic Republic of Congo, Guinea and Sierra Leone and by other 
key producing, exporting and importing countries, as well as by the 
diamond industry, in particular by the World Diamond Council, and 
by civil society; WELCOMING voluntary self-regulation initiatives an-
nounced by the diamond industry and recognizing that a system of 
such voluntary self-regulation contributes to ensuring an effective inter-
nal control system of rough diamonds based upon the international 
certification scheme for rough diamonds; RECOGNISING that an inter-
national certification scheme for rough diamonds will only be credible if 
all Participants have established internal systems of control designed to 
eliminate the presence of conflict diamonds in the chain of producing, 
exporting and importing rough diamonds within their own territories, 
while taking into account that differences in production methods and 
trading practices as well as differences in institutional controls thereof 
may require different approaches to meet minimum standards  . . .
 Recommend the Following Provisions: 
 SECTION I Definitions  For the purposes of the international certifica-
tion scheme for rough diamonds the following definitions apply: 
 CONFLICT DIAMONDS means rough diamonds used by rebel 
movements or their allies to finance conflict aimed at undermining 
legitimate governments . . . 

210 Data and Documents
 COUNTRY OF ORIGIN means the country where a shipment of 
rough diamonds has been mined or extracted; 
 COUNTRY OF PROVENANCE means the last Participant from 
where a shipment of rough diamonds was exported, as recorded 
on import documentation; 
 DIAMOND means a natural mineral consisting essentially of pure 
crystallised carbon in the isometric system, with a hardness on the 
Mohs (scratch) scale of 10, a specific gravity of approximately 3.52 
and a refractive index of 2.42; 
 EXPORT means the physical leaving/taking out of any part of the 
geographical territory of a Participant; 
 EXPORTING AUTHORITY means the authority(ies) or body(ies) 
designated by a Participant from whose territory a shipment of 
rough diamonds is leaving, and which are authorized to validate 
the Kimberley Process Certificate; 
 FREE TRADE ZONE means a part of the territory of a Participant 
where any goods introduced are generally regarded, insofar 
as import duties and taxes are concerned, as being outside the 
customs territory; 
 IMPORT means the physical entering/bringing into any part of the 
geographical territory of a Participant; 
 Source:  Kimberley Process Web site, http://www.state.gov/e/eeb/
diamonds/c19974.htm. 
 Gambling Prohibition and Enforcement Act, 2006 
  Law enforcement has given illegal (and legal) gambling a low priority 
in recent years. But with the boom in televised gambling, mostly in the 
form of poker and its popularity on the Internet, U.S. authorities have 
begun to target gambling for the first time in a generation. The Gambling 
Prohibition Act forces U.S. banks and credit card companies to block elec-
tronic transactions to Internet gambling sites. Building on legislation 
introduced but rejected in 1999, this Act aims to prevent the use of cer-
tain payment instruments, credit cards, and fund transfers for unlawful 
Internet gambling, and for other purposes. The following excerpt pertains 
to the additional prohibitions.  
 Title I—Modernization of the Wire Act of 1961 
 Sec. 102. Modification of Existing Prohibition 
 Section 1084 of title 18, 
United States Code, is amended to read as follows: 
 Sec. 1084. Use of a communication facility to transmit bets or 
wagers; criminal penalties 

Other Types of Organized Crime 211
 (a) Except as otherwise provided in this section, whoever, being 
engaged in a gambling business, knowingly— 
 
(1) uses a communication facility for the transmission in interstate 
or foreign commerce, within the special maritime and territorial 
jurisdiction of the United States, or to or from any place outside 
the jurisdiction of any nation with respect to any transmission 
to or from the United States, of— 
 (A) bets or wagers; 
 (B) information assisting in the placing of bets or wagers; or 
 (C)  a communication, which entitles the recipient to receive 
money or credit as a result of bets or wagers, or for 
information assisting in the placing of bets or wagers; or 
  
(2) accepts, in connection with the transmission of a communication 
in interstate or foreign commerce, within the special maritime 
and territorial jurisdiction of the United States, or to or from 
any place outside the jurisdiction of any nation with respect to 
any transmission to or from the United States of bets or wagers 
or information assisting in the placing of bets or wagers— 
 (A) credit, or the proceeds of credit, extended to or on behalf 
of another (including credit extended through the use of a 
credit card); 
 (B) an electronic fund transfer or funds transmitted by or 
through a money transmitting business, or the proceeds of 
an electronic fund transfer or money transmitting service, 
from or on behalf of the other person; 
 (C) any check, draft, or similar instrument which is drawn by 
or on behalf of the other person and is drawn on or 
payable through any financial institution; or 
 (D) the proceeds of any other form of financial transaction as 
the Secretary of the Treasury and the Board of Governors 
of the Federal Reserve System may prescribe by regulation 
which involves a financial institution as a payor or finan-
cial intermediary on behalf of or for the benefit of the other 
person, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not 
more than five years, or both. 
 Source:  109th Congress, 2nd Sess., H.R. 4411, July 13, 2006. 
 Money Laundering 
  The roots of modern money laundering can be discerned as early as the Pro-
hibition Era (1920–1933) when American bootleggers found it necessary 

212 Data and Documents
to disguise their vast profits from the tax services. Meyer Lansky report-
edly opened his first secret Swiss bank account in 1934, taking advan-
tage of Swiss banking laws that ensured anonymity for clients. Today 
money laundering is used by every form of criminality, from white collar 
criminals and mobsters to terrorist groups. Some use cash businesses and 
others traffic in diamonds. But until relatively recently, offshore banks and 
shell corporations in the Caribbean were among the major components of 
schemes to launder vast amounts of cash. In 2001, New York’s Federal 
Reserve Bank estimated that more than $800 billion was sitting in Grand 
Cayman banks. The creation of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) 
by the G-7 group of industrialized nations in 1989, however, has closed 
some of the loopholes formerly enjoyed by money launderers.  
 Bank Secrecy Act of 1970 
 In 1970, the U.S. Congress passed the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA), which is 
considered the first legislation in the United States specifically targeting 
money laundering. According to the BSA, all business are expected to 
keep up-to-date records and to file reports, thus guaranteeing tax en-
forcement officers an important source of information for domestic and 
international law enforcement agencies targeting money laundering and 
tax evasion by criminal and terrorist groups. The following excerpt de-
fines money laundering and the three steps typically used in the money 
laundering process. 
 Money laundering is the criminal practice of filtering ill-gotten 
gains or “dirty” money through a maze or series of transactions, so the 
funds are “cleaned” to look like proceeds from legal activities. Money 
laundering does not have to involve cash at every stage of the laundering 
process. Any transaction conducted with a bank might constitute money 
laundering. Although money laundering is a diverse and often complex 
process, it basically involves three independent steps that can occur si-
multaneously: 
 Placement: The process of placing, through deposits or other means, 
unlawful cash proceeds into traditional financial institutions. 
 Layering:  The process of separating the proceeds of criminal activity 
from their origin through the use of layers of complex financial transac-
tions, such as converting cash into travelers’ checks, money orders, wire 
transfers, letters of credit, stocks, bonds, or purchasing valuable assets, 
such as art or jewelry. 
 Integration:  The process of using an apparently legitimate trans-
action to disguise the illicit proceeds, allowing the laundered funds to 

Other Types of Organized Crime 213
be disbursed back to the criminal, such as sham loans or false import/
excise invoices can be used. 
 Source:   Bank Secrecy Act,  Comptroller ’ s Handbook, p. 17, http://www.occ.
treas.gov/handbook/bsa.pdf. 
   Amounts of Money Reported Laundered in the 
Tri-Border Area (TBA), 1992–2001 (USD) 
 The border frontier between Argentina, Brazil, and Paraguay has 
long been a haven for organized crime activity and an active cor-
ridor for the smuggling of weapons, drugs, and now counterfeit 
goods. As the figures below indicate in 2000 alone it was estimated 
that $12 billion was being laundered each year. Porous borders 
have made it relatively easy to transport stolen cars from Brazil 
and Argentina into Paraguay via the TBA. Besides the indigenous 
groups, there is an increasing presence of international crime syndi-
cates from Chile, Colombia, Corsica, Ghana, Italy, Ivory Coast, 
Japan, Korea, Lebanon, Libya, and Taiwan. Most of the criminal ac-
tivity is centered in three closely connected population centers at 
Puerto Iguaçu, Argentina, Foz de Iguacu, Brazil, an Ciudad del 
Este, Paraguay. Testament to the region’s growing diversity and 
impact of globalization was the 2001 census in Foz de Iguacu which 
determined there were 65 different nationalities living there.  
TABLE 6.8
Amounts of Money Reported Laundered in the Tri-Border Area (TBA), 1992–2001 (USD)
Period
Amount
TBA location of activity 
2000 –2001
$12 billion per year
TBA in general
2000
$25 billion
TBA in general
2000
$5 billion annual average
Ciudad del Este
1998 –1999
$12 billion total
Foz do Iguacu
1996 –1997
$18 billion total
Foz do Iguacu
1992 –1998
$70 billion total
Foz do Iguacu
1992 –1998
$30 billion total
Foz do Iguacu
Source: Rex Hudson, “Terrorist and Organized Crime Groups in the Tri-Border Area (TBA) of South America,” Federal 
Research Division, Library of Congress, July 2003, 52, http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/66086.pdf.

214 Data and Documents
 Combating Organized Crime 
in the United States 
 Organized Crime Drug Enforcement 
Task Force (OCDETF) 
 The Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force Program was 
authorized in 1982 as federal drug enforcement program under 
the U.S. Attorney General and the Department of Justice. Its main 
tasks are disrupting major drug trafficking networks and solving 
related crimes including money laundering, tax and weapons vio-
lations, and violent crimes. Today, almost 2,500 agents work for the 
force. Structurally it combines resources and skills of other federal 
agencies including the FBI, ICE, BATF, the U.S. Marshals Service, 
the IRS, and the U.S. Coast Guard. The program’s stated purpose 
is to focus its resources “on coordinated, nationwide investiga-
tions, targeting the entire infrastructure of major drug trafficking 
networks.” Since its inception, its operations as of 2006 have led to 
more than 44,000 drug-related convictions and the seizure of more 
than $3 billion in cash and property. All of the country’s 93 judicial 
districts are attached to one of the 9 OCDETF regions depending 
on its geographical location. Organizationally, within each region 
a hub city is selected.  
TABLE 6.9
OCDETF Regions
Task force region
Core city
New England
Boston
New York/New Jersey
New York City
Mid-Atlantic
Baltimore
Great Lakes
Chicago
Southeast
Atlanta
West Central
St. Louis
Florida/Caribbean
Miami
Southwest
Houston
Pacific
San Francisco
Source: DEA Programs, Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force, http://www.justice.gov/dea/programs/
ocdetf.htm.

Combating Organized Crime in the United States  215
 U.S. Patriot Act, 2001 
  In the aftermath of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the United 
States Congress, wide bipartisan support passed Public Law 107-56, The 
Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Re-
quired to Intercept and Obstruct terrorism Act of 2001, better known 
either as the USA PATRIOT ACT or simply the Patriot Act. Although 
it clearly targets terrorists, there are a number of provisions outlining 
various investigative techniques and methods law enforcement can use 
against organized crime activity. The following excerpts focus on wire-
tapping and money laundering activities. Although the FBI already had a 
broad authority to scrutinize telephone and Internet communications, the 
Patriot Act further limited judicial oversight of electronic surveillance by:  
 
(i) Subjecting private Internet communications to a minimal stan-
dard of review; 
 
(ii) Permitting law enforcement to obtain what would be the equiv-
alent of a ‘blank warrant’ in the physical world; 
 
(iii) Authorizing scattershot intelligence wiretap orders that need 
not specify the place to be searched or require that only the tar-
get’s conversations be eavesdropped upon; and 
 
(iv) Allowing the FBI to use its ‘intelligence’ authority to circumvent 
the judicial review of the probable cause requirement of the 
Fourth Amendment. 
 The Patriot Act created several new money laundering crimes while increasing 
the penalties for some already established money laundering violations. Among 
the new provisions are the following:  
 Prohibits the laundering of any proceeds from foreign crimes of 
• 
violence or political corruption. 
 Prohibits the laundering of proceeds of cybercrime and 
• 
offenses relating to the support of a terrorist organization 
 Prohibits bulk cash smuggling (concealed on the person, in 
• 
a container, or a conveyance) and sets out procedures for the 
forfeiture of smuggled bulk cash shipments 
 Revises the language of 18 U.S.C. 1960 relating to the operation 
• 
of illegal money transmitting businesses by eliminating the 
old requirement that the government had to show that the 
defendant knew the business was operating illegally. Now 
any person who “knowingly conducts, controls, manages, 
supervises, directs, or owns all or part of an unlicensed money 
transmitting business” is subject to criminal sanctions. 

216 Data and Documents
 The Patriot Act also contains a number of other provisions related to money laun-
dering including:  
 31 U.S.C. 5318 ( j  ); Act Section 313: Prohibition on U.S. 
• 
Correspondent Accounts with Shell Banks 
 31 U.S.C 5318 ( i ); Act Section 312: Due Diligence for Private 
• 
Banking and Correspondent Accounts 
 31 U.S.C. 5318A; Act Section 311: “Special Measures” for 
• 
Certain Jurisdictions, Financial Institutions, and Accounts 
 31 U.S.C. 5318 ( l ); Act section 326: Standards for verification of 
• 
Customer Identification 
 31 U.S.C. 5331, Act Section 365: Suspicious Activity Reporting 
• 
 18 U.S.C 981 ( k ); Act Section 319: Forfeiture of Funds in U.S. 
• 
Interbank Accounts 
 31 U.S.C. 5318 ( g ); Act Section 352: Anti-Money Laundering 
• 
Program Requirement 
 Source: U.S. Patriot Act, 2001, http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/
getdoc.cgi?dbname=107_cong_public_laws&docid=f:publ056.107.pdf. 
 U.S. Attorney General Michael Mukasey, 2008 
  On April 30, 2008, Attorney General Michael Mukasey made a speech en-
titled “Combating the Growing Threat of International Organized Crime,” 
at the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS). The following 
is an excerpt from that speech.  
 Perhaps we are victims of our own success because it seems that 
there is a widespread belief around the country that organized crime is no 
longer a serious threat. Most Americans think of organized crime only 
as a part of America’s past, its modern role merely the subject of popular 
movies or television dramas. I can assure you that organized crime is 
different in source and different in scope, but unfortunately this phenom-
enon, in a different institutional costume, is alive and well. 
 That is why, earlier this year, the Organized Crime Council met for 
the first time in 15 years. It did so because the United States faces a new 
and more modern threat, from international organized crime. We can’t 
ignore criminal syndicates in other countries on the naïve assumption 
that they are a danger only in their homeland, whether it is located in 
Eurasia, Africa, or anywhere else. 
 International organized crime poses a greater challenge to law 
enforcement than did the traditional mafia in many respects. And the 
geographical source of the threat is not the only difference. The degree 

Quotations 217
of sophistication is also markedly different, markedly higher. Some of 
the most significant international organized criminals are also infiltrat-
ing our own strategic industries and those of our allies, are providing 
logistical support to terrorist organizations and foreign intelligence agen-
cies, and are capable of creating havoc in our economic infrastructure. 
These international criminals pose real natural security threats to this 
country. . . . International organized criminals are not motivated by ideol-
ogy; they are motivated by the same thing that has motivated traditional 
organized criminals over history: money. International organized crime 
is a hybrid criminal problem that implicates three of the department’s 
national priorities: national security, violent crime, and public corrup-
tion. . . . Therefore, the department and other federal agencies recently 
conducted a comprehensive review and assessment of international or-
ganized crime. 
 First, we learned that organized crime, in addition to being as 
varied and as dangerous as ever, has a remarkable ability to adapt to 
changing conditions. . . . They are more sophisticated; they are richer; 
they have greater influence over government and political institutions 
worldwide; and they are savvier about using the latest technology first 
to perpetrate and then to cover up their crimes . . .  
 A second threat we identified was the logistical and other support 
that organized crime provides to terrorists, foreign intelligence services, 
and foreign governments that may be targeting the United States or oth-
erwise acting against our interests . . .  
 Another set of recent cases highlights yet a third threat—from in-
ternational organized criminals who smuggle and traffic people and 
contraband into the country . . .  
 Another threat involves the ways organized crime exploits the U.S. 
and international financial systems to move illegal funds . . .  
 Yet another threat is the way international organized criminals use 
cyberspace to target U.S. victims and infrastructure . . .  
 Other threats identified in our assessment include manipulation of 
securities markets, corrupting public officials globally, [and] using vio-
lence as a basis for power (Mukasey 2008). 
 Source:  Center for Strategic and International Studies, http://www.
csis.org. 
 Quotations 
 All we can give you is a fragmentary picture of any great criminal en-
terprise. We can give you a fairly full picture of what happens at the bottom, 
a smaller picture of what happens at the next stratum . . . and very little 
up at the top. 

218 Data and Documents
 Thomas Dewey, 1935 (quoted in Mary M. Stolberg,  Fighting 
Organized Crime: Politics, Justice, and the Legacy of Thomas E. 
Dewey (Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1995), 95. 
 Organized crime stems from various forms of vice operations, gam-
bling, prostitution, and the illegal sale of narcotics and liquor. . . . Vice 
activities are now and always have been the seedbed of organized crime. 
 McClellan Committee Report, Hearings before the Permanent 
Subcommittee on Investigations of the Committee on Govern-
ment Operations, U.S. Senate, 88th Congress, 1st and 2nd Sess., 
Pt. 3, Oct. 10, 11, 15, 16, 1963. 
 There exists . . . today a criminal organization that is directly descended 
from and is patterned upon the centuries-old Sicilian terrorist society, 
the Mafia. This organization, also known as the La Cosa Nostra, operates 
vast illegal enterprises that produce an annual income of many billions 
of dollars. This combine has so much power and influence that it may be 
described as a private government of organized crime. 
 McClellan Committee Report, Hearings before the Permanent 
Subcommittee on Investigations of the Committee on Govern-
ment Operations, U.S. Senate, 88th Congress, 1st and 2nd Sess., 
Pt. 3, Oct. 10, 11, 15, 16, 1963. 
 It is a malignant parasite, which fattens on human weakness. It survives on 
fear and corruption. . . . It is totalitarian in its organization. A way of life, 
it imposes rigid discipline on underlings who do the dirty work while the 
top men of organized crime are generally insulated from the criminal act 
and the consequent danger of prosecution. 
 Combating Organized Crime.  A Report on the 1965 Oyster Bay 
Conference, New York, Conferences on Combating Organized 
Crime (Albany, New York: Office of the Counsel of the Gover-
nor, 1966), 19. 
 Since there is no organization, no secret society called mafia, one can-
not write the history of such an institution. All that can be traced is the 
behavior pattern of Mafiosi in various historical situations, the role they 
played in the history of Sicily. 
 Henner Hess,  Mafia and Mafiosi: The Structure of Power  (Lex-
ington, MA: Lexington Books, 1971), 155. 
 Up to the early 1980s a major branch of the scientific and popular discourse 
understood the term mafia as an attitude and behavior typical of Sicilians, 
denying a corporate dimension. Since then however, thanks to judicial in-

Quotations 219
vestigations, it has become clear that organized crime groups lie at the core 
of the mafia phenomenon. 
 Letizia Paoli, “The Future of Sicilian and Calabrian Organized 
Crime.” In Stanley Einstein and Menachem Amir, Eds.,  Organized 
Crime: Uncertainties and Dilemmas  (Chicago: OICJ, 1999), 186. 
 Organized crime is a society that seeks to operate outside the control of 
the American people and their governments. It involves thousands of 
criminals, working within structures as complex as those of any large 
corporation, subject to laws more rigidly enforced than those of legiti-
mate governments. Its actions are not impulsive but rather the result of 
intricate conspiracies carried on over many years and aimed at gaining 
control over whole fields of activity. 
 President’s Commission on Law Enforcement and the Admin-
istration of Justice,  The Challenge of Crime in a Free Society,  3rd 
ed. (New York: Avon, 1972), 437. 
 Transnational Organized Crime is crime committed by an organized 
criminal group, which is planned or committed in more than one state, 
or has substantial effects on more than one state, or is committed by a 
group which commits crimes in more than one state. 
 UN Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, 2000, 
http://www.uncjin.org/Documents/Conventions/dcatoc/final_
documents_2/convention_eng.pdf. 
 An organized criminal group is a structured group existing for a period 
of time and acting in concert, with the aim of committing one or more 
crimes for financial or other material benefit. 
 U N Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, 2000, 
http://www.uncjin.org/Documents/Conventions/dcatoc/final_
documents_2/convention_eng.pdf. 
 the FBI could get a wiretap to investigate the mafia, but they could not 
get one to investigate terrorists. To put it bluntly, that was crazy! What’s 
good for the mob should be good for terrorists. 
 Sen. Joe Biden, Cong. Rec., Oct. 25, 2001, http://www.usdoj.gov/
archive/ll/subs/support/senbiden102501_1.pdf. 
 On Russian Organized Crime 
 An organized community of criminals ranging in size from 50 to 1,000 
persons, which is engaged in systematic criminal business and protects 
itself from the law with the help of corruption. 

220 Data and Documents
 Russian Ministry of the Interior, 1999, http://www.russianlaw.
org/roc_csis.pdf. 
 was really a hodgepodge of criminal groups that were highly flexible and 
mobile. 
 Joseph D. Serio,  Investigating the Russian Mafia  (Durham, NC: 
Carolina Academic Press, 2008). 
 On Latin America and Mexican Drug Networks 
 Throughout Latin America, organized criminal networks exercise a sig-
nificant degree of influence over the state. 
 Washington Office on Latin America,  The Captive State: Orga-
nized Crime and Human Rights in Latin America,  Oct. 28, 2007, 
28 pp. 
 Colombian organized crime is quite different from the other organized 
crime groups because it operates as a cartel . . . 
 Louise I. Shelley, “Transnational Organized Crime: An Immi-
nent Threat to the Nation State,”  Journal of International Affairs 
48 (1995):479. 
 there was no group or association that was the cartel of Medellin. . . . I 
never heard any of us say the ‘cartel of Medellin’ or the ‘cartel of Cali.’ 
 Former Medellin member Juan David Ochoa, Frontline inter-
view (n.d.),  Drug Wars, http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/front-
line/shows/drugs/interviews/och. 
 The cartel myth achieved remarkable staying power in American popular 
culture, in part because of the vivid imagery it conveyed was plausible—
and useful—to politicians eager to pass drug control legislation, law 
enforcement hoping for greater drug war resources, investigative jour-
nalists searching for profitable copy, and citizens fearful of the harmful 
effects of drug abuse and addiction . . . . The cartels never existed until 
they were created by the media and the U.S. government. 
 Michael Kenney,  From Pablo to Osama: Trafficking and Terrorist 
Networks, Government Bureaucracies, and Competitive Adapta-
tions  (University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 
2007) 25. 
 Our countries are working together to fight transnational gangs. And 
the President (of Guatemala) was right—I suggested we think about this 

Quotations 221
issue regionally. You’ve got to understand that these gangs are able to 
move throughout Central America and up through Mexico into our own 
country. 
 President George W. Bush, Guatemala City, March 12, 2007, 
http://merln.ndu.edu/archivepdf/ARA/State/93800.pdf. 
 On Drug Trafficking 
 European criminals played crucial roles in the years of the greatest struc-
tural change in the production and trafficking of narcotics. 
 Alan Block, “European Drug Trafficking: Between the World 
Wars,” in Alan Block, Ed.,  Space, Time and Organized Crime  (New 
Brunswick: Transaction, 1994), 93–125, 94. 
 It’s like being a good trucker. You don’t want to travel the return leg with 
an empty truck. If you use this sort of analogy, you have drugs coming 
out one way and that produces money and that buys the weapons and 
the weapons go back in. 
 Quoted in Glen E. Curtis and Tara Karacan, “The Nexus Among 
Terrorists, Narcotics Traffickers, Weapons Proliferators, and Or-
ganized Crime Networks in Western Europe,” Washington, D.C. 
Federal Research Division, Library of Congress, December 2002 
(2–3), 1–30. 
 Methamphetamine is the most widely used illicit drug after marijuana. 
 World Health Organization, 2003, http://www.cbc.ca/fifth/dark-
crystal/canada.html. 
 Drug prohibition is also a failure that causes more harm than the drug 
use it is purportedly intended to control. 
 Bar Association of the City of New York, 1986 (quoted in Wil-
liam F. Buckley, “Reefer Madness at the bar on the Rights,” Sep-
tember 27, 1994, http://www.drugsense.org/tfyl/buck_bar.htm). 
 Drug prohibition in Bolivia and Afghanistan has done exactly what al-
cohol prohibition did in America: it has financed organized crime. . . . The 
Saudis can fight alcoholism by forbidding the sale of Jack Daniels, but 
we’d think they were crazy if they ordered us to eradicate fields of barley 
in Tennessee. 
 John Tierney, “Reading the Coca Leaves,”  New York Times,  Sep-
tember 26, 2006, A23. 

222 Data and Documents
 Street gangs, prison gangs, and outlaw motorcycle gangs have long been 
and continue to be the predominant organized retail drug distributors; 
their level of organization is the key factor that renders gangs a signifi-
cant threat that gangs pose to the nation, their influence with respect to 
drug smuggling, transportation, and wholesale distribution has increased 
sharply. 
 National Drug Intelligence Center, “National Drug Threat As-
sessment 2006: Organized Gangs and Drug Trafficking,” Janu-
ary 2006, http://www.usdoj.gov/ndic/pubs11/18862/gangs.htm. 

223
 7 
 Directory of Organizations 
 Academic and Research-Oriented 
Organizations 
 Academy of Criminal Justice Sciences 
 Web site: http://www.acjs.org 
 Founded in 1963, the Academy of Criminal Justice Science (CJS) is 
an international organization created to promote criminal justice 
education, research, and policy analysis within the discipline of 
criminal justice for both practitioners and educators. Membership 
is international in scope and multidisciplinary in orientation. An-
nual membership dues are $75 and include subscriptions to  Justice 
Quarterly, the  Journal of Criminal Justice Education, and  ACJS Now. 
 American Society of Criminology (Division 
of International Criminology) 
 Web site: http://www.asc41.com 
 DIC Web site: http://www.internationalcriminology.com/
dic_home 
 Despite its parochial-sounding title, the American Society of Crim-
inology is an international organization with membership from 
around the world. Its annual meeting offers hundreds of papers 
and presentations revolving around international crime issues, 
many of them related to global trafficking issues and transnational 
organized crime. Nothing reflects the international dimensions of 
this organization, however, more than its Division of International 

224 Directory of Organizations
Criminology (DIC), which meets at the ASC  ’s annual meeting. Its 
stated goals include fostering research and the exchange of infor-
mation related to international criminology. To join the DIC, one 
must be a member of the American Society of Criminology. Dues for 
the DIC are $90 per year and include subscriptions to  Criminology, 
Criminology and Public Policy,  and the  Criminologist.  DIC member-
ship dues are $20 annually. Members receive the peer-reviewed  In-
ternational Journal of Comparative and Applied Criminal Justice four 
times a year. This journal can be subscribed to without membership 
for $75 for members in the United States and $120 to international 
members. 
 The Centre for Information and Research 
on Organised Crime 
 Web site: http://www.ciroc.org/ 
 Founded by the criminology departments at the Erasmus Univer-
sity Rotterdam and the Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam in 2001 and 
the Research and Documentation Center of the Dutch Ministry of 
Justice (WODC), the Centre for Information and Research on Orga-
nised Crime (CIROC) is an international center for information and 
research on organized crime and the fight against it. According to 
the CIROC, it intends to build rapport between criminologists and 
the practice of investigation, prosecution, and trial. From a global 
perspective, the CIROC works for and with such groups as research 
institutions, government bodies, nongovernmental bodies, the Eu-
ropean Commission, the United Nations, and other agencies. 
 The European Institute for Crime 
Prevention and Control 
 Web site: http://www.heuni.fi 
 The European Institute for Crime Prevention and Control (HEUNI) 
was created on December 23, 1981. Established by an agreement 
between the United Nations and the Government of Finland, the 
organization works to promote the international exchange of strat-
egies on crime prevention and control between countries in Europe. 
Its main contributions have been research oriented, providing tech-
nical assistance to countries when requested and offering work-
shops and meetings. Its current focus has been on topics related to 
organized crime, human trafficking, and violence against women. 
In addition it analyzes UN surveys on crime trends and the work-

Academic and Research-Oriented Organizations  225
ing of criminal justice systems and corrections, as well as publish-
ing profiles of various European criminal justice systems. 
 Hong Kong Society of Criminology 
 Web site: http://www.crime.hku.hk/hksoccrim.htm 
 The Hong Kong Society of Criminology was established in 1983. 
Its founders included criminal justice practitioners, academics, and 
lay members—all interested in the study of crime in Hong Kong. 
The Society ’s objectives include promoting the discussion and dis-
semination of the latest international research on topics germane 
to law enforcement, crime, and criminal justice. The society collab-
orates with similar organizations locally and internationally and 
recently sponsored a symposium on organized crime, human smug-
gling, art crime, crime prevention, crime and the elderly, and other 
topics. Society membership, which includes police officers, lawyers, 
medical practitioners, social workers, correctional officers, academic 
criminologists, and many other types of practitioners, reflects its 
interdisciplinary nature. 
 International Association for the 
Study of Organized Crime 
 E-mail: iasoc_office@yahoo.com 
 Founded in 1984, the International Association for the Study of Or-
ganized Crime (IASOC) is a professional association made up of 
criminologists, researchers, working professionals, teachers, and 
students. Its stated purpose is to promote a greater understanding 
of all the facets of organized crime. Meetings are held at the annual 
meetings of the American Society of Criminology in November each 
year. The organization offers a Web site listing the expertise of mem-
bers. Membership is $25 per year and includes a free online sub-
scription to the quarterly  Trends in Organized Crime,  which features 
articles based on current research in organized crime activities, as 
well as the response by the criminal justice system. 
 Nathanson Centre on Transnational Human Rights, 
Crime and Security (Formerly Nathanson Centre 
for the Study of Organized Crime and Corruption) 
 Web site: http://www.osgoode.yorku.ca 
 The Jack and Mae Nathanson Centre for the Study of Organized 
Crime and Corruption was established in 1997. Over the ensuing 

226 Directory of Organizations
decade the Nathanson Centre became a prominent base for the 
study of global organized crime issues, money laundering, and 
police strategies. It has also sponsored a number of conferences, 
books, symposia, and other research. In 2006, after a series of discus-
sions, it was decided to expand its mandate to include other issues 
germane to the study of 21st-century organized crime by including 
terrorism, human rights accountability of transnational economic 
actors, and security intelligence activity. That same year the name 
was changed to reflect the new mandate. The Centre continues to 
support interdisciplinary research on transnational crime. 
 STRATFOR Global Intelligence 
 Web site: www.stratfor.com 
 STRATFOR was founded in 1996 by the futurologist George Fried-
man. It has earned a reputation as one of the world’s leaders in col-
lecting and analyzing global intelligence. Although it focuses on 
political, economic, and military forecasts, it features a number of 
reports detailing and forecasting global organized crime issues, par-
ticularly the confluence of terrorism and organized crime and the 
persistence of human trafficking and piracy. Although it is an open 
site, a membership fee is required to receive all geopolitical mono-
graphs, assessments, and situational reports (SITREPS). Free arti-
cles, however, can be downloaded and a free trial subscription is 
available. 
 Terrorism, Transnational Crime and Corruption 
Center (Headquarters) 
 Web site: http://policy-traccc.gmu.edu 
 The Terrorism, Transnational Crime and Corruption Center 
(TraCCC) was established in 1998. Most of its research and policy-
building projects over the past decade have been devoted to the 
former states of the Soviet Union and Turkey. TraCCC is the first 
center in the United States dedicated to unraveling the links be-
tween terrorism, transnational crime, and corruption, while at the 
same time offering classes, training, research, and help in formulat-
ing policy related to these issues. Every year TraCCC hosts and 
supports visiting scholars and international leaders through such 
programs as Fulbright, IREX, and the Open World Leadership Pro-
gram. Research topics have included human smuggling, nuclear 

Governmental Organizations 227
proliferation issues, the convergence of terrorism and organized 
crime, money laundering, and other global crime issues. 
 Transnational Institute 
 Web site: http://www.tni.org 
 The Transnational Institute (TNI), established in 1974, is an inter-
national network made up of primarily activist-scholars who are 
committed to the critical examination of various global problems. 
Among its projects related to organized crime is the Crime and 
Globalisation project, which analyzes the relationship between 
globalization and crime. It takes into account the criminogenic ef-
fects of globalization and the concomitant development of what it 
calls an “underground axis of evil” made up of drug trafficking, 
transnational organized crime, and international terrorism. This 
project is devoted to opening a discussion on the criminogenic ef-
fects of globalization and to developing a new global security strat-
egy that would entail a body of multilateral agreements. The TNI’s 
Drugs and Democracy program likewise analyzes global trends 
in drug policy while promoting a more realistic approach to sup-
pressing the illegal drug trade based on harm reduction principles. 
This program focuses on drugs and conflict in the Andean/Ama-
zon region, Afghanistan, and Burma and ties it to wider issues such 
as demilitarization, democratization, and poverty reduction. 
 Governmental Organizations 
 Australian Crime Commission 
 Web site: http://www.crimecommission.gov.au 
 The Australian Crime Commission (ACC) was established on 
January 1, 2003, specifically to target national crime threats and 
organized criminal activity. Its creation merged the National Crime 
Authority, which was established in 1984 to handle organized crime, 
with the Australian Bureau of Criminal Intelligence and the Office 
of Strategic Assessments. It was hoped that a streamlined single-
agency approach would be more effective. The ACC is led by a CEO, 
who is selected by the governor-general of Australia and is respon-
sible for the organization’s corporate management and the coordi-
nation and control of its operations and investigations. Day-to-day 

228 Directory of Organizations
activities are the responsibility of directors and managers. The ACC 
is imbued with coercive powers that are not available to the Aus-
tralian and state and territorial police forces. These nontraditional 
methods, however, must be first authorized by the ACC Board, 
which comprises the commissioner of the Australian Federal Police 
(chair of board), the secretary of the department, the chief execu-
tive officer of the Australian Customs service, the director-general 
of the Australian Security Intelligence Organization, the commis-
sioner from each state and territory police force, and several others. 
 Borderpol European Secretariat c/o Hungarian 
National Police Service 
 Borderpol was officially established in March 2003 as a nonprofit 
international association dedicated to bringing together the inter-
national community to promote safe and secure borders. Its stated 
goal is to facilitate cooperation between progressive border services 
and related agencies in furtherance of establishing and operating 
border system that more effectively connect the global community. 
It devotes much of its resources consulting governments that are 
interested in improving the enforcement of transnational criminal 
activities such as smuggling humans, drugs, and weapons, as well 
as protecting against terrorism. Borderpol has access to more than 
100 professionals in more than 12 countries that can provide ser-
vices and advice at short notice. 
 Borderpol International Association 
 Web site: http://borderpol.org 
 Borderpol was officially established in March 2003 as a nonprofit 
international association dedicated to bringing together the inter-
national community in order promote safe and secure borders. Its 
stated goal is to facilitate cooperation between progressive border 
services and related agencies in furtherance of establishing and op-
erating border system that more effectively connect the global com-
munity. It devotes much of its resources consulting governments 
that are interested in improving the enforcement of transnational 
criminal activities such as smuggling humans, drugs, and weap-
ons as well as protecting against terrorism. Borderpol has access to 
more than 100 professionals in over 12 countries that can respond 
quickly on short notice to requests for advice. 

Governmental Organizations 229
 Bureau for International Narcotics and Law 
Enforcement Affairs 
 Web site: http://www.state.gov/g/inl 
 The Bureau for International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Af-
fairs (INL) is positioned within the undersecretary for political af-
fairs for the U.S. State Department and is tasked with combating 
the global drug trade and other major crimes through programs in-
volving other federal agencies and national governments. It is not 
a true law enforcement agency but functions as a source of fund-
ing to assist law enforcement personnel in the United States and 
other countries. The drug trade remains its primary mission, but in 
recent years it has moved toward working on other transnational 
criminal operations such as human trafficking. With an annual bud-
get approaching a billion dollars, almost $14 million goes toward 
supporting efforts to suppress money laundering, intellectual prop-
erty theft, and cybercrime. It also contributes to border security pro-
grams geared toward supporting counterterrorism training for 
port and airport police, as well as private security officials. 
 Caribbean Financial Action Task Force 
 Web site: http://www.cfatf.org 
 The Caribbean Financial Action Task Force (CFATF) was established 
in 1992 as a way of addressing criminal money laundering in the 
region. Today it is an organization of 30 states representing the Ca-
ribbean basin. Its main objective is to attain effective implementa-
tion of, and conformity with, its recommendations to prevent and 
control money laundering and the financing of terrorism through 
international finance markets. 
 Central Intelligence Agency 
 Web site: http://www.cia.gov 
 The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) was created by the National 
Security Act of 1947. It mandated that the CIA would be responsi-
ble for coordinating the country  ’s intelligence activities and with 
correlating and disseminating intelligence affecting national se-
curity. For most of its history, it focused on the machinations and 
threats of the Cold War era. Senior U.S. policymakers rely on the 

230 Directory of Organizations
CIA to provide timely national security intelligence. The Director 
of the Central Intelligence Agency (D/CIA) is selected by the Pres-
ident of the United States; however, the appointee must first be 
approved with the advice and consent of the Senate. The director 
is responsible for operations, personnel, and the budget of the CIA. 
Since the agency has no domestic police powers, when the CIA 
uncovers information on organized crime activities it sends the 
analytical information to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the 
Drug Enforcement Administration, and the Office of Foreign Assets 
Control. As the CIA has become increasingly involved in fighting 
terrorism and the accompanying organized crime activities that of-
ten fund it, it has played an important role providing analytical sup-
port to the Department of State on human trafficking and smuggling. 
In 2004, President George W. Bush signed legislation that restruc-
tured the CIA by abolishing the positions of director and deputy 
directors of central intelligence and merging them into the position 
of director of the Central Intelligence Agency. In addition the act 
inaugurated the new position of director of national intelligence, 
which is tasked with supervising the Intelligence Community and 
the Counterterrorism Center. 
 Centre for International Crime Prevention 
 Web site: http://www.uncjin.org/CICP/cicp.html 
 The Centre for International Crime Prevention (CICP) is an office 
in the United Nations dedicated toward crime prevention, criminal 
justice, and legal reform. It is especially active in countering trans-
national organized crime networks, corruption, and the illicit traf-
ficking of humans. The CICP is located within the United Nations 
Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention. It recognizes the 
impact of globalization on the internationalization of criminal syn-
dicates and emphasizes the international cooperation between law 
enforcement agencies and governments. It often collaborates with 
the United Nations Interregional Criminal Justice and Research In-
stitute in Rome and has played a prominent role in the develop-
ment of three proposals aimed at global crime: the  Global Programme 
against Corruption,  the  Global Programme against the Trafficking in Hu-
man Beings,  and a program called  Assessing Transnational Organized 
Crime Groups. Links to these programs are available on this site as 
well as the biennial World Organized Crime Report published by 
the United Nations. 

Governmental Organizations 231
 The Egmont Group 
 Web site: http://www.egmontgroup.org 
 The Egmont Group is an organization made up of Financial Intelli-
gence Units (FIU) representing about 85 countries around the world. 
FIUs have been created to collect and store information about sus-
picious financial transactions, money laundering activities, and ter-
rorist financing. The Egmont Group has a major goal of creating a 
global network dedicated to increasing international cooperation 
between FIUs. A number of countries in the Egmont Group, how-
ever, have been associated with lax money laundering policies. The 
Egmont Group homepage has links to all FIUs. 
 Home Office 
 Web site: http://www.homeoffice.gov.uk 
 Great Britain’s Home Office is one of the country  ’s largest govern-
ment departments. It is the lead government department for im-
migration and passports, drug policy, counterterrorism, and police. 
Home Office headquarters contains the Office for Security and 
Counter-Terrorism, the Crime and Policing Group, and other pro-
fessional services. Agencies germane to transnational crime include 
the UK Border Agency, the Identity and Passports Service, and the 
Criminal Records Bureau. In 2009, the Home Office, together with 
the Cabinet Office, published a new strategy for fighting organized 
crime in an effort to ensure that the government, law enforcement, 
business, and the public have the requisite knowledge and tools 
needed to reduce the harm of organized crime. No unit of the Home 
Office plays a larger role in this effort than the Serious Organized 
Crime Agency (SOCA). 
 Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission 
 Web site: http://www.cicad.oas.org 
 Established by the General Assembly of the Organization of Amer-
ican States (OAS) in 1986, the Inter-American Drug Abuse Control 
Commission (CICAD) assists member states in the construction 
of strong teams of qualified individuals to lead the region’s fight 
against the illegal drug trade. Each member government selects a 
high-ranking representative to the commission, which meets twice 

232 Directory of Organizations
each year. CICAD not only serves as a policy forum on all aspects 
of the drug problem but also promotes coordination and coopera-
tion among the 34 OAS member states through action programs 
directed at preventing and treating substance abuse, reducing the 
availability of illicit drugs, improving money laundering control 
laws, and developing alternate sources of income for growers of 
coca, poppy, and marijuana. In 2008, CICAD consolidated Central 
America’s first training and certification process, which included 
a structure curriculum for drug treatment counselors in an effort 
to provide better quality care to drug users and their families. This 
concept has been taken to heart by Central American states that 
support the establishment of a government-sponsored mechanism 
for training counselors. 
 International AntiCounterfeiting Coalition 
 Web site: http://www.iacc.org 
 The International AntiCounterfeiting Coalition (IACC) bills itself 
as the “world’s largest non-profit organization” dedicated to sup-
pressing counterfeiting and protecting intellectual property. Head-
quartered in Washington, D.C., the IACC was created in 1979. 
Today it is made up of a range of members representing businesses 
and industries that include among others the automotive, apparel, 
luxury goods, food and entertainment, and pharmaceutical indus-
tries. The annual revenues produced by its membership approaches 
$700 billion. The IACC offers anticounterfeiting programs intended 
to help protect patents, trademarks, copyrights, service marks, and 
trade secrets. The organization supports governmental and law 
enforcement actions directed at global counterfeiting operations. 
From a global organized crime perspective, the IACC firmly up-
holds the notion that global organized crime groups are deeply in-
volved in counterfeiting and piracy activities. 
 Office of Territorial and International Criminal 
Intelligence and Drug Enforcement 
 E-mail: interpolpago@usa.com 
 The Office of Territorial and International Criminal Intelligence and 
Drug Enforcement (OTICIDE) was created to fulfill the commit-
ments of the American Samoa Government to the South Pacific 

Governmental Organizations 233
Chiefs of Police Organization in the Pacific region, as well as their 
counterparts in the U.S. State Department. In recent year OTICIDE 
has become increasingly involved in countering drug-trafficking op-
erations and organized crime activities in the region. On March 12, 
2004, Samoa’s governor issued an executive order recognizing 
OTICIDE as the leading agency for investigating illegal drug and 
human trafficking. 
 Organization of American States (OAS 
Anti-Trafficking in Persons Section) 
 Web site: http://www.oas.org 
 The Organization of American States was chartered in 1948. It is 
composed of 35 countries in the Western Hemisphere. When it 
comes to transnational organized crime, the organization has been 
instrumental with varying degrees of success in creating strategies 
for fighting corruption, drug trafficking, and the trafficking in per-
sons. In 1986, it created the Inter-American Drug Abuse Control 
Commission (CICAD) as a policy forum to handle various aspects of 
the drug problem, weapons trafficking, and related issues. Its major 
goals are to strengthen existing drug laws, improve prevention 
programs, and making strides toward reducing the flow of illegal 
drugs and firearms. Brazil has been tasked with creating a high-
level working group to develop an effective antidrug strategy in the 
hemisphere in 2009. With the increase in human trafficking, the 
OAS created the Anti-Trafficking in Persons (TIP) Section in 2004. 
Its goal is to promote the exchange of information among country 
members, provide training, and implement broad antitrafficking 
policies that will suppress the trafficking in persons, especially chil-
dren, women, and adolescents on a transnational basis. 
 United States Customs and Border Patrol 
 Web site: http://www.cbp.gov 
 The U.S. Customs and Border Patrol (CBP) is an agency within the 
Department of Homeland Security. It was established in 1924 with 
a contingent of 450 officers. Initially its task was to police American 
borders with Canada and Mexico. During the 1980s and 1990s, a 
surge in illegal migration into the United States led to an increase 
in staff and introduction of new technologies such as infrared night 

234 Directory of Organizations
vision scopes, seismic sensors, and modern computer-processing 
equipment to help apprehend and process those caught crossing 
the borders illegally. After the terrorist attacks on September 11, 
2001 border security became a primary concern in Washington, 
leading to the reorganization of the agency within the new De-
partment of Homeland Security (DHS). 
 Today the CBP is tasked with policing almost 6,000 miles of 
Mexican and Canadian international land borders and more than 
2,000 miles of coastal waters adjoining the Florida peninsula and 
Puerto Rico. Preventing illegal immigration is still the primary task 
of the CBP, but the ongoing battle with international terrorists and 
the increase in drug trafficking along the Southwest border have 
added to the jobs of this group. More than a million people enter the 
United States through 327 different land, air, and seaports each day. 
 United States Department of Homeland Security 
 Web site: http://www.dhs.gov 
 The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) was created by Exec-
utive Order 13228 soon after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. 
The DHS was designed to oversee and coordinate a comprehensive 
national strategy to protect the United States from terrorists and 
to respond to future attacks. Eight years later, the DHS has 210,000 
employees and is the third largest department in the federal gov-
ernment. Since its inception its mandate has expanded to include 
various threats posed by organized crime groups and gangs on the 
nation’s borders. Today it is tasked with preventing and investi-
gating all illegal border activity, including the smuggling of people, 
drugs, cash, and weapons. The DHS has been particularly active 
on the southwest border, working to disrupt the drug, cash, and 
weapon smuggling that fuels cartel violence in Mexico and increas-
ingly on the American side of the border. Of the 22 component ag-
encies that make up DHS, seven are immigration-related, including 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), Customs and Bor-
der Patrol (CBP), and U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services 
(USCIS). Other related agencies include the U.S. Coast Guard, the 
Secret Service, the Transportation Security Administration (TSA), 
and Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The Office 
of Counternarcotics Enforcement (CNE) coordinates the depart-
ment  ’s multiagency efforts with other units and agencies. The Bor-
der Enforcement Security Taskforces (BEST) investigate cases that 
often involve disrupting cross-border smuggling activities. 

Governmental Organizations 235
 United States Department of Justice 
 Web site: http://www.usdoj.gov 
 The U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) is charged with enforcing the 
law and defending the interests of the United States. From an in-
ternational perspective, it is also expected to ensure public safety 
against foreign and domestic threats. Among its agencies most ger-
mane in the fight against international organized crime are the U.S. 
Marshals Service, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and the Drug 
Enforcement Administration. The creation of the Department of 
Homeland Security in 2001, however, saw the shifting of the Bu-
reau of Customs and Border Patrol and the Bureau of Immigration 
and Customs Enforcement from the DOJ to the new department. 
 United States Treasury Department (Financial 
Crimes Enforcement Network) 
 Web site: http://www.fincen.gov 
 The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) was cre-
ated within the U.S. Treasury Department in 1990. It is tasked with 
supporting federal, state, local, and international law enforcement 
by analyzing the information required under the 1970 Bank Secrecy 
Act (BSA), which is considered one of the country  ’s greatest tools 
against money laundering. The BSA records information on finan-
cial transactions that helps establish a paper trail for investigators. 
FinCEN assists foreign governments by providing training, tech-
nological advice, and policy guidelines in order to develop effec-
tive use of antimoney laundering and counterterrorism financing 
strategies worldwide. Today FinCEN employs 300 full-time em-
ployees, including federal agents, analysts, regulatory experts, and 
technology specialists. They are supplemented by almost 40 others 
representing 20 different law enforcement and regulatory agencies. 
The passage of the USA PATRIOT Act in 2001 expanded the focus 
of FinCEN to include more responsibilities in fighting terrorism 
and financing and money laundering, and in 2004 it became a lead 
office in the new Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence, 
responsible for fighting the financial war against terrorists and en-
forcing economic sanctions against rogue states. 
 World Customs Organization 
 Web site: http://www.wcoomd.org 
 The World Customs Organization (WCO) was established in 1952 
and was originally called the Customs Co-operation Council (CCC). 

236 Directory of Organizations
Its initial task as an independent intergovernmental body was to 
improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the world ’s customs ad-
ministrations. Today it is the only intergovernmental organization 
focused exclusively on customs matters. The WCO fights global 
organized crime by lobbying and crusading for new anticounter-
feiting and piracy initiatives. It currently represents 174 customs ad-
ministrations around the world who are collectively responsible for 
almost 98 percent of the world’s trade. 
 Law Enforcement Organizations 
 The Asian Gang Investigators ’ 
Association of California 
 Web site: http://www.agiaconline.org 
 The Asian Investigators’ Association of California (AGIAC) was 
established in 1989 as a nonprofit organization dedicated to net-
working between various law enforcement units investigating 
Asian crime and gangs in California. In recent years the organiza-
tion has expanded its mandate as more international members join. 
Membership, however, is limited only to law enforcement person-
nel. It continues to interact with its counterparts across the United 
States in developing and coordinating strategies that can be used 
against organized crime, Asian gangs, and terrorist groups. 
 Criminal Intelligence Service of Canada 
 Web site: http://www.cisc.gc.ca/ 
 The Criminal Intelligence Service of Canada (CISC) was created in 
1970 as part of a national strategy to fight organized crime. Based in 
Ottawa, it currently involves more than 380 agencies representing 
law enforcement at every level of government. It maintains and 
manages the Automated Criminal Intelligence Information System 
(ACIIS), which provides Canadian law enforcement with the lat-
est information and trends on organized crime. The CISC is gover-
ned by a National Executive Committee of 22 members from the law 
enforcement community and chaired by the Commissioner of the 
Royal Canadian Mounted Police. Among its best known reports 
are its  Annual Report on Organized Crime in Canada  and the  National 
Criminal Intelligence Estimate. 

Law Enforcement Organizations 237
 Direzione Investigativa Antimafia 
 Web site: http://www.interno.it 
 The Direzione Investigativa Antimafia (DIA) was created within 
the Italian Department of Public Safety in December 1991. The fol-
lowing year it began its first investigations targeting Sicily  ’s mafia 
crime families. Later in the decade, the DIA channeled its efforts to-
ward other organized crime groups on the mainland of Italy such 
as Sacra Corona Unita, ‘ Ndrangheta, and the Camorra, as well as 
other European syndicates. At the international level the DIA has 
established cooperative structures through multilateral projects 
with other international police forces. Operationally the DIA con-
ducts its activities within the Public Security Department of the Ital-
ian Ministry of Interior. The organization has a staff approaching 
1,500 individuals including investigators from the national secu-
rity forces. The minister of the interior is responsible for dissemi-
nating the activities of the DIA to the Italian parliament twice a year. 
Structurally the DIA is headed by a director selected in rotation 
from among senior officials of the Carbinieri Corps and the Guar-
dia di Finanza. Under him are two deputy directors. At the central 
level, the DIA is made up of a cabinet division and seven units sub-
divided into three branches (Preventive Investigations, Criminal 
Investigations Activities, and International Investigation Relations). 
The DIA plays a leading role in the fight against Mafia-related of-
fenses in Italy and abroad. More recently it has participated in the 
G-8 Expert Working Group against Eastern European organized 
crime alongside police forces from the United States, Germany, Rus-
sia, Canada, Great Britain, France, and Japan. 
 European Police Office (Europol) 
 Web site: http://www.europol.eu.int 
 The European Police Office, more commonly known as Europol, 
was established by the Maastricht Treaty on European Union in 
1992. Based on the Interpol model, its focus is on problems involv-
ing European transnational crime. Although it initially went after 
the illegal drug trade, in 1994 its mandate was expanded to include 
preventing trafficking in nuclear and radioactive substances, money 
laundering, immigrant smuggling and trafficking, and motor ve-
hicle theft. In July 1996, European member states ratified Europol 
with the main objective of improving cooperation between mem-
bers states in order to more effectively counter serious forms of 

238 Directory of Organizations
international crimes and terrorism. Similar to Interpol, its agents 
have no arrest powers, although they are permitted to participate 
in operations along with members of other police agencies. 
 International Association of Asian 
Crime Investigators 
 Web site: http://www.iaaci.com/ 
 The International Association of Asian Crime Investigators (IAACI) 
is a professional organization of law enforcement personnel respon-
sible for the investigation of Asian organized crime and gangs. The 
IAACI was formed in Falls Church, Virginia in 1987. Today the or-
ganization has expanded from a handful of Asian investigators to 
a larger circle of Asian crime specialists. It continues to sponsor train-
ing seminars and the publication of research through the  Center for 
Asian Crime Studies (CACS). 
 International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP) 
Organized Crime Committee 
 Web site: http://www.iacp.org 
 The International Chiefs of Police (IACP) was founded in 1893. Its 
initial goals were directed toward advancing the science of po-
lice services; developing and disseminating better administrative, 
technical, and operational practices and integrating these into 
everyday police work; and enhancing professional standards of 
performance and conduct. More important from an international 
standpoint was its attempts to foster police cooperation, especially 
the exchange of information. The IACP played an important role 
in spearheading a variety of professionally recognized programs 
in the United States and elsewhere. The FBI Identification Division 
and the Uniform Crime Records system can trace their origins back 
to the IACP. Over the past decades international policing has be-
come more relevant than in times past as a result of the increasing 
complexity of transnational crime, terrorism activities, cybercrime, 
and the international trafficking of humans, drugs, weapons, and 
other contraband. A major step was taken toward this end with the 
creation of the Organized Crime Committee (OCC) of the IACP. Its 
stated mission is to fight global organized crime by strengthening 
cooperation and coordination among law enforcement agencies 
around the world. To this end every attempt is being made to es-
tablish best practices relative toward this goal by bringing together 

Law Enforcement Organizations 239
members of the international law enforcement community to share 
innovative strategies and analyze the nexus between organized 
crime and other disciplines. To accomplish this, the OCC of the 
IACP has established closer bonds with Interpol and partnered with 
the International Organized Crime Policy Coordinating Committee 
(IOCPCC) to remain abreast of the latest organized crime threats. 
 International Criminal Police Organization 
 Web site: http://www.interpol.int 
 Better known as Interpol, the International Criminal Police Orga-
nization was founded in Vienna in 1923. It was disbanded in 1938 
and then resuscitated after World War II in 1946. It adopted Inter-
pol as its formal name only in 1956 and have since become syn-
onymous with international police cooperation. With more than 
185 members today, it is second only to the United Nations as an 
international organization. Its main job is facilitating the introduc-
tion, coordination, and cooperation between law enforcement from 
different nations and cultures. More recently its focus has been di-
rected toward fighting terrorism, organized crime, human traffick-
ing, drug trafficking, money laundering, corruption, financial, and 
high-tech crime. It reportedly also has the world largest interna-
tional criminal database. Today Interpol is active in various major 
projects targeting global organized crime. For example, Project Mil-
lennium focuses on Eurasian crime syndicates, Project AOC tar-
geting Asian criminal groups, Project Pink Panthers focuses on 
armed jewelry robberies by gang members from the former Yugo-
slavia, and Project Bada targets maritime piracy. 
 International Latino Gang Investigators Association 
 Web site: http://www.ilgia.org 
 The International Latino Gang Investigators Association (ILGIA) 
was created on January 1, 2002. This organization of law enforce-
ment personnel is dedicated to seeking information on the inter-
national drug trade linked to Latino gangs in the United States and 
Mexico. The ILGIA endeavors to inform policymakers on the need 
to confront the Mexican drug cartels and the associated gangs. The 
association hopes to assist federal, state, local, and tribal govern-
ments improve policies and resources to more efficiently gang-
related organized crime. Membership costs $25 per year and is only 
open to law enforcement and correctional officers. 

240 Directory of Organizations
 International Narcotic Enforcement 
Officers Association 
 Web site: http://www.ineoa.org 
 The International Narcotic Enforcement Officers Association 
(INEOA) was formally chartered as an association under the laws 
of New York in November 1960 as the International Narcotic En-
forcement Officers Association. It is a nonprofit membership asso-
ciation with membership from law enforcement agencies around 
the globe. Its stated mission is to promote and foster mutual coop-
eration, discussion, and interest in the problems of dug abuse and 
the global drug trade. INEOA publishes the  Narc Officer magazine. 
Among its valuable services it provides is assistance to families of 
law enforcement officers killed in the line of duty. It also recognizes 
officers who have distinguished themselves in drug enforcement 
operations during an annual awards ceremony. During its almost 
half-century history, the INEOA has provided training and educa-
tion to more than 15,000 individuals. Its mission is not just directed 
toward narcotics officers at every level of government and inter-
nationally, but has also been directed toward a number of person-
nel from the medical, scientific, and educational disciplines. The 
INEOA boasts a diverse membership that includes members from 
the FBI, DEA, ATF, U.S. Customs and Border Protection, every 
branch of the U.S. Armed Forces, and other agencies within the 
U.S. Department of Justice and the U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security, as well as many state agencies and international organi-
zations and agencies. 
 International Organization of Asian Crime 
Investigators and Specialists 
 Web site: http://www.ioacis.com 
 The International Association of Asian Crime Investigators and 
Specialists (IOACIS) is dedicated to providing a forum for inter-
national and American law enforcement personnel interested in 
strengthening global cooperation and coordination through teach-
ing, education, and training. It hosts an annual conference called the 
International Conference on Asian Organized Crime and Terrorism 
(ICAOCT), formerly known as the International Asian Organized 
Crime Conference. The IOACIS has broadened its mandate in the 
21st century by expanding its focus from mainly Asian gangs and 
organized crime to terrorism and other convergent issues. Mem-
bership costs $30 annually. 

Law Enforcement Organizations 241
 Serious Organised Crime Agency 
 Web site: http://www.soca.gov.uk 
 The Serious Organised Crime Agency (SOCA) was created on 
April 1, 2006 after the passage of the Serious Organised Crime and 
Police Act of 2005. Its creation merged the National Crime Squad, 
the National Criminal Intelligence Service, the National Hi-Tech 
Crime Unit, and investigators from the HM Revenue and Customs 
Service and the immigration service. It is Great Britain’s first non-
police law-enforcement agency. It has more investigative powers 
in England and Wales than in Northern Ireland and Scotland. Thus 
it often works in cooperation with the Northern Ireland Organized 
Crime Task Force and the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement 
Agency. The SOCA has sometimes been referred to as the “ British 
FBI ” by the media (but its tasks are closer to the U.S. Immigration 
and Customs Enforcement). The SOCA is tasked with investigat-
ing organized crime, including drug trafficking, money launder-
ing, fraud, global pedophilia networks, and human smuggling. It 
currently has more than 4,200 employees and a budget of more 
than 400 million pounds. The government, however, has been 
criticized for investing so much more on counter-terrorism—2.5 
billion pounds, leading critics to suggest the government does 
not take organized crime seriously. SOCA is led by a board con-
sisting of 11 members and is divided into four directorates. Strate-
gies are decided by the board, which has invested 40 percent of its 
efforts toward fighting the drug trade, 25 percent toward human 
trafficking and smuggling, 10 percent to fraud, 10 percent support-
ing other agencies and 15 percent on other forms of organized 
crime. 
 South Pacific Islands Criminal Intelligence Network 
 Web site: http://americansamoa.gov/departments/dhs/
spicin.htm 
 The South Pacific Islands Criminal Intelligence Network (SPICIN) 
was established in October 1987. A rise in crime in this region led 
its 17 police executives to sign a regional cooperation agreement in 
an effort to improve information sharing between the countries of 
this region. The stated mission of the SPICIN is to support the po-
lice forces of the South Pacific Chiefs of Police Conference (SPCPC) 
in gathering information and developing and disseminating crime-
related intelligence on a timely basis. In addition it was expected 
to help identify criminal organizations and facilitate successful 

242 Directory of Organizations
prosecutions by providing necessary intelligence to the SPICIN 
Control Center and then to law enforcement organizations in mem-
ber countries. 
 United States Drug Enforcement Administration 
 Web site: http://www.dea.gov 
 With the passage of an Executive Order in July 1973, President Rich-
ard Nixon created the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) 
with the intent of mounting “an all-out global war on the drug men-
ace.” It is tasked with enforcing all controlled substances laws and 
regulations and targeting organizations involved in the growing, 
manufacture, and distribution of controlled substances in the United 
States (or destined for here). In one of its most high-profile cases, 
DEA agent Enrique “ Kiki ” Camarena was tortured and murdered 
by Mexican drug kingpin Rafael Caro Quintero. This launched 
“Operation Leyenda” as the DEA launched a massive dragnet that 
resulted in nearly two dozen indictments including three drug 
lords now serving life sentences in the United States for the crime. 
Today it has 19 field offices across the United States and 87 foreign 
offices in 63 countries. Its staff had grown from 1,470 at its incep-
tion to more than 5,000 today. Its expanded responsibilities have 
led the DEA into investigations involving money laundering, ter-
rorism, and other crimes. From a global perspective, the DEA is the 
U.S. liaison to the United Nations, Interpol, and other interna-
tional antidrug trafficking efforts. 
 United States Federal Bureau of Investigation 
(Organized Crime Section) 
 Web site: http://www.fbi.gov/hq/cid/orgcrime/ocshome.htm 
 The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) was created on July 26, 
1908 as the Bureau of Investigation (BOI). It grew gradually over its 
first decades. World War I, the Russian Revolution, and the Mann 
Act of 1910 (targeting sex trafficking) saw the expansion of the bu-
reau’s role in federal law enforcement. Concerns about rising crime 
during the 1930s led the U.S. Congress to enact a wave of legisla-
tion that vastly increased the power of the FBI. The official FBI stance 
on organized crime before 1957, however, was that it was mostly a 
local police problem committed by local gangsters and decentral-
ized hoodlums and was not the FBI’s responsibility. The discovery 

Law Enforcement Organizations 243
of the Apalachin meeting in upstate New York by New York state 
troopers and the high level of publicity accorded the high-level 
meeting of national Mafia figures forced J. Edgar Hoover to com-
mit more resources to fighting organized crime. In one of its most 
lengthy global organized crime investigations, dubbed the “ Pizza 
Connection ” in 1984, the FBI documented the international connec-
tions between Italian American and Sicilian crime syndicates that 
were using pizza parlors as fronts for laundering heroin money. To-
day the FBI’s Organized Crime Section is divided into three units 
focused on La Cosa Nostra, Italian organized crime, and racketeer-
ing; Eurasian/Middle Eastern organized crime; and Asian and 
African criminal syndicates. Each of the agency  ’s 56 field offices in-
vestigates organized crime in its own territory. The FBI also partic-
ipates in joint task forces in conjunction with other federal, state, 
and local law enforcement agencies. In 2005, the FBI had 651 pend-
ing investigations related to labor racketeering and Italian orga-
nized crime, with another 468 cases related to Asian and African 
criminal organizations. After opening its first international office in 
Moscow, FBI agents frequently work together with their counter-
parts in Italy, Hungary, and other countries. 
 United States Marshals Service 
 Web site: http://www.usmarshals.gov 
 Founded in 1789, the U.S. Marshals Service is America’s oldest 
federal law enforcement agency. It is considered the enforcement 
wing of the federal courts and is therefore involved in every fed-
eral law enforcement initiative. Domestically, it is charged with 
apprehending federal fugitives, protecting the federal judiciary, op-
erating the Witness Security Program, transporting federal prison-
ers, and seizing property acquired by criminals during their illegal 
activities. Today the purview of the U.S. Marshals has been ex-
panded by the Department of Justice to include being responsi-
ble for the apprehension of fugitives from foreign countries and 
thought to be hiding in the United States. In addition the marshals 
are responsible for tracking and extraditing fugitives who are cap-
tured in foreign countries and wanted for prosecution in the United 
States. In essence U.S. Marshals have a statutory responsibility for 
all international, federal, and state extraditions. They often network 
with their counterparts in other countries. In 2003, the U.S. Mar-
shals Service opened field offices in Mexico City, Mexico, Kings-
ton, Jamaica, and Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic and have 

244 Directory of Organizations
also established liaison programs on the borders of Canada and 
Mexico. In 1995, the Marshals and the Bureau of Immigration and 
Customs Service merged their air fleets to form the Justice Prisoner 
and Alien Transportation System (JPATS). It is considered an effec-
tive system for transporting prisoners and criminal aliens and is 
now one of the largest transporters of prisoners in the world. In 2008, 
the marshals coordinated more than 850 extraditions and deporta-
tions involving 60 countries. 
 Nongovernmental Organizations 
 Amnesty International 
 Web site: http://www.amnesty.org 
 Amnesty International was founded in 1961 by British lawyer Peter 
Berenson. During its early years it focused on the rights of political 
prisoners and other human rights issues. Over the following de-
cades this international nongovernmental organization expanded 
its mission to concentrate on all categories of human rights viola-
tions. It was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for its efforts in 1977. 
Currently there are more than 7,500 Amnesty International groups 
with almost 1 million members operating in 162 countries and ter-
ritories. More recently it has become embroiled in the fight against 
the unregulated global arms trade. Together with Oxfam and the 
International Action Network on Small Arms (IANSA), Amnesty 
International set up the Control Arms campaign, which calls for an 
international and legally binding Arms Trade Treaty. In 2006, the 
UN General Assembly saw 152 governments vote for a resolution 
that would start the process toward a global Arms Trade Treaty. 
 Anti-Slavery International 
 Web site: http://www.antislavery.org 
 Created in 1839, this organization is the world’s oldest interna-
tional human rights organization. It also claims to be the only char-
ity in the United Kingdom working exclusively against slavery and 
slavery-related crimes. Although headquartered in London, Anti-
Slavery International works through local partnerships around the 
world in countries in Africa, South and East Asia, Latin America, 
Europe, and the Gulf region. Since it does not have any overseas of-
fices, it seeks to work together with local organizations at the grass-

Nongovernmental Organizations 245
roots level. The organization issues a newsletter called the  Reporter 
 four times a year. 
 Coalition against Trafficking in Women 
 Web site: http://www.catwinternational.org 
 The Coalition against Trafficking in Women (CATW) was founded 
in 1988 and is considered the first nongovernmental organization 
to focus on human trafficking. Its goal is to promote women’s rights 
by working on a global stage to end sexual exploitation, and espe-
cially the sex trafficking of women and girls. The CATW is made up 
of a coalition of regional networks and affiliated groups and individ-
uals that endeavor to bring international attention to all forms of 
sexual exploitation including prostitution, pornography, sex tour-
ism, and the selling of mail-order brides. CATW members testify 
before national congresses, parliaments, law reform commissions, 
regional and United Nations committees and commission and of-
ten serve as consultants to various governmental commissions seek-
ing to draft new legislation on sex trafficking. 
 The Council of Europe 
 Web site: http://www.coe.int 
 The Council of Europe is made up of representatives of 47 Euro-
pean countries (virtually every European country). It is headquar-
tered in Strasbourg (France). It was established on May 5, 1949 
by an original nucleus of 10 countries. Its stated purpose is to de-
velop throughout Europe common and democratic principles based 
on the European Convention on Human Rights and related docu-
ments on the protection of individuals and human rights. It is on 
behalf of these goals that the countries of the European Council co-
operate to find shared solutions to major issues such as terrorism, 
organized crime and corruption, cybercrime, and the trafficking in 
human beings. 
 Global Alliance against Traffic in Women 
 Web site: http://www.gaatw.org 
 Created in Chiang Mai, Thailand in 1994, the Global Alliance against 
Traffic in Women (GAATW), coordinates, organizes, and facilitates 
strategies related to suppressing the trafficking of women and im-
proving conditions for the labor migration of women throughout 

246 Directory of Organizations
the world. A nongovernmental human rights organization, it con-
tinues to campaign for the inclusion of legal protection of the hu-
man rights of trafficking victims. Comprising an alliance of 100 
nongovernmental organizations around the globe, its International 
Secretariat is now based in Bangkok, where it coordinates its activi-
ties and collects and disseminates information. The GAATW also 
has a special consultative status on the Economic and Social Coun-
cil (ECOSOC) of the United Nations. 
 International Organization for Migration 
(Counter-Trafficking Service) 
 Web site: http://www.iom.int 
 The International Organization for Migration (IOM) was estab-
lished in 1951 and is considered one of the leading intergovern-
mental organizations in the arena of migration. It has 127 member 
states with 17 others holding observer status and offices in more 
than 100 countries. Its focus remains on promoting international 
migration law and protecting migrants’ rights, migration health, 
and the gender dimension of migration. Among its current concerns 
are the rise in fraudulent offers of migration assistance from hu-
man smugglers and the rise in forced labor. 
 Investigative Roundtable 
on Organized Crime 
 La Strada International European Network 
against Trafficking in Human Beings 
 Web site: http://lastradainternational.org/?main=home 
 La Strada International is an association of nine independent hu-
man rights nongovernmental organizations. The countries making 
up this network are Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, the 
Czech Republic, Macedonia, Moldova, the Netherlands, Poland, 
and Ukraine. Its goal is to prevent human trafficking (as defined in 
Art.3 (a) of the UN Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Traf-
ficking in persons), with particular focus on women in Central and 
Eastern Europe. Among its stated goals is to improve the position 
of women as well as their universal rights, which includes the 

Investigative Roundtable on Organized Crime  247
freedom to choose to immigrate to other countries and to protect 
them from violence and abuse. According to La Strada most of the 
trafficked individuals who it has helped over the past decade are 
young women 18 to 30 years old who were trafficked into the sex 
trade. The organization runs hotlines, often 24/7. Consultants are 
available to provide information on destination countries, safety 
tips, and information about legislation in these countries. Several 
offices provide consultations for potential migrants. 
 Transparency International 
 Web site: http://www.transparency-usa.org/ 
 Founded in 1993, Transparency International (TI) is a global society 
devoted to fighting corruption and helping its victims. Its global 
network is made up of more than 90 locally established national 
chapters (and chapters-in-formation). Together these bodies fight 
international corruption by bringing together representatives from 
government, the media, civil society, and business in an effort to pro-
mote transparency in elections, business, procurement, and pub-
lic administration. IT also uses this network to lobby governments 
to introduce anticorruption campaigns. It is not involved in under-
taking investigations of alleged corruption or exposing individual 
cases, but it will work with organizations that will. 
 United Nations Interregional Crime 
and Justice Research Institute 
 Web site: http://www.unicrit.it 
 The United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research In-
stitute (UNICRI) was established in 1968. It is located on the United 
Nations campus in Turin, Italy. Its stated mission is to help inter-
governmental, governmental, and nongovernmental organizations 
in developing and putting into practice new and improved policies 
related to crime prevention and criminal justice. Its work is orga-
nized into four areas. The one related to global organized crime is 
called “ Emerging Crimes and Anti-Human Trafficking,” which is 
dedicated to suppressing the trafficking of humans for commercial 
and sexual exploitation. It has also become more involved in de-
signing antiorganized crime programs involving money launder-
ing, counterfeiting, environmental crime, illegal trade in cultural 
artifacts, and cybercrime. The institute recently produced a report 

248 Directory of Organizations
culled from data from governments and international organiza-
tions that offers recommendations for countering the growing 
problem of counterfeiting. The UNICRI carries out its projects in 
Africa, Southeast Asia, Central America, Eastern Europe, and the 
Balkans. 
 United Nations (United Nations 
Office on Drugs and Crime) 
 Web site: http://www.unodc.org 
 The United Nations officially came into existence on October 24, 
1945. Since then it has become a global leader in the struggle against 
international organized crime. In 1997, it established the United Na-
tions Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), which is now among 
the most prominent organizations combating international crime 
and the illicit drug trade. It was created through a merger of the 
United Nations Drug Control Program and the Centre for Interna-
tional Crime Prevention. The UNODC is active in every region of 
the world offering an extensive network of field offices. Ninety per-
cent of its budget is funded by voluntary contributions, mostly 
from governments around the globe. The UNDOC mandate in-
cludes assisting member states in the fight against illegal drugs, 
crime, and terrorism. More recently the ratification of the Millen-
nium Declaration asserted the resolution of member states to put 
more efforts into the struggle against global organized crime ac-
tivity and to concerted actions against international terrorism. The 
UNODC work program requires field-based technical cooperation 
among member states to enhance their abilities to counteract global 
crime syndicates and terrorist activities. Among the UNODC ’s var-
ious counter-drug trafficking efforts are the Illicit Crop Monitoring 
Program (ICMP), the Alternative Development Program (ICMP), 
and the Global Program against Money Laundering (GPML). It has 
also created the Global Program against Trafficking in Human Be-
ings (GPAT) in its ongoing effort to counter human trafficking net-
works around the world. 

249
 8 
 Resources 
 Print Resources 
 African Organized Crime 
 Periodicals and Publications 
 United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. 2005.  Transnational 
Organized Crime in the West African Region.  New York: United 
Nations. 38 pages. 
 This United Nations report examines the development of trans-
national organized crime in five West African countries: Cote de 
Ivoire, Ghana, Nigeria, Senegal, and Sierra Leone. It highlights the 
numerous challenges facing the countries as well as the variety 
of operational structures used by organized crime groups, which 
range from very loose to networked structures. The report concludes 
that one must first take into account the historical development of 
organized crime and the socioeconomic and political factors that 
have made this region so vulnerable. Particular attention is paid 
to crimes such as oil bunkering, arms and drug trafficking, human 
trafficking, money laundering, cigarette smuggling, advance fee 
and Internet fraud, and diamond smuggling. Associations are also 
made with the looming terrorism threat in this region. 
 Asian Organized Crime 
 Books 
 Booth, Martin. 2001.  The Dragon Syndicates: The Global Phenom-
enon of the Triads. New York: Carroll and Graff. 368 pages 

250 Resources
 This book examines the history of the Chinese Triads, or Dragon 
Syndicates. Booth demonstrates how these gangs have infiltrated 
legitimate business in Hong Kong and other parts of Asia. Fur-
thermore, he draws a number of interesting parallels between the 
Triads and the Italian American crime syndicates, particularly 
dictates about maintaining secrecy and the importance placed on 
maintaining respect at all costs. 
 Hill, Peter B. E. 2006.  The Japanese Mafia: Yakuza, Law, and the 
State. New York: Oxford University Press. 336 pages. 
 Hill’s book is essential reading for anyone wanting to understand 
the intersection of the Yakuza, law and politics in Japan since the 
end of the Cold War. Especially instructive is his examination of 
the conditions of post-World War II Japan that led to development 
of “mafia-style” gangs. According to Hill this can be traced in part 
to an economy in shambles, a weak police force, and the availabil-
ity of large number of unemployed and homeless former soldiers, 
and the emergence of a black market run by neighborhood strong-
men. This book examines the decline of Yakuza membership in the 
1960s and the emergence of larger Yakuza groups that subsumed 
smaller and less powerful ones. He follows their activities in the 
1970s as a national crackdown on gambling leads the Yakuza into 
the more profitable amphetamine trade. Finally, the author delves 
into the impact of various countermeasures by the government in 
the 1990s, as well as the economic downturn that has adversely 
affected Yakuza influence and power in the early 21st century. 
 Lintner, Bertil. 2003.  Blood Brothers: The Criminal Underworld 
of Asia . New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 480 pages. 
 Lintner’s two decades of reporting from Asia have given him vast 
insight into the world of Asian organized crime. The book grace-
fully chronicles the various criminal fraternities of the Far East, and 
the author’s research skills have revealed an exhaustive amount of 
data on large-scale organized crime in the region. He discusses all 
of the familiar rackets such as drugs, prostitution, gambling, extor-
tion, kidnapping, piracy, and so forth. More important, he discusses 
the expansion of Asian crime syndicates into Australia and North 
America. The Yakuza and various Triads such as the Green Gang 
are among the various gangs covered. 

Print Resources 251
 Morgan, W. P. 1960.  Triad Societies in Hong Kong . Hong Kong: 
Government Press. 306 pages. 
 Although written in 1960, this book by Hong Kong police inspector 
W. P. Morgan was considered the standard work on the subject for 
decades. Morgan’s intent was to illustrate the growth (and deterio-
ration) of the Hong Kong Triads in the 1950s. The book contains a 
rare account of the early elaborate Triad rituals compiled from his 
own experiences, as well as various interviews with Triad members 
in prison. The book is divided into a 60-page history of the Triads 
and almost 200 pages on the Triad societies, secret signs, and cer-
emonies. At the end of the book are appendices on the principal 
Hong Kong Triads between 1946 and 1958 and an Anglo-Chinese 
glossary. 
 Scholarly Journals 
 Asian Journal of Criminology 
 Social Science Research Centre, University of Hong Kong 
 Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong 
 Web site: http://www.ssrc.hku.hk 
 This journal is peer reviewed and is published 12 times a year. 
It promotes comparative studies about crime, crime prevention, 
and criminal justice in Asia. Articles are often multidisciplinary in 
scope, including those based on quantitative, qualitative, histori-
cal, and comparative methodologies. It encourages manuscripts 
from a broad range of disciplines. More recently it devoted two 
issues (Dec. 2007 and June 2008) to organized crime in Asia. 
 Asia Pacific Journal of Police & Criminal Justice 
 Appalachian State University 
 P.O. Box 32107 
 Boone, North Carolina 26808-2107 
 Web site: http://www.aaps.or.kr 
 Formerly known as  Asian Policing,  the  Asia Pacific Journal of Po-
lice and Criminal Justice  is a peer-reviewed journal published twice a 
year by the Asian Association of Police Studies. The regional focus 
of the journal is on the Asia-Pacific region, and most articles are 
related to criminal justice issues among the countries of Asia, North 
America, South America, and Oceania. 

252 Resources
 Canadian Organized Crime 
 Books 
 Schneider, Stephen. 2009.  Iced: The Story of Organized Crime in 
Canada. Toronto, Ontario: John Wiley and Sons. 608 pages. 
 This book chronicles 400 years of organized crime in Canada. It is 
far ranging, covering Atlantic coast pirates, prohibition bootleggers, 
and international organized crime groups such as Chinese triads, 
Colombian “cocaine cowboys,” the Italian mafia, outlaw motorcy-
cle gangs, and others. The book also examines the often overlooked 
fact that Canada has long served as an important transit point for 
international smuggling syndicates. 
 Reference Books 
 Edwards, Peter, and Michael Auger. 2004.  The Encyclopedia of 
Canadian Organized Crime: From Captain Kidd to Mom Boucher. 
McClelland and Stewart. 280 pages. 
 This encyclopedia on Canadian organized crime was written by 
two veteran crime reporters. It contains 300 entries arranged al-
phabetically and accompanied by more than 150 illustrations. Al-
though the authors never define organized crime and many of the 
entries are clearly not related to organized crime, there is enough 
to edify those interested in learning about the impact of global 
crime groups on Canada, including such topics as early sea pi-
racy, the Sicilian Mafia and the Calabrian ‘Ndrangheta, American 
and Colombian drug syndicates, Russian mobsters, and the emer-
gence of powerful outlaw motorcycle gangs. 
 Periodicals and Publications 
 Drug Enforcement Administration, the Federal Bureau of In-
vestigation and the Royal Mounted Police. 2006 . Canada/U.S. 
Organized Crime Threat Assessment. 16 pages. 
 This joint Canadian-American report examines transnational or-
ganized crime between these two countries. It looks at legal and il-
legal immigration, drug and contraband smuggling, and financial 
crimes. What seems most daunting to the authorities is the sheer 
challenge of policing such a large border between the countries, 
let alone coastal areas. The report found that both countries are 
plagued by Albanian, African, Russian, Italian, Latin American, and 
Asian organized crime syndicates. 

Print Resources 253
 European Organized Crime 
 Books 
 Fijnaut, Cyrille, and Letizia Paoli, eds. 2004.  Organised Crime in 
Europe: Concepts, Patterns and Control Policies in the European 
Union and Beyond.  Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer. 1,074 
pages. 
 This volume is one of the first attempts to compare systemati-
cally organized crime concepts, as well as concrete historical and 
contemporary patterns and control polices in 13 European coun-
tries. These include the original seven European Union states of 
Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, and the 
United Kingdom, as well as new members, the Czech Republic and 
Poland, and the countries of Albania, Russia, and Switzerland, 
which had yet to join by 2004. Experts from a variety of legal and 
social disciplines offer detailed country reports in each chapter. 
 Van Duyne, Petrus C., Almir Maljevic, Maarten van Dijck, 
Klaus von Lampe, and Jackie Harvey, eds. 2006.  Crime Business 
and Crime Money in Europe: The Dirty Linen of Illicit Enterprise . 
Nijmegan, Netherlands: Wolf Legal Publishers. 267 pages. 
 This book is based on the presentations of leading international 
organized (economic) crime scholars at the eighth Cross-Border 
Crime Colloquium conducted in May 2006. Among the topics 
covered in the 12 chapters are cigarette black markets in Estonia 
and the Netherlands, corruption in the Ukraine, human traffick-
ing, money laundering, and recent criminal law initiatives by the 
European Union (EU) in the wake of 9/11, including the third EU 
money laundering directive. 
 Van Duyne, Petrus C., Jackie Harvey, Almir Maljevic, Miroslav 
Scheinost, and Klaus von Lampe, eds. 2008.  European Crime-
Markets at Crossroads: Extended and Extending Criminal Europe. 
Nijmegan, Netherlands: Wolf Legal Publishers. 290 pages. 
 This book contains a number of articles delivered at the ninth Cross-
Border Crime Colloquium in October 2007. Among those related to 
organized crime are several on human trafficking in Great Britain 
and Ukraine. Others papers examine Slovene and Serbian offend-
ers as “organized criminals,” police corruption in Bosnia and Her-
zegovina, cigarette smuggling in Greece, value-added tax (VAT) 
fraud in the European Union, and various aspects of money laun-
dering in the region. 

254 Resources
 Van Duyne, Petrus C., Klaus von Lampe, Maarten van Dijck, 
and James L. Newell, eds. 2005.  The Organised Crime Economy: 
Managing Crime Markets in Europe . Nijmegan, Netherlands: 
Wolf Legal Publishers. 290 pages. 
 This edited volume of papers from the 2004 Cross Border Crime 
Colloquium includes articles on the ecstasy industry in the Nether-
lands in a global perspective; Norwegian organized crime; cigarette 
smuggling in Germany; economic crime in the Czech Republic, 
Russia, and the Baltic States; money laundering; cross border crime 
in Estonia; as well as drug trafficking in Bulgaria and women traf-
ficking in Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
 Periodicals and Publications 
 Council of Europe. 2005, December.  Organised Crime Situation 
Report 2005: Focus on the Threat of Economic Crime. Strasbourg: 
Department of Crime Problems. 134 pages. 
 This document was produced after the meeting of European heads 
of states and governments at the 3rd Summit of the Council of Eu-
rope in Warsaw, Poland. It is a major assessment of Europe’s over-
all organized crime problem and aims to address new threats and 
major issues of concern and to help form anticrime policies. It is 
richly documented, with an emphasis on the threat of economic 
crime. Its first section examines the concept of organized crime 
and the purpose of the report. The second part chronicles various 
trafficking issues, cybercrime, money laundering, and various or-
ganized crime networks and groups. The third section offers case 
studies based in Western and Eastern Europe. 
 Europol. 2007, June.  The Organised Crime Threat Assessment 
(OCTA). The Hague: Europol. 28 pages. 
 Although the report’s main focus is Europe, it also examines nonin-
digenous international organized crime groups in the region. This 
report marked a new proactive approach to fighting crime. The 
OCTA, which was first endorsed in 2006, replaced the Organised 
Crime Report (OCR) because of the need for a more future-oriented 
assessment of organized crime in Europe by highlighting strategic 
priorities in different regions in Europe. 
 Surtees, Rebecca. 2008. “Traffickers and Trafficking in South-
ern and Eastern Europe: Considering the Other Side of Human 
Trafficking.”  European Journal of Criminology 5 (1): 39–68. 

Print Resources 255
 This article examines human trafficking patterns from and within 
Southeastern Europe. Most research has been directed at victims of 
trafficking, but this article makes a valuable contribution by investi-
gating the traffickers and their operations. In her effort to develop a 
profile of the typical trafficker in the region, Surtees finds them to be 
much more diverse than portrayed in the media. Unlike in South-
east Asia, where most trafficking is informally conducted through 
personal connections, in Southeastern Europe it is conducted by 
organized criminal syndicates. Especially valuable is information 
on methods traffickers use to recruit victims, relationships between 
the trafficker and the victim, and how they move victims across 
borders. Surtees reveals how transportation routes have changed in 
recent years, how travel arrangements are made, and in what type 
of configurations victims are moved (individually and groups). The 
treatment of victims and the behaviors of traffickers vary according 
to what is necessary to control victims. The article also examines 
the different types of sex trafficking, living and working conditions, 
payment and salary, and the control and use of abuse and violence. 
Finally, Surtees asserts that this type of research can help determine 
more effective methods of suppressing these activities through the 
criminal justice system. 
 Globalization and Organized Crime 
 Books 
 Chanda, Nayan. 2007.  Bound Together: How Traders, Preachers, 
Adventurers, and Warriors Shaped Globalization.  New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press. 391 pages. 
 Chanda traces the roots of globalization to a process of intercon-
nectedness and interdependence that began centuries ago. Espe-
cially illuminating is his accounts of how the British established 
the “first” global drug trade, when, in the 1840s, it went to war with 
China over the right to enforce the opium trade there. One of 
Chanda’s most important assertions is that modern globalization 
has had the negative consequence of decreasing the ability of many 
national governments to prevent transnational crime and terrorism 
from flourishing in their countries. 
 Galeotti, Mark. 2005.  Global Crime Today: The Changing Face of 
Organised Crime. London: Routledge. 166 pages. 

256 Resources
 This book offers 10 essays by various scholars on the modern mani-
festations of global organized crime. Chapters are devoted to the 
globalization of organized crime in North America, Latin America 
and the Caribbean, and East Central Europe, as well as the North 
Korean drug trade, the terrorism-organized crime nexus, the global 
dimension of cybercrime, and the changing nature of the Japanese 
Yakuza and Chinese organized crime. 
 Glenny, Misha. 2008.  McMafia: A Journey Through the Global 
Criminal Underworld. New York: Knopf. 375 pages. 
 Investigative journalist Misha Glenny takes the reader through the 
global underworld in the wake of the fall of the Soviet Union. Ac-
cording to the author, organized crime should be regarded as one 
of the fundamental political narratives of the modern era. To get to 
the root of the matter, he traveled widely, interviewing police, crime 
victims, officials, and crime syndicate members from Eastern Eu-
rope, North and South America, Africa, the Middle East, China, 
Japan, and India. What he makes clear is that the world’s organized 
crime groups have reaped the benefits of globalization, taking ad-
vantage of new technologies and the widespread poverty that still 
impacts much of the world. 
 Hagedorn, John M. 2008.  A World of Gangs: Armed Young Men 
and Gangsta Culture . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press. 198 pages. 
 Written by a respected scholar on the international range of youth 
gangs, the book focuses on the conditions that create gangs in cit-
ies ranging from Chicago to Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, and Capetown, 
South Africa. Hagedorn observes how globalization has contrib-
uted to the development of urban gangs in societies throughout 
the world. He has found that a number of these gangs now play an 
important role in a variety of criminal activities ranging from drug 
trafficking and extortion to religious and political violence. 
 Madsen, Frank. 2009.  Transnational Organized Crime.  London: 
Routledge. 144 pages. 
 This book examines key issues related to organized crime includ-
ing the war on drugs, antimoney laundering strategies, the rela-
tionship between terrorism and organized crime, the development 
of cyber-related crime, and international responses to transnational 
organized crime. The author brings a wealth of experience from 
his role as a police officer with Interpol and with the Danish police. 

Print Resources 257
This book will be of interest to anyone looking for an introduction 
to the current crime problems related to globalization. 
 Naim, Moises. 2005 edition.  Illicit: How Smugglers, Traffickers, 
and Copycats are Hijacking the Global Economy.  New York: An-
chor Books edition. 340 pages. 
 Moises Naim was among the first observers to identify the real 
consequences of transnational crime in the globalized world. This 
thought-provoking book demonstrates how small and illicit players 
are using the tools of globalization to weaken nations and econo-
mies around the world. Naim illuminates the underside of global-
ization, revealing the struggle between traffickers and the restricted 
bureaucracies trying to control them. Chapters focus on illegal mi-
grants, drugs, weapons, counterfeit goods, and money laundering 
and on the black markets used by terrorists and new businesses. 
 Nicaso, Antonio, and Lee Lamothe. 2005.  Angels, Mobsters & 
Narco-Terrorists: The Rising Menace of Global Crime Empires . 
Toronto, Ontario: John Wiley and Sons Canada. 292 pages. 
 Nicaso and Lamothe examine the changing tactics and strategies 
of global organized crime groups. They investigate a wide range of 
groups and activities ranging from outlaw motorcycle gangs to 
narcoterrorists. They find that criminal syndicates are expanding 
their activities worldwide and are cooperating with each other 
more than ever, citing such groups as the Italian Mafia and Chinese 
Triads, Albanian gangs, and Russian and Mexican trafficking net-
works. Finally, the authors delve into the world of investigators 
and crime victims. 
 Reichel, Philip, ed. 2005.  Handbook of Transnational Crime and 
Justice. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 512 pages. 
 This book offers a variety of perspectives providing global cover-
age of the increasingly transnational nature of crime and the at-
tempts to provide cooperative cross-national responses. Besides 
a comprehensive introduction to the topic of transnational crime, 
the book it provides chapters specifically focused on related issues 
including international terrorism, drug trafficking, and money 
laundering to illustrate the expansion of global organized crime 
activity. 
 Siegel, Dina, and Hans Nelen, eds. 2007.  Organized Crime: Cul-
ture, Markets and Policies.  Dordrecht, Netherlands:  Springer. 
230 pages. 

258 Resources
 This book offers 15 essays on various aspects of organized crime 
including drugs, diamonds, human trafficking, ecocrime, conflict 
resolution, and underground banking. The general consensus of 
the distinguished scholars represented in this book is that there is 
a dire need for more empirically funded research on specific situa-
tional contexts instead of merely concentrating on why organized 
crime develops throughout the world. Studies were conducted on 
Sicily, the Sinai, the United States, Quebec, Amsterdam, Antwerp, 
Sub-Saharan Africa, and Asia. What is most notable is the inter-
disciplinary nature of the research that includes sociology, history, 
criminology, political science, and anthropology. 
 Thachuk, Kimberly L., ed. 2007.  Transnational Threats: Smug-
gling and Trafficking in Arms, Drugs, and Human Life. Westport, 
CT: Praeger. 256 pages. 
 This book of essays focuses on the unforeseen aspects of globaliza-
tion. The essays document the challenges to law enforcement and 
unstable countries and regions by transnational criminal activity, 
featuring articles on the interconnectedness between terrorists and 
organized crime groups, narcotrafficking, human trafficking, and 
the illegal weapons trade. Some chapters focus on specific coun-
tries, regions, and international and security issues. Contributors 
represent a wide range of organizations from the FBI and the CIA to 
the Rand Corporation and the Congressional Research Service. 
 Williams, Phil, and Dimitri Vlassis, eds. 2001.  Combating Trans-
national Crime: Concepts, Activities and Responses . London: 
Frank Cass. 272 pages. 
 This book is divided into three sections containing 20 articles by 
some of the leading academics on transnational organized crime. 
The first section examines conceptual issues and features seven 
chapters on issues such as emerging trends in Chinese transnational 
organized crime and organized crime and ethnic minorities. The 
second part focuses on criminal activities and markets and is made 
up of four chapters featuring weapons trafficking, sex trafficking, 
cybercrime, and maritime fraud and piracy. The final section con-
tains nine articles focused on responses to transnational organized 
crime. Particularly useful is a section at the end containing all of the 
article abstracts. 

Print Resources 259
 Periodicals and Publications 
 United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. 2002, September. 
 Global Programme against Transnational Organized Crime: Re-
sults of a Pilot Survey of Forty Selected Organized Criminal Groups 
in Sixteen Countries. New York: United Nations. 
 This project report assesses transnational organized crime based 
on the results of a pilot survey of 40 selected organized criminal 
groups in 16 countries undertaken by the United Nations center 
for international crime prevention is presented. The objective of the 
report was to collect and present data on different criminal groups 
spread globally, as well as to develop a method by which it can be 
analyzed and monitored to help policymakers and law enforcement 
officials working on the phenomenon of organized crime groups 
around the world. 
 Italian Organized Crime 
 Books 
 Arlacchi, Pino. 1993.  Men of Dishonor: Inside the Sicilian Mafia . 
New York: William Morrow. 285 pages. 
 Mafia expert Pino Arlacchi collaborated with former Sicilian crime 
boss Don Antonino Calderone on his autobiography to give the 
reader a rare first-hand glimpse into the hierarchy of a Sicilian 
crime family. Among his revelations was a detailed description of 
the Mafia initiation ceremonies. After his testimony in the 1980s, 
academics revisited the previously discredited testimony of Ameri-
can mafia turncoat Joseph Valachi and found a remarkable amount 
of substantiation of some of his testimony. Calderone had run the 
Catania “family” from the 1960s to the 1980s before his arrest and 
imprisonment. During this time he decided to cooperate with the 
authorities. His testimony led to the arrest of more than 200 in-
dividuals. Calderone then moved out of Italy under an assumed 
identity. 
 Behan, Tom. 1996.  The Camorra . London: Routledge. 225 pages. 
 Behan chronicles the emergence of the Camorra as an international 
force in international organized crime by the 1990s. He traces its 
roots to the 19th century and chronicles how it expanded from a 
group of small-time cigarette smugglers in the 1960s into the 

260 Resources
savvy entrepreneurs of the 1990s. This book supplements the cur-
rent research on the Camorra as exemplified by Saviano’s  Gomor-
rah  (reviewed later). Especially informative is Behan’s coverage 
of the organization’s relationships with the region’s politicians in 
the 1970s that allowed the Camorra to become more powerful, ex-
panding its protection rackets, investing in the drug business, and 
laundering the proceeds in the construction business after the de-
structive 1980 earthquake. 
 Dickie, John. 2004.  Cosa Nostra: A History of the Sicilian Mafia . 
London: Palgrave Macmillan. 400 pages. 
 This book is among the best and most readable accounts of the 
history of the Sicilian Mafia. With access to a vast amount of new 
research and information, Dickie has written a compelling and 
comprehensive account of the  Cosa Nostra,  the more common ex-
pression for Mafia among insiders. He traces it from its early roots 
in Sicilian society to its modern-day incarnation. More than half of 
the book is devoted to the post-World War II Mafia. Especially in-
structive is the coverage of its links to the highest levels of politics 
and the concomitant corruption that allowed the Cosa Nostra to 
move unimpeded through much of the 20th century. 
 Fiandaca, Giovanni, ed. 2007.  Women and the Mafia . New York: 
Springer. 308 pages. 
 This book is a collection of essays devoted to chronicling women 
who participate in organized crime activity in Italy and other coun-
tries. Written by authors from a wide variety of disciplines, chapters 
are dedicated to women involved in organized crime activities in 
Argentina, Albania, Russia, Brazil, Germany, Japan, and the United 
States. The book also reveals the abuse and violence these women 
are often subjected to. 
 Jamieson, Alison. 2000.  The Antimafia: Italy’s Fight against Or-
ganized Crime . New York: St. Martin’s Press. 257 pages. 
 This book chronicles the successes and failures of the Italian gov-
ernment’s Antimafia campaign after the murders of magistrates 
Giovanni Falcone and Paolo Borsellino in 1992 and the bombings in 
Rome, Florence, and Milan in 1993. What sets this book apart is its 
use of primary sources, interviews with judges, police officers, and 
families of victims. It examines allegations of collusion between the 
Mafia and the seven-times elected Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti, 

Print Resources 261
as well as other criminal alliances between the upperworld and un-
derworld. 
 Longrigg, Clare. 2009.  Boss of Bosses: How One Man Saved the 
Sicilian Mafia. London: John Murray. 300 pages. 
 Investigative journalist Clare Longrigg offers the first detailed bi-
ography of Bernardo “The Tractor” Provenzano. After evading cap-
ture for 43 years, he was brought down in 2006. He had taken over 
the reins of the Mafia at its low point after the 1980s’ Maxi Trial and 
the assassinations of prosecutors Giovanni Falcone and Paolo Bor-
sellino. This book offers a wealth of information about Proven-
zano’s family and the investigators who tracked him for decades. 
More important, it examines how after the arrest of the brutal Toto 
Riina, Provenzano took the Sicilian Mafia underground, eschewing 
former methods of high-profile killings and prospering in the new 
age of globalization. 
 Paoli, Letizia. 2003.  Mafia Brotherhoods: Organized Crime Ital-
ian Style . New York: Oxford University Press. 320 pages. 
 Paoli’s book is considered among the most important academic 
works on the ‘Ndrangheta. Its sources include previously undis-
closed confessions of former members who are now cooperating 
with police. This interdisciplinary work uses a host of methodolo-
gies to provide deep insight into mafia behavior, motivations, and 
structure in Italy. 
 Saviano, Robert. 2008.  Gomorrah: A Personal Journey into the 
Violent International Empire of Naples’ Organized Crime Sys-
tem. London: Picador. 320 pages. 
 Investigative journalist Robert Saviano risked life and limb to doc-
ument the modern rise of Naples’s Camorra crime families. These 
gangs have eclipsed the power of the Sicilian mafia in recent years 
as they expanded their activities into the construction and high 
fashion rackets, drug trafficking, and the movement of hazardous 
waste. Having witnessed his first gangland killing while barely in 
his teens, Saviano has written a compelling book that has led to 
renewed interest in this crime faction and resulted in the author 
having to live under full-time protection while avoiding contract 
killers hoping to collect a payoff for his murder. 
 Stille, Alexander. 1996.  Excellent Cadavers: The Mafia and the 
Death of the First Italian Republic.  New York: Vintage Books. 
480 pages. 

262 Resources
 The “excellent cadavers” referred to in the book’s title are Sicil-
ian Mafia victims who are government officials. In this case Stille 
chronicles the antimafia crusade of the prosecutors Giovanni Fal-
cone and Paolo Borsellino that ultimately led to their murders just 
two months apart in 1992. Before their untimely deaths, the two 
exposed mafia corruption in the highest corridors of power. Stille 
chronicles the rise and fall of Mafia fortunes after the assassina-
tions, as well as the investigations that implicated the politicians 
Bettino Craxi and Guilio Andreotti. 
 Periodicals and Publications 
 Federal Bureau of Investigation. 1958, July 9.  Mafia Monograph. 
Washington, D.C. Freedom of Information Act. 258 pages. 
 This document was prepared by the FBI’s Central Research Sec-
tion and for many years was a confidential file available only to 
federal law enforcement. It is now available under the Freedom of 
Information Act. The stated purpose of the monograph is to present 
evidence that the Mafia exists in the United States and to explain 
what it is. It examines the origins and activities of the Mafia and its 
transplantation to the New World through immigration. Although 
a product of the 1950s, it is richly documented with citations. Topics 
range from mafia practices of vendetta and  omerta , to speculations 
about the existence (or nonexistence) of the Mafia, the Black Hand, 
and many others. 
 Varese, Federico. 2006. “How Mafias Migrate: The Case of 
‘Ndrangheta in Northern Italy.”  Law & Society Review  40 (2): 
411–444. 
 In this article, one of the leading scholars on Italian organized crime 
tests several theories on the extent to which mafia groups migrate 
beyond their place of origin. Among the factors studied are migra-
tion from territories with high mafia density, the policy of forcing 
criminals to resettle outside their region of origin, the existence of 
mafia wars, different systems of recruitment into mafia families, the 
level of impersonal trust in the new territory, and the demand for 
criminal protection. The author concludes that contrary to the es-
tablished theories of social capital and trust, a high degree of im-
personal trust among the respectable residents is not sufficient to 
hinder mafia transplantation. Varese’s conclusions are based on 
two case studies. One involves the transplantation of ‘Ndrangheta 

Print Resources 263
members from Calabria to Bardonecchia in the Piedmont region; 
the other involves their movement into Verona in the Veneto region. 
 Law Enforcement 
 Books 
 Diaz, Tom. 2009.  No Boundaries: Transnational Latino Gangs and 
American law Enforcement.  Ann Arbor: University of Michigan 
Press. 341 pages. 
 Former journalist Tom Diaz explored the world of Latino gangs for 
this book. He uncovers the international dimensions of modern La-
tino gangs and chronicles their development into highly structured 
criminal organizations. He examines the life of the “first Latin god-
father in the United States,” Nelson Martinez Comandari, as well 
as influential gangs with international ties such as the Los Angeles-
based Mara Salvatrucha (MS-13), the 18th Street Gang, and the Latin 
Kings, based in Chicago. Diaz also tells a parallel story focusing on 
complex American issues such as racial tensions and immigration 
policy, conflict in Latin America, and the forces of globalization. 
 Richards, James R. 1998.  Transnational Criminal Organizations, 
Cybercrime, and Money Laundering: A Handbook for Law En-
forcement Officers, Auditors, and Financial Investigators. Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press. 344 pages. 
 Although this book is written for a law enforcement audience and 
is more than a decade –old, it has much to recommend it to aca-
demics and practitioners. The book contains a section devoted to all 
of the usual suspects—from the Italian Mafia to the Colombian and 
Mexican drug trafficking organizations; it also includes case stud-
ies of international terrorist-cum-organized crime groups such as 
the Irish Republic Army and the Peruvian Shining Path and inter-
national figures immersed in the transnational crime such as Khun 
Sa and Manuel Noriega. Two-thirds of the book is devoted to well-
organized chapters on money laundering, cyberbanking, investi-
gative techniques, international treaties, law enforcement agencies, 
and asset forfeiture. 
 Periodicals and Publications 
 Levi, Michael, and Alaster Smith. 2002.  A Comparative Analysis 
of Organised Crime Conspiracy Legislation and Practice and Their 

264 Resources
Relevance to England and Wales.  Home Office Online Report 
17/02. http://www.homeoffice.gov.uk/rds/pdfs2/rdsolr1702.pdf. 
 This article examines and compares the operation of the Racketeer 
Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO) in the United 
States and similar legislation geared toward countering organized 
crime in England and Wales. More than 30 investigators and pros-
ecutors from the United States, Canada, New Zealand, the Nether-
lands, Italy, and Great Britain were interviewed on various aspects 
of legislation dealing with proof and organized crime activity. 
 Scholarly Journals 
 Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies 
 College of Education 
 Department of Criminal Justice 
 University of Cincinnati 
 600 Dyer Hall 
 P.O. Box 210389 
 Cincinnati, Ohio 45221-0389 
 E-mail: Lawrence.Travis@uc.edu 
 This journal is published four times a year. Although most ar-
ticles are related to various aspects of policing, it claims in its mis-
sion statement to welcome articles related to the intersection of 
organized crime and policing, particularly when it comes to new 
police strategies developed to suppress organized crime activities. 
The journal is peer reviewed and offers book reviews and debates 
and abstracts of articles published in related journals. 
 Maritime Piracy 
 Gottschalk, Jack A., Brian P. Flanagan, Lawrence J. Kahn, and 
Dennis M. Larochelle. 2000.  Jolly Roger with an Uzi: The Rise 
and Threat of Modern Piracy . Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute 
Press. 192 pages. 
 Although written almost a decade ago, this book serves as an intro-
duction to modern piracy at the end of the 20th century. It will be 
of interest to professional mariners as well as pleasure-boat sailors 
and government officials. The authors are both lawyers and have 
written the book for a general audience. They chronicle an 80 per-

Print Resources 265
cent rise in pirate attacks and offer several case studies to illustrate 
pirate activities in the waters off the coasts of Indonesia, Brazil, So-
malia, and the South China Sea. The authors also offer suggestions 
for reducing this crime such as redefining jurisdictions, policy re-
forms, and an expansion of the mandates of military and maritime 
enforcement agencies. 
 Langewiesche, William. 2004.  The Outlaw Sea: A World of 
Freedom, Chaos, and Crime . New York: North Point Press. 256 
pages. 
 In the wake of the recent spate of high-profile pirate attacks off the 
coast of Somalia, this book is all the more compelling for its dis-
cussion of the current state of maritime law and order. The book 
discusses the unforeseen consequences of globalization on the ship-
ping industry. Langewiesche not only explores the rising crime of 
piracy and its potential connections to terrorism, but he turns a 
discerning eye toward the poor state of affairs in the shipping in-
dustry, plagued by poorly trained and paid seamen, dishonest ship 
owners, and overmatched regulators. 
 Mueller, G.O.W., and Freda Adler. 1985.  Outlaws of the Ocean: 
The Complete Book of Contemporary Crime on the High Seas. New 
York: Hearst Marine Books. 362 pages. 
 The well-known criminologists Mueller and Adler were among the 
first to look at piracy from an academic perspective. In fact they 
begin the book noting how little research has been conducted by 
criminologists on crime in the oceans. Their findings are prescient, 
establishing links between sea piracy with the growing problems 
of international organized crime, terrorism, illegal immigration, and 
drug trafficking (almost 25 years ago). Anyone interested in analyz-
ing modern piracy and homeland security would do well to begin 
with this book, as the authors combine empirical research with nau-
tical minutia and real-life maritime experience. 
 Organized Crime and Related Issues 
 Books 
 Allum, Felia, and Renate Siebert, eds. 2003.  Organized Crime 
and the Challenge to Democracy . London: Routledge. 238 pages. 

266 Resources
 This volume consists of 12 essays and a conclusion focusing on the 
impact and threat of organized crime to democratic institutions. 
The book is divided into four parts, with the first examining defini-
tions and the myths and reality of transnational organized crime. 
The second part examines states under siege in Europe, Russia, and 
Colombia. The third part delves into the choices of civil society in 
responding to organized crime. The last focuses on the intercon-
nectedness of politics and organized crime in France, Italy, and 
Japan. 
 Bovenkerk, Frank, and Michael Levi, eds. 2007.  The Organized 
Crime Community: Essays in Honor of Alan A. Block.  New York: 
Springer. 231 pages. 
 This book is a collection of essays on organized crime by students 
and friends of Penn State University’s Professor Alan Block, a pio-
neer in the study of this phenomenon. The first chapter reprints 
Block’s well-known study on the origins of the Iran Contra scandal 
and moves on to chapters on the social history of organized crime 
in the United States, corruption in the United Nations Oil-for-Food 
Program in Iraq, the fight against identity fraud, efforts to control 
international money laundering, the development of the illegal 
drug industry in Afghanistan and Colombia, and other issues. 
 Reference Books 
 Chepesiuk, Ron. 1999.  The War on Drugs: An International Ency-
clopedia . Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. 317 pages. 
 Although this book was published a decade ago, there is still much 
to recommend it. It is constructed alphabetically covering subjects 
including major drug cartels and kingpins, trafficking organiza-
tions, smuggling and counter-smuggling strategies, legal issues, 
case studies, and historical background germane to understanding 
drug prohibition and trafficking in the 21st century. 
 Newton, Michael. 2004.  The Encyclopedia of High-Tech Crime 
and Crime-Fighting: From Airport Security to the ZYX Computer 
Virus. New York: Facts on File. 374 pages. 
 There are a number of references in this encyclopedia to global 
high-tech crime including the trafficking in synthetic narcotic and 
designer drugs; software, video, and satellite piracy; computer vi-

Print Resources 267
ruses and worms; as well as electronic crimes such as identification 
theft, cell phone cloning and fraud, bank fraud, and online gam-
bling. 
 Newton, Michael. 2007.  The Encyclopedia of Gangsters: A World-
wide Guide to Organized Crime . New York: Thunder’s Mouth 
Press. 256 pages. 
 This reference book offers a comprehensive look at the world’s 
leading crime syndicates past and present. It is arranged in chap-
ters geographically, showing the history of organized crime in dif-
ferent parts of the world, chronicling prominent individuals and 
crimes. Chapters include the Sicilian mafia and its American in-
carnation, the gangsters of Marseilles and Paris, Jamaican Posses 
and Yardies, and legendary London gangsters such as the Kray 
brothers. 
 Shanty, Frank G., ed. 2008.  Organized Crime: From Trafficking to 
Terrorism,  2 vols . Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. 792 pages. 
 This two-volume reference is broken up into one volume detailing 
transnational organized crime issues around the world, describing 
the workings of crime syndicates around the world as well as in-
ternational law enforcement efforts to suppress them. The second 
volume is a compilation of national and international laws and 
treaties aimed at organized crime enterprises in different corners of 
the world. 
 Periodicals and Publications 
 Finklea, Kristin M. 2009, April 16.  Organized Crime in the United 
States: Trends and Issues for Congress . Washington, D.C.: Con-
gressional Research Service. 28 pages. 
 This document was prepared by a domestic security analyst, es-
pecially for members of Congress. Its focus is on the increasingly 
transnational nature of organized crime in the United States. It ex-
amines current organized crime trends in the United States, focus-
ing on Eurasian, Russian, Asian, Balkan, Italian, and other groups. 
Finklea also provides a definitional overview of organized crime, 
explaining various federal law enforcement efforts to combat orga-
nized crime, as well as recent statutes. The author also examines the 
domestic impact of money laundering, cigarette smuggling, piracy 

268 Resources
and counterfeiting, as well as the convergence of terrorism and or-
ganized crime. She also poses potential issues for Congress involv-
ing staffing organized crime units, setting budgetary resources, and 
multilateral crime fighting efforts. 
 Grabosky, Peter. 2007. “The Internet, Technology, and Organized 
Crime.”  Asian Journal of Criminology: An Interdisciplinary Jour-
nal on Crime, Law and Deviance 2 (2), http://www.springerlink.
com/content/d361354j58h05u35/. 
 This article examines how organized crime groups have exploited 
digital technology over the past decade while chronicling develop-
ments in communications and in information storage and retrieval. 
Grabosky demonstrates how organized crime groups are among 
the actors who have readily adapted their activities to a digital world. 
He also examines the criminal exploitation of digital technology 
using several case studies from Asia and other regions. One of the 
important questions taken up by the author is whether the activi-
ties of Asian organized crime groups have changed noticeably after 
adopting new technologies or whether it is just a case of becoming 
more efficient and effective through the use of technology in com-
mitting old crimes. Especially alarming is the transnational nature 
of organized crime today. The author offers several control strate-
gies that may be used to confront high-tech criminals. 
 Shaw, Mark. 2002. “Typologies of Transnational Organized Crime 
Groups.” Center for International Crime Prevention, UNODC. 
www.unodc.org/pdf/crime/training/typologies.pdf. 
 According to this study by Mark Shaw, a future analysis of trends 
in transnational organized crime could benefit by investigating 
several components, which he refers to as groups, clusters, and mar-
kets. At the lowest level,  groups  refer to the collecting of data on 
individual criminal organizations.  Clusters  refer to the collection of 
information around various clusters of criminal groups (often geo-
graphically defined).  Markets  refer to information on regional crimi-
nal markets. Shaw creates a profile of 40 selected organized crime 
groups in 16 different countries using this analysis. 
 United States Department of Justice. 2009.  National Drug Threat 
Assessment.  Washington, D.C.: National Drug Intelligence Cen-
ter. 81 pages. 
 This report contains the strategic findings on the progress and 
emerging counter-drug challenges. It offers maps and recent figures 

Print Resources 269
related to the drug trade in the United States and on its borders. 
Among its most relevant summations are that Mexican drug traf-
ficking organizations are the greatest organized crime threat to the 
United States. It also asserts that violent street gangs are an impor-
tant cog in retail-level drug distribution, and that cocaine and meth-
amphetamine remain the leading drug threats. Attention is devoted 
to how drug gangs acquire precursor chemicals for methamphet-
amine despite myriad state and federal restrictions. Also note-
worthy is the Mexican participation in the heroin trade, the rising 
potency of marijuana, and the involvement of Asian drug traffick-
ing groups in the production of drugs such as MDMA in Canadian 
superlabs. The report is divided into separate reports containing an 
overview, strategic findings, intelligence gaps, and outlooks for the 
future of the trafficking in cocaine, methamphetamine, marijuana, 
heroin, controlled prescription drugs, and MDMA. Attention is also 
given to drug threats on Indian reservations, various illicit finance 
systems, and drug trafficking organizations. 
 Scholarly Journals 
 Crime, Law and Social Change 
 Northeastern University 
 College of Criminal Justice 
 400 Churchill Hall 
 Boston, MA 02115-5000 
 Web site: http://www.wkap.nl/journals/cris 
 This peer-reviewed journal publishes articles and essays related 
to the political economy of organized crime, political corruption, en-
vironmental crime, and the expropriation of resources from devel-
oping nations. It is also dedicated to publishing scholarship in the 
realm of human rights, including genocide, and studies examining 
compensation and survivors of state-sponsored terrorism and mass 
murder. It also offers a large book review section. 
 Global Crime 
 Web site: http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/titles/17440572.asp 
 Global Crime  is a social science journal published four times a 
year. Interdisciplinary in scope, articles come from such disciplines 
as history, sociology, criminology, economics, political science, and 
other areas of research. The journal publishes peer-reviewed articles 
on any topic relating to crime, including organized criminality, its 

270 Resources
history, activities, relations with the state and its impact on global 
economies, as well as corruption, illegal migration, terrorism, illicit 
markets, violence, and police studies. Each issue features a substan-
tial book review section. In most years one issue is edited by a guest 
editor (s). Personal subscriptions cost $95 per year. 
 International Journal of Comparative and Applied Criminal Justice 
 School of Criminal Justice 
 Michigan State University 
 East Lansing, Michigan 48824-1118 
 Web site: http://www.ijcacj.com 
 Published four times a year, the  International Journal of Compara-
tive and Applied Criminal Justice  is the official journal for the Ameri-
can Society of Criminology Division of International Criminology. 
Individual subscriptions are $40 annually and $30 for students. 
 Journal of Gang Research 
 National Gang Crime Research Center 
 P.O. Box 990 
 Peotone, Illinois 604681-0990 
 Web site: http://www.ngrc.com 
 The  Journal of Gang Research  is published four times a year by 
the National Gang Crime Research Center. This professional in-
terdisciplinary journal publishes original research on gangs, gang 
members, gang problems, gang crime patterns, gang prevention, 
and many other related issues. Some articles are international in 
scope, chronicling “cross-national gangs” that operate across na-
tional borders and that operate inside or pose a threat to the United 
States. It examines new types of gangs, new strategies for old gang 
problems, and recent developments in the purview of social policy 
on gangs. 
 Trends in Organized Crime 
 Springer, New York 
 23 Spring Street 
 New York 10013 
 E-mail: welmoed.spahr@springer.com 

Print Resources 271
 Trends in Organized Crime is a peer-reviewed journal published 
four times a year in association with the International Association 
of Organized Crime (IASOC). It publishes a wide range of original 
research including significant government reports. It also publishes 
book reviews of recent organized crime-related books and offers 
analysis and commentary on current organized crime-related top-
ics. This journal has a readership that includes practitioners, schol-
ars, and policymakers. 
 Organized Crime-Terrorism Nexus 
 Periodicals and Publications 
 Berry, LaVerle, Glenn E. Curtis, Tara Karacan, Nina Kollars, 
John N. Gibbs, Rex Hudson, and Ramon Miro. 2003, October. 
 Nations Hospitable to Organized Crime and Terrorism . Washing-
ton, DC: Federal Research Division, Library of Congress. 
 This article is a must for anyone trying to get a handle on the con-
vergence of organized crime and terrorism in the 21st century. The 
report examines conditions that attract transnational criminal and 
terrorist activity. It examines the years 1999–2002 using a variety of 
sources including periodicals, Western and regional sources, reliable 
Internet sites, selected monographs, and personal communications 
with experts in the regions. The report is divided geographically 
into Africa, the Former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, South 
Asia, Southeast Asia, Western Europe, and the Western Hemisphere. 
Emphasis is on the countries with the most serious problems, al-
though there are profiles on most countries and regions within the 
subheadings. 
 Makarenko, Tamara. 2004. “The Crime-Terror Continuum: Trac-
ing the Interplay between Transnational Organized Crime and 
Terrorism.”  Global Crime 6 (1): 129–145. 
 Makarenko offers one of the best models for understanding the 
interconnectedness between terrorism and crime and pioneers an 
approach that is increasingly finding favor with theorists and prac-
titioners. She asserts that beginning with the use of terror by Co-
lombian drug organizations, often referred to as narcoterrorism, in 
the 1980s the use of crime has become a key factor in the growth of 
terrorism. What’s more, both groups are learning from each other, 
by discovering what works or does not work before adapting a par-
ticular strategy from the other. 

272 Resources
 Shelley, Louise, and John T. Picarelli. 2005, Winter. “Methods 
and Motives: Exploring Links between Transnational Organized 
Crime and International Terrorism.”  Trends in Organized Crime 9 
(2): 52–67. 
 The authors assert that the distinction has become blurred between 
organized crime and terrorist groups. Demonstrating how terrorist 
groups have adopted the same methods as criminals, this report 
identifies their points of convergence. Among the regions studied 
are Chechnya, the Black Sea region, and Latin America’s Tri-Border 
area. The authors conclude that law enforcement should integrate 
crime analysis in the work of intelligence analysts and others ad-
dressing terrorism. What’s more, it is no longer possible to rely on 
the once accepted divide that all terrorists are ideologically moti-
vated while crime groups are all just profit-driven. 
 Sverdlick, Ana R. 2005. “Terrorists and Organized Crime Entre-
preneurs in the ‘Triple Frontier’ among Argentina, Brazil, and 
Paraguay.”  Trends in Organized Crime 9 (2): 84–93. 
 This article examines the characteristics of the organized crime 
sanctuary along the Tri-Border region of Latin America where Ar-
gentina, Brazil, and Paraguay meet. She demonstrates how terror-
ists and organized crime groups often collaborate and cooperate in 
order to support their operations. Her research demonstrates that 
there is often a fine line, if there is one at all, separating the activities 
of both groups. 
 Outlaw Motorcycle Gangs 
 Books 
 Marsden, William, and Julian Sher. 2006.  Angels of Death: In-
side the Bikers’ Global Crime Empire . Cambridge, MA: Da Capo 
Press. 480 pages. 
 Although this book focuses on the Hells Angeles outlaw motorcy-
cle gang, it is also an examination of the globalization of the Hells 
Angels and several other major competitors. In rich detail the au-
thors recount several specific cases to illustrate the brutal nature of 
this phenomenon. The story of the Angels and their leader Ralph 
“Sonny” Barger takes the reader on a tour of bikerdom and its as-
sociated organized crime activities in the Netherlands, Canada, 
United States, and Australia (where bikers are known as “bikies”). 
This book is both well researched and well written. 

Print Resources 273
 Russian and Soviet-Era Organized Crime 
 Books 
 Galeotti, Mark, ed. 2002.  Russian and Post Soviet Organized 
Crime . Burlington, VT: Ashgate. 340 pages. 
 This volume edited by noted organized crime scholar Mark Gale-
otti contains 23 chapters on various aspects of Russian organized 
crime. It is divided into five sections. The first section offers five 
articles on the criminal foundations of Russian organized crime. 
The next section devotes six pieces to exploring what exactly is the 
Russian “Mafiya.” The third section has four essays assessing Rus-
sian organized crime in the 1990s. The fourth section has four ar-
ticles on the interconnectedness of Russian organized crime and the 
economy. The final section is composed of four chapters examining 
global Russian organized crime. 
 Orttung, Robert W., and Anthony Latta, eds. 2008.  Russia’s Bat-
tle with Crime, Corruption and Terrorism.  New York: Routledge. 
202 pages. 
 This book is a collection of essays examining Russia’s response to 
post-Soviet threats such as rising crime, corruption, and terrorism. 
Combined together the articles demonstrate the inextricable links 
between a growing drug trade, organized crime, border problems, 
migration issues, corruption, and terrorism. Authors examine ram-
pant corruption, ties between organized crime groups and law 
enforcement agencies, crime and migration in Siberia, drug traffick-
ing along the Russian-Kazakh border, and the numerous challenges 
facing the government and law enforcement. 
 Satter, David. 2003.  Darkness at Dawn: The Rise of the Rus-
sian Criminal State . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 314 
pages. 
 This book looks at the evolution of organized crime in Russia in its 
various manifestations since the breakup of the Soviet Union. The 
author has the benefit of having observed life firsthand in Russia 
as he reported on the country for more than two decades. Among 
his most cogent assessments is that it was unexpected that after a 
decade of freedom and democracy the country was still marked by 
poverty and the existence of organized crime activity at virtually 
every level of life. 
 Serio, Joseph D. 2008.  Investigating the Russian Mafia . Durham, 
NC: Carolina Academic Press. 324 pages. 

274 Resources
 This book is unique in that is based on the observations of an Amer-
ican who spent seven years in the Soviet Union before its collapse. 
During this time he served an internship in the Organized Crime 
Control Department of the Soviet police, and it was from this van-
tage point that he observed the evolution of organized crime activ-
ity in the region. It is especially valuable as a counterpoint to the 
avalanche of “Russian Mafia” books that have dominated much 
of the discussion on this misunderstood phenomenon. More im-
portant, Serio seeks to explain what the Russian “mafia” actually 
means. His close examination of official statistics and his analyses 
of the various nationalities and ethnic groups involved in organized 
crime in this region are especially useful. 
 Shelley, Louise, Erik R. Scott, and Anthony Latta, eds. 2007.  Or-
ganized Crime and Corruption in Georgia . London: Routledge. 
129 pages. 
 This collection of six essays focuses on organized crime in Georgia 
since the collapse of the Soviet Union. Chapters focus on the na-
tion’s so-called anti-corruption revolution and its aftermath, smug-
gling in the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali region in 2003–2004, the use 
of public service reform to overcome economic crime, and recent 
Georgian police reform efforts. 
 Trafficking and Criminal Networks 
 Books 
 Farah, Douglas. 2004.  Blood from Stones: The Secret Financial 
Network of Terror. New York: Broadway Books. 225 pages. 
 Prize-winning investigative journalist Douglas Farah traveled into 
the heart of Africa to uncover the connections between corrupt 
politicians, diamond and weapons traffickers, and terrorist money 
laundering operations. Farah traces the global dimensions of the 
illicit diamond trade, which stretches from West Africa to Belgium 
and the Middle East. He reveals the interlocking links between un-
derground financial systems, charities, and friendly bankers that 
allow such terrorist groups as al Qaeda to launder its cash through 
the illegal diamond trade. 
 Farah, Douglas, and Stephen Braun. 2007.  Merchant of Death: 
Money, Guns, Planes, and the Man Who Makes War Possible. 
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley. 320 pages. 

Print Resources 275
 Investigative journalists Farah and Braun have written a well-
researched expose of the Russian arms trafficker Viktor Bout. The 
supposed inspiration for the movie  Lord of War,  Bout has been linked 
to the illegal weapons trade from the Cold War era until his recent 
arrest in Thailand. The authors chronicle the demise of the Soviet 
Union and the aftermath that left the weapons of a world power 
ripe for the taking and its weapons manufacturers looking for cli-
ents to sell them to. This book reveals the sordid story of how dicta-
tors, warlords, insurgent groups, and organized crime syndicates 
acquire weapons despite well-publicized UN embargoes. When it 
comes to the major activities of global organized crime networks, 
most focus has been devoted to human smuggling and drug traf-
ficking. The weapons trade has yet to receive its magnum opus, but 
this is a welcome addition to the body of literature on international 
arms trafficking. 
 Kenney, Michael. 2007.  From Pablo to Osama: Trafficking and 
Terrorist Networks, Government Bureaucracies, and Competitive 
Adaptation. University Park: The Pennsylvania State Univer-
sity Press. 293 pages. 
 This book is a comparative study of Colombian drug trafficking net-
works and terrorist networks, including al-Qaeda, and the myriad 
law enforcement organizations devoted to their destruction. Kenny 
interviews gang informants and former drug smugglers and many 
others to give a better-rounded picture of how the gangs and police 
officials operate. What’s more he illustrates the uncanny abilities of 
terrorists and Colombian drug kingpins to adjust to the strategies 
of their adversaries. 
 Lee, Maggie, ed. 2007.  Human Trafficking . Devon, UK: Willan 
Publishing. 239 pages. 
 This book offers an interdisciplinary examination of human traffick-
ing over the centuries. Leading experts in criminology, sociology, 
social anthropology, politics, law, and human rights weigh forth on 
the continuum between the historical slave trade and modern hu-
man trafficking as they examine the changing nature, pattern, and 
process of human trafficking. 
 Lunde, Paul. 2004.  Organized Crime: A Guide to the World’s Most 
Successful Industry. New York: DK Publishing. 192 pages. 
 This book traces the evolution of organized crime activity from pi-
racy and secret societies to the emergence of today’s group. Lunde 

276 Resources
profiles the major syndicates, chronicling their origins and struc-
ture, methods, territories, codes of behavior, rites and rituals, and 
connections to the legitimate business world and governments. 
 Morselli, Carlo. 2009.  Inside Criminal Networks . New York: 
Springer. 203 pages. 
 Morselli uses a social network perspective to examine a variety of 
criminal networks. What stands out is his analysis of how organiza-
tions and members adapt when key members are lost, the roles of 
key members and peripheral ones, and the use of legitimate actors 
in illegal situations, but the focus of the book is the flexibility of 
modern crime syndicates (flexible order). Morselli uses a wealth 
of communication data, electronic surveillance material, and other 
investigative sources, as well as case studies to demonstrate the 
flexible nature of modern syndicates. This book will be of interest 
to both organized crime researchers and social network theorists 
and analysts. 
 Nonprint Resources 
 Videos 
 American Organized Crime 
 American Gangster: Season One 
 Type: DVD 
 Date: 2007 
 Length: 246 minutes 
 Source: Black Entertainment Television 
 The inaugural season of this popular documentary series features 
two discs chronicling the stories of Stanley “Tookie” Williams, co-
founder of the Crips; Harlem drug kingpin Leroy “Nicky” Barnes; 
crack kingpin “Freeway” Ricky Ross; jewel thieves Troy and Dino 
Smith; the Chambers Brothers; and Lorenzo “Fat Cat” Nichols. 
 American Gangster: Season Two 
 Type: DVD 
 Date: 2007 
 Length: 420 minutes 
 Source: Black Entertainment Network 

Nonprint Resources 277
 This three-disc collection examines the Philly Black Mafia; Larry 
Hoover and the Gangster Disciples; Melvin Williams; Frank Lucas 
(the inspiration for the Denzel Washington film  American Gangster ); 
Felix Mitchell, Oakland California’s first major heroin kingpin; Jeff 
Fort and the Blackstone Rangers; and others. Bonus features in-
clude extended interviews with Frank Lucas and others. 
 Busting the Mob 
 Type: DVD 
 Date: 2008 
 Length: 50 minutes 
 Source: A&E Television Networks 
 This documentary examines the various surveillance strategies 
used to incriminate some of America’s leading organized crime fig-
ures in the early 1980s. Those interested in how undercover agents 
go about their investigations will enjoy the first-person accounts by 
agents describing how they placed various listening devices that led 
to the Pizza Connection trial and convictions. This case is significant, 
representing one of law enforcement’s few major successes in the 
fight against Cosa Nostra, and leading to imprisonment of four of 
the five major Mafia bosses of New York City. The fifth, Paul Cas-
tellano of the Gambino family, was killed before he could be sen-
tenced. 
 Gangland: Season One 
 Type: DVD 
 Date: 2007 
 Length: 10 hours, 11 minutes 
 Source: A&E Television Networks 
 Season one examines 13 gangs on four discs including La Nues-
tra Familia, MS-13, the Mexican Mafia, Hells Angels, the Almighty 
Black P. Stone, skinheads, and others. Several episodes reveal how 
gang members join the military to gain weapons expertise, battle 
each other over racial issues, and fight over the Harlem heroin 
trade. 
 Gangland: Season Two 
 Type: DVD 
 Date: 2008 
 Length: 9 hours, 24 minutes 
 Source: A&E Television Networks 

278 Resources
 Season two documents 12 different gangs on three DVDS, in-
cluding the Maniac Latin Disciples, Chicago Gangster Disciples, the 
Texas Syndicate, the Los Angeles 18th Street Gang, the Mongols, 
the L. A. Crips and Bloods, the Chicago Vice Lords, the Outlaws, 
Hells Angels, and Asian Triads. 
 Gangland: Season Three 
 Type: DVD 
 Date: 2008 
 Length: 9 hours, 24 minutes 
 Source: A&T Television Networks 
 Season three examines 12 American gangs on three DVDs, includ-
ing the Bandidos, Los Zetas, Warlocks, Gotti Boys, Los Solidos, 
Satan Disciples, Tiny Rascal Gangsters, La Gran Familia, as well as 
Zoe Pound (Haitians), Friends Stand United, and the Utah Crips. 
 Gangland: Season Four 
 Type: DVD 
 Date: 2009 
 Length: 9 hours, 24 minutes 
 Source: A&E Television Networks 
 Season four consists of three discs covering 12 American gangs and 
organized crime groups including the Pagans, Hells Angels, Aryan 
Brotherhood of Texas, Sons of Silence, Chicago’s Latin Kings, the 
Avenues, the Best Friends, and others. 
 In Search of History: Five Points Gang 
 Type: DVD 
 Date: 1997 
 Length: 50 minutes 
 Source: A&E Television Networks 
 This film chronicles the evolution of New York City’s first major 
gangs in the Five Points Section of New York. From a global per-
spective these gangs were primarily made up of Irish immigrants. 
Over time some of these gangs would morph into organized crime 
syndicates thanks to their corrupt overseers in city government. 
The story of gangs developing out of marginalized populations in 
American slums is an oft-repeated story in most other developing 
urban communities. By the end of the 19th century, German, Italian, 

Nonprint Resources 279
Jewish, and Chinese gangs would vie for turf in the area left by the 
assimilating Irish. 
 Asian Organized Crime 
 The Yakuza Papers 
 Type: DVD 
 Date: 2004 
 Length: 500+ minutes 
 Source: Home Vision Entertainment 
 This series came out the year after the Godfather. It offers a dero-
manticized portrait of the Japanese underworld. It is based on the 
memoirs of an actual Yakuza boss. A sixth disc supplements the 
five films in the series and features an interview with David Kaplan 
on the evolution of the Japanese underworld after World War II. 
 British Organized Crime 
 The Long Good Friday 
 Type: DVD 
 Date: 2006 
 Length: 109 minutes 
 Source: Anchor Bay Entertainment 
 This film has been compared to the  Godfather  and  Scarface.  Its por-
trayal of the London underworld is unsurpassed. Particularly in-
teresting is that it was filmed in 1979 and offers an early glimpse 
of the convergence of terrorism and organized crime through the 
competition of the Irish Republican Army (IRA) and the London 
mob over criminal rackets. 
 Italian and Italian American Organized Crime 
 Excellent Cadavers: Fighting the Mafia in Sicily 
 Type: DVD 
 Date: 2005 
 Length: 92 minutes 
 Source: First Run Icarus Films 

280 Resources
 This documentary is based on the eponymous 1995 book by Al-
exander Stille. It focuses on the amoral relationship between cor-
porate and political interests that has protected the Mafia for so 
long. The story is linked with the tragic campaigns of the ill-fated 
prosecutors Giovanni Falcone and Paolo Borsellino, both killed in 
1992. The film features interviews with the photojournalist Letizia 
Battaglia, whose photos have chronicled the Mafia’s violent legacy 
in Palermo for more than 20 years. Bonus materials include a photo 
gallery and biographies. 
 Godfathers Collection: The True History of the Mafia 
 Type: DVD 
 Date: 2003 
 Length: 5 hours 
 Source: A&E Television Networks 
 This two-disc collection is divided into five programs. Four are epi-
sodes from the BIOGRAPHY television series, featuring portraits 
of Lucky Luciano, Meyer Lansky, Bugsy Siegel, and the Genovese 
Family. The other section is a separate 100-minute disc featuring the 
history of American organized crime from the 19th century, using 
newly discovered footage from Italian archives and rare interviews 
with investigators and gangsters. 
 Mafia: The History of the Mob in America 
 Type: DVD 
 Date: 2001 
 Length: 250 minutes 
 Source: A&E Television Networks 
 Former title: American Justice: Target Mafia 
 This two-DVD set is divided into four sections covering The Pro-
hibition Years/Birth of the American Mafia, The Kennedys and 
the Mob, Unions and the Mob, and the Empire of Crime, covering 
post-World War II activities. It also includes interactive menus. Its 
strength lies in its delineation of the origins of ethnic gangs in 
America. 
 Irish and Irish American Organized Crime 
 Paddy Whacked: The Irish Mob 
 Type: DVD 

Nonprint Resources 281
 Date: 2007 
 Length: 100 minutes 
 Source: A&E Television Networks 
 Based in part on T. J. English’s best-selling book of the same name, 
it covers the evolution of Irish organized crime in America from 
the “Westies” of New York to gangs in Boston, Chicago, and Phila-
delphia. It is especially strong in describing the horrific conditions 
that led to Irish immigration to the United States, as well as disease, 
vice, and other conditions that awaited them in America. 
 Global Organized Crime and Trafficking 
 Lords of the Mafia 
 Type: DVD 
 Date: 2000 
 Length: 780 minutes 
 Source: Koch Vision, Port Washington, NY 11050 
 Robert Stack narrates this 13-hour investigation of global orga-
nized crime. This seven-disc collection features examination of 
Japan and China, Britain and Sicily, New York and New Orleans, 
Los Angeles and Vietnam, Mexico and Colombia, Russia and Ja-
maica, and a final hour that ties in the relationships between vari-
ous global organized crime groups. The DVD set also features 
extensive biographical and background information for the entire 
series, including profiles of crime bosses and charts of organization 
and much more. 
 Traffik 
 Type: DVD 
 Date: 2001 
 Length: 315 minutes 
 Source: Acorn Media 
 This miniseries, originally broadcast on  Masterpiece Theater in 
1989, is as timely today as it was then. Much of the film takes place in 
the opium fields of Pakistan and Afghanistan. The series revolves 
around a British drug addict, her drug czar father, and various func-
tionaries in the drug-trafficking continuum. Their intertwined lives 
offer a microcosm of the continuing international drug trade and its 
victims. 

282 Resources
 The World History of Organized Crime 
 Type: DVD 
 Date: 2001 
 Length: 250 minutes 
 Source: A&E Television Networks 
 This two-disc set includes one that features China, India, and Co-
lombia (150 minutes) and one that covers Sicily and Russia. Extra 
features includes a Timeline of Critical Events for each Featured 
Country and interactive menus. 
 Web Sites 
 Australian Institute of Criminology 
 The Australian Institute of Criminology is the country’s lead-
ing research center on crime and justice issues. It offers links to a 
number of documents and sites related to global organized crime 
networks, corruption, and various forms of illegal trafficking. 
http://www.aic.gov.au 
 Centre for Transnational Crime Prevention 
(Faculty of Law: University of Wollongong) 
 Established in 2000, the center focuses on responding to organized 
crime activities that threaten global security, including cybercrime, 
terrorism, all forms of illegal trafficking, money laundering and 
other mainstays of organized crime. http://www.ctcp.uow.edu.au 
 Crime Magazine: An Encyclopedia of Crime 
(Organized Crime) 
 This online magazine is devoted to all forms of criminal activ-
ity. It offers links by topics, including organized crime. Most links 
are related to American and Italian organized crime, but it does offer 
a few related to transnational activities. http://www.crimemaga 
zine.com 
 Criminal Intelligence Service Canada 
(Annual Reports on Organized Crime) 
 Available in both English and French, this site features annual re-
ports on organized crime trends and activities in Canada based 
on intelligence and investigative reports. http://www.cisc.gc.ca 

Nonprint Resources 283
 Criminal Justice Resources: Organized Crime 
(Michigan State University Library) 
 This site offers dozens of links to resources devoted to organized 
crime, including reports, documents, articles, and references to 
global trafficking activities. http://staff.lib.msu.edu/harris23/crim 
just/orgcrime.htm 
 Drug Library (Online Library) 
 This site bills itself as the “World’s Largest Online Library of Drug 
Policy.” It might be right. Among the most useful links are the li-
brary resources available from the Schaffer Library of Drug Policy 
link. http://druglibrary.org 
 European Market Ecstasy Trafficking 
 This site offers links to everything ecstasy, including recent re-
search on the drug, the rave party scene, and various law enforce-
ment and public health attempts to suppress the drug. http://www.
narcomafie.it/emet 
 Italian Law Enforcement Agency 
“Direzione Investigativa Antimafia” (DIA) 
 The DIA is responsible only for mafia-related offenses. This site of-
fers data on various Italian organized crime factions between 1992 
and 2004. http://www.interno.it/dip_ps/dia/eng/compet.htm 
 Klaus Von Lampe Home Page: 
Topics on Organized Crime 
 This site is especially helpful for anyone interested in the interna-
tional definitions of organized crime. It lists samples from dozens 
of countries. It is also a great resource for book reviews on the 
subject. http://people.freenet.de/kvlampe/index.html 
 The Mafia and Organised Crime in General 
(The Influence of Criminal Organizations in 
Banking and Finance) 
 This site offers a variety of links to articles, reports, and re-
sources dedicated to the influence of organized crime on banking 
and financial crimes. http://www.ex.ac.uk/~RDavies/arian/scan 
dals/mafia.html 

284 Resources
 Mob Watcher: Antonio Nicaso’s Homepage 
 This site has links to numerous book reviews on the latest organized 
crime-related books. Some are in Italian, but it is a helpful resource 
for hard-to-find European sources. http://www.nicaso.com 
 Newsfile:  Time Archive on Organized Crime 
 This site offers an archive of hundreds of  Time  magazine articles 
on organized crime dating from the present back to more than 20 
years ago. These can all be accessed by searching under the topic of 
organized crime. http://www.search.time.com 
 Rick Porrello’s American Mafia.com 
 This site offers article-length reports on various aspects of the his-
tory of organized crime in America by some of the leading re-
searchers in the field. http://americanmafia.com/ 
 Royal Canadian Mounted Police 
 This is the homepage for the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and 
its strategies for fighting transnational organized crime. http://
www.rcmp-grc.gc.ca 
 United Nations Convention against 
Transnational Organized Crime 
 The 2003 United Nations Convention against Transnational Or-
ganized Crime can be accessed here. http://www.odccp.org/pal 
ermo/convmain.html 
 United Nations Crime and Justice Information Network 
 This site is home to the Centre for International Crime Prevention, 
offering numerous links to research sources, statistics, documents, 
and organizations related to international organized crime and 
crime-fighting. http://www.uncjin.org 
 U.S. Department of State, International 
Information Programs 
 On the following links are international information programs ded-
icated to various forms of global organized crime and related 
law enforcement efforts. 

Nonprint Resources 285
 The Fight against Bribery and Corruption  
 http://usinfo.state.
gov/topi cal/econ/bribes 
 Chinese Alien Smuggling  
 http://usinfo.state.gov/regional/ea/
chinaaliens/homepage.htm 
 Global Forum on Fighting Corruption  
 http://usinfo.state.gov/
topical/econ/integrity 
 U.S. Treasury Department Financial 
Crimes Enforcement Network 
 The Global Fight against Money Laundering  
 This site is dedicated to 
fighting international financial crimes. Under International Pro-
grams are links to a number of financial crime fighting efforts and 
strategies. http://www.fincen.gov 
 

This page intentionally left blank 

287
 Glossary 
 Activity appropriation Process in which terrorists and organized crime 
actors borrow each other  ’s methods. 
 Advance Fee Fraud  Also known as the 419 scam, this fraud is perpe-
trated typically by Nigerians. It involves sending mass e-mails to in-
dividuals soliciting help in transferring funds out of the country for a 
percentage of the profits by borrowing a victim ’s personal information. 
 African Connection This refers to the involvement of Nigerians in the 
global heroin trade. Nigeria emerged as a major transshipment stop for 
Southeast Asian heroin heading to Europe and the United States in the 
1990s. 
 Apartheid  This is a system of racial separation that existed in South Af-
rica before it became a constitutional democracy in 1994. 
 Bank Secrecy Act  In 1970, this became the first important piece of legis-
lation directed toward money laundering. It mandated a series of report-
ing and recordkeeping requirements to help track money launderers. 
 Boryokudan Japanese police prefers to eschew the term  Yakuza  in favor 
of this word meaning “the violent ones.” 
 Cacique This is Mexico ’s version of a political boss who accepts bribes. 
 Camorra  This criminal society originated in the prisons of Naples, Italy 
in the early 1800s. Camorra gangs continue to flourish in the 21st century. 
 Capone, Al  He was America’s public enemy number one during the 
1920s and early 1930s. 
 Cartels This term is used to describe many drug-trafficking networks 
in Latin America and Mexico. From an economic perspective, cartel mem-
bers should have the ability to control prices, production, and the mar-
keting of certain commodities. 
 Coronelismo This is Brazil ’s version of a corrupt political boss. 
 Cosa Nostra This expression, which means “our thing,” is preferred over 
“   Mafia” by the Italian criminal milieu in the United States and Sicily. 

288 Glossary
 Coyotes   These are Mexican human smugglers who participate in the il-
legal smuggling of immigrants, often from Mexico and Central America, 
into the southwestern United States. 
 Cybercrime Most authorities assert that computer-assisted crimes are 
changing the nature and shape of organized crime. The FBI ranks it as its 
third priority behind terrorism and espionage. 
 European Union Created in 1993, the EU is a treaty-based framework 
that defines and manages economic and political cooperation among its 
member states. This region is the most profitable for global drug-traffick-
ing syndicates. The unintended consequences of EU policies allowing for 
the free movement of goods, services, people, and capital in the member 
countries have facilitated smuggling operations for transnational crime 
groups. 
 Export syndicates  Recent scholarship presents this as an alternative 
perspective to the cartel. Rather than control raw material production and 
most distribution systems like a cartel, drug trafficking organizations are 
more like “export syndicates,” in which trafficking networks are created 
to share risks and guarantee profits for each partner, a form of risk mini-
mization.. 
 Failed State  This is a nation-state characterized by high levels of crime, 
corruption, and violence, a country in which areas are beyond govern-
ment control and subsequently become havens for organized crime and 
terrorist groups. 
 FARC  This acronym stands for the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Co-
lombia, a leftist paramilitary organization that is also a major player in the 
region’s cocaine traffic. 
  Financial Action Task Force   The FATF was established by seven indus-
trialized countries in 1989 to fight money laundering. 
 419 Scam This is the same as the advance fee fraud. The 419 refers to the 
Nigerian criminal statute that made this fraud illegal in 1980. 
  French Connection  In the 1930s, Corsican gangsters in Marseilles, 
France worked together with French gangsters in the heroin business 
and established that city as the epicenter of the heroin trade, or the French 
Connection, until the 1960s. 
 Globalization  This is a process that refers to the increasing integration 
and interdependence of the world’s nation states. 
  Golden Age of Piracy  Sea pirates were most active between 1650 and 
1730. It is estimated that up to 4,000 pirates roamed the high seas. Modern 
organized crime scholars have been able to draw a number of parallels 
with this era and global organized crime activities in the 21st century. 
  Great Nordic Biker War  Between 1994 and 1997, the Hells Angeles and 
Bandidos outlaw motorcycle gangs fought for supremacy over Denmark   ’s 

Glossary 289
criminal operations. The conflict left almost a dozen dead and at least 100 
wounded. 
 Harrison Narcotics Act  This 1914 law criminalized the nonmedical use 
of opium, morphine, and coca derivatives in the United States and set the 
stage for the development of global drug-trafficking networks to supply 
the drugs. 
 Hawala This informal underground banking system evolved in South 
Asia. It is used to exchange money for commodities without leaving a 
paper trail for investigators. Based on trust, it is used by criminal and ter-
rorist networks to transmit funds, usually for illicit activities, on a global 
scale. 
 Hezbollah This terrorist group was created in Lebanon by Revolution-
ary Guards from Iran shortly after the Israeli invasion of Lebanon. Al-
though it receives funding from Iran and Syria, it also relies on funding 
through various organized crime activities. 
 Human smuggling  Unlike human trafficking, this form of smuggling 
usually involves the full participation of those being smuggled, with the 
assistance of individuals who facilitate the movement between national 
boundaries by avoiding the legitimate protocol for immigration. 
 Human trafficking This refers to the movement of people through a 
variety of illegal practices such as coercion, abduction, and deception. It 
also sometimes results in sexual exploitation such as prostitution, as well 
as forced labor and other practices similar to slavery. 
 Hybrid groups Over the decades certain groups such as FARC have 
taken on a “ hybrid” appearance, blurring the distinction between terror-
ist and organized crime networks. 
 International Maritime Bureau  This agency is a clearinghouse for sea 
piracy data. 
 Interpol  The International Criminal Police Organization, more com-
monly known by its acronym, was created in 1923. Headquartered in 
Lyons, France, it helps global police forces coordinate and cooperate on 
transnational criminal issues. 
 Kosovo Liberation Army The KLA emerged in 1996 out of the prob-
lems created by the Yugoslavian conflicts. Its goal was to win Kosovan in-
dependence from Serbia. Few organizations illustrate the nexus between 
organized crime and terrorism more than the relationship between the 
KLA and Albanian crime syndicates beginning in the 1990s. 
 Krysha In Russian this means roof and refers to an organization or in-
dividual that can provide protection and patronage necessary to carry on 
business or government practices. 
 Mafia  First found in an Italian dictionary in the 1860s, this term has 
been used interchangeably with organized crime for so long its meaning 

290 Glossary
has become obscured in a blizzard of stereotypes and clichés. Probably 
of Arabic origin, it has been used to refer to traditional organized crime 
groups that originated on the island of Sicily and then later saw some of 
its traditions imported to the United States during a wave of late 19th-
century immigration. The American and Sicilian versions of the mafia re-
main distinct. 
 Mafiya   In the waning days of the Soviet Union, it became popular to 
brand different forms of corruption as  Mafiya.  Unlike its more recogniz-
able counterpart in Italy, the Russian term referred to the daily inequi-
ties of life in the communist system rather than to any monolithic crime 
group. In the aftermath of the Soviet Union, journalists used this term to 
refer to emerging crime syndicates. 
 Mara Salvatrucha  Better known as MS-13, this gang was named after 
La Mara, a street in El Salvador as well as for Salvatrucha guerrillas who 
fought in the country   ’s civil war in the 1980s. The gang is unique for hav-
ing made the transition from street gang to transnational organized crime 
group in a rather short time, as well as for its influence in drug trafficking 
throughout Mexico, Central America, and the United States. 
 Money laundering  Organized crime groups from around the world use 
this process to conceal the existence and source of illicit income. 
 Mustache Petes  This refers to the Old World bosses from Sicily who ran 
operations in New York City and elsewhere in the United States before 
their demise in a series of slayings in 1931. 
 Narcoterrorism  This term was coined by Peruvian President Belaunde 
Terry in 1983 to describe the violent attacks on antinarcotics police by the 
Shining Path terrorist group. In the 1980s, however, it became more iden-
tified as a form of terrorism used by drug cartels such as Colombia’s Me-
dillin drug kingpin Carlos Escobar. 
 Navigation Acts The English Parliament passed a series of acts between 
1651 and 1696 meant to control the movement of certain commodities into 
the English colonies in North America. Organized gangs of smugglers, 
pirates, and black marketeers stepped in to supply the colonists with 
luxury goods prohibited from other countries. 
 ‘  Ndrangheta  The “  honored society   ” or “  brotherhood ” is well estab-
lished in southern Italy   ’s Calabria. This organization has apparently sur-
passed the power of the Sicilian Mafia in both clout and international 
contacts and has readily adapted to globalization. 
 Operation Jessica  This 2002 FBI operation revealed the existence of 
large-scale organized crime involvement in the counterfeiting of CDs in 
Italy, as well as the transnational operational structure that ran the en-
terprise. 

Glossary 291
 Opium War  The defeat of the Chinese by the British in this 1842 war 
forced China to accept the free trade of opium within its borders, inaugu-
rating the global drug trade. 
  Outlaw Motorcycle Gangs (OMGs)  OMGs are motorcycle gangs 
such as Hells Angels that have evolved into structured organized crime 
groups. 
 Pizza Connection Case This was one of the first organized crime inves-
tigations and prosecutions with international implications. Police agen-
cies from at least five countries cooperated in the 1980s to shut down a 
major drug-trafficking and money-laundering operation using pizza res-
taurants as fronts for heroin traffic. 
 Plata o plomo   The expression “silver or lead” refers to the choice given 
to Colombian judges by Medillin drug cartel members in Colombia of ei-
ther taking financial bribes or a bullet. 
 Posses These are Jamaican gangs that developed in the poverty-stricken 
areas of Kingston, Jamaica, before emerging as an organized crime threat 
in the United States and Great Britain (where they are known as Yardies) 
in the 1980s. At their zenith, they played an important role in the expan-
sion of the crack cocaine trade in the United States. 
  President   ’s Commission on Organized Crime (PCOC)  In 1986, this 
commission’s findings forced scholars and public officials to reevaluate 
their understanding of organized crime by refocusing their attentions 
from traditional Italian organized crime to emerging groups such as Ja-
maican posses, Asian gangs, prison gangs, Russian mafiya, and others. 
 Smurfing In the 1980s, drug-trafficking groups used the tactic of break-
ing large sums of money into smaller amounts in order to conduct finan-
cial transactions at financial institutions and avoid certain reporting pro-
cedures. 
 Snakeheads These are Chinese human smugglers who facilitate the 
migration of individuals from China overseas. Almost 85 percent come 
from the Fujian province. The modern snakeheads emerged in the 1960s 
and 1970s when many mainland Chinese fled to Hong Kong for more 
freedom. 
 Triads  These are Chinese secret societies, many of whom are engaged 
in various organized crime activities. They have been involved in global 
crime activities since around 1917. Triads are decentralized, lacking a 
central body capable of uniting all the groups or giving universally ac-
cepted commands. 
 Tribalism  In certain regions of the world, particularly in Africa, a high 
premium is placed on one ’s tribal or ethnic background. It is not uncom-
mon for criminal gangs and organized crime groups to be bound by these 
natural affinities. 

292 Glossary
  United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime 
Signed into law in 2003, this Convention offered for the first time a singu-
lar legal definition of transnational organized crime that was acceptable 
to most countries. 
 Vory-v-zakone  Between the 1920s and the 1990s, the Soviet labor camps 
gave birth to this elite criminal fraternity, whose members lived accord-
ing to a  thieves’ law, an unwritten system of rules and behavior. 
 Yakuza  This term originally referred to a losing hand of cards, hence its 
traditional association with gambling rackets. After the post-World War II 
economy recovered in the 1950s, Yakuza gangs flourished thanks to al-
liances with politicians at all levels of government, inadequate policing, 
and fear of extreme left-wing activity by labor unions and student groups. 
Groups have a fairly complex hierarchy. Members are unique for carry-
ing business cards and maintaining identifiable headquarters. There are 
roughly 22 Yakuza syndicates today with about 85,000 members. A gov-
ernment crackdown, however, has shattered much of their former pres-
tige. 
 Zetas  These are former members of the Mexican Army who deserted in 
the late 1990s and enlisted in the Gulf cartel as killers and enforcers. By 
2006. they had become influential in their own right by trying to control 
their own drug routes. 

293
 Abadia, Juan Carlos Ramirez, 
149 
 Abadinsky, Howard, 168 
 Abrego, Juan Garcia, 102, 155 
 Academy and research organi-
zations, 223 –227 
 Academy of Criminal Justice 
Sciences, 223 
 Advance fee fraud (Nigeria), 
65 – 66 
 Afghanistan
anti-drug operations, 100
drug prohibitions in, 221
drug smuggling through, 57
as failed state, 37
in Golden Crescent of Central 
Asia, 186
heroin/opium production, 26, 
45, 183
Nigerian drug purchasing 
from, 116
Transnational Institute in, 227 
 Albanese, Jay S., 169 
 Albanian mafia, 12, 51, 156 –157 
 Al Capone of South Asia. See 
Dawood, Ibrahim 
 Alcohol prohibition, 3 – 4, 10, 59.
 See also Drug prohibition 
 al-Qaeda terrorist group, 51, 
54, 55 
 American Outlaw Motorcycle 
Gangs (OMGs), 71 
 American Society of Criminology 
(Division of International 
Criminology), 223  –225 
 Amnesty International (AI ), 244 
 Anslinger, Harry, 163  –  164 
 Anti-Slavery International, 244 
 Arlacchi, Pino, 169 
 Arms brokers.  See Weapons 
trafficking 
 Arms Trade Treaty (2006), 244 
 Aryan Brotherhood, 8 
 Asia
gangs of, 11
organized crime groups, 
105   –  108
political corruption in, 42
Triads crime group, 105 – 108
underground banking 
arrangements, 59 – 60 
 Asian Gang Investigators’ 
Association of California 
(AGIAC), 236 
 Asian mafia, 12 
 Assessing Transnational Orga-
nized Crime Groups 
proposal, 230 
 Australia
Chinese migration to, 18
Crime Commission (ACC), 
227
Hells Angels in, 117–119
‘Ndrangheta in, 95 –96
Index

294 Index
prison/street gangs in, 71
Vietnamese migration to, 43 
 Australian Bureau of Criminal 
Intelligence, 227 
 Automated Criminal Intelligence 
Information System 
(ACIIS), 236 
 Badalamenti, Gaetano, 73, 90 
 Balkan crime groups, 44 – 45 
 Bank Secrecy Act (1970), 61– 62, 
212–213, 235 
 Bar Association of the City of 
New York, 221 
 Battle, Jose Miguel, 149 –150 
 Berenson, Peter, 244 
 Big Circle Boys (China), 108 –109 
 Blackbeard the Pirate, 3 
 Black Hand extortion group, 154 
 Block, Alan, 221 
 Bonanno crime family, 73 –74, 89, 
93, 165, 167 
 Border Enforcement Security 
Taskforces (  BEST), 234 
 Borderpol European Secretariat, 
228 
 Borderpol International Asso-
ciation, 228 
 Born to Kill: America’s Most Noto-
rious Vietnamese Gang and the 
Changing Face of Organized 
Crime ( English), 170 
 Borsellino, Paolo, 91, 165 
 Bout, Viktor, 150 
 Brasco, Donny.  See Pistone, 
Joseph D. 
 Brezhnev, Leonid, 41– 42 
 British East Asia Company, 23 
 Bruinsma, Klaas (De Dominee), 
151 
 Buckley, William F., 221 
 Bureau for International Narcotics 
and Law Enforcement 
Affairs ( INL), 229 
 Buscetta, Tommaso, 151– 152, 
164 –165 
 Bush, George H. W., 160 
 Bush, George W., 153, 193 –194, 
199, 222, 232 
 Calabrian ‘Ndrangheta (crime 
group), 2, 8, 91, 94 –96, 239 
 Cali cartel, 68 – 69 
 Camarena Salazar, Enrique 
“Kiki,” 168, 242 
 Camorra crime group, 8, 66, 
91– 92, 94, 237 
 Canada
Amezucas in, 104
Big Circle Boys in, 108 –109
Cheng Chui Peng’s activities 
in, 161
Chinese migration to, 18
Criminal Intelligence Service, 
118, 236, 241
criminal networks, 14
cross-border smuggling, 10, 23
DIA participation in, 244
Hells Angels in, 117–119
high-tech crime arrests, 63
liaison with U.S. Marshals 
Service, 243
‘Ndrangheta in, 95 –  96
prison and street gangs, 71
Sicilian Mafia in, 84
Tongs and Chinese street 
gangs in, 109 –111
U.S. CBP activities in, 236
Vietnamese migration to, 43
WHO in, 223 
 Capone, Al, 59, 152, 153 
 Caribbean Financial Action Task 
Force (CFATF  ), 229 
 Castro, Fidel, 149 
 CD music piracy, 66 – 67 
 Center for Asian Crime Studies 
(CACS), 238 
 Central America
CICAD and, 233
coyotes of, 21
Mara Salvatrucha gangs, 43, 
72, 104 , 158

Index 295
UNICRI and, 248
weapons trafficking, 55, 195.
 See also Noriega, Manuel 
 Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 
70, 97, 230 
 Centre for Information and 
Research on Organised 
Crime (CIROC), 224 
 Centre for Information Crime 
Prevention (CICP), 230 
 CFATF (Caribbean Financial 
Action Task Force), 229 
 Cheng Chui Peng, 161 
 Chicago (U.S.) crime and cor-
ruption, 38 
 Chin, Ko-lin, 170 
 China
Big Circle Boys crime group, 
108 – 109
diamond smuggling activities, 
54
drug trafficking, 18, 23
gang activity in South America, 
108
Ghost Shadows gang, 43
Green Gang crime group, 109
heroin trade, 25
human smuggling costs, 204
Maoist Revolution in, 25
migrations from, 18, 19
opium prohibition attempts, 182
opium trade and addiction, 23
organized criminal activity, 
1–2, 14, 163
smuggling networks, 20  –21, 22
snakeheads of, 22
street gangs in Canada, 109 –111
Tong street gangs, 109 –111
Triads (crime group), 105 –108
underground banking 
arrangements, 59 – 60.
 See also Cheng Chui Peng;
Opium War; Snakeheads 
 Chinatown Gangs: Extortion, 
Enterprise & Ethnicity 
(Chin), 170 
 Chinese Subculture and Criminality: 
Non-Traditional Crime Groups 
in America (Chin), 170 
 CICAD ( Inter-American 
Drug Abuse Control 
Commission), 233 
 Civil wars, corruption and, 41– 45 
 Clinton, Hillary, 70 
 Coalition against Trafficking in 
Women (CATW), 245 
 Cold War, 1, 35, 42, 45, 97, 229 
 Colombia
Chinese drug trade in, 186
coca production and traf-
ficking, 184, 187
counter-feiting activities, 55 –  56
Dutch Hells Angels in, 71, 118
Guadalajara Cartel activity, 103
heroin production and traf-
ficking, 26, 183
Medillin cocaine cartel, 53, 
67– 69, 153
money laundering, 215
narcoterrorism in, 52
‘Ndrangheta in, 96
Noriega’s association with, 
160 –161
Norte del Valle drug cartel, 149
organized criminal activity, 1, 
14, 50  – 52, 221
political corruption in, 37– 39.
 See also Abadia, Juan Carlos 
Ramirez; Escobar-Gaviria, 
Pablo Emilio 
 Combating Organized Crime report, 
218 
 Comparative Criminal Justice Sys-
tems (Albanese, Dammer, 
Fairchild), 169 
 Connolly, John, 40 
 Control Arms campaign (of AI ), 244 
 Core criminal groups, 15 
 Corleone family, 91, 157–158, 164 
 Corruption
by the Camorra, 94
in failed states, 36

296 Index
by Hells Angels, 72
by Medillin/Cali cartels, 68
in Mexico, 168
organizations fighting against, 
173, 228 –2 29, 232 – 233, 
235  –  236, 241, 248, 250
piracy and, 3, 4, 8
of police officers, 39 – 40
of political officials, 37– 39
Shelley on, 47, 173
by Sicilian/Italian American 
Mafias, 90
in the Soviet Union, 41– 42
targeting by Dewey, 164
as transnational offense, 12 
 Corsican crime group, 25, 94, 
96 – 97 
 Council of Europe, 245 
 Council of Europe Convention on 
Action against Trafficking 
Human Beings (2005), 207, 
206 – 209 
 Counterfeiting operations, 55 – 56 
 Coyotes ( Mexican human smug-
glers), 21– 22 
 Crackdown on Human Traf-
ficking (2005), 204 
 Crime, Crusades and Corruption: 
Prohibitions in the United 
States (Woodiwiss), 174 
 Crime and Globalisation project 
( TNI ), 227 
 Crime syndicates
of Africa, 40
of Albania, 51
of California, 113
cooperation between, 47, 48
diamond smuggling by, 54
of Eurasia, 239
globalization and, 10 –11, 15, 
16, 41
Hispanic, in the U.S., 150
of Italy in Germany, 96
of Japan, 112
legal networks created by, 41
of Mexico, 21
money laundering by, 215
of Nigeria, 116
of Russia, 42, 98
of South Africa, 42– 43
undercover infiltration of, 
73 –74
UNODC vs., 251 
 The Criminal Elite: Professional 
and Organized Crime 
(Abadinsky), 168 
 Criminal Intelligence Service 
of Canada (CISC), 118, 
236 
 Criminal Justice (Albanese), 169 
 Criminal justice systems, 35 
 Criminology and Public Policy 
journal, 224 
 Cross-border smuggling
BEST investigations of, 234
and Borderpol, 228
from Canada, 10, 23
in Central Asia, 186 –  87
in China, 170, 182
from Mexico, 10, 23, 24 – 25, 
27–28, 39, 70 –71, 99 –104, 
154 –156, 158, 184 –185, 193, 
296, 199
of money, 194, 213
in Paraguay, Brazil, Argentina, 
47, 213
in Russia, 97
and UK Border Agency, 231
and U.S. Customs and Border 
Patrol, 233 
 Cuba
organized criminal activity, 14, 
149 – 150
slave trafficking, 17
U.S. mob infiltration in, 170.
 See also Battle, Jose Miguel;
English, T. J. 
 Curtis, Glen E., 221 
 Customs Co-operation Council 
(CCC), 235 
 Cyber Action Teams ( FBI ), 65 
 Cyber Program ( FBI), 65 

Index 297
 Dangerous Drugs Act (Great 
Britain, 1920), 10, 23 
 Dawood, Ibrahim, 48 – 49, 152 
 Dayton Peace Accords (1995), 
28 
 De Dominee.  See Bruinsma, 
Klaas 
 Department of Homeland 
Security (DHS), 234 – 235 
 Devolved hierarchies, 15 
 Dewey, Thomas, 159, 164, 218 
 Diamond smuggling, 54 –55 
 Digital technology, 62 – 63 
 Direzione Investigativa Antimafia 
(DIA), 165, 237 
 Division of International Crim-
inology (DIC), 223 – 224 
 Donnie Brasco: My Undercover Life 
in the Mafia (Pistone), 167 
 Drug prohibition, 3 – 4, 10, 23, 
164, 190, 221.  See also  
Harrison Narcotics Tax Act 
 Drugs and Democracy program 
( TNI), 227 
 Drug trafficking, 22 – 27, 182 –  195
Andean region coca culti-
vation, 184
Central Asian seizures, 186 –187
cocaine seizure records, 186
in Europe, 25 –27, 44 – 45, 95, 
97, 99 –100
in Great Britain, 22 – 23
heroin global production data, 
25 –26, 182 –183
International Opium 
Convention, 188
legislation against, 10, 23, 25, 
164, 190 –191, 190 –195
Mexican cartels, 24, 154 –155, 
158, 184 –186
of opium, 23, 25
Single Convention on Narcotic 
Drugs, 192 –  193
in the Soviet Union, 187
in the United States, 23 –24 
 DVD piracy, 66 – 67 
 Eastern Europe
counterfeiting activities, 56
DIA activity in, 240
human smuggling in, 204, 205
music piracy activities, 66
‘Ndrangheta in, 96
organized crime/terrorism 
in, 46
sex trafficking networks, 14 
 Economic and Social Council 
(ECOSOC) of the United 
Nations, 246 
 Egmont Group, 231 
 Electronic money laundering, 
62–  63 
 El Salvador, 19, 72, 104 – 105 
 Encyclopedia of Organized Crime in 
the United States (Kelly), 171 
 End User Certificate (EUC), 
199  – 200 
 English, T. J., 170 
 Escobar-Gaviria, Pablo Emilio, 
53 – 54, 69, 149, 153 
 Europe
Chinese migration to, 18
cigarette contraband in, 94
drug trafficking, 25 –27, 44 – 45, 
95, 97, 99 –100, 149, 151, 
182 –183, 222
Hells Angels in, 117–18
human trafficking, 203, 204, 
206 – 209
Nigerian gangs in, 116
piracy history, 2, 4, 6
prison and street gangs, 71
slave trafficking in, 17, 19
smuggling networks, 20 – 21
terrorist activities, 51
transnational crime networks, 
77–78
U.S. gangsters in, 10, 24.
 See also Anti-Slavery 
International; Borderpol 
European Secretariat; 
Council of Europe; 
Schengen Agreement 

298 Index
 European Convention on Human 
Rights, 245 
 European Institute for Crime 
Prevention and Control 
(HEUNI), 224 
 European Police Office ( Europol), 
75, 237 
 European Union (EU)
crime fighting framework, 
74 –75
human smuggling and 
trafficking groups, 201–207
Maastricht Treaty, 75, 237
organized crime groups, 
205 –206
tightening of border controls, 
20 – 21 
 The Executioner. See Lazcano, 
Heriberto 
 Export syndicates, 69 
 Failed states
defined, 36 and globalized 
crime, 37
of Sierra Leone and Liberia, 
44 
 Falcone, Giovanni, 164 –165 
 Farabundo Marti National Lib-
eration Front (FMNL), 43 
 FARC (Revolutionary Armed 
Forces of Colombia), 50 
 “Fat Man.”  See Rosenstein, Ze’ev 
 Federal Bureau of Investigation 
(FBI), 1, 40, 65, 79, 167, 235, 
242 
 Federal Bureau of Narcotics, 163 
 Federal Emergency Management 
Agency (FEMA), 234 
 Ferro, Don Vito Cascio, 154, 166 
 Fijnaut, Cyrille, 170 – 171 
 Financial Action Task Force 
(FATF), 61 
 Financial Crimes Enforcement 
Network (FinCEN), 235 
 Financial Intelligence Units 
(FIUs), 231 
 Finckenauer, James, 171 
 “First War on Organized Crime” 
(U.S., 1960s), 78 
 Five Points Gang, 159 
 FMNL (Farabundo Marti National 
Liberation Front), 43 
 France
DIA activity in, 240 
 Freeih, Louis J., 1 
 FRELIMO (Liberation Front of 
Mozambique), 44 
 Friedman, George, 226 
 Friedman, Robert I., 42 
 Gambling, Prohibition and Enforce-
ment Act (2006), 211 –213 
 Gamboa, Gregorio Sauceda, 
154 – 55 
 Gangster Capitalism: The United 
States and the Global 
Rise of Organized Crime 
( Woodiwiss), 174 
 Gang structures, 67– 72
drug cartels, 67– 69
export syndicates, 69
prison/street gangs, 71–72
Russian mafiya, 11, 12, 42, 67
U.S.–Mexico border, 70 –71 
 Gang violence, 40 – 41 
 Gates, Robert, 5 
 Germany
DIA activity in, 240 
 G-8 Expert Working Group 
against Eastern European 
organized crime, 237 
 Ghost Shadows (Chinese gang), 43 
 Giuliani, Rudolph, 165 
 Global Alliance against Traffic 
in Women (GAATW), 245 
 Global Anti-Counterfeiting 
Group, 55 
 Globalization, 8 –10, 16
of crime and terrorism, 35, 
45 – 48
and illicit drug trafficking, 
22 –27

Index 299
and weapons trafficking, 
27–29 
 Global Program against Money 
Laundering (GPML), 248 
 Global Programme against 
Corruption, 230 
 Global Programme against the 
Trafficking in Human 
Beings, 230 
 “Golden Age of Piracy,” 2 –3 
 Golden Crescent of Central Asia, 
186 
 The Golden Triangle: from Opium and 
Heroin to Methamphetamine 
(Chin), 170 
 Governmental organizations, 
227–2 36 
 GPML (Global Program against 
Money Laundering), 248 
 Grant, Ulysses S., 38 
 Great Britain
Chinese migration to, 18
Dangerous Drugs Act, 10, 23
DIA activity in, 240
drug prohibition in, 10
drug trafficking, 22 –23
Home Office of, 231
Jamaican Posses in, 114 –116
shipping and trade monopoly, 
3 – 4
slavery prohibition in, 17 
 Green Gang crime group, 109 
 Guidelines for Safety and Security in 
Russia (Serio), 173 
 Guillen, Osiel Cardenas, 155 
 Gulf Cartel (of Mexico), 154 – 155, 
158, 185 – 86 
 Guzman, Joaquin ( El Chapo, 
Shorty), 155 –156 
 Harrison Narcotics Tax Act (1914), 
10, 23, 189 –190 
 Havana Nocturne (English), 170 
 Hawala money broker network, 
59 – 60 
 Hayden, Michael, 70 
 Hells Angels, 71–72, 112, 117–119, 
186 
 Heroin production and traf-
ficking
in Afghanistan, 26, 45, 183
in China, 25
global data, 182 – 83
in Myanmar, 26
in Nigeria, 26
in South America, 25
in Southwest Asia, 25 –26
in the U.S., 26
in Vietnam, 183 
 Hess, Henner, 218 
 HEUNI (European Institute for 
Crime Prevention and Con-
trol), 224 
 Hezbollah terrorist group, 46, 48, 
54 – 55 
 Hierarchical conglomerates, 15 
 High-technology crimes, 63 – 65 
 Home Office (Great Britain), 231 
 Hong Kong Society of Crimi-
nology, 225 
 Hoover, J. Edgar, 243 
 Human smuggling and traf-
ficking, 201– 205
definitions, 201–202 legislation 
and statistics, 201–20 5
operational structures of, 19
organized EU groups, 205 – 206
selected average costs, 203 –204
services required by, 205
vs. human smuggling, 20 –21 
 IAEA (International Atomic 
Energy Agency), 57–58 
 Illegal Drug Trade in Russia (Paoli), 
172 
 Illicit Crop Monitoring Program 
(ICMP), 248 
 Illicit Trafficking (Kelly), 171 
 Immigrations and Customs 
Enforcement (U.S.), 237 
 India
high-tech crime arrests, 63

300 Index
opium production, 23
organized crime groups, 16 
 Indian Ocean piracy incident, 5 
 Information technology, 35, 173 
 INL (Bureau for International 
Narcotics and Law 
Enforcement Affairs), 229 
 Inter-American Convention 
against the Illicit Manu-
facturing of and Trafficking 
in Firearms, Ammunition, 
Explosives and Other 
Related Materials (1997), 
195 –199 
 Inter-American Drug Abuse Con-
trol Commission (CICAD), 
233 
 International Action Network 
on Small Arms ( IANSA), 
244 
 International Anti-Counterfeiting 
Coalition (IACC), 232 
 International Asian Organized 
Crime Conference, 240 
 International Association for the 
Study of Organized Crime 
(IASOC), 225 
 International Association of 
Asian Crime Investigators 
( IAACI ), 240 
 International Association of Chiefs 
of Police (IACP) Organized 
Crime Committee, 238 
 International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA), 57– 58 
 International Criminal Police 
Organization, 239 
 International Journal of Comparative 
and Applied Criminal Justice, 
224 
 International Latino Gang Inves-
tigators Association, 239 
 International Maritime Bureau, 4 – 5 
 International Narcotic Enforcement 
Officers Association 
( INEOA), 240 
 International Opium Convention 
(1912), 188 –189 
 International Organization for 
Migration (IOM), 246 
 International Organization of Asian 
Crime Investigators and 
Specialists (IOACIS), 240 
 Investigating the Russian Mafia 
(Serio), 173, 220 
 Investigative Roundtable on 
Organized Crime, 246 – 248 
 Ireland
organized criminal activity, 14 
 Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, 
51 
 Italian organized crime groups.
 See Camorra crime group;
Corsican crime group;
‘Ndrangheta crime group;
Sicilian Mafia 
 Ivankov, Vyacheslav, 156 
 Jack and Mae Nathanson Centre 
for the Study of Organized 
Crime and Corruption, 225 
 Jamaican Posses, 11, 29, 114 –116 
 Japan
DIA activity in, 240
organized criminal activity, 
1– 2, 13, 14
weapons trade, 29
Yakuzas (crime group), 2, 
111–114.
 See also Kodama, Yoshio 
 Jefferson, Thomas, 5 
 Jolly Roger pirate ship, 3 
 Just Desserts for Corporate Crimi-
nals (Schlegel), 172 
 Kadriovski, Daut, 156 –157 
 Karacan, Tara, 221, 271 
 Kefauver Hearings (1950 –1951), 
14 
 Kelly, Robert J., 171 
 Kennedy, Robert F., 78 
 Kenney, Michael, 220 

Index 301
 Kenya, 7, 40 – 41, 161 
 Khun Sa, 162 
 Kidd, William, 2 
 Kimberly Process Certification 
Scheme (2003), 209 –211 
 Kodama, Yoshio, 157 
 Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA), 
51– 52 
 Lansky, Meyer, 59, 150, 159 
 La Strada International Euro-
pean Network against Traf-
ficking in Human Beings, 
246 – 248 
 The Last Struggle with the Mafia  
(Mori), 166 
 Latin America
Anti-Slavery International 
activities, 247
car theft activities, 105
Chinese migration to, 18
drug cartels in, 67– 68
drug trafficking in, 24 –25, 
26 –27
murders of young males in, 43
narcoterrorism in, 52 – 53
organized crime groups, 183, 
221
political corruption in, 38, 42
political violence in, 42
Sicilian Mafia activity in, 
84 – 85
terrorist groups in, 45.
 See also Maierovitch, Walter 
 Law enforcement, international
barriers to, 75 –78
European Union framework, 
74 –75
international cooperation, 
72–74
language of, 76 –77
law/jurisdiction variance, 77
organizations, 238 – 247
policing cyberspace, 78
technology and, 77–78 
 Lazcano, Heriberto, 158 
 Leggio, Luciano, 157–158 
 Leyva, Arturo Beltran, 158 –159 
 Liberation Front of Mozambique 
(FRELIMO), 44 
 Liberia
political corruption in, 37– 39 
 “Little Japanese.”  See Ivankov, 
Vyacheslav 
 LOS PEPES Colombian vigilante 
group, 154 
 Luciano, Charles “Lucky,” 59, 
163  –  64 
 Lugar, Richard, 198  – 199 
 Maastricht Treaty on European 
Union, 75, 237 
 Mafia
of Albania, 12, 51, 160 –161
defined, 12–14
in Latin America, 84 – 85
in Russia (mafiya), 11, 12, 
42, 67.
 See also Sicilian Mafia 
 Mafia, Peasants and Great Estates: 
Society in Traditional Calabria 
(Arlacchi), 169 
 Mafia and Mafiosi: The Structure 
Power ( Hess), 218 
 Mafia and Organized Crime: 
A Beginner’s Guide  
(Finckenauer), 171 
 Mafia Brotherhoods (Paoli), 172 
 Mafia Business: The Mafia Ethic 
and the Spirit of Capitalism  
(Arlacchi), 169 
 The Mafia in America: An Oral 
History (Abadinsky), 168 
 Magellan, Ferdinand, 9 
 Maierovitch, Walter, 165 –  166 
 A Man of Honor (Giuliani), 165 
 Maoist Revolution, 25 
 Mara Salvatrucha (MS-13) gangs, 
43, 72, 104 – 105, 158 
 Marijuana Tax Act (1937), 164, 
191–192 
 Masseria, Joe “the Boss,” 159 

302 Index
 McClellan Committee Hearings 
(1963 –1964), 14, 219 
 Medillin cocaine cartel 
(Colombia), 53, 67– 69 
 Memon, Tiger, 49 
 Men of Dishonor: Inside the Sicilian 
Mafia (Arlacchi), 169 
 Meridia Initiative (2008), 70, 
193 – 195 
 Mexican Mafia, 8 
 Mexico
cocaine trafficking, 27
coyotes of, 21–22
cross-border smuggling, 10, 
23, 27
drug cartels, 99 –105
drug trafficking, 24
Gulf Cartel of, 154 – 155
Mara Slavatrucha gangs, 43, 
72, 104 – 5
police corruption in, 39 – 40
weapons trading, 28 –29.
 See also Gamboa, Gregorio 
Sauceda 
 Middle Ages, piracy during, 2 
 Mob and Mobility: How Mafias 
Settle in New Territory 
( Varese), 173 
 Modernization of the Wire Act 
(1961), 210 –211 
 Mogilevich, Semion, 74, 160 
 Money laundering, 58 –59, 213  –215
Bank Secrecy Act vs., 212 –13
BSA vs., 235
Camorra involvement in, 94
CFATF vs., 229
controlling, 61– 62
diamond smuggling and, 54
Egmont Group vs., 231
electronic, 62– 63
Europol vs., 75, 237
by global terrorist groups, 47
GPML vs., 248
INL vs., 229
by Islamic terrorist groups, 46
by Japan, 112
music piracy and, 66
Nathanson Centre vs., 226
by Nigeria, 116 –118
by Noriega, 161
OCDETF vs., 214
offshore banking/shell 
corporations and, 60 – 61
origins of, 213
piracy and, 4
Shelley on, 173
SOCA vs., 241
in South Asia, 48
TraCCC vs., 226
as transnational crime, 12, 73, 
181
U.S. Patriot Act vs., 215 –216
in Yugoslavia, 44 
 Money Laundering Control Act 
(1986), 61– 62 
 Mori, Cesare, 166 
 Mozambique National Resistance 
(RENAMO), 44 
 MPLA (Popular Movement for the 
Liberation of Angola), 44 
 MS-13 (Mara Salvatrucha) gangs, 
43, 72, 104 –105, 158 
 Mukasey, Michael, 216  –217 
 Music piracy, 66 
 Myanmar
heroin/opium production, 26
Nigerian drug purchasing 
from, 116 
 Narcoterrorism, 45, 52 – 54 
 Nathanson Centre on Trans-
national Human Rights, 
Crime and Security, 225 
 National Crime Authority 
(Australia), 227 – 228 
 National Drug Intelligence 
Center report (2009), 25, 222 
 National Drug Intelligence 
Center (NDIC) report 
(2009), 25 
 National Drug Office (U.S.), 
165 – 166 

Index 303
 National Union for the Total 
Independence of Angola 
(UNITA), 44 
 Navarra, Michele, 157–158 
 Navigation Acts (17th century), 
3 – 4 
 ‘Ndrangheta crime group, 2, 8, 
91, 94 – 96, 239 
 New Jersey State Commission of 
Investigation, 26 
 Nigeria
advance fee fraud, 65 – 66
female prostitution, 19
fraud rings, 14
gangs of, 116 –117
heroin trade, 26
transnational crimes, 41 
 9/11 Commission, 55 
 Nixon, Richard, 242 
 Nongovernmental organizations 
(NGOs), 244  –  246 
 Noriega, Manuel, 160 – 161 
 North American Free Trade 
Agreement (NAFTA), 21 
 Northern Ireland Organized 
Crime Task Force, 241 
 Nuclear smuggling, 57–  58 
 Obama, Barack, 70 
 OCDETF (Organized Crime Drug 
Enforcement Task Force), 
214 
 Ochoa, Juan David, 220 
 Office of Counternarcotics 
Enforcement (CNE), 234 
 Office of Territorial and 
International Criminal 
Intelligence and Drug 
Enforcement (OTICIDE), 
232 
 Offshore banking, 60 – 61 
 Old World piracy, 2 
 Operation Cyber Chase, 63 
 Operation Jessica (FBI), 66 – 67 
 Operation Miracle (of Salazar), 168 
 Operation Tiger Trap, 162 
 Opium Exclusion Act (U.S., 1909), 
23 
 “Opium King.”  See Khun Sa 
 Opium production, smuggling 
and trading, 10, 23 
 Opium War (1842), 23 
 Organization of American States 
(OAS), 231 – 233 
 Organized Crime and American 
Power ( Woodiwiss), 174 
 Organized crime and terrorism, 
45 – 48
activity types, 16 – 29
combating in the U.S., 215 –219
defined, 4, 10 –12, 176 –181
facts and statistics on, 175 –176
globalization and, 10
group characteristics, 7– 8
in India, 16, 23, 63
in South Asia, 48 – 49
structure of groups, 14 –16
types of groups, 2
in Ukraine, 28, 67, 163, 249 – 250.
 See also Eastern Europe; 
European Union; Latin 
America; South America; 
Soviet Union; individual 
crime groups 
 Organized Crime Committee 
(OCC), 238 
 Organized Crime Drug 
Enforcement Task Force 
(OCDETF), 214 
 Organized crime hybrids, 50 
 Organized Crime in Our Times 
(Albanese), 169 
 Organized Crime Section ( FBI), 243 
 Organized Crime textbook 
(Abadinsky), 169 
 Organized criminal networks, 15 
 Organ removal and trade, 20 
 Oxfam International, 247 
 Paddy Whacked: The Untold Story of 
the Irish American Gangster 
( English), 170 

304 Index
 Paoli, Letizia, 172, 220 
 Patriot Act (U.S.), 215 –216 
 Petrosino, Giuseppe “Joe,” 154, 
166 
 Piracy
definition, 4 – 5
economic factors, 3 – 4, 6
history of, 2 – 3
past vs. present, 7– 8
in the 21st century, 5 –7 
 Pistone, Joseph D., 73 –74, 167–168 
 Pizza Connection Trial, 73, 74, 79, 
164 
 Police agencies
cooperation problems, 35
corruption in, 39 – 40 
 Political corruption, 37– 39 
 Popular Movement for the 
Liberation of Angola 
(MPLA), 44 
 President’s Commission on Law 
Enforcement and the 
Administration of Justice, 
78, 219 
 President’s Commission on 
Organized Crime, 11, 14 
 “Prince of Death.”  See Khun Sa 
 Professional Ethics in Criminal Justice: 
Being Ethical When No One 
is Looking (Albanese), 169 
 Prohibition Bureau (U.S.), 163 
 Project Bada, 239 
 Project Millennium, 239 
 Project Pink Panthers, 239 
 Protocol against the Smuggling 
of Migrants by Land, 
Sea and Air, Article 3, 
Supplementing the UN 
Convention against 
Transnational Organized 
Crime (2000), 203 
 Protocol to Prevent, Suppress 
and Punish Trafficking 
in Persons, Article 3, 
Supplementing the UN 
Convention against 
Transnational Organized 
Crime (2000), 202 
 Provenzano, Bernardo, 49 – 50, 91, 
158 
 Quintero, Rafael Caro, 242 
 Quotations
from  Combating Organized 
Crime, 218
by Dewey, 219
on drug trafficking, 222 – 223
by Hess, 220
on Latin America/Mexican 
drug networks, 221– 222
in McClellan Committee 
Report, 219
by Paoli, 220
from President’s Commission 
on Law Enforcement and 
the Administration of 
Justice, 220
on Russian organized crime, 
221
from UN Convention against 
Transnational Organized 
Crime, 220 –221 
 Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt 
Organizations Act (RICO), 
40, 74, 165, 167, 176 –179 
 Ransoms (in piracy incidents), 6 
 Reagan, Ronald, 11 
 RENAMO (Mozambique 
National Resistance), 44 
 Research organizations, 225 – 229 
 Revolutionary Armed Forces of 
Colombia (FARC), 50 
 Rice, Condoleezza, 70 
 RICO. See Racketeer Influenced 
and Corrupt Organizations 
Act 
 Rigid hierarchies, 15 
 Riina, Salvatore, 158, 164 
 Roberts, Bartholomew, 3 
 Rosenstein, Ze’ev, 161 
 Rothstein, Arnold, 10, 23 –24 

Index 305
 Royal Canadian Mounted Police, 
236 
 Russia
cross-border smuggling, 97
DIA activity in, 240
Mafiya activities, 11, 12, 42, 67
organized criminal activity, 14
political corruption in, 37– 39 
 Russian organized crime (ROC), 
97– 99 
 Sacra Corona Unita, 237 
 “Scarlet Pimpernel of Corleone.”
 See Leggio, Luciano 
 Schengen Agreement (Europe), 
21, 78 
 Schlegel, Kip, 172 
 Schultz, Dutch, 164 
 Scottish Crime and Drug Enforce-
ment Agency, 241 
 Serio, Joseph, 172 –173, 221 
 Serious Organised Crime Agency 
(SOCA), 233, 24 1
 Sex trafficking networks, 14 
 Shan United Army (SUA), 162 
 Shell corporations, 60 – 61 
 Shelley, Louise, 47, 173, 220 
 Shining Party terrorist group, 52, 
184 
 Sicilian Mafia, 2, 8, 12 –13, 49, 54, 
73 –74, 89 – 96, 152, 157–159 
 Siegel, Benjamin “Bugsy,” 159 
 Silver, Long John, 3 
 Single Convention on Narcotic 
Drugs (1961), 192 – 193 
 SITREPS (situational reports), 226 
 Slavery, 16 –19, 71, 177, 203.  See also 
Anti-Slavery International 
 Smuggled Chinese: Clandestine 
Immigration to the United 
States (Chin), 170 
 Smurfing, 62 
 Snakeheads (Chinese human 
smugglers), 22, 161 
 SOCA (Serious Organised Crime 
Agency), 241 
 Somalia piracy incidents, 5 – 6 
 South America
Chinese gang activity in, 104
cocaine production in, 73
heroin trafficking in, 25
human trafficking in, 204
money laundering in, 214
Nigerian drug purchasing 
from, 116
organized crime groups, 16
prison/street gangs in, 72.
 See also Colombia 
 Southwest Asia, 25 –26 
 Soviet Union
collapse of, 41– 42, 45, 58, 74, 
172
drug trafficking in, 183
emergence of new countries 
from, 44 – 45
financial/money laundering 
crimes, 206
organized criminal activity, 13, 
38 – 39, 41, 46
terrorism in, 46, 228 – 229
underground economy of, 98
weapons trafficking in, 27–28, 
195.
 See also Bout, Viktor 
 STRATFOR Global Intelligence, 
226 
 Structures of organized crime 
groups, 14 –16 
 Supreme Court ( U.S.) cases
 U.S. v. Badalamenti, 73
 U.S. v. Salerno, 165 
 Tamil Tigers (Sri Lanka), 51 
 Taylor, Charles Ghankay, 162 –163 
 Teach, Edward, 3 
 Technologies
FinCEN use of, 238
in have vs. have-not countries, 
77–78
high-tech crimes, 63 – 65
information technology, 35, 173
for oceangoing, 5, 9

306 Index
for policing cyberspace, 78
post-Cold War, 1
Schlegel’s examination of, 172
and terrorism, 35 
 Terrorism, Transnational Crime 
and Corruption Center 
(TRaCCC), 173, 226 
 Tierney, John, 221 
 Tong street gangs, 109 –111 
 Trafficante, Santos, Sr., 150 
 Transnational crime
activities in Africa, 41
Camorra crime group and, 94
categories of offenses, 185
defined/types of, 12, 41
Finckenauer vs., 171
organizations fighting, 228 –229, 
233, 240, 241
Shelley on, 47, 177
technology and, 77 
 Transnational Institute (TNI), 227 
 Transparency International (TI), 247 
 Transportation Security Agency 
(TSA), 234 
 Treasure Island pirate ship, 3 
 Trends in Organized Crime online 
subscription, 227 
 Triads (crime group), 2, 105 –108 
 Triads crime group (China), 
105 –  108 
 Tribalism and ethnicity, 40 – 41 
 Tupac-Amaru terrorist group, 52 
 Tu Yueh-sheng (Big Eared Tu), 163 
 21st century piracy, 5 –7 
 Ukraine
as center of weapons trade, 28
human trafficking in, 249 –250
music piracy in, 67
organized crime groups, 163 
 Underground economies, 36 –37, 
38 
 UNITA (National Union for the 
Total Independence of 
Angola), 44 
 United Kingdom, 253
Dawood’s criminal activity 
in, 152
Jamaican Posses in, 11, 29, 
114 –116
Nigerian scams in, 65.
 See also Anti-Slavery Inter-
national 
 United Nations Convention 
against Transnational 
Organized Crime (2000), 
11–12, 179 –181, 201–202, 
220 –221 
 United Nations Convention 
Relating to the Status of 
Refugees (1951), 202 
 United Nations Economic and 
Social Council (ECOSOC), 
246 
 United Nations Interregional 
Criminal Justice and 
Research Institute 
(UNICRI), 233, 247 – 248 
 United Nations Office for Drug 
Control and Crime Preven-
tion, 230 – 231 
 United Nations Office on Drugs 
and Crime (UNODC), 14, 
248 
 United Nations Protocol against 
the Smuggling of Migrants 
by Land, Sea and Air, 20 
 United States
California crime syndicates, 
113
combating crime and 
terrorism in, 215 –219
drug trafficking, 23 –24, 26
“First War on Organized 
Crime,” 78
Harrison Narcotics Act, 10, 23
Hells Angels in, 117–119
high-tech crime arrests, 63
Hispanic crime syndicates, 
150
Jamaican Posses in, 11, 29, 
114 –116

Index 307
Mara Salvatrucha gangs, 43, 
72, 104 –105
Marijuana Tax Act, 164
McClellan Committee Hearings 
(1963 –1964), 14, 219
National Drug Office, 169 –170
Opium Exclusion Act, 23
Pizza Connection Trial, 165
political corruption in, 37– 39
President’s Commission on 
Organized Crime, 11, 14
Prohibition Bureau, 164
RICO legislation, 40
Russian gangs in, 42
Supreme Court cases, 73, 165
Tongs and Chinese street 
gangs in, 109 –111
War on Drugs, 153 
 Uniting and Strengthening 
America by Providing 
Appropriate Tools 
Required to Intercept and 
Obstruct Terrorism Act 
(  USA PATRIOT ACT  ), 
216 –217 
 U.S. Citizenship and Immigration 
Services (USCIS), 234 
 U.S. Coast Guard, 234 
 U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ), 
235 
 U.S. Drug Enforcement Adminis-
tration (DEA), 26, 68, 232, 
242 
 U.S. Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement, 241 
 U.S. Marshall’s Service, 237, 
246 –  247 
 U.S. Secret Service, 237 
 U.S. Treasury Department, 235 
 U.S. v. Badalamenti court case, 73 
 U.S. v. Salerno court case, 165 
 USA Patriot Act, 215, 235 
 Varese, Federico, 173 –174 
 Vietnam
English, T. J. on, 170
heroin production, 183
migration to U.S., 43
organized criminal activity, 
14, 170
political corruption in, 43 
 von Lampe, Klaus, 174 
 War on Drugs (George W. Bush 
administration), 153 
 Washington Office on Latin 
America, 220 
 Weapons trafficking
by al-Qaeda, 55
CICAD and, 233
described, 27–29
documents related to, 
195 –201
by Hells Angels, 118 
 The Westies: The Irish Mob  
( English), 170 
 Witness Security Program, 168, 
243 
 Woodiwiss, Michael, 174 
 World Customs Organization 
(WCO), 75, 235 
 World Health Organization 
( WHO), 223 
 World Organized Crime Report 
(  UN), 233 
 World Wide Web (WWW), 1 
 Yakuzas (crime group), 2, 
111 –114 
 “ Yaponchik.”  See Ivankov, 
Vyacheslav 
 Yeltsin, Boris, 42 
 Los Zetas (of Gulf Cartel ), 158 

308
About the Author
Mitchel P. Roth is professor of criminal justice at Sam Houston 
State University in the College of Criminal Justice. He has also been 
a regular instructor at the International Law Enforcement Academy 
(ILEA) in Roswell, New Mexico, since 2001, where he has focused on 
organized crime issues. He is the author of numerous articles and 
book chapters and 10 books including Organized Crime, published 
by Pearson-Prentice Hall (2009); Crime and Punishment: A History 
of the Criminal Justice System, published by Cengage (2005); Prisons 
and Prison Systems: A Global Encyclopedia, Greenwood Press (2003); 
and Historical Dictionary of Law Enforcement, Greenwood Press 
(2001). He has taught numerous study-abroad classes including 
one, in the summer of 2009, focusing on the Sicilian Mafia.

