
GLOBAL DISEQUILIBRIUM IN THE WORLD ECONOMY

CENfRAL ISSUES IN CONTEMPORARY ECONOMIC THEORY AND
POLICY
GeneralEditor: Mario Baldassarri,ProfessorofEconomics, Universityof
Rome, 'La Sapienza', Italy
This new series is a joint initiative between Macmillan and SIP!, the
publishing company of Confindustria (the Confederation of Italian
Industry), based on the book collection MONOGRAFIE RPE, published
by SIPI and originated from the new editorial programme of one of the
oldest Italian journals of economics, the Rivista di Politica Economica,
founded in 1911.This series is intended to become an arena in which the
most topical economicproblems are freely debated and confronted with
different scientific orientations and/or political theories.
The 1990s clearly represent a transition period in which the world
economy will establish new international relationships and in this con-
text, new challenges and new risks will have to be faced within each
economic system. Fundamental issues on which economic theory and
policy have long based theirreasoning over thelast two or three decades
have to be critically reviewed in order to pursue new frontiers for
theoretical development and economic policy implementation. In this
sense, this new series aims at being a "place of debate" between profes-
sional economists, an updated learning tool for students and a specific
reference for a wider readership aiming at understanding economic
theory and policy evolution even from a non-specialist point of view.
Published
Mario Baldassarri (editor)
KEYNES AND THE ECONOMIC POLICIES OF THE 1980s
Mario Baldassarri, Luigi Paganetto and Edmund S. Phelps (editors)
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC INTERDEPENDENCE,
PATfERNS OF TRADE BALANCES AND ECONOMIC POLICY
COORDINAnON
Mario Baldassarri (editor)
OLIGOPOLY AND DYNAMIC COMPETITION
Mario Baldassarri, John McCallum and Robert Mundell (editors)
GLOBAL DISEQUILIBRIUM IN THE WORLD ECONOMY

Global Disequlibrium
in the World Economy
Edited by
Mario Baldassarri
Professor ofEconomics
University ofRome, 'LA Sapienza'
John McCallum
Professor ofEconomics
McGill University, Monteal
and
Robert Mundell
Professor of Economics
Columbia University, NewYork
in association with
Palgrave Macmillan

Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1st edition 1992
All rights reserved . No reproduction, copy or transmission of
this publication may be made without written permission.
No paragraph of this publication may be reproduced, copied or
transm itted save with written permission or in accordance with
the provisions of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988,
or under the terms of any licence permitting limited copying
issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, 90 Tottenham Court
Road, London W1P 9HE.
Any person who does any unauthorised act in relation to this
publication may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil
claims for damages.
First published in Great Britain 1992by
THE MACMILLAN PRESSLTD
Houndrnills, Basingstoke, Hampshire RG212XS
and London
Companies and representatives
throughout the world
A catalogue record for this book is available
from the British Library.
Reprinted 1993
First published in the United States of America 1992 by
Scholarly and Reference Division,
ST. MARTIN'S PRESS, INC.,
175 Fifth Avenue,
New York, N.Y. 10010
ISBN 978-0-312-07984-0
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Global disequilibrium in the world economy I edited by Mario
Baldassarri, John McCallum, and Robert Mundell.
p.
cm.-
(Central issues in contemporary economic theory and
policy)
Includes index.
ISBN 978-0-312-07984-0
1. Economic history-l99D-
2. International finance.
3. Europe--
-Economic integration.
4. Debts, External.
5. Commercial policy.
I. Baldassarri, Mario, 1946-
.
II. McCallum, John, 1950-
III. Mundell, Robert A., 1932-
IV. Series.
HC59.15.G56
1992
330.9'049-dc20
92~5
CIP
ISBN 978-1-349-22271-1
ISBN 978-1-349-22269-8 (eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-1-349-22269-8
© SIPI Srl, Rivista di Politica Economica 1989, 1992 

Contents
Preface
1
Introduction
Catherine Listonand John McCallum
PART I: OVERVIEW PAPERS
1
5
2
The Economic Science of Today and Global Disequilibrium
25
Maurice Allais
3
Global Disequilibrium and International Monetary Reform
39
AlexanderK. Swoboda
4
The Dollar and the Policy Mix
57
Robert Mundell
5
The European Monetary System in the World Economy
79
Robert Triffin
6
The State of the World Economy: Global Imbalances,
Exchange Rates and the World Debt
87
Gottfried Haberler
7
Monetarism Yesterday and Today
107
PhilipCagan
PART II: TRADE BALANCE, STOCK MARKETS AND
FOREIGN EXCHANGE RATES
8
Trade Balance and Exchange Rates
125
John S. Chipman
9
Fiscal Stimulus and Employment at Home and Abroad in a
Real Two-eountry Customer-Market Model
157
Edmund S. Phelps
v

vi
Contents
243
PART III:THE EUROPEAN MONETARY AND COMMERCIAL
AREA
10 EC 1992:Prospects and Problems
185
Herbert Giersch
11 The European Monetary System and Its Predecessors
199
Marcello de Cecco
12
Policy Coordination in Europe
213
Norbert Walter
13 Ten Reasons to Fear Fortress Europe
225
Gerard Curzon
PART IV:THIRD WORLD DEBT
14 World Disequilibrium and Third World Debt
Harold Lord Lever
PART V: THE REFORMOF THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY
SYSfEM
15
International Nominal Targeting (INT): A Proposal for
Overcoming Obstacles to Policy Coordination
257
Jeffrey A. Frankel
16 Toward a Common Monetary Standard Through the
Regulation of Exchange Rates
295
Ronald I. McKinnon
17
What Future for the International Monetary System?
323
Richard N. Cooper
18 The Global Adjustment System
351
Robert A. Mundell
fu~x
~5

Preface
The theme of this bookis "GlobalDisequilibriumin World Economy', a
subjectthatto manyeconomistsseemed to be a fitting characterizationof
the world economy at the beginning of the 19905.
At the heart of the analysis on Global Disequilibrium there are the
problems connected with the budget deficit, rising debts and the large
trade deficit of the United States. The US trade deficit problem involves
the controversy between those who think the correction is dollar depre-
ciation and those who regard it as a problem of deficient saving. But US
deficits cannotbe considered apart from the corresponding surpluses in
West Germany, in Japan and other South Eastern Asian countries. The
problem has to be considered in its global context because correction of
the deficits is contingent on correction of the surpluses.
Western European integrationraises anotherset of issues. The freeing of
those financial markets, scheduled to begin in 1993,will affect the rest of
theworld.Will whatisassumedtobe goodfor Europebe good for the rest
of the world? The same question is raised by the movement toward the
creation of a common European currency. Would Europe have a better
monetary system on the whole if its countries' centralized monetary
policy, or would decentralized monetary policies act as a protection
against big mistakes? Would a European currency become a reserve
currencyand, therefore,besubject to the deficits of otherreservecenters?
Would a common European currency create an international monetary
system elsewhere?
Thedevelopmentof a widerand deeperdegreeofdiscriminationagainst
the rest of the world is also a subject that requires careful attention for its
economic and its political implications.

2
Preface
Very recently, Canada and the United States inaugurated a ''Northern
American free trade area." The move, which may have been influenced,
if not inspired, by the bloc forming on the continent of Europe, raises
problemsboth within and withoutNorthAmerica. Howfar willthe free
trade movement go within the two countries? Will theyfind it necessary
to harmonize tax systems? Will it be desirable to proceed to a complete
integrationoffinancial flows? Howcana countryone-tenth thesize of its
neighbour maintain its own independence and individuality in the face
of close economicintegration?Should thefree tradeareabe expanded to
include Japan and other east Asian countries or Europe? Should it
discriminate against Latin America or introduce compensating prefer-
ences? What effectwill the free trade area have on Canadian federalism,
in particular,onFrenchCanada's need to preserve its own heritage in an
anglophone continent?
The debt load of the less developed countries (LDCs) is one of the most
urgent of the problems that fit under the category of «disequilibrium».
Although the issue is worldwide, it hasbecome particularly acute and
concentrated in Latin America. Since the 1982Mexico crisis, the problem
hasoccupied the attention of bankers, economists, and politicians. The
Mexicansituationwasaggravatedimmenselybythefall in thepriceofoil
in and following the winter of 1985-86.
The solution to the problem surely rests in some combination of debt
forgiveness, guarantees to banks, new growth-fostering policies in the
LOCs, and provision for their easier access to new capital and advanced
technology. The planofUSSecretaryof theTreasuryJames Bakerdid not
solve the problem,buttheoneproposedbyhissuccessor,WilliamBrady,
has created new hopes of reaching a compromise; it represents a new,
forward stage in US thinking and holds open the promise that growth
policies can be resumed in Latin America.
The former Soviet Union is undergoing unprecedented change in its
approach to economic and political organization. The new breezes raise
questions for the international economy. To what extent should the
western world react positively, in the sense of providing them with
technology and credits?
The changing role and rising economic importance of East Asia -
including not only Japan but also Korea, Taiwan, and Hong Kong -
introducethepossibilityofa newmodelfor growththatcouldbe imitated

Preface
3
in someofthecountriesofLatinAmericaandAfrica,Havethe hugetrade
surpluses and international reserves of the East Asian countries arisen
because of their high savings rates and their desire to acquire more
diversified foreign assets abroad? Should these trade surpluses from
capital-exporting areas be regarded as a disequilibrium situation? Ifso,
what policies need to be taken to correct it?
Thelastissueto be consideredwasthe questionofinternationalmonetary
reform. The flexible exchange system that replaced the Bretton Woods
system resulted in excessive appreciation of the dollar in the first half of
the 1980s,followed by excessive depreciation of the dollar in the second
half.
The Plaza Accord of September 1985 was an attempt to depreciate the
dollar; then, in February1987and again in December1987,the Group of
seven countries agreed to stabilize the exchange rate at two meetings in
the Louvre. Since 1988, however, it has been difficult to prevent the
dollar's regaining part of the ground it lost after 1985. Nevertheless,
economic policy during the past three years has moved away from the
flexible exchange rate system toward a system of coordinated exchange
rates. Thedecisiongroupbased ontheGroupofsevenhas proved viable,
but it leaves unspecified the future of the international monetary order.
Moreover, the possibility of the development of a European currency
along the lines recommended by the Delors Committee raises the ques-
tion of whether the focus on the European MonetarySystemwill detract
from theneed for international monetary reformin the rest of the world.
It remains to be seen whether the Group of seven can maintain its
decentralized character after (and if) the European countries move
toward a common monetary policy.
The purpose of the book is to raise these issues in a very general way.
There is still a great need for theoretical, empirical, historical and policy
analysis that expandsourunderstanding of these issues. With regards to
this, we trust that these essays will further stir up the debate on the
development of sound economic policies and the advancement of eco-
nomic science, thus favouring a constant progress of the economic
science.
John McCallum
and
Robert Mundell

Introduction
Catherine Liston . John McCallum
McGill University
The essays included in this volume on Global Disequilibrium in
the World Economy have been divided in five sections.
The first section, includes six mayor contributions on important
topics regarding the "disequilibrium"; the second one describes the
problems existing in the relations between trade settlements and
exchange rates.
The third and fourth sections deal with an analysis carried out on
some main aspects concerning geographic areas of importance and a
focus on Europe's situation and role, besides the analysis on third-
world debt problems.
The fifth section includes a series of contributions dealing with
the reform of the international monetary system. In this introduction,
we tried to point out the most topic issues that have been proposed
and the most interesting conclusions that have been reached, with a
synthetic analysis for each single contribution.
The five sections are followed by an essay by Robert Mundell
which ends up the volume and goes over again the historical experi-
ence and the most important theoretical aspects of the global adjust-
ment system.
I . The Overview Papers
The six overview papers set the stage for the more detailed
analysis that follows. Nobel Laureate Maurice Allaisopens this section
with a case for major reforms designed to deal with destabilizing

6
Catherine Liston - John McCallum
short-term capital flows and speculation. The paper by Alexander K.
Swoboda provides a lucid account of the links between global imbal-
ances (the topic of the first section of the collection) and international
monetary reform (the topic of the last section). Robert Mundell
analyzes the monetary-fiscal policy mix in the United States over the
past thre decades, criticizing "national monetarists" and arguing that
monetary policy should be directed toward exchange rate stabi-
lizazion.
In contrast to Mundell, Gottfried Haberler presents a case for
floating exchange rates, contending that policy should target domestic
objectives, and allow exchange rates to be determined in free,
competitive markets. Robert Triffin argues strongly for a European
Central Bank and, ultimately, a truly international monetary standard
based on reserves deposited with the International Monetary Fund
(IMF). Finally, Philip Cagan describes the "triumph of monetarism" in
the 1970s and the rather less triumphant state in which monetarism
finds itself today.
Maurice Allais provides a critique of contemporary economics
and an analysis of possible reforms of monetary and financial struc-
ture. On the first point, Allais stresses that the total submission of
theories to data is the golden rule that dominates any scientific
discipline. He criticizes today's "pseudo-theories" characterized by
the use of mathematics for its own sake and a failure to carry out
appropriate empirical tests. Too often, according to Allais, researchers
apply models to a single country for a short period, and true para-
meters are so arbitrary and so numerous that the findings obtained
have practically no real meaning.
Allais then argues that frantic speculation has turned the world
into a vast casino. He cites the uncontrolled creation ex nihilo of new
means of payment, the growth of national and international debt, and
the growth of unrestrained speculation in foreign exchange and
security markets. Nevertheless, he adds, no one today questions the
rationale of today's credit system, which is based on money creation
by the banking system and the widespread policy of financing long-
term credits with short-term borrowings.
Allais calls for fundamental changes, including a reform of the
credit mechanism, the compulsory indexation of all forward con-

Introduction
7
tracts, and a reform of the international monetary system. On this last
point, he favours dropping the dollar as a reserve currency and
returning to a system of fixed exchange rates, revisable if need be .
Alexander K. Swoboda begins by asking why we should worry
about current account imbalances. After all, such imbalances may be
seen as a natural mechanism for the allocation of resources among
countries, and the literature on the stages of the balance of payments
suggests that persistent imbalances may be both natural and desirable.
On the other hand, many people believe that today's US current
account deficit is a problem because it breeds protectionism, because
it is an indicator of bad policies, or because its correction will become
increasingly difficult the longer it persists. If only because these beliefs
are held by many people, they are important however profondly
misguided they may be .
Assuming, then, that the current account is a policy target, what
is the appropriate policy instrument? Swoboda's answer is that
governments should use fiscal policy, not monetary or exchange rate
policy, to address the current account. In a two-country world, the
current account depends on the difference between the fiscal policies
of the two countries (G -
(;1<), irrespective of the exchange rate
regime. The world's real interest rate depends on the sum of the two
countries' fiscal policies (G +
(;1<). Monetary policy affects only
nominal variables: the price level and nominal exchange rate under
floating exchange rates and the world price level under fixed rates.
These conclusions hold
in
the long
run;
things are more
complicated in a short-run context with variable output. In this case,
overall output is determined by the sum of fiscal and monetary stances
and the distribution of world output is determined by their differen-
ces. In Swoboda's words, «the scope for strategic interaction and
conflict is clearly there».
Turning
next
to
international
monetary
reform,
Swoboda
analyzes the main components of reform required for a return to
more fixed exchange rates. On the monetary side, fixed exchange
rates require both the sacrifice of monetary autonomy in (n
-
1)
countries and a mechanism for controlling the world money supply. A
number of such mechanisms are available , including "outside" reo
serve systems (the gold standard, special drawing rights, etc.) and

8
Catherine Liston . John McCallum
"inside" systems (the dollar standard, multi-currency reserves, etc.).
These requirements are generally well understood, and Swoboda
refers the reader to Ronald McKinnon's proposals (as described'in this
volume) for details.
A more difficult question is whether a return to fixed exchange
rates requires the coordination of fiscal policies. As Swoboda's earlier
analysis has indicated, current account targets require the coordi-
nation of fiscal policy differences (G -
G"), whereas world output or
real interest rate targets require the coordination of fiscal policy sums
(G + (?). In general, however, these rather onerous requirements are
independent of the exchange rate regime.
Is it true, then, that current account imbalances are an obstacle
to
international
monetary
reform?
The
problem,
according
to
Swoboda, is not the current account imbalances as such, but rather
the fiscal imbalances that they reflect. Correct these fiscal imbalances
and any remaining current account imbalances should not be a cause
for concern. But today's lack of fiscal discipline breeds uncertainty
about the appropriate parities for exchange rates, and this uncertain-
ty, according to Swoboda, is a major obstacle to exchange rate
stabilization.
Robert Mundell analyzes the monetary-fiscal policy mix in the
context of the history of the US and w~rld economies since the 1960s.
Throughout this period, Mundell has favoured the use of monetary
policy to protect the balance of payments and control inflation and the
restriction of tax policy to growth and employment objectives. He
argues that all too often the authorities have failed to adopt this policy
mix, with negative consequences for economic performance.
In particolar, Mundell asserts, the recessions of 1969-1971, 1974-
1975, and 1982-1983 were all based on mistakes in the monetary-fiscal
mix. The first two recessions were characterized by tight money and
rising real tax rates, and the recession of 1982-1983 was caused by
very tight money and a delay in the stimulus from the tax cut. In all
the cases, he argues, inflation could have been controlled without
recession had policy-makers shifted simultaneously to tighter money
and lower taxes.
Moreover, in the aftermath of the recessions of 1969-1971 and
1974-1975, the authorities erred in allowing rapid monetary expan-

Introduction
9
sion, which, in the mid-1970s, was further fuelled by the explosion of
the Eurodollar market. Excessive US monetary expansion in the early
1970s contributed to the demise of the Bretton Woods system, and the
resulting destruction of a working international monetary system
eroded global discipline against inflation.
At present, the United States is as close to full employment as it
has been in the past 15 years. Mundell claims that three factors have
been responsible for this success: the Reagan tax cuts, enhanced US
competitiveness as a result of the decline in the dollar, and the steep
drop in oil prices in 1985 and 1986. Mundell argues that the pillar of
US monetary policy should be the stabilization of the dollar near
current levels, along the lines of the Louvre Agreement of February
1987. On the fiscal side, he favours reductions in the capital gains tax
rate and the corporate profit tax rate to 15% and 20% respectively. If
these policies were followed, he argues, the United States might
achieve the remarkable feat of a decade of uninterrupted economic
expansion.
Mundell's paper is followed by his answers to a series of questions
on a wide variety of issues: the evolution of the international monetary
system, including the possible entry of eastern bloc countries and a
return to the gold standard; policies to deal with the international debt
crisis; the problem of balancing the budget in the context of further
tax cuts; the "new classical" view that deficits do not matter; and a
series of questions about the Japanese "threat," the Japanese stock
market, and Japan's buying-up of US assets.
Robert Triffin states that he is in full agreement with Karl Otto
PoW, the governor of the Bundesbank, on the question of European
monetary integration. Both agree on the ultimate objective of full
monetary union, under which all national currencies would disappear
entirely and be replaced by a single European currency, the European
Currency Unit (ECU). Participating countries would have to agree,
however, on two essential points: the joint pursuit of price stability as
well as exchange rate stability and the independence of the European
central bank from political pressure from member governments.
Unless these conditions were satisfied, Europe would face the major
danger that surplus countries would be forced to import the inflation
of deficit countries.

10
Catherine Liston - John McCallum
Turning to the international monetary system, Triffin argues that
today's international "paper exchange standard" based mainly on the
US dollar is subject to inescapable defects that have been known for
many years. The system permits the United States to run excessive
and persistent balance of payments deficits, thereby generating infla-
tionary increases in world reserves. The fact that only the richest
country in the world is granted such a privilege and such a re-
sponsability is as absurd economically as it is humanly. These con-
cerns from the past have been amply justified by recent events: the
cumulative current account deficits of the United States over the years
1983 through 1987 are equivalent to the total income on which must
live -
or die of starvation -
3.5 billion inhabitants of the Third
World.
Triffin argues that it is as urgent and indispensable as ever to
move toward a truly international monetary standard based on re-
serves deposited with the IMF. In the absence of any chance of US
acceptance of such a reform, he proposes that the European countries
accelerate their move to a monetary union in order to diminish their
excessive dependence on "a violently fluctuating paper dollar." He
also argues for the conversion of short-term dollar assets reluctantly
held by central banks into perpetual bonds with adequate interest rate
and exchange rate guarantees. This step would eliminate the principal
danger of a collapse of the dollar. Additional loans would still be
necessary in order to give the United States time in which to adjust its
fiscal deficit and balance of payments deficit. The IMF and an
embryonic central bank of Europe should negotiate the terms of such
loans with the United States.
Gottfried Haberler analyzes three related issues: global imba-
lances, exchange rates, and Third World debt. He argues that initially
the US deficit helped to lift the United States out of recession, thereby
restoring international confidence in the United States. On the other
hand, he also argues that the deficit should be phased out over the
next three to five years. The easiest, cheapest, and most efficient
method of balancing the budget would be a stiff gasoline tax.
Although many people, including even the Pope, have com-
mented on the "excessive fluctuations" of exchange rates in recent
years, Haberler feels that floating should continue. He contends that a

Introduction
11
large part of exchange rate volatility has been the result of volatile
monetary policy. He criticizes the "open mouth" policy of Group of
Seven officials regarding the appropriate level of exchange rates and
argues that central bank intervention in the foreign exchange market
diverts monetary policy from its proper function of maintaining price
stability at home.
The basic problem with fixed exchange rates is that we simply do
not know what the equilibriwn exchange rate is. True, markets
sometimes makes mistakes. But markets tend to correct themselves
faster than governments do . The right policy, therefore, is to concen-
trate efforts on basic domestic objectives and leave exchange rates to
be determined in free, competitive markets.
In an interesting postscript entitled The Strong Dollar, Haberler
analyzes the surprising strength of the dollar in the first half of 1989.
He emphasizes the role of the US budget deficit in this development
and argues that recent international policy reactions to the strong
dollar lend further support to his contention that markets are better at
setting exchange rates than governments are .
Phillip Cagan recalls the "triwnph of monetarism" in the late
1970s. A consensus had emerged that inflation could be reduced only
if rates of money growth were reduced, and a variable denoted "M"
came to play a crucial role in theoretical and empirical models.
However, the foundation of monetarist policy of constant money
growth depends on a predictable velocity, and confidence in this
predictability collapsed totally with the dramatic changes in velocity in
the United States in the early 1980s. Moreover, the reasons for these
changes remain unclear.
As a result, monetary authorities have
downgraded or abolished monetary targets.
In response to these problems, some economists have called for
monetary rules that would not allow any discretion to the central bank
but would automatically require adjustments of the money supply to
offset lagged changes in velocity. Although such rules would guaran-
tee long-run price stability, Cagan argues that governments and
central banks would not or could not resist pressures to deviate from
the rule during recessions. These pressures would be substantial, since
simulations suggest that there would have been sizable deviations of
real GNP from trend had the rule been followed in the past. Similar

12
Catherine Liston - John McCallum
pressures stand in the way of other possible non-discretionary mon-
etary rules, such as the gold standard.
2 - Trade Balances,
Stock Markets, and Exchange Rates
Two essays are included in this section: in the first one John S.
Chipman analyzes the relation existing between exchange rates and
trade balance settlement, qualifying the relation linking the two
variables. In the second essay Edmund S. Phelps analyzes the effects
that fiscal policy has both in the country and abroad, in a model
characterized by rigidity in real wages.
John Chipman argues that the doctrine that a country can
improve its balance of trade by devaluing its currency is based largely
on misconceptions and is valid only in limited circumstances. He
begins with a review of the elasticity approach, in which he argues,
first, that the theory of the effect of currency depreciation is neces-
sarily a disequilibrium theory and, second, that the question of the
consequences of altering the exchange rate cannot be answered
without taking account of the different means by which it may be
pegged.
Chipman then turns to the absorption approach and, within the
framework of that approach, examines three mechanisms by which a
currency depreciation can improve a country's trade balance. The
first mechanism operates through a reduction in the real wage in a
context of high unemployment. The second involves an adjustment of
cash balances that leads to a temporary effect on the trade balance.
The third involves the use of currency depreciation, via inflation, to
lower the real value of a country's budget deficit and redistribute
income from low to high savers. In the last section of his paper,
Chipman analyzes data on the United States' current account, federal
budget balance, and price competitiveness. He argues that there is
only very slender support for the hypothesis that links the current
account to price competitiveness.
Edmund S. Phelps extends his recent research with Jean-Paul
Fitoussi on "structuralist" models of employment fluctuations. The

Introduction
13
standard approach based on money wage stickiness implies that a
fiscal stimulus will have an expansionary effect at home and abroad.,
Although empirical evidence supports this finding over a one or two
year horizon, the answer is much less clear for longer time horizons.
Although not persuaded by the new classical "real business cycle"
theories, Phelps favours an alternative line of non-monetary models
that he labels "structuralist." These models seek to explain low-fre-
quency employment fluctuations by appeal to real wage rigidity or
stickiness.
In a closed economy structuralist model, a fiscal stimulus is
contractionary: its effect is to raise interest rates, thereby reducing the
production of capital goods without causing any increase in the
production of consumer goods. This result suggests a contractionary
effect over some medium term after the initially favourable monetary
effects have been worked off.
In the case of a small open economy that faces an exogenous real
interest rate, Phelps' earlier analysis indicated that a fiscal stimulus
would be expansionary. On the other hand, an increase in world
demand that drove up the world real interest rate world lead to a
contraction of employment. However, certain of these results de-
pended on a monetary mechanism that involved a real cash balance
effect. In his current paper, Phelps examines the extent to which the
Fitoussi-Phelps explanation of the slump in Europe is robust to the
exclusion of monetary mechanisms.
3 - The European Monetary and Commercial Area
In this section Herbert Giersch examines the prospects for
Europe in 1992, highlighting the debate between market-oriented and
corporatist or constructivist views on how European integration
should proceed. In the following paper Marcello de Cecco analyzes
the European Monetary System (EMS) in historical perspective. Then,
Norbert Walter analyzes the problems connected to exchange rates
and to the harmonization of fiscal policies in Europe.
The section ends on a somewhat ominous note, as Gerard Curzon
expresses his fears on the subject of Fortress Europe.

14
Catherine Liston - John McCallum
According to Herbert Giersch, Europe's integration process is
now in its last stage. By the end of 1992, the 12 members of the
European Community (EC) will have abolished their border controls
and completed their internal common market. As 1992 approaches,
however two main European schools of thought will increasingly
come
into
conflict.
The
first
school,
which
reflects
Europe's
corporatist traditions, argues that regulations, taxes, norms, and
standards should be harmonized before border controls are removed.
In contrast, the "market approach" school argues that a more
competitive environment will produce a
harmonization
process
superior to any "planned" harmonization.
Giersch argues that the removal of border controls and the
establishment of pro-competition government policies could add sub-
stantially to Europe's growth rate of trend productivity. However,
realization of these opportunities for growth will not be automatic.
Success will require the
deregulation and liberalization of the
European economy and the privatization of business and employment
risks. Also, policy makers most be prepared to respond to the new
opportunities -
for example, by allowing monetary policy to ac-
comodate a higher growth rate.
Giersch goes on to state that the opening of markets to more
competition, domestic and foreign, should be a central component of
anti-inflation strategy. He also emphasizes the need for world-market
pricing of agricultural products. Farmers' resistance to this policy
could be overcome by government-funded compensation for the
income loss they are likely to experience.
In response to high US inflation and a volatile US dollar in the
1970s, western Europe emerged as an area of monetary and exchange
rate stability. According to Marcello de Cecco, however, the image a
united Europe standing up to the spendthrift habits of its monetary
leader is totally false. The only country that stood up against US
double-digit inflation was West Germany. The deutsche mark became
an anchor of monetary stability, and the result was a sharp exchange
rate appreciation and a decline in the competitive position of German
industry. In order to protect its industries and industrial jobs, Ger-
many had to terminate this era of deutsche mark appreciation. This
was the motive behind its decision to join the European Monetary

Introduction
15
System (EMS). Its currency would now be shielded from the dollar by
a layer of weaker European currencies.
The
other EMS members' eagerness to join the system is
explained by their need to preserve intra-European exchange rate
stability. The common policies of the EEC, particularly the Common
Agricultural Policy, were based on the premise of stable exchange
rates. When the dollar was allowed to float in 1971, the viability of
these policies was endangered, and the need for the EMS became
apparent.
De Cecco draws on historical experience to argue that Europe
must achieve political unification if the process of monetary unifi-
cation is to remain viable in the long run. He considers monetary
arrangements of the past and argues that the Latin Monetary Union of
1865 was perhaps the one most similar to the EMS. Economic
benefits under that earlier arrangement were substantial, but the
agreement came apart because of political conflict between France
and Italy. De Cecco argues that a similar fate awaits the EMS unless
Europe achieves political integration.
Norbert Walter argues that Europe has overcome its phase of
Euro-pessimism and is now in the process of weakening the "distribu-
tion coalitions" -
such as farmers and miners. National governments
will increasingly be able to blame unwelcome policies on higher
European decision-making bodies. Hence these supra-national groups
will provide Europe with competition as a public good.
Norbert Walter argues that the deutsche mark has become an
effective nominal anchor, and the deems positive the Delors Report,
suggesting that the proposed framework is similar to what already
exists under the Bundesbank. In fiscal policy, the trends has been
away from demand management coordination and toward supply side
policies. If free trade is implemented among countries with different
tax rates, distorted trade patterns will result. Hence Walter favours a
harmonization process in conjunction with the dismantling of trade
barriers.
Walter contends that Europe is in the midst of a transition that is
often misinterpreted by outsiders. With its balanced current account,
its substantial growth, and its moderate price development, Europe

16
Catherine Liston - John McCallum
does not pose a macroeconomic adjustment problem to the rest of the
world.
Gerard Curzon examines the possibility that .the European Com-
munity will turn in upon itself and become "Fortress Europe." The
official EC position is that Europe will experience massive deregul-
ation in order to overcome its internal inefficiencies. Its relations with
the rest of the world should not be affected by this process. Curzon
proposes 10 reasons for skepticism, including the entry into the EC of
protectionist Spain, Portugal, and Greece; the possible continuation or
intensification of non-tariff barriers in the areas of technical standards,
procurement policies, and anti-dumping; the continuation of policies
regarding "sensitive" manufactured goods and the classification of
trading partners by a "least-favoured-nation" principle; and the possi-
bility of increased cooperation between government and industry as a
result of the EC's effort to institute a common industrial policy.
On the other hand, Curzon acknowledges that other factors may
counterbalance his concerns. These factors include the possibility of a
successful Uruguay Round; the possibility that the increased effici-
ency resulting from European integration may decrease the demand
for protection; and the fact that Europe, being so heavily dependent
on external trade, cannot afford to risk the retaliation that would
likely accompany a shift to protectionism. In concluding, Curzon
stresses the importance of maintaining steady pressure on the
European Community to remain open to all trading partners; an open
Europe is prerequisite to a frontierless world economy.
4 • Third World Debt
Two centuries ago, Adam Smith suggested that government
would have to intervene in some sectors of the economy if the public
interest was to be served efficiently. Harold Lord Lever believes that
Smith's recommendation has been applied well in domestic econ-
omies but not so well in the global arena. In particular, he criticizes
the incoherence of the multi-country power system that has emerged
as US leadership has weakened.
Within this system, however little agreement there may be on

Introduction
17
other points, it is still unanimously believed that the economic devel-
opment of poorer countries -
the Latin American countries in
particular -
can benefit advanced countries as well. In the past, this
development was sustained by commercially based transfers of funds.
After the 1974 oil shock, when the banks were flooded with oil
dollars, these transfers increased beyond the developing countries'
ability to repay. Unsurprisingly, these countries' export surpluses
were far from sufficient to service their foreign currency loans. This
government-approved lending spree, which came to an end in 1981,
not only left the debtor countries with an unmanageable burden of
debt but left the banking system itself dangerously exposed.
According to Lord Level, it is generally recognized that funds
should be provided to cover at least the interest on the outstanding
debt. Given that premature flows of funds from debtors to creditors
are detrimental to both parties, it should also be recognized that new
lending must be provided until the debtors can sustain export sur-
pluses for extended periods. Hence, the IMF should drop its present
policy of extracting these surpluses as they arise. Instead, it should
seek cooperation with the debtor nations and encourage them to
adopt growth-oriented reforms.
Further, the volume of lending necessary will require government
backing. This lending, contrary to what many suggest, cannot be
expected to come voluntarily from the banks, at least not in the near
future. Private bank lending will be required, but it will have to be
supported and disciplined by the institutions and governments of
advanced countries. The integrity of the banking system needs to be
protected.
Under Lord Lever's recommendations for the management of the
debt, the IMF would approve policies that limited debtors' export
surpluses to levels compatible with their economic growth. Countries
that adopted such policies would then be guaranteed new funding by
agencies of the advanced countries. Consequently, there would be no
difficulty in generating the required borrowing through the markets.
In exchange for this guarantee of full interest payments, banks could
agree to transfer the debt to an appropriate international agency at a
written-down book value in a future period. Cooperation among
governments, central banks, and agencies would enforce the banks'

18
Catherine Liston - John McCallum
commitment to write down existing debt and execute the agreed
transfers to the appropriate international agency.
5 - Refonn of the International Monetary System
The works included in this section offer specific proposals in
regards to a reform of the international monetary system. Jeffrey A.
Frankel argues for internationally coordinated nominal GNP tar-
geting; Ronald I. McKinnon presents his proposal for monetary
coordination between the United States, Japan, and West Germany;
finally Richard N. Cooper surveys a variety of alternatives and ends up
by proposing a single currency for the industrialized democracies.
Jeffrey A. Frankel reviews the obstacles to successful interna-
tional macroeconomic policy coordination and then describes the
system that in his view has the best change of overcoming these
obstacles. This system is an international version of nominal GNP
targeting, and Frankel argues that it is likely to be superior to either
monetary targeting or fixed exchange rates. Under Frankel's system,
the Group of seven countries would meet annually and agree upon
target bands for nominal GNP growth over the next year and the next
five years. This system would replace the current multiple-indicator
framework, and it would be a first step, though a relatively modest
one, in the direction of international policy coordination.
To ensure enforceability, the targets should be public and there
should not be many of them. The targeted variable(s) should be
observable and controllable by government authorities on, say, an
annual basis. Given real-world uncertainties, they should also be such
that unexpected disturbances in economic relationships would not
cause drastic harm. For example, it would have been most unfor-
tunate had the United States signed an international agreement
regarding rates of growth of Ml in the early 1980 -
period of major
and unanticipated changes in velocity. A final and crucial considera-
tion is that anti-inflation credibility requires policy-makers to commit
themselves in advance to some nominal anchor.
In the light of these considerations, Frankel argues that nominal
GNP targeting clearly dominates monetary targeting, because of

Introduction
19
velocity shifts, and is also likely to be superior to either fixed exchange
rates or a fixed price of gold. Under a fixed exchange rate (gold price),
shocks in the foreign exchange market (gold market) feed directly into
the money supply and hence the price level. Thisdynamic creates and
additional source of price-level instability that is absent under nominal
GNP targeting. Although Frankel argues that shocks in foreign ex-
change markets are large, he also acknowledges the possibility
(discussed at some length in the Cooper paper) that a shift to fixed
exchange rates would diminish the amplitude of these shocks.
Finally, with respect to the means by which the authorities would
control nominal GNP, Frankel favours the use of a monetary instru-
ment, such as the monetary base, over the use of a fiscal instrument.
For political reasons, especially in the United States, fiscal policy is too
cumbersome, and in any case the comparative advantage of fiscal
policy is that it controls the current account rather than nominal GNP.
Ronald I. McKinnon draws attention to the extraordinarily high
volatility of both exchange rates and long-term interest rates under the
post-1973 regime of floating rates. He argues that the exchange rate
regime is responsible for much of the volatility of long-term interest
rates. Moreover, because of the "continuing clamour" for dollar
devaluation, international investors now demand much higher yields
on dollar assets than on those denominated in yen or marks.
McKinnon documents the dramatic transformation of the United
States from a strong-currency country in the 1960s to a weak-cur-
rency country in the 1980s. He then asks why it is that in competitiom
with the seemingly more patient Japanese, Americans have become
less willing to undertake the longer term, riskier investments neces-
sary to hold markets. The answer: not because of sociology, but
because of higher nominal interest rates and higher price inflation
arising out of continual threats to devalue the dollar. A new monetary
pact among all three blocs, which would enable the United States to
borrow from the now-superior financial reputations of the Germans
and the Japanese, might be the most efficient way to eliminate the
expectation of dollar devaluation and reduce US interest rates to
German levels.
McKinnon seeks to devise a system that would escape from the
instability associated with the monetary nationalism of the past two

20
Catherine Liston - John McCallum
decades and establish a common monetary standard that would not
depend on the hegemony of anyone country. His proposal for
monetary cooperation is evolutionary; it does not involve any formal
loss of monetary sovereignty or any restrictions on exiting from the
agreement. The proposal consists of four basic rules:
1) set official targets for exchange rates based on purchasing
power parity. During the transition to the new system and a common
inflation rate, target bands should initially be fairly wide. These bands
would subsequently be narrowed to, say, plus or minus 1%;
2) central banks should make monetary adjustments sym-
metrically. To nudge exchange rates in the desired direction, the
country with the weak currency would reduce its money growth and
the country with the strong currency would increase its money
growth. The aggregate money stock would remain approximately
constant. This mechanism relies primarily on symmetrical adjust-
ments of short-term interest rates, but the amounts of such adjust-
ments would be reduced -
speculation would become stabilizing -
if
central banks formally announced their exchange rate targets;
3) official exchange intervention should be largely unsterilized.
This condition would be necessary to maintain credibility if exchange
rates moved sharply away from their official targets, but once the pact
became operational little intervention would be necessary;
4) choose a consistent nominal anchor. Collective monetary
policy would be aimed at keeping national producer price indices
stable. This provision would be consistent with the mutual fixing of
nominal exchange rates and stability in the common price level.
Richard N. Cooper begins with a survey of past international
monetary systems. He considers how each of six systems responded to
two
fundamental problems that
any
international system
must
address: the establishment of a mechanism through which countries
can adjust to disturbances (the adjustment problem) and the provision
of an internationally acceptable means of payment (the liquidity
problem).
Cooper then reviews arguments for and against flexible exchange
rates. Both the monetarist and the Keynesian traditions favour flexible

Introduction
21
rates. In the monetarist view, flexible rates insulate the economy from
monetary impulse, generated elsewhere in the world. The Keynesian
view begins with the assumption that the system is replete with
nominal rigidities and then argues that a flexible exchange rate may
substitute for price or wage flexibility, thereby reducing the output
costs of adjustment to shocks.
Cooper then considers a number of worrisome features of the
present system of floating exchange rates. First, as James Tobin
stressed, major external disturbances may require changes in the
overall price level, but if governments treat the price level as a policy
target this adjustment mechanism is thwarted. Second, as Dixit and
Krugman argue, exchange rates may have to swing a long way in
order to achieve adjustment, since industries subject to significant
entry and exit costs will not respond to small movements in exchange
rates. Third, uncertainties created by the high variability of real
exchange rates are likely to reduce investment. Furthermore, firms
will diversify their exchange rate risk by investing abroad, mainly
through takeovers and buyouts, thereby reducing the level of world-
wide competition. And finally, the system may encourage protection-
ist pressures.
The force of these arguments depends very much on whether
foreign exchange markets are subject to speculative bubbles or
whether observed exchange rate volatility merely reflects unstable
policies and the unavoidable uncertainties in the economic system.
Cooper argues that there is a growing body of evidence in favour of
the former view.
The question, then, is whether there are alternative exchange rate
systems that would reduce uncertainty without incurring high costs in
some other dimension. Cooper reviews a number of proposals, in-
cluding Tobin's proposal for a small tax on foreign exchange transac-
tions, the Williamson-Miller proposal for target zones, and the system
described in detail by McKinnon elsewhere in this volume. Cooper
ends with his own much more radical proposal for a single currency
for the industrialized democracies. Although Cooper acknowledges
that implementing such a system would create many problems, he
argues that they are likely to be less serious than the problems created
by the uncertainties inherent in the present system.

22
Catherine Liston - John McCallum
Trying to synthesize the various and important contributions
collected in this volume was surely a hard task, it is nearly impossible
to summarize the final essay by Robert Mundell. In his The Global
Adjustment System, the author develops his analysis in a deep and
extremely wide evaluation ranging from the gold standard and its
consequences to the most relevant aspects of the international adjust-
ment mechanism and still, from an evaluation of what the classic
adjustment mechanism had meant, to the analysis of the general
economic equilibrium.

I . OVERVIEW PAPERS

The Economic Science of Today
and Global Disequilibrium
Maurice Allais
Ecole Nationale Superieure des Mines de Paris
1. . Theory and Reality
1.1 Economic Science, Its Theories and Models
The essential condition of any science is the existence of regu-
larities which can be analyzed and forecast. This is the case in celestial
mechanics. But it is also true of many economic phenomena. Indeed
their thorough analysis displays the existence of regularities which are
just as striking as those found in the physical sciences. This is why
economics is a science, and why this science rests on the same general
principles and methods as physics.
All science is based on models, whether descriptive, explanatory,
forecasting, or decision-making, and every scientific model entails
three distinct stages: 1) statement of well specified hypotheses; 2) de-
duction of all the consequences of these hypotheses and nothing but
these consequences; 3) confrontation of these consequences with
observed data. Of these three stages only the first and third -
estab-
lishing hypotheses, and confronting results with reality -
are of inter-
est to the economist. The second stage is purely logical and mathe-
matical, that is tautological, and it is only of mathematical interest.
The model and the theory it represents must be accepted, at least
temporarily, or rejected, depending on the agreement or disagree-
ment between observed data and the model's hypotheses and impli-
cations. When neither the hypotheses nor the implications of a theory
can be confronted with the real world, that theory is devoid of any
scientific interest. Mere logical, even mathematical, deduction is

26
Maurice Allais
worthless in terms of the understanding of reality if it is not closely
linked to that reality.
Total submission to experimental data is the golden rule which
dominates any scientific discipline . It explains the extraordinary
success of Western thought in the last three centuries. This rule is the
same in economics as in physics.
Any theory whatever, if it is not verified by empirical evidence,
has no scientific value and should be rejected. This is true, for
example, of the contemporary theories of general economic equilib-
rium which are based on the hypothesis of general convexity of the
fields of production, a hypothesis that is disproved by all the empirical
data and leads to absurd consequences. That is also the case of the
neo-Bernoullian theories of expected utility which are founded on
postulates whose consequences are incompatible with observed data.
Abstraction plays an essential role in the construction of theories
and their models. The role of science, in fact, is to simplify and to
choose: to reduce facts to significant data and to seek their funda-
mental dependences. A mass of facts does not constitute a science.
However, if abstraction is necessary, how we set about achieving it is
essential. We can simplify reality without danger and with advantage,
if, and only if, this is not likely to change the actual nature of
phenomena. But, in no case whatsoever, should the concern for
simplification change the essence of reality.
The claim that theory and practice are opposed is completely
unjustified, because a theory is valid only insofar as it constitutes a
condensed synthesis of reality. If it does not, it is purely a creation of
the mind, totally artificial, and of no value from he scientific point of
view. If, however, the theory is actually a condensed synthesis of
reality, it is extremely useful, because it represents in succinct and
easily usable form a vast amount of information of all kinds on the real
phenomena of which it treats.
1.2 Pseudo-Theories
In examining certain contemporary theories in terms of the two
requirements of scientific method -
logical coherence and con-

The Economic Science of Today ecc.
27
fonnity with observed data -
we finds two kinds of deviation: logical
inconsistency, and neglect of real phenomena.
The defects common to many literary theories are the continual
use of non-operational concepts, of vague and undefined words,
whose meaning changes constantly within the analysis and varies
from author to author; the absence of rigour in the analysis; the
abundant use of more or less metaphysical expressions, which having
no precise meaning, can mean anything one wants, and are thus
sheltered from objections; the use of expressions charged with
emotional content which, while
they may ensure the popularity of
their authors, cannot lend themselves to rigorous reasoning.
While many literary theories cannot be considered scientific, the
same can be said of a great number of theories, purely logical wit no
real link to facts. While mathematics is a tool whose mastery is
extremely precious, it is, and can only be, a tool. One cannot be a
good physicist or a good economist simply because one has some
ability and skill in mathematics.
For almost forty-five years contemporary economic literature has
developed too often in a totally erroneous direction with the construc-
tion of completely artificial mathematical models detached from
reality.
Paradoxically, from the scientific point of view, incomparably
more care is brought today to the mathematical elaboration of models
than to the discussion of their structure, their hypotheses and the
results from the point of view of the analysis of facts.
Contemporary literature offers countless examples of aberrations
which flow from neglect of the essential principle that a theory is valid
only if it is in agreement with observed facts, and that the only source
of truth is experience.
It cannot be repeated too often: for the economist, as for the
physicist, the essential objective is not to use mathematics for its own
sake, but as a means of exploring and analyzing concrete reality, and
consequently never to dissociate a theory from its applications.
But the abusive use of mathematics is unfortunately not the only
failing in contemporary literature. Indeed, too often, it has generated
a crop of pseudo-theories based on the mechanical application, devoid
of any real intelligence, of econometrics and statistical techniques. All

28
Maurice Allais
these theories have the same characteristics: a) the elaboration of
models of linear correlation which are in reality only pseudo-models,
with a mathematical-statistical panoply of untamed, totally unjustified
econometrics, which seem to
the naive to be scientific theories,
whereas they are too often just empty shells; b) the blind and brutal
application of linear correlation programs and the tests associated
with them, although these tests generally are not applicable to the
cases studied; c) and the use of models, too often applied to a single
country and for a short period, where the explanatory variables and
the arbitrary parameters are so numerous that the obtained fittings
can have practically no real meaning.
2. . The Monetary and Financial
Institutional Structure of the Economy
2.1 The Monetary and Financial Framework
of an Economy of Markets
The main purpose of economic activity is to satisfy the virtually
unlimited needs of men using the limited resources available of
labour, natural resources, and existing equipments, given the level of
technological knowledge.
But, in order that such an objective may be attained, it is
necessary that the economic activity should take place in an appro-
priate institutional framework, and it is certainly an essential task for
economic science to define correctly the general principles of such a
framework.
Unfortunately, experience shows that, till now and as regards the
monetary and financial framework particularly, it has not been
possible to achieve this task.
Indeed the major problem facing the Western economies is the
problem, completely unresolved today, of economic fluctuations and
the changes in the real value of money, which endanger economic effi-
ciency, equity in income distribution, the security of employment and
resource availability, and which, in the final analysis,
generates
social troubles. Economic instability, underproduction, iniquity, under-

The Economic Science of Today ecc.
29
employment, and the distress and misery they bring about, are the
worst plagues of an economy of markets. These factors are at the origin
of the best-founded and most violent criticisms of societies based on
economic liberty and private property. They are all closely linked to the
monetary and financial institutions of Western economics.
2.2 The Economic Fluctuations and the Potential Instability
of the Contemporary Economy
Fluctuations in the real value of money make absolutely impos-
sible an efficient and equitable functioning of an economy of markets.
As a result its ethical justification may be questioned, especially as
regard decentralized decision-taking, private ownership of property,
and the principle of the private appropriation of surpluses.
In reality, the major inequities afflicting our society stem from the
distortions of the income distribution that are brought about by
changes in the real value of money.
The whole world economy today rests on gigantic pyramids of
debts, each supporting its neighbour in a fragile equilibrium. Never in
the past has there been such a piling up of promises to pay. Never,
doubtless, has it been so difficult to cope with it. .
Whether it be on currencies or stocks, frantic speculation has
turned the world into a vast casino in which gaming tables are spread
all over the places. Both the game and the bidding, with millions of
players involved, simply never stop. Chicago quotations are followed
by those of Tokyo, Hong Kong, London, Frankfurt and Paris. Every-
where speculation is made easier by the credit mechanism which
makes it possible to purchase without paying or to sell without
holding.
Indeed, all the difficulties met arise because a basic fact has been
widely overlooked namely that no decentralised system founded on an
economy of markets can operate properly if the uncontrolled creation
ex nihilo of new means of payment allows the necessary adjustments
to be postponed, at least for a while. This is the case whenever
expenses or debts can be paid with mere promises to pay, without any
effective real counterpart, direct or indirect.

30
Maurice Allais
The effect of the credit mechanism, as it works today, and which
is based on the fractional coverage of deposits, the creation of money
ex nihilo, and the lending at long-term of funds borrowed at short-
term, has considerably amplified the disorders that occurred. All the
major crises of the 19th and 20th centuries sprang from the excessive
expansion of credit, of promises to pay and their monetization, and
from the speculation which this expansion made possible and faci-
litated.
Whether foreign exchange rates or stock prices are involved,
most of the time real economic data and
nominal values
as
determined by speculation are found to move out of step with each
other. Everywhere a frantic and feverish speculation is allowed, fed,
and expanded by the credit mechanism, as it works today. Never in
the past had it reached such a size. The continuous quotation, minute
by minute, of stocks and currencies has but one result: to considerably
amplify the destabilizing effects of speculation, and to engender
market manipulation and fraud.
As in all the preceding periods, the credit mechanism exercises
its destabilizing effects, but on an intensified scale, both nationally and
internationally: 1) an accelerated monetization of debts and an in-
creasing confusion of money with saving; 2) a rash expansion of
credit; 3) the potential instability of the banking system; 4) the growth
of national and international indebtedness; 5) unstable floating ex-
change rates; 6) imbalances in foreign trade and the threat of
protectionism; 7) the growth of unrestrained speculation in foreign
exchange and security markets, strengthened by the uninterrupted
quotation of prices; 8) the world use, as a value unit of the dollar,
whose real value is extraordinarily unstable and unpredictable; 9) the
fundamental contradiction between the liberation of short-term capi-
tal movements and the autonomy of national monetary policies; 10)
measures of expediency to deal with immediate threats; 11) and the
potential instability of the world economy.
Up to now, a collapse has been avoided, but it is becoming ever
more difficult to deal with disequilibria that nobody is really capable
of mastering. As a matter of fact, there is no historical record of an
instance in which the exaggerated ex nihilo expansion of credit has
not finally culminated in its -collapse.

The Economic Science of Today ecc.
31
2.3 The Disarray and Blindness of Economic Thought
It is certainly a great intellectual and political scandal that after
the periodic recurrence of major crises for at least two centuries, our
democratic
societies
have
not
yet
proven
capable
of
defining
economic institutions enabling economic fluctuations to be, if not
suppressed, at least considerably reduced.
From the innumerable analyses which have been produced over
the past few years, only one certainty can be drawn: the deep
disagreement, indeed the disarray, that prevails amongst experts,
whether it be with regard to the floating exchange rate system; the
dollar rise and subsequent fall; the fluctuations of interest rates; the
United States trade, payments
and budget deficits, and their inter-
dependence; the role of the Euromarket; Third World debt, etc ... The
striking fact is the absence of a consensus not just on any sort of
diagnosis, but on prospects for the near future as well.
Even more significant is the fact that no one questions the very
rationale of the credit system as it operates today, i.e., the ex nihilo
money creation by the banking system and the widespread policy of
financing long-term credit with short-term borrowings, all factors
which are eminently destabilizing.
No one either seems to be concerned about the monetary flows
between countries being twenty to thirty times higher than those
corresponding to transactions on goods and services, which demon-
strates that the so-called regulation of the balance of trade by ex-
change rates is in fact meaningless.
No one either seems to be concerned about the average American
standard of living being maintained by foreign loans at a level 3%
higher that it would be in a situation of equilibrium, nor about the
international use of the dollar giving the United States the benefit of
che creation of money on the international level, a real tribute paid to
the rich by the poor.
2.4 The General Principles for a Reform
of Monetary and Financial Structures
In fact, on the national as well as the international level, the
fundamental principles on which the monetary and financial system is

32
Maurice Allais
now resting must be entirely rethought and, as I showed in numerous
publications, it would be relatively easy to define an appropriate
international structure, provided that the principles to consider be
deduced from the observation of facts and not from a priori concep-
tions.
Such a structure would imply at the same time a reform of the
credit mechanism as it now operates, the compulsory indexation of all
forward contracts, and a reform of the international monetary system.
In its principle, the reform of the credit mechanism should make
impossible the ex nihilo creation of money and the borrowing at short
term to finance loans of a longer term, and it would permit only loans
at maturity terms shorter than those corresponding to the funds
borrowed. Such a reform of the credit mechasnism would imply the
disassociation of banking activities such as they are today and their
attribution to two distinct categories of establishments: a) on the one
hand deposit banks only taking care, at the exclusion of all loan
operations, of the cash entries and payments of their clients, the
corresponding expenses being billed to them; b) and on the other
hand loan banks borrowing at given terms and loaning the funds
borrowed at shorter terms. In either case the competition of the
establishments concerned would assure their clients the best possible
conditions.
Indexation of all forward contracts would permit at the same
time the correctness of all economic calculations involving the future
while assuring equitable conditions for the execution of loaning and
borrowing contracts. In fact, such an indexation would permit all
economic agents to use a unit of account of an invariable real value
for all their decisions implying arbitratiortbetween the present and the
future.
If such reforms were carried out, an appropriate reform of the
international monetary system, capable of contributing to effectively
favour in the future the realization of the main equilibria, could be
achieved fairly easily. It would imply in particular: a) abandoning
completely the dollar as money of account, money of exchange, and
reserve currency on the international level; b) abandoning completely
the system of floating exchange rates and replacing it with a system of
fixed exchange rates, revisable if need be.

The Economic Science of Today ecc.
2.5 The Incomprehension of the Necessary Reforms
33
Indeed the very powerful particular interests of monetary and
financial pressure groups and the ruling doctrines are not at all
favourable to such reforms. The grip of some contemporary schools
on economic thought naturally brings to mind the hold of certain
religions. More power is needed to disseminate clear, simple and
coherent ideas than to promote obscure concepts that, lending them-
selves to every interpretation, are all things to all men whatever their
opinions and feelings.
The last four decades have been dominated by a succession of
dogmatic doctrines, all sustained with the same assurance, each
contradicting its just as unrealistic predecessor, and all abandoned
under the pressure of facts. In place of the study of history and the
thorough analysis of past errors, one has been too ready to substitute
simple assertions, too often resting on pure sophisms, on unrealistic
mathematical models, and superficial analyses of the circumstances of
the moment.
As a matter of fact, almost all the present difficulties do result
from a total misappreciation of the monetary and financial conditions
of an efficient and equitable working of an economy of markets, and
from an
inappropriate structure of banking institutions and the
financial markets. The present incapability of the economic science, as
it is currently admitted and taught, to face up to these difficulties is
striking.
3. - Obstacles to and Conditions
for the Progress of Economic Science
I will limit myself to examining two major obstacles to the
progress of economic science: the opposition to new ideas and the
tyranny of dominant doctrines, vested interests and ideologies; and
two very important conditions for the progress of economic science:
concern for synthesis and unconditional submission to the teachings
of experience.

34
Maurice Allais
3.1 Opposition to New Ideas
and the Tyranny of Dominant Doctrines
Indeed, only through the blossoming of new ideas suggested by
creative intuition and empirical evidence can science truly progress.
But all real scientific progress comes up against the tyranny of the
dominant ideas generated by the establishments. The more such
dominant ideas are taken for granted, the more they become rooted in
the psychology of men, and the more difficult it becomes to gain
acceptance for a new conception, no matter how fruitful it may later
turn out to be. The dominant ideas however erroneous they may be,
end up, simply through continual repetition, by acquiring the quality
of established truths which cannot be questioned without confronting
the active ostracism of the establishments.
It is this resistance to new ideas that explains why in economics
we had to wait to long to discover the major contributions of Dupuit,
Walras, Edgeworth, Pareto, and many others.
The successful scholar is always the one who adds some marginal
improvement to the dominant theories to which everyone is accus-
tomed. If, however, a new theory falls outside of established paths, it
is certain to face general opposition, whatever its justifications.
For all of these reasons, today just as yesterday, it is essential to
subject the established truths constantly to a critical analysis without
indulgence, always keeping in mind Pareto's statement: The history of
science boils down to the history of errors of competent men.
3.2 Vested Interests and Ideologies
Secondly, it has been said that Euclid's theorem would have been
bitterly contested had its implications brought financial or politicl
interests into play. This is no exaggeration. By its implications the
content and development of the economic science are very closely
interwoven with vested interests and ideologies.
At any era of history the success of the economic doctrines was
ensured, not by their intrinsic value, but by the power of the interests
and the feelings which these doctrines appeared to justify. Indeed,

The Economic Science of Today ecc.
35
unfortunately, economic science is too often linked to the fate of
political doctrines representative of vested interests and ideologies.
To take only three examples, the theory of maximum economic
efficiency and the conditions it implies, the theory of the relation
between prices and money supply, the theory of unemployment and
its causes, these three theories have massive political implications. It
matters little that a theory be confirmed, or not, by empirical data. It
will be accepted or rejected according as its conclusions will be
judged, or not, in conformity with the interests of the dominating
groups. Consequently, the criterion of the truth of a theory is not
anymore its conformity with the data of observation, but its con-
formity with the vested interests and dominant ideologies.
As a matter of fact, economic science can not aim to define what
ends ought to be pursued, and it would be incapable of doing so. The
question of ends must be faced by every society, but their definition is
no part of economic science, or of any science, for that matter.
The ends pursued may be anything. First priority may be given to
economic efficiency. Alternatively, primary concern may be for a just
income distribution, however relative the concept of justice may be.
The aim could be to promote the fastet possible economic growth or,
contrary, first preference might be given to stability of income and
employment.
Whether efficiency, equity, or security are at issue, it is impos-
sible to state that some ends are intrinsically preferable to others. It is
for society, that is to say, in the final analysis, for the men who
compose it, to decide on the form of an acceptable compromise
between the different ends which may be conceived.
The ends to be pursued can emerge only through the functioning of
the political system. Procedures differ from time to time and from
country to country, but the object is always the same, namely to imple-
ment a compromise between the aspirations of the different citizens
when, as is usually the case, these aspirations are contradictory.
The economist in qualidied to answer only the two following
questions: Firstly, are the economic ends pursued compatible with
one another? Secondly are the means resorted to the most appro-
priate to achieve the ends pursued. The object of economic science is
not to specify what choices should be made. Its role is only to provide

36
Maurice Allais
scientific information in functions of which an enlightened decision
can be taken.
3.3 A Vast Global Effort of Synthesis
Indeed an essential conditionn for the progress of economic
science is a vast global effort of synthesis.
The domain of analysis of economic science today has been so
greatly enlarged that it is tending more and more to become special-
ized into different fields: the description of institutions, price theory,
the theory of risk, monetary theory, the theory of international trade,
the theory of development, business cycle analysis, are but a few of
them. There are many others.
This specialization is necessary, for it seems clear that it would be
beyond one man's capacity to have thorough knowledge of all these
different fields. Nevertheless, it is essential to maintain concern for
synthesis. Progress in each individual field is conditioned by a broad
overall view, and thus such a view is essential.
In any event, the economic science is only a part of a greater
whole of the social sciences. The applications of economic science
inevitably have political incidences, so that the economist must also
have large views in sociology, politics and history.
It is by the way of a vast global effort of synthesis that immense
progress can be realized by the social sciences today. It calls very
strongly for the training of economists having a broad background in
history, sociology and political science, historians who are experi-
enced in economic analysis and sociological study; and sociologists
whose educations has also included economics and history.
3.4 The Unconditional Submission
to the Teaching of Experience
The second condition for the progress of economic science, like
any science, is the search for objectivity and the unconditional
submission to the teaching of experience.

The Economic Science of Today ecc.
37
The essential property of error is one's belief to hold the truth.
Thus he who thinks he is right may be making a mistake. Indeed he
who makes a mistake is doubly ignorant. He.does not know the right
answer and he does not know that he does not know it.
It is never possible to pronounce finally on men or things. In the
sciences, the propositions which have been considered by each
century as the best established have given way to others which in their
turn have been replaced under the pressure of facts. This is one of
those regularities which can be extrapolated with full confidence.
Some opinions which the world today takes for unquestionable will be
recognized tomorrow as untenable.
Universal, or even majority agreement, cannot be considered as
critera of truth. In the last analysis the essential condition for the
progress of science is total submission to the teachings of experience,
the only real source of our knowledge.
As my master Vilfredo Pareto said: «It is always the concrete
phenomenon which decides whether a theory should be accepted or
rejected. There is and can be no other criterion of a theory's truth
than its more or less perfect agreement with concrete phenomena».
Conclusions
If I may conclude this address, I will merely say that I ·have no
doubt raised many more questions than I have solved. Some of my
propositions may have seemed to you quite obvious, others very
questionable to say the least. But perhaps, after all, is their association
capable of giving rise to further reflection on some questions which
have never ceased being debated for so many years, and of con-
tributing for a modest part to motivate the debates of this Conference.

38
Maurice Allais
BIBUOGRAPHY
[1] ALLAIS MAURICE: «L'Econornique en Tant Que Science» , Lecture given at the
opening session of the academic year 1967-1968, Geneva, Institut Universitaire de
Hautes Etudes Intemationales, Collection Des Etudes Internationales, n. 6, 1966,
p. 26, Reproduced in Revue d'Economie Politique , January 1968, p. 5-30.
[2] -
- : Growth Without Inflation, Tokyo, Center for Modem Economics, Rikkyo
University, 1968, p. 86.
[3] - -: «Theories of General Economic Equilibrium and Maximum Efficiency» in
ALLAIS M.: Equilibrium and Disequilibrium in Economic Theory, Dordrecht,
Reidel Publishing Company, 1977, pp. 129·201.
[4] --: L'irnpot Sur le Capital et la Reforme Monetaire, Paris, Herman, 1977, p.
370, 2nd ed. 1988.
[5] -
- : «The So-Called Allais' Paradox and Rational Decisions under Uncertainty»,
in ALlAIS M. - HAGEN 0 .: Expected Utility Hypothesis and the Allais Paradox;
Contemporary Discussions of Decisions under Uncertainty with Allais ' Rejoinder,
Dordrecht, Reidel Publishing Company, 1979, p. 714.
[6] --: «The Credit Mechanism and Its Implications», in FEIWELL GEORGE R. (ed.):
Arrow and the Foundations of the Theory of Economic Policy, London, McMillan,
1987.
[7] --: Les Conditions Monetaires d'une Bconomie de Marche-De la Reflexion Sur
le Passe Ii la Preparation de l'Avenir, Paris, Montchrestien, 1989.
[8] --: «My Life Philosophy», The American Economist, 1989.
[9] - -: Autoportraits, Paris, Montchrestien, 1989.

Global Disequilibrium
and International Monetary Reform
Alexander K. Swoboda
University of Geneva
Introduction
This paper explores the links between global imbalances and
international monetary reform. These links are both imaginary and
real. They are imaginary in the sense of the argument that interna-
tional monetary reform, understood as a return to some form of fixed
exchange rate regime, is impossible in the face of current-account
imbalances. They are real in the sense that a viable system of
international monetary relations must include a mechanism for the
adjustment of current-account imbalances to sustainable levels and
that adopting fixed exchange rates in the absence of such a mechan-
ism is likely to prove self-defeating.
The paper proceeds in four steps. First, I ask why anyone should
be concerned with current-account imbalances. To the extent that
people are, what are the appropriate policies to deal with such
imbalances? The second part of the paper attempts to answer that
question and also offers some comments on inappropriate responses
to such disequilibria. I argue there that the appropriate policies are
essentially fiscal and structural, while monetary and exchange rate
policies are largely inappropriate, irrespective of the exchange rate
regime. The third part of the paper suggests that the adoption of an
inappropriate policy mix is at least partly responsible for the current
slow pace of international monetary reform; it also highlights a
number of other reasons for that lack of progress. The argument of
the concluding section is that in the long run, current-account imbal-

40
Alexander K. Swoboda
ances are in one sense largely irrelevant to restoring a fixed exchange
rate regime and to international monetary reform.
1. - When Are Current-Account Imbalances Undesirable?
There seems to be widespread agreement that a number of
today's current-account imbalances are undesirable. In particular, a
US current-account deficit of some 3 to 4% of GNP is seen as at least
worrying and at worst disastrous, and a Japanese or German surplus
of about 4% of GNP as clearly excessive and in need of correction. Yet
it is not at all obvious why and when current-account imbalances
should be deemed undesirable, nor is it obvious that a country's
current-account is a legitimate target of economic policy.
Mer all, current-account surpluses and deficits are precisely the
mechanism by which real resources are transferred among countries
(presumably from regions where capital is abundant to those where it
is scarce). With full and symmetric information, with competitive and
complete markets, and in the absence of externalities, the free
movement of capital should entail optimum levels of current-accounts
"and an outcome for, the world economy that is efficient and
maximizes potential welfare. In such a world, distributive issues
should be dealt with through lump-sum income transfers, and there
would be almost no reason to consider current accounts as legitimate
targets of macroeconomic policy. The sole exception would be from
the national point of view of a country large enough to influence the
rate of interest at which it borrows or lends; it might want to impose
an "optimum" tax on capital movements.
Current-account deficits or surpluses are not necessarily short
lived. One hypothesis is that the balance of payments naturally moves
in stages or cycles; it suggests that long periods of current-account
deficits are followed by equally long surplus periods as a country
slowly moves from being a young debtor to being a mature creditor
(1). The United States was a mature debtor nation with a trade-ac-
(1) For a recent discussion of the hypothesis. see GENBERG and SWOBODA [2]
Advise: the numbers in square'brackets refer to the Bibliography in the appendix.

Global Disequilibrium ecc.
41
count surplus and an investment-income deficit for the better part of
the 1873-1914 period and a young creditor nation with a surplus on
both the trade and the investment income account during the whole
inter war period. Similarly, the United Kingdom become a mature
creditor nation with a trade deficit, an investment income surplus,
and a positive (though gradually declining) current account as early as
1875, and it basically stayed in that stage of the balance of payments
cycle until the beginning of the Second World War.
Shorter-lived movements in current-accounts can be interpreted
as responses to shocks to the basic determinants of the current-ac-
count. Since the current-account is the difference between income
and absorption or, if you prefer, between national saving and national
investment, it is possible to build, as Sachs ([5], p. 16) does, a model
of a small,
open economy in which the current-account is the
outcome of "the behavior of far-sighted, intertemporally maximizing
households and firms". In such a model, it turns out that the current
account is a positive function of the excess of current over permanent
income, of the excess of the domestic rate of time preference over the
world interest rate (at which the country is assumed to be able to
borrow and lend), and a negative function of the excess of the current
over the permanent level of government spending. Explicitly intro-
ducing investment spending into this type of model suggests, in
addition, that an investment boom deteriorates the current-account,
the more so if the boom is the result of new investment opportunities
that imply an increase in permanent output and income (and hence in
current consumption).
Such a framework offers no reason to worry about the current
account or to make it a target of policy. How then can one explain the
fact that today's imbalances are one of the major sources of worry for
both policy makers and the public at large. And why are the current
accounts of major countries increasingly considered legitimate targets
of economic policy? There are at least four reasons.
The first is that there may exist some distortions or market
imperfections that result in an inappropriate level of national saving
and!or investment or, if you prefer, that drive a wedge between the
market and the social rate of interest (or of time preference). Apart
from the monopoly or monopsony power that gives rise to the

42
Alexander K. Swoboda
optimum tax on capital movements mentioned above, there are no
generally accepted and obvious sources of such distortions. One can,
however, think of institutional setups that would distort borrowing
and lending choices internationally. For instance, implicit or explicit
guarantees on some types of loans could lead to excessive risk-taking
and lending by banks or others; asymmetries of information could
lead to differences between private and social rates of time preference.
It is important to note, however, that such distortions do not, of
themselves, justify targeting the current-account. Nor do they neces-
sarily imply that macroeconomic policies aimed at that account
should be used to deal with the problem. Ideally such distortions
should.be dealt with at the source; the use of macroeconomic policy
to deal with them has a distinctly second-best flavour.
In fact -
this is the second argument -
preoccupation about the
current-account may reflect the belief that it is an indicator of the
appropriateness of the prevailing policy mix. This view may be the
main reason people are concerned about prevailing imbalances. They
are perceived as undesirable because they would not be there (or
would not be there to the same extent) if the appropriate set of
macroeconomic policies were being followed. In other words, imbal-
ances are a rational response to a set of incentives that reflects
inappropriate macroeconomic policies. The difficulty here is knowing
what the level of surpluses or deficits would be if appropriate macro-
economic policies were being followed. Moreover, even if one could
know these levels, adopting them as targets would be inappropriate
unless one was sure that the correct policies were actually being
pursued. The current-account is neither an instrument of economic
policy nor an appropriate target; it is an endogenous variable that can,
in some circumstances, be an appropriate intermediate target or
indicator. Such circumstances may arise if one has reason to believe
that the actual levels of current accounts diverge widely from their
optimal or desirable levels.
Today people put forward at least two reasons for believing that
this divergence exists; they provide the third and fourth arguments for
targeting the current account. In one such view, the present current-
account deficit of the United States is a source of protectionist
pressure that, if heeded, could prove disastrous for the international

Global Disequilibrium ecc.
43
economic system. Some Americans argue that employment and the
manufacturing sector would fare much better if net exports were
higher. The argument is incorrect -
or at best incomplete -
since US
output is close to capacity, since it is aggregate demand (net foreign
demand plus domestic demand) that governs employment, and since
it is relative competitiveness that allots the share of manufacturing
versus that of other production in total output. Nevertheless, the very
existence of a belief that current-account deficits call for protection
provides a pragmatic argument for reducing the US current-account
deficit, however profoundly misguided the belief may be.
The fourth reason for targeting the current account is also a
pragmatic one. It is the "unsustainability" argument. The idea here is
that present levels of current-account imbalances cannot be sustained
in the long run. One may well wonder why this should be a reason for
policy intervention since, almost by definition, a current-account
disequilibrium that is unsustainable will eventually have to correct
itself. The rejoinder is that the correction, if brought about by market
forces without the help of a change in policies, may be unnecessarily
brutal; the adjustment may well take the form of a hard landing with
.damaging consequences to the United States and the world economy.
Again the difficulty is defining a sustainable level of the current-
account over the medium run. Yet whatever the answer, the belief
that the prevailing current-account deficit is clearly unsustainable
provides pragmatic argument for seeking to reduce it.
2. - Dealing with Current-Account Imbalances
Assume that, for whatever reason (legitimate or not), the level of
the current-account is a target of policy. How is the desired level to be
achieved? There are a wide variety of proposals, ranging from inac-
tion (all that is needed is to wait for the J curve to go away; the
present pattern of real exchange rates will insure approximate cur-
rent-account balance in the longer run) -
to ambitious comprehen-
sive schemes for policy targeting and coordination (such as the
extended target-zone proposal of Edison, Miller, and Williamson,
1987, p. 7). What many of these schemes have in common is an

44
Alexander K. Swoboda
emphasis on securing current-account balance by engineering real
exchange rate changes. This emphasis is misplaced. If securing
current-account balance is an objective of policy, the saving-invest-
ment approach suggests that the appropriate instrument is fiscal
policy. Notice that the argument is not that current-account equilib-
rium cannot be reached without changes in fiscal policy. Rather, I am
saying that doing nothing or using other instruments will either entail
the sacrifice of other important policy objectives or lead to instability
in the world economy (or both).
This argument has been developed fully in Genberg and Swoboda
[3], [4], so I will summarize it only partially and briefly here. The first
point to note is that the real exchange rate is not an instrument of
policy but an endogenous variable that can, at best, serve as an
intermediate target of policy . Second, calculating and achieving the
appropriate real exchange rate -
one compatible with the set of
policies required to bring it about to serve other goals of economic
policy, and at the same time to yield the desired current-account level
-
is a daunting task highly demanding of information and interna-
tional policy coordination. Any mistakes in the calculation could be
very costly in terms of cumulative instability. Third, the real exchange
rate is a real variable; the implication is that its target level cannot be
achieved by manipulation of a nominal instrument, such as the money
supply or the nominal rate of exchange, except in the short run (when
changes in nominal variables may affect real ones because of the
existence of various nominal rigidities).
Economic analysis suggests that, in an open economy, fiscal
policy has a comparative advantage in affecting the current-account.
The rationale of this statement goes beyond the obvious observation
that the current-account is the difference between national saving and
national investment or the sum of the excess of private saving over
private investment and of the government's budget surplus. Ob-
viously, a change in the government's budget can have a one-for-one
effect on the current-account only in very special circumstances (for
example, those in the version of the Mundell-Fleming model that
features a small country with perfect capital mobility version) and in
the medium run. To see the sources of fiscal policy's advantage for
manipulating the current account consider a two-country world in

Global Disequilibrium ecc.
45
which national monetary and fiscal policies are the four instruments
of policy. The objectives of policy will differ depending on whether a
fixed or a flexible exchange rate system is in place.
TABLE 1
LONG-RUN ASSIGNMENTS OF POlley INSTRUMENTS (*)
Target
Instrument
Fixed E
Floating E
regime
regime
P
M
P"
M*
Pw
Mw=M+M*
E
M- M*
CA
G- G*
G -
G*
rw
G+ G*
G + G*
(*) The variables are defined as:
G = government spending;
M = money stock;
P = price level;
E = nominal exchange rate;
CA = current-account;
rw =
world interest rate.
An asterisk identifies foreign variables and the subscript w world variables . The real exchange
ratel e = EP"/ P is endogenous under both exchange rate regimes.
Source: SWOBODA [6].
The assignment of instruments to targets is illustrated in Table 1.
Those assignments are most easily understood in a long-run case
where output is at full employment (and where, as a consequence,
one can abstract from joint output and price level determination),
although similar considerations apply in the short run. On the one
hand, monetary policy affects only nominal variables -
national price
levels and the nominal exchange rate under flexible rates, the world
price level under fixed rates. Fiscal policy, on the other hand, affects
real variables. But note that if one assumes perfect capital mobility (as
is done in the table), it is the sum of fiscal stances in the two regions
that determines the world level of the real rate of interest, while the
difference between these stances determines the current-account. In
the long-run case of the table, it is obvious that it would be self-
defeating to assign monetary policy to the current-account under

46
Alexander K. Swoboda
floating exchange rates (on the idea that a monetary expansion
depreciates the domestic currency in real terms and hence improves
the trade balance). It turns out, however, that even in the short run,
where price rigidities are assumed, fiscal policy has a comparative
advantage over monetary policy in affecting the current-account (the
contrast is the two policies' effects on national output levels). This
out-come is obvious in the simple Mundell-Fleming small-country
model: assuming perfect capital mobility, the effect of an increase in
government spending is to deteriorate the current-account by the
same amount and to leave the level of output unaffected while the
effect of a monetary expansion is to improve the trade balance and to
increase output (2).
Table 1 also contains lessons, some of them familiar, about the
implications of alternative exchange rate regimes for policy coordi-
nation. Fixed exchange rates require that national monetary policies
(in the table, the difference between money stocks) be devoted to
fixing the nominal exchange rate -
to external balance, if you wish -
while the overall stance of monetary policy in the world economy (the
sum of national money stocks, dubbed the "world money supply")
determines the world price level in the long run (or in the short run
and together with fiscal policy, world nominal output). Coordination,
therefore, requires that nations reach some agreement as to the
appropriate levels of world prices and the world money stock and as
to some mechanism for achieving those levels. Coordination of the
regional distribution of fiscal policies is required to achieve a specific
distribution of current-account deficits and surpluses; coordination of
the overall stance of fiscal policy in the world economy is required to
reach a particular level of interest rates. Note again that if the
coordination of fiscal policies is to be effective, there must be some
agreement as to the desirable pattern of current accounts and level of
(2) Fiscal policy has comparative advantage over monetary policy with respect to
the current account relative to the output target if the expression:
R = (dcA/dG)/(dYldG) - (dcA/dM)l(dYldM)
is positive. For the special case in the text, the first left-hand term tends toward infinity,
the second toward zero. GENBERG and SWOBODA [4] show that R is positive for more
general models of an open economy under floating exchange rates.

Global Disequilibrium ecc.
47
interest rates as well as some institutional mechanism for reaching the
agreed targets (assignment rules, for example).
The same principles govern the coordination of fiscal policies
whether exchange rates are flexible or fixed. What does change with
the regime, of course, is monetary policy coordination. In the long
run, flexible rates require no coordination of national monetary
policies, each country being free to pursue its own price level and
inflation targets; indeed, this autonomy of monetary policy is one of
the main advantages claimed for flexible exchange rate regimes.
Things are more complicated in the short run. In an integrated world
economy, national monetary and fiscal policies have real spillover
effects abroad (notably on output). Analytically, it is possible to
aggregate the individual countries into a world model of the IS-LM
type. Assuming that capital is perfectly mobile internationally, overall
output will be determined by the sum of fiscal and monetary stances
and its distribution by their difference. Yet scope for strategic interac-
tion and conflict is clearly there.
3.. International Monetary Reform
International monetary reform could take many forms, ranging
from a marginal improvement of the current semifloating exchange
rate system to institution of a full-fledged, cooperatively-managed
system of fixed exchange rate. The question to be asked here is, what
does the analysis of the previous section suggest about the main
components of reform required for a return to fixed exchange rate.
The answer should suggest some of the main obstacles to such a
reform.
On the monetary side, the requisites for a return to fixed ex-
change rates are fairly obvious: 1) a mechanism for fixing exchange
rates, which inescapably means that monetary autonomy be sacrificed
in (n-t) of the participating countries; and 2) some agreement on a
mechanism governing the growth and composition of international
reserves and hence the growth of the world money stock, the wide
variety of choices available here range from "outside" reserve systems
(such as gold or SDRS) to various "inside" reserve systems (dollar

48
Alexander K. Swoboda
standard, multicurrency reserves, and so on). Once these two require-
ments are credibly met, overall payments adjustment should not be a
major problem insofar as it would be achieved by the automatic
monetary mechanism of adjustment inherent in any fixed exchange
rate system. A key word in the preceding sentence is "credibly". The
adoption of a number of simple rules that could be monitored could
help achieve credibility. One crucial rule would be the assignment of
monetary policy to overall payments equilibrium. A second rule would
have to concern the rate of growth of international reserves and of
system-wide monetary agregates; of the various alternatives that
suggest themselves, some are variants of McKinnon's proposals. (An
additional issue for a return to fixed exchange rates, the choice of an
appropriate initial level of the parities to be defended by the rules, is
discussed in the concluding section of this paper).
Would a return to fixed exchange rates put requirements on the
running and coordination of fiscal policies? In the type of framework
outlined in the preceding section, the answer, would depend on
whether member countries wished to pursue internal balance policies
in the short run or a real interest rate target in the long run and on
whether they were seeking a particular pattern of current-accounts.
Note that, as far as long-run outcomes are concerned, the issues of
fiscal policy would be, in one sense, independent of the exchange rate
regime.
The types of issues that would arise for fiscal policy coordination
are illustrated in Graphs 1 and 2. Let G and G* represent government
spending (or more generally, the fiscal stances) in the United States
and the rest ofthe world respectively (3). The line CA represents those
combinations of (differences between) levels of government spending
that yield a specific current-account level; for simplicity, assume that
countries agree to target current-account balance and that it is
reached on CA. The rw lines show those combinations of government
spending levels that yield a given world real rate of interest. The sum
of government spending is constant along a given rw line, which thus
has a slope of 45 degrees; the further up and to the right is the line,
the higher the rate of interest.
(3) For a fuller explanation of the diagrams used in Graphs 1 and 2, see GENBERG
and SWOBODA [3] .

Global Disequilibrium ecc.
NO CHANGE IN FISCAL POUCY (*)
49
GRAPH 1
CA
CA'
",
/
G~
--f{
/c
I»:
/r
./
-:
TwO
G
0
Go
G1
(*) For definitions of variables, see Table I.
Consider Graph 1. Where are we today? One answer is to argue,
as most people would, that the US current account is too large and so
we are below the line CA, and that the level of interest rates is too high
and so we are above the rw line that would yield an "appropriate"
interest rate level -
say we are on rwoo In other words, current US
government spending, at G) is too high and we are somewhere
between B and D on the vertical line above G. Assume for simplicity
that we are at C -
that is that the current level of government

50
Alexander K. Swoboda
A CHANGE IN FISCAL POUCY (*)
G*
GRAPH 2
o
I
r
Go
TwO
G
(*) For definitions of variables, see Table I.
spending in the rest of the world, Go*, is that which, in combination
with Go, would yield the targeted current account and interest rate.
Assume first that no change in fiscal stance takes place that is, G
stays at G1 and G* at Go*. What will happen? Presumably, current-ac-
count equilibrium will eventually be reestablished by what I call the
debt-dynamics mechanism. Increasing indebtedness in the United
States will lead to a risk premium on the dollar, so real interest rates

Global Disequilibrium ecc.
51
will rise in the United States and fall in the rest of the world. Net
private saving will rise in the United States and fall abroad, and the CA
line will gradually shift to the right to CA'. The system will come to
rest at point C. However, world interest rates will be higher than the
target. (The average will stay roughly at its initial excessive level.)
The only way to achieve the CA and the rw target simultaneously
is to change fiscal policy so that the world reaches point A. A number
of recent proposals for getting there can be illustrated in terms of
Graph 2 (4). The additional line, rwi, indicates those combinations of
government spending that would maintain the world rate of interest at
its present excessive level. The issue is how to move from C to A. One
suggestion, made notably by Branson [1], is, in effect, to move
directly from C to A, leaving it to expansionary monetary policy in
Germany and Japan both to cushion the possible recessionary impact
of a reduction in US government spending in the short run and to
avoid too sharp a nominal depreciation of the dollar. The Louvre
Accord, with its emphasis on fiscal policy and its suggestion that
exchange rates are about right, seems to call for a movement from C
to E where the matching of the decrease in US government spending
by an increase in government spending abroad would result in a
return to current-account equilibrium at the currently high level of
real interest rates. Proponents justify their expectation of the match-
ing increase in government spending abroad by referring to fear of the
recessionary impact of the fall in US absorption coupled with fear of
the inflationary consequences of monetary expansion in the surplus
countries and a general desbelief in the effectiveness of monetary
expansion). A third possibility is to combine the US budget cut with a
temporary fiscal stimulus abroad, if possible on the supply side. The
result would amount to moving from C to E and then to A as the
temporary stimulus is withdrawn.
Fiscal policy coordination of the type suggested here would be
difficult not only because fiscal stances are as much a matter of
politics as of economics but also because the degree of ignorance
about the structure of economies (the exact slopes and locations of
curves such as CA and rw) is such that one does not know the
(4) The remainder of this paragraph is adapted from SWOBODA [6].

52
Alexander K. Swoboda
appropriate long-run values of instrument variables with any pre-
cision.
These problems suggest that nations must devise and adhere to
some simple but robust contingent rules governing national policies,
notably fiscal policies. (This suggestion is, of course, in the spirit of
Mundell's famed
assignment
problem.)
One such
rule,
already
mentioned above, is that under a floating exchange rate system,
monetary policy be assigned to national internal balance targets and
fiscal policy to current-account targets, and that under a fixed ex-
change rate system monetary policy be devoted to overall payments
equilibrium. It is more difficult to devise an assignment rule for fiscal
policies that would allow simultaneous convergence to current-ac-
count equilibrium and the appropriate level of world interest rates. In
a sense, the problem is analogous to the (n-l) problem in the context
of monetary policies and exchange rates. One suggestion, made in
Genberg and Swoboda [3] for a two country case, is to have the larger
country aim its fiscal policy at the real rate of interest and the smaller
one at its current account. In the framework of the United States
versus the rest of the world this suggestion translates to US fiscal
policy that looks after the current account and fiscal policy for the rest
of the world that looks after the real rate of interest. The difficulty is,
of course, that the rest of the world is not a single country!
Be that as it may, an additional general issue is relevant here: the
relationship between the exchange rate regime and fiscal discipline. A
floating exchange rate does seem to provide some discipline for fiscal
policy since irresponsible spending will, in principle, result in an
exchange crisis. The potential of exchange crises should thus impose
some constraint on governments (although one may wonder whether
such discipline operates for a country with large currency reserve.
The fear has recently been expressed that, in a world of integrated
capital markets, no such discipline would be provided under a fixed
exchange rate regime (consider the case of Italy after 1990). On the
other hand, the example of federal countries such as the United States
and especially Switzerland suggests that such fears may be much
exaggerated (5).
(5) In any case , the issue cl iserves serious discussion, at though it cannot be
pursued here.

Global Disequilibrium ecc.
4. - Are Current-Account Imbalances an Obstacle
to International Monetary Refonn?
53
That comprehensive international monetary reform will not be
easy to achieve should be apparent from the preceding discussion of
its requisites. Disagreement about any of the coordinating mechan-
isms listed would constitute an obstacle. Yet these obstacles are not
insurmountable in a medium-run perspective. The question is whether
prevailing current-account imbalances are a serious obstacle to inter-
national monetary reform, in particular to a return to fixed exchange
rates. The answer, I think, is no, but lack of fiscal discipline does
constitute a major obstacle to exchange rate stabilization.
The main reason prevailing imbalances are seen as an obstacle to
a return to fixed exchange rates is the emphasis on changes in real
exchange rates as both a necessary consequence of the imbalances
and the instrument by which they must be eliminated. The US dollar
must depreciate by another 15%, so the argument goes, if the US
current-account deficit is to be eliminated. Moreover, the argument
continues, the sooner this happens the better; the longer the wait, the
harder the landing will be. And stabilizing nominal exchange rates
would prevent the necessary adjustment in the real exchange rate
from taking place.
I find these arguments unconvincing. If the 15% real depreciation
of the dollar is a forecast, so be it. One can imagine circumstances in
which it would be an accurate one. As a policy prescription, however,
it is without merit until someone specifies by what mechanism the
dollar is to be brought down. Furthermore, it has the double disadvan-
tage of distracting attention from the crucial problem -
fiscal policy
and private saving -
and of probably fueling protectionist sentiment
if, as may well be the case, the depreciation does not bring about US
current-account balance. In that case, protectionism may be seen as
the only instrument left since "everything else" will have been tried. In
an ideal world and with a long-run perspective, a decision on ex-
change rate stabilization could take place irrespective of the existence
of fiscal policy coordination or discipline. In reality and in the short
run, however, the separation is not possible. There is the question of
choosing an appropriate nominal parity for exchange rates. In a

54
Alexander K. Swoboda
tranquil period, the choice would be relatively easy, and mistakes
would be easily corrected by relative price level movements. Today,
however, uncertainty -
about fiscal policy in particular -
is so high
that nobody can ascertain with any precision in which direction and
by how much real exchange rates will have to change in the near
future. Lack of fiscal discipline has thus become a major obstacle to
exchange rate stabilization.
In brief the problem is not current-account imbalances but the
fiscal imbalances, (or, more generally saving-investment imbalances)
that they reflect. Once fiscal imbalances have been substantially
redressed, however, any remaining current-account surpluses and
deficits should not be a cause for worry and should not constitute an
obstacle to international monetary reform.

Global Disequilibrium ecc.
BIBUOGRAPHY
55
[1) BRANSON, W.H.: «International Adjustment and the Dollar: Policy Illusions and
Economic Constraints», in GUTH W. (ed.): Economic Policy Coordination, Wash-
ington (DC), International Monetary Fund, 1988.
[2] GENBERG, H. - SWOBODA A.K.: «The Stage in the Balance of Payments Hypothesis
Revisited», Background Paper or the , World Development Report, 1985, Mimeo-
graph, 1985.
[3] -- «The Current Account and the Policy Mix under Flexible Exchange Rates»,
Washington (DC), International Monetary Fund, Working Paper, no. 70, 1987.
[4] -
-
1989. «Policy and Current Account Determination under Floating Exchange
Rates», International Monetary Fund, Staff Papers, vol. I, n. 36 March 1989, pp.
1-30.
[5] SACHS, J.: «Policy and Current Account in the Macroeconomic Adjustment Pro-
cess», in CALMFORS L., (ed.): Long-Run Effects of Short-Run Stabilization Policy,
London, MacMillan, 1983.
[6] SWOBODA, A.K.: The Changing Role of International Policy Coordination, Back-
ground paper prepared for the Israeli International Institute Conference, Paris,
1988.

The Dollar and the Policy Mix
Robert A. Mundell
Colwnbia University
Almost two decades ago I wrote a monograph titled The Dollar
and the Policy Mix: 1971 (Mundell [5] (*». It arose from a talk I
had given in February 1971 at a US Treasury Consultants' meeting
presided over by Paul Volcker, then undersecretary of the Treasury,
and by Secretary John B. Connally, who had returned from his
confirmation proceedings that very day. My talk was in answer to a
question prepared by the late Henry Wallich, then a professor at Yale
University and adviser to the Treasury, who had organized the
proceedings: "Is the balance of payments deficit a menace to the
dollar?"
This question was posed at a time when other economists were
advocating "benign neglect" and a "passive policy" for the dollar. My
answer, however, was in line with a paper I had written a decade
earlier when I was at the International Monetary Fund (IMF). This
paper (Mundell [4]), recommended, in a similar situation, that Presi-
dent John F. Kennedy follow a policy mix opposite to that then
advocated by his Council of Economic Advisors. The task force report,
prepared for Kennedy after the 1960 elections, and headed by Profes-
sor Paul Samuelson, had recommended low long-term interest rates to
spur economic growth and a budget surplus to prevent inflation; this
policy mix was tried in the first two years of the Kennedy Administra-
tion. My proposal, however, was to have tighter monetary policy to
protect the balance of payments and prevent inflation, and a tax cut to
(*) Advise: the numbers in square brackets refer to the Bibliography in the
appendix.

58
Robert A. Mundell
increase employment and spur economic growth. Less than a year
after the publication of that article, President Kennedy made his
famous New York Club speech in which he reversed the policy mix.
The result, delayed a year, was the famous Kennedy-Johnson tax cut
of 1964, which started the United States along its magnificent full-em-
ployment growth path for 1963 through 1968. The prosperity of the
1960s was undermined, however, by a tax surcharge in the summer
of 1968, which combined with tight money a year later to sow the
•
seeds of the 1969-1971 recession.
After the 1968 election, President Richard Nixon's task force on
the economy, chaired by Professor Arnold Harberger, recommended
tax increases to balance the budget and tight money to stop inflation;
that was in line with the monetarists' philosophy that a recession was
necessary to stop inflation. The policy mix was, however, wrong. The
result was a severe recession and a costly shortfall of actual GNP from
potential full-employment GNP. Unemployment rose sharply, and the
political outcry became so great that President Nixon shifted policies,
declaring that he had become a Keynesian! The Federal Reserve eased
up. The result was low interest rates, inflation, and an outflow of
capital that put pressure on the dollar. By early 1971, when I gave my
paper at the Treasury consultants' meeting, the recovery was under-
way, but the $35 an ounce price of gold was under attack. My
prescription for the United States was, as it had been in 1961, tighter
money to protect the balance of payments (and control inflation) and
a tax cut to spur employment and growth. But now the Federal
Reserve, under Chairman Arthur Burns, presumably concerned about
the effects of the recession on President Nixon's chances for re-elec-
tion, gunned the money supply and brought about the demise of the
gold dollar.
August 15, 1971 was the day of the Nixon Shock. The United
States dropped the connection of the dollar to gold, put a 10% surtax
on imports, imposed a wage and price freeze, and attempted to
persuade the rest of the world to let the dollar depreciate. There was
chaos in the exchange markets for a few months but in December an
agreement at the Smithsonian Institution established fixed exchange
rates again, with the price of gold (and the SDR) raised by 8.571% and
some currencies by over 12%. But the connection to gold had become

The Dollar and the Policy Mix
59
a fiction. The official dollar price was now $38 an ounce but with the
market price much higher, no transactions took place. Money sup-
plies were no longer linked, even remotely, to gold. Monetary discip-
line broke down, and the dollar price of gold soared in the free
market. The fixed exchange system established at the Smithsonian
without an anchor could not survive. A criterion was needed for
determining where the burden of adjustment should lie, a function
formerly provided by the "golden umpire". Europeans complained of
the continued US balance of payments deficit and of an excessive
overhang of dollars. The US government then embarked on a second
devaluation of the dollar, raising the price of gold to $42.22 dollars
and the SDR to $1.20635; this occurred in February 1973. It did
nothing to stem the outflow of dollars, however. The Europeans then
attempted a joint float of their currencies against the dollar. Lacking a
central pivot, an anchor, it failed. It might have been possible to rally
round the pound or even the deutsche mark or the franc, but at that
time neither the British, Germans, French or Italians were willing to
allow another country's currency to play the central role. The joint
float thus broke up into flexible exchange rates. (Today, the European
Monetary System (EMS) works as well as it does not only because of
joint coordination but also because of the centralizing role of the
deutsche mark.)
In June 1973, the Committee of Twenty agreed to adopt a system
of floating exchange rates, abandoning international monetary reform
until inflation had been brought under control. In effect, each country
was left to fight inflation on its own. National monetarism, based on
the policy ideas of Milton Friedman, had come into its heyday. The
national monetarist idea was that each country should fix its rate of
monetary expansion so that, if velocity were constant, the desired
inflation rate would converge to that monetary growth rate minus the
rate of economic growth. Wall Street suddenly developed a fixation
with the money supply, hoping they could predict the course of the
economy from those statistics. The role of central bank presidents
now changed greatly. Under fixed exchange rates they had little scope
for independent policy actions and no room for serious policy mis-
takes. Now their importance increased beyond all precedence because
of the power they could exert on money markets and the rate of

60
Robert A. Mundell
inflation. The most important leader was the chairman of the Federal
Reserve Board.
In 1976 the IMF endorsed a system of managed flexible exchange
rates at a meeting in Jamaica leading to the second amendment to the
Articles of Agreement. At the same time it was attempted to demote
gold from its central position in the Fund and to elevate the SDR.
1. . Retrospective on the Gold Standard
Opposing the national monetarists were the internationalists who
favored a global standard and regarded what was happening as a
disintegration of the international monetary system. The gold stan-
dard was a mechanism that gave the world a kind of monetary unity.
The great stability of gold over the centuries had depended on its
widespread use by the commercial public as well as banks. As long as
gold was the most important financial asset in the world, changes in
demands or supplies were likely to be a tiny proportion of outstanding
gold stocks, ensuring stability under normal conditions. The periods
when gold was unstable were usually associated with sudden changes
in government policies. With the exception of gold discoveries, the
most important cause of the instability of gold was the movement of
large countries or many countries at the same time to or from the gold
standard. Thus in the 1870s Germany, France, the Scandinavian
countries and the United States joined Britain on the gold standard,
creating an increased demand for gold, causing it to appreciate and
gold prices to fall; simultaneously those countries that deserted silver
created inflation in the remaining silver countries. In the 1880s and
1890s South African gold discoveries did not reverse the deflation in
the gold countries because of the increased demand for gold caused
by the entry into the gold standard of Austria-Hungary, Russia and
Japan. For a time the new monetary needs for gold balanced the
rapidly increasing supplies. The turning point came in 1896. From
1896 to the First World War, the price level rose gently as a result of
the vast increases in supply of South African gold. India became a
major importer of gold and the Russian Empire had become the
second largest holder of gold by 1914.

The Dollar and the Policy Mix
61
Another turning point came with the outbreak of World War I.
The European countries went off the gold standard, but the United
States remained on it throughout the war (in fact until 1933). Excess
European gold was thus sent to the United States to finance the
belligerents' war expenses. Gold suddenly became an inflationary
standard because of the decline in demand for it in Europe. At that
time the US lacked instruments to stem the inflationary influx of gold;
the newly-created Federal Reserve System had no government secur-
ities to sell in the open market to prevent inflation. The US price level
therefore rose sharply, doubling by 1918. Despite the post-war defla-
tion of 1920-1921, the dollar price level was still over 35% higher than
in the pre-war period, with the bulk of the world's gold reserves in the
United States. There was a kind of equilibrium as long as the US was
the only major country on gold. The world gold stocks were, however,
insufficient to support a world-wide gold standard. When, therefore,
Germany, Britain and France and most of the smaller countries
returned to gold during the middle twenties, the excess demand for
gold for monetary purposes imposed deflationary pressures on the
world economy, particularly in countries like Britain, with an over-
valued currency. The League of Nations had attempted, even in 1922,
to rectify the gold shortage by recommending that countries hold
foreign exchange reserves in lieu of gold; this was called the gold
exchange standard. But stability of the gold exchange standard
required close cooperation and international political harmony. The
political climate in the inter-war period, however, was soured by the
complications of German reparations debts and
France's frantic
efforts -
not entirely misplaced as it turned out -
to prevent a
renewed German domination of Europe. The stock market collapse in
1929 disturbed this fragile system and undermined confidence. US
lending to Europe, which had more than financed German repar-
ations payments to the allies, dried up. Germany could not pay its
reparations, and there was a universal gold squeeze as countries, led
by France, cashed in their foreign exchange reserves. In September
1931, after a banking collapse in Central Europe, Britain went off the
gold standard.
Britain was an important pivot of the international monetary
system in 1931, and London was the major center of world finance.

62
Robert A. Mundell
After the pound sterling floated, a sterling area formed under British
leadership; in conjunction with the 1932 Ottawa Commonwealth
Conference, a zone of discrimination, called imperial preference, was
created against other countries, including the United States, embit-
tering international friendships. President Franklin D. Roosevelt, after
taking the United States off the gold standard in March 1933, refused
to stabilize the dollar with the exchange rates of France and Britain
and other countries at the World Economic Conference in June 1933;
it has been said that President Roosevelt scuttled the conference.
Concurrently, the US Treasury's silver purchases created distress in
countries such as China, that were on a silver standard. (The impact
of currency appreciation in China was so great, it has been blamed as
one of the causes of the success of the Communists in the 1930s).
When the US finally went back to the gold standard in 1934, it raised
the price of the metal from its historic level of $20.67 to $35 an ounce.
The new price lasted until 1971; it set the tone of the international
monetary system in the interim.
An exchange rate stabilization agreement was made in 1936
among the United States, Britain, and France. Known as the Tripar-
tite Agreement, it was to be a precursor to the IMF and World Bank
agreements made at Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, in 1944.
The United States emerged from the Second World War as a
superpower and the globe's pre-eminent economy accounting for over
three-quarters of world manufacturing output. At that time, the dollar
was as good as gold, and the world economy was, for most purposes,
on a dollar standard. History was, however, to repeat itself. The
"dollar shortage" concealed an underlying gold shortage that arose as
a result of wartime inflation. The US had ample gold with over 700
million ounces in 1950 -
most of the world's gold stock. But as
European countries recovered, they developed surpluses that they
wanted settled in gold. The drain of US gold reached enormous
proportions -
hundreds of millions of ounces went to (or were
earmarked for) countries on the continent.
Because of high dollar price levels after the postwar inflation and
the Korean War, there was not enough gold to satisfy both European
and US needs. By 1958, after the establishment of European conver-
tibility and Robert Triffin's timely warnings, the United States became

The Dollar and the Policy Mix
63
concerned about its gold losses. Before that time US policy had
ignored the balance of payments, acting as if the United States were a
closed economy. Now it had to internationalize its economic policy,
taking into account its balance-of-payment deficit. Unfortunately,
President Kennedy's initial policy mix was wrong, as I indicated
before, and gold losses continued. By the time the policy mix was
reversed, US gold reserves were already seriously depleted. By 1971
the US gold stock was down to 290 million ounces, and on that fateful
day of August 15, 1971 the United States closed the gold window.
Despite inconvertibility, most countries since 1971 have held onto
gold for dear life, but it has not been an effective part of the
international monetary system. Most countries hold onto their gold
stocks because they believe gold holdings encourage confidence in
their currency, because it can be used as collateral for loans, and
because of the possibility that someday gold might again be utilized as
an international money. Within Europe, gold has become a part of the
European Monetary System, and the European Monetary Cooper-
ation Fund holds over 90 million ounces.
2.• Later Experience in the 19705
Let us return to June 1973, when the Committee of Twenty
decided to let each country go off on its own, according to the
recommendations of the national monetarists, onto floating exchange
rates. The Federal Reserve set targets for US monetary growth rates.
But the Federal Reserve ignored the inflationary pressure that arose
from dollar creation in Europe in the Eurodollar market. Both foreign
banks and overseas branches of American banks, mainly in London,
used low-powered money in the US (mainly demand deposits in New
York) as high-powered reserve money in London. Because part of the
US money supply became a reserve base for money creation in
London, Eurodollars exploded. This created inflationary pressure in
the US and in the world as a whole. The Federal Reserve had
underestimated the importance of the Eurodollar phenomenon, de-
fending itself by reference to the slow growth of M1, and by the
argument that the figures for Eurodollar deposits were exaggerated

64
Robert A. Mundell
because they involved double-counting. Blind to these fallacious
arguments, the soaring Eurodollar liquidity started a wild inflation.
The acceleration of commodity prices and the increase in spending
provided the economic catalyst for the activation of the Organization
of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC). Following the Egyptian-
Israeli War, OPEC was able to generate the consensus for an oil
embargo that threatened to bring western industry to a standstill. The
embargo was soon transformed into a quadrupling of oil prices. It is a
common error to attribute the oil price increase solely to exogenous
factors, the Egyptian-Israeli War and the monopolization of the
industry by members of OPEC. No doubt these exogenous factors
determined the timing and the exaggerated degree of the price
increase. But it would not have been possible in the absence of the
increase in liquidity that followed the collapse of monetary discipline
when the Bretton Woods System broke down in 1971 and flexible
exchange rates came into being in 1973.
The OPEC shock went far beyond the increase in prices necessary
to restore equilibrium. Because it went beyond the equilibrium in-
crease, it created cost inflation and a profit squeeze in oil-importing
countries. Soon the major oil-importing countries experienced deficits
in their balances of payments of a magnitude hitherto unexperienced
in international trade. Corresponding to these deficits were huge
surpluses in the oil-exporting countries. The transfer of wealth to a
few countries with a narrow population base was the most remark-
able shift of its kind ever experienced. The old poor became the new
rich. Yet the deficit countries financed their oil imports by borrowing
in the Eurodollar market, which caused the supply of Eurodollars to
explode and spread rampant inflation all around the world.
The profit squeeze caused by the oil prices created recessionary
pressure in the United States additional to that resulting from the end
of the Vietnam War. Inflation had pushed individuals into higher
income brackets, steadily increasing the progressivity of the income
tax structure and the weight of taxes in the economy. The mild
recession that had started at the end of the Vietnam war became more
severe in the spring and summer of 1974.
The situation was calling out for a tax cut. In May, 1974. at a
conference at the American Enterprise Institute, I recommended a

The Dollar and the Policy Mix
65
$15 billion tax cut; and in June, at a conference of the International
Economic Association in Budapest, I argued that a $20 billion tax cut
was needed. But President Gerald Ford assembled a conference of 30
American economists who, with one exception (Richard Cooper),
recommended an increase in taxes to balance the budget! Oddly
enough the tax hawks included both Keynesians and monetarists.
Because the Ford Administration was dominated by monetarists
(William Simon as Treasury Secretary and Alan Greenspan as Chair-
man of the Council of Economic Advisers) a plan was established to
raise taxes. As the officials were preparing a large tax increase, I kept
trying to promote the opposite action. With the recession deepening, I
thought that a tax cut of at least $30 billion was required. By October,
the Ford administration finally saw that a tax increase was no longer
feasible, but, as the President put it, he would not do a 180 degree
turn and lower taxes. This was a very expensive consistency!
In December, I presented my views at a conference in the
Roosevelt Room of the Treasury; I made a case for shifting the policy
mix to tight money to control the inflation, combined with a tax cut to
spur growth and employment, but my arguments failed to persuade
the authorities to alter their policies. One useful and lasting result,
however, was that I was invited by Chairman Norm Ulman to meet
with him and other members of the Ways and Means Committee. I
made a case for extending to all corporations the 25% tax rate that
then applied to small corporations. Ulman said that it was politically
impossible to lower corporation taxes in general, but he and other
members were willing to consider an extension of the low tax rate to
larger, but still small, corporations; this reform came into being.
Advisers on both sides of the political fence were adamant in their
opposition to a significant tax cut. The opportunity to turn the
economy around was lost. Supply-side economics was not then a
political force. Only in April 1975 was a tax cut of $15 billion officially
proposed and passed, too little and too late to prevent the recession
from deepening. More important, it was presented as a rebate, lacking
any of the supply-side effects that would have stimulated economic
expansion. What was needed was not only a tax cut but an indexing of
the tax brackets to make them immune to inflation. The passing of the
tax cut was not, however, without significance. It amounted to

66
Robert A. Mundell
complete repudiation of the proposals for tax increases made at the
conference of economists only nine months before.
That the 1974-1975 recession was the most severe since the 1930s
reflected several economic mistakes. The first was not having a
working international monetary system to maintain global discipline
against inflation. The second was the United States not adjusting its
income tax brackets to compensate for inflation or rolling back tax
rates from levels that were already hurting the economy. The third
was in failing to take action against the recession. The argument used
against my proposal for a sweeping tax cut was that it would worsen
the budget deficit. As it turned out, however, the Simon-Greenspan
budget deficits in the years 1974 and 1975 were the highest in
peacetime history. Tax cuts geared to stimulating investment would
have prevented the recession from deepening and reduced the loss of
tax revenues.
From the mistakes of that recession, Supply Side Economics
emerged as a force to be reckoned with. In the fall and winter of 1974
a small group, including myself, Arthur Laffer, Jude Wanniski and
Robert Bartley, met regularly at a New York restaurant "Michael
One" to discuss policy changes needed to bring the US and the world
economy back into equilibrium. The ideas had already been for-
mulated but there was no political constituency that could effectuate
them. With the growing resentment against simultaneously high
unemployment
and
accelerating
inflation,
however,
one
soon
developed. Directly and indirectly, our ideas reached the administra-
tion. Congressman Jack Kemp played a leading role and became the
leading political spokesman in Congress for these views. Wanniski's
book, The Way the World Works [6], popularized what he called the
Laffer curve, the double-valued relationship between tax revenues and
the tax rate, that was drawn on a cocktail napkin at Michael One.
With the aid of Paul Craig Roberts, Kemp put into legislative form the
ideas for a tax cut. The Kemp-Roth bill, named after its congressional
sponsors, called for a 30% cut in income tax rates. It was discussed
politically during the Republican presidential primaries, and after
Ronald Reagan received the nomination he adopted it for the Re-
publican platform in the election of 1980.
That contest turned on ·the economic policies of Jimmy Carter's

The Dollar and the Policy Mix
67
administration in 1977 to 1980. As a result of excess monetary
expansion, inflation had increased and the dollar had depreciated to
all-time lows. On November I, 1978, the Federal government had
announced steps to prevent further depreciation of the dollar. But the
strategy adopted was faulty. The government borrowed $30 billion of
foreign currencies to support the dollar, but the Federal Reserve did
not stop its inflationary monetary policies; the loan was wasted and
the dollar resumed its downward trend.
The situation was now ripe for a repetition of the 1974 oil shock.
Again the event was assisted by a political event, this time the Iranian
revolution. The second oil shock of 1979 raised the price to $34 a
barrel. As in 1974, the oil shock created a cost squeeze. The economy
stagnated in 1980 with high inflation and rising unemployment, events
that cost President Carter the election. The Carter policy mix of easy
money, a depreciating dollar, and increasing real taxes had proved a
failure. The Reagan promise to stop the inflation and cut taxes
represented a reversal of the policy mix, a reversal as historically
important as the reversal of the Kennedy-Johnson policy mix at the
end of 1962.
3. - The Reagan Revolution
No sooner was Reagan elected than a split emerged within his
administration between the supply-siders and the monetarists. The
monetarists were not enthusiastic about the tax cuts but agreed to
support them if they could influence other aspects of administration
economic policy. The truce between the two groups allowed the
passage of a modified version of the Kemp-Roth bill with a 25% cut in
tax rates spread over three years, starting with 5% in October 1981,
followed by
10% in July 1982 and July 1983 (cumulatively this
amounted to a 23% cut in tax rates). In addition, the top income tax
rate was lowered from 70% to 50% immediately. Finally the tax
brackets were to be indexed for inflation to prevent it from altering
real tax rates through increasing progressivity, but the indexing was
scheduled to begin only in 1985.

68
Robert A. Mundell
It is important to recognize that the delay in the implementation
of the tax cuts required a corresponding adjustment in monetary
policy. Unfortunately the Federal Reserve, under Paul Volker, now
took the position that the budget deficit, already over $50 billion, was
inflationary in itself and thought that harsh monetary contraction was
needed to slow the inflation. This was a serious mistake because the
monetary contraction was much in advance of the fiscal stimulus from
the tax cuts. The tight money policy combined with the lingering
effects of the oil shock brought on the recession of 1982 to 1983. This
recession was a policy mistake on the part of the monetarist Federal
Reserve. It was based on a belief that a recession was needed to stop
the inflation. Had the tax cut been instituted at once and the tight
money been imposed as the economy expanded, the dollar would
have appreciated and inflation would have slowed. Had the change in
policy mix been executed correctly, the inflation could have been
stopped without a major recession.
With the recession, the stock market and Dow-Jones average hit
bottom at significantly below 800 in August 1982. The unemployment
rate went to a post-1930s high of 11%. The best that can be said of the
policy is that the soaring dollar slowed inflation and the unemploy-
ment discouraged wage increases. But the failure of the tight money
policy is best indicated by the fall in output and tax revenues that
greatly aggravated the budget deficit .
After the recession hit bottom in November 1982 the economy
experienced an unprecedented recovery. With economic expansion
and renewed confidence in the dollar, capital that had left the United
States during the preceding years returned. Expectations for the
dollar became bullish. This .self-fulfilling expectation appreciated the
dollar, which rose far beyond what was desirable in the long run from
the
standpoint
of
US competitiveness.
The
overshoot
reduced
American competitiveness and threatened to slow the recovery.
The continued appreciation of the dollar resulted from the rapid
economic recovery and the renewed confidence in the dollar. The
monetarists, predicting inflation because of the rapid monetary
growth, failed to take into account the strength of the rising demand
for dollars. The money supply expanded rapidly to meet the enormous
increase in demand for dollars that arose from the restoration of

The Dollar and the Policy Mix
69
confidence. The appreciation of the dollar could have been checked
by a looser monetary policy in 1983, achieved by an accumulation of
foreign exchange reserves. But the administration had not yet come
round to a belief in the merits of stable exchange rates. The US
Treasury under Donald Regan was monetarist.
The 1984 presidential election was fought on the issues of the
budget deficit and taxes. Reagan defended the tax cuts and suggested
the need for further reform of the tax system. Walter Mondale
campaigned on a platform of raising taxes, arguing that they would be
increased no matter which party was elected. With Reagan 's victory
assured, the tax reform act became the most important legislation
under discussion in 1985, although it was not passed until a year later.
But important changes were already taking place in foreign exchange
and monetary policy early in 1985. The Federal Reserve had shifted to
a policy of monetary ease, which brought an end to the strong dollar.
In March 1985, the dollar, having reached a high of DM 3.4 (it was
DM 1.7 in 1980), stopped rising. It had fallen to DM 2.5 and Yen 239
by September 22, 1985, when the Group of five finance ministers met
at the Plaza Hotel in New York, on the initiative of the new US
Treasury Secretary James Baker III, and announced their agreement
to coordinate a further depreciation of the dollar. The Plaza Accord
was a milestone in recent international monetary history. It intro-
duced an era in which other currencies are coordinated against the
dollar; the system became a managed dollar system.
The administration's political reason for depreciating the dollar
was its desire to preempt the protectionist forces that were developing
rapidly in Congress. It was believed that devaluation of the dollar
would increase exports and improve US competitiveness. The trade
balance, however, is governed not by the exchange rate but by the
level of expenditure compared to income, and expenditure is fed by
loans from or sales of asset abroad. If to lower the value of the dollar
in foreign currencies other countries have to follow tighter monetary
policies, these policy changes will in themselves tend to worsen the
balance of trade, not improve it. As noted, capital imports finance the
excess of expenditure. If other countries continue to invest in the
United States or the latter continues to borrow from abroad at the
same rate as before the depreciation, expenditure will not be reduced

70
Robert A. Mundell
relative to income and the trade balance will be unaffected by
exchange rate depreciation. If the lower dollar underprices capital
assets and raises the marginal efficiency of capital, attracting more
capital from abroad, the gap between expenditure and income may
even widen and therefore worsen the trade balance. A trade deficit
can only be corrected if the sum of the budget deficit and the excess of
investment over saving is reduced.
Depreciation of the dollar did make the US more competitive.
The fall in the dollar was only slightly offset by higher wage rates so
that US labor became much cheaper relative to labor in the appreci-
ating countries. By the end of 1985 the dollar had fallen to about
Yen 200 and DM 2.0. The dollar seemed to have settled in equilibrium
at this level when a quite unexpected event occurred, a fall in the price
of oil. It plunged from more than $30 to $12 a barrel and recovered
only to $15-$20. Japan had prepared for another oil shock and had
amassed enough saving to provide a cushion. But when the price of oil
went down instead of up, Japan and other oil-dependent countries
experienced a remarkable improvement in their terms of trade and
became the recipients of a huge transfer of wealth. This real factor led
to a great appreciation of the yen and, to a lesser extent, the mark.
The dollar went down steadily in 1986 until, when it had arrived at
Yen 160, members of the Group of seven decided it had fallen far
enough. On February 22, 1987, the Louvre Agreement set into motion
a provisional stabilization plan for maintaining national currency
prices of the dollar. With its agreement to stabilize exchange rates
"around current levels" the Louvre Agreement recalls the 1936 Tri-
partite Agreement that was a precursor of the Bretton Woods Agree-
ment eight years later.
Stabilization of exchange rates now led to a troublesome but
familiar question: which countries should do the stabilizing? If the
dollar weakens against the deutsche mark, should the Germans ease
or should the Americans tighten? If policy changes in both countries
are desirable, what mixture of the two countries' policies should be
adopted? The correct answer depends on the goals sought. If the goal
is price stability, the choice turns on whether more or less inflation is
required in the world. If there is deflationary pressure in the world,
the surplus country should expand; but if there is excessive inflation,

The Dollar and the Policy Mix
71
it is better for the deficit country to contract. Settling the issue,
therefore, requires development of an index to measure world infla-
tion. This problem was posed at the Group of seven summit meeting
in June 1987, and further discussed in a private conference at Santa
Colomba, Italy, where Robert Heller, then a member of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, suggested working out an
index of inflation explicitly for use as a referee; discussion then turned
on the usefulness of including gold as one of the elements of the index.
At the IMF meetings in September 1987, Baker proposed the use of an
index of commodity prices, going out of his way to specify that the
index should include the price of gold. The Federal Reserve and the
IMF began to work on such an index.
Alas, the index idea was put on the back burner in October 1987
when the stock market crashed. After a week of bad news, starting on
October 12 with receipt of a worsened trade deficit figure for the
previous month, the Dow Jones average fell to about 1740; this was a
crash of 23%, almost double the less than 13% crash in October 1929.
On the following day the market initially recovered by almost 200
point only to fall to crash again to reach a mid-day low of 1620, a drop
since the August high of more than 1,000 points. There was a quick
recovery, however, and the Dow soon recovered to a trading range
between 1900 and 2100, closing out the year about even. Since that
time, the Dow fluctuated at higher levels that overtook its August
1987 record. From its lows in 1982 to the highs of 1989 the Dow has
increased 3,5 times.
The behavior of the stock market cannot be understood outside
the context of the revolutionary tax changes introduced in the tax
reform act of 1986. This act built on the triangle of three proposals:
the Bradley-Gephardt bill, which posed a 30% maximum personal
income tax rate; the Kemp-Kasten bill which called for a 25% flat tax
with a $2,000 exemption; and the Reagan proposal prepared at the
Treasury late in 1984 for a three-step rate with a 35% maximum. The
actual tax act was a compromise that set the maximum income tax
rate to 33% then falling to 28%, and raised the tax rate on capital gains
to the level levied on incomes. Achieving revenue neutrality was
assumed to require a compensating increase in business taxes, in-
cluding the elimination of the investment tax credit, but the corporate

72
Robert A. Mundell
tax rate was lowered to 34%. The tax reform act caused mixed
reactions on Wall Street because of the elimination of many tax
shelters and the investment tax credit. When interest was deductible
from corporate profits, debt could be substituted for equity at the
expense of the government and to the benefit of new corporate
owners.
It is necessary to notice the immense importance of the Reagan
tax revolution. The top US income tax rates had been more than 60%
since June 1932 and had reached as high as 90%. In 1980 the top rate
was 70% on federal income tax alone. During the Reagan years, this
rate was brought down to 28% (after a hump that rose to 33%). It was
indeed a tax revolution in the United States.
The Reagan tax cuts have had an important demonstration effect
abroad. Top income tax rates were lowered in nearly all the major
countries. Alan Reynolds has prepared a table of the changes in these
tax rates for the decade 1979 to 1989 for forty countries. Comparing
1979 to 1989 the reduction was from 83% to 40% in Britain, from 50
to 35% in Indonesia, from 75 to 50% in Japan, from 58 to 45% in
Canada (Ontario), from 60 to 53% in France, from 72 to 62% in Italy'
and so on. We should also add the momentous drop from 100% to
60% in the USSR. In only two cases -
Germany and the Netherlands
-
have income taxes not been lowered; and even in these two
countries tax reductions have been prepared for the future. The
revolution is becoming a global phenomenon and that is a promising
development for economic growth in the rest of the world.
4•. The Present
The United States is now in the enviable state of an economy as
close to full employment as it has been in the last 15 years. It has been
more successful than Europe in boosting employment. For the first
time since 1974, unemployment has been rduced to 5% of the labor
force. The number of employed has now reached 119 million. Three
reasons for this stand out. The first is the sweeping tax-rate cuts that
have increased incentives, raised the marginal productivity of labor
and the marginal efficiency. of capital; they shifted the Phillips curve

The Dollar and the Policy Mix
73
downward and to the left and thus created a more favorable trade off
between inflation and unemployment. A'widely used measure of the
success of inflation-unemployment policy is Okun's discomfort index
which sums the rate of inflation and the rate of unemployment. In
1980 the discomfort index was 22, made up of 7% unemployment and
15% inflation. In 1989 the corresponding number on the Okun index
is at 10, composed of 5% unemployment and 5% inflation. The
discomfort index has been cut by more than half, a tribute to the
success of the US policy mix, even if it is poor by comparison with the
two decades before the 1971 breakdown of the international mon-
etary system. The second factor has been the Baker dollar. The low
dollar has increased the competitiveness of the United States by
substantially lowering its real exchange rate relative to that of Japan,
Germany and other trading partners. The lower real wage accounted
for part of the increase in employment and the exceptional export
expansion in 1988. A third factor was the steep drop in the price of oil
in the winter of 1985-86. It improved the US terms of trade and
increased profits and growth. But it helped oil-dependent economies
such as those of Japan and Europe (except for Britain and Norway)
even more, and it was that factor that carried the fall of the dollar
further than policy could ordinarily have done. The United States is
now experiencing some of the employment advantages of an under-
valued dollar in return for the sacrifice of its financial terms of trade.
Full employment without inflation has been the standard goal of
the United States for the past four decades; the present is no
exception. The best full-employment policy is to maintain the low
dollar. The undervaluation of the dollar works to the benefit of US
employment and production.
An undervalued dollar is the best
approach to a lower interest rate. The low dollar policy is, however,
more inflationary than a high dollar policy. The best way to slow
inflation would be to let the dollar appreciate, a policy the United
States followed between 1981 and 1984. But it should not permit such
an appreciation now. Doing so would bankrupt debtor less developed
countries (LDCs) and dissipate the attractive United States' competi-
tive position. It is true that the dollar is somewhat undervalued, that
the depreciation from 1985 to 1988 went too far, and that this
undervaluation puts on prices some pressure that would not exist if

74
Robert A. Mundell
the dollar were allowed to rise. The best policy, however, is to
maintain the spirit of the Louvre Accord and to stabilize the dollar.
Much of the stabilizing of exchange rates can be done by foreign
countries. When the dollar is strong, foreign sales of dollars reduce
bank reserves (assuming no sterilization), raise foreign interest rates
and inhibit inflation. But the United States should help in the adjust-
ment if there is a threat of deflationary pressure. Under a system of
'fixed exchange rates the US would automatically buy foreign ex-
change to prevent appreciation of the dollar and this would auto-
matically provide the increase in bank reserves necessary for adjust-
ment. Under the managed dollar system the US should exercise the
opportunity to build up a stock of foreign exchange reserves for use
when the dollar ceases to be strong. It is true that historically the
United States has not held much foreign exchange because its reserves
were held in the form of gold. But as long as gold is not used in
international transactions the United States is without effective re-
serves to defend the dollar when it becomes weak. It has no way to
combat speculative attacks against the dollar except by borrowing
foreign exchange, as it did on November 1, 1978; this is obviously not
very convincing to the market. At the present time, Japan has $70
billion in foreign exchange reserves, Germany $38 billion, the United
Kingdom $31 billion, Italy $25 billion, France $17 billion and Swit-
zerland $16 billion. The United States has only $17 billion at the end
of 1988 and has only recently increased its holdings. In the near future
it should take direct steps to build up its holdings of foreign exchange
reserves, especially deutsche marks and yen. The US Treasury could
keep most of these reserves in short term interest-bearing accounts
overseas so it would not sacrifice income from the holdings.
In the long run, it would be desirable to create an international
reserve unit, analogous to the SDR, to which each country could
stabilize its currency and use unsterilized intervention as the basis of
monetary policy.
Turning to fiscal policy, the economy has not yet absorbed fully
the tax changes put into effect during the past eight years. As the
saying goes, "A good tax is an old tax." But two distortions need to be
corrected. One is the taxation of capital gains at the same rate as
ordinary income. This results in a distortion, for three reasons: first,

The Dollar and the Policy Mix
75
capital gains are not offset by capital losses; second, taxes are based
on nominal rather than real capital gains; and third, capital gains
income is generally riskier than ordinary income. For those reasons I
support a move to cut the tax on capital gains to 20%.
A second desirable change in fiscal policy is to lower the
corporate income tax rate. The 34% rate of the 1986 tax reform act is
too high, especially now that personal income tax rates have been
lowered. Distributed profits are already taxed as personal income.
Most countries -
the United States, Sweden and the Netherlands are
exceptions -
integrate the personal and corporate taxes by dividend
relief either at the corporate or personal level. In the United States the
corporate tax rate is added to the income tax rate to make income
from capital taxed at a substantially higher rate than income from
labor. Reducing the corporation tax to 20% would mitigate, but not
eliminate, this defect. Such a reduction would not necessarily result in
lower tax revenue. It is possible that more total tax revenue would be
raised at a 20% rate than at a 34% rate, considering that the likely
results would include an increased tax base, a booming economy, and
more taxes on capital gains and income. Also, very little of the tax is
now collected on American corporations abroad. Because US corpor-
ations can deduct foreign taxes paid from their US tax liabilities, many
countries have nothing to lose and everything to gain by charging a
tax rate as high as that of the United States, even if it is above the
optimum rate for their own economies. A reduction in the US
corporate tax would encourage these countries to lower their own
rates.
If the capital gains tax and the corporate profit tax could be
lowered to 20%, it is possible that the great expansion initiated in 1983
could be prolonged for several more years, avoiding a recession.
5. - Conclusions
In conclusion, the policy today should be to stabilize the dollar
near current levels, and that should be the central pillar of our
monetary policy. The responsibility for fixing the dollar rests formally
with the Treasury, but the Federal Reserve must implement the

76
Robert A. Mundell
policy. The United States should also take the lead in reviving the
fruitful discussions of an inflation index to provide a "referee" be-
tween surplus and deficit countries. The policy mix should involve
stabilization of the dollar through monetary policy, combined with a
reduction in the corporate tax rate and the capital gains tax rate to
20%.
It would go beyond the context of the present discussion to
consider what an adjustment of expenditures to income, which would
be implied by an improvement in our trade balance, would mean to
the rest of the world. Trade surpluses in the rest of the world would
have to disappear and that would involve important adjustments. At
the current state of the business cycle, a reduction in lending to the
US with a consequent adjustment of the trade balance would involve
more difficult adjustments for the rest of the world than for the United
States.
The major challenge to the administration of George Bush, and
the foundation of any deficit-reduction package, is to continue the
current six-year expansion for another four years. Doing so will
require skilful steering and a policy mix along the lines I have
suggested.

The Dollar and the Policy Mix
BIBUOGRAPHY
77
[I] BARRO
ROBERT: «Are Government Bonds
Net Wealth?», Journal of Political
Economy?, , n. 82, die . 974, pp. 1095-1117.
[2] HELLER ROBERT: «Money and the International Monetary System», Homer Jones
Memorial Lecture, University of Missouri , St. Louis, April, 1989. Unpublished
manuscript.
[3] MUNDELL ROBERT: «The Public Debt, Corporate Income Taxes and the Rate of
Interest», Journal of Political Economy, n. 68, December 1960. Reprinted in
MUNDELL R.A.: Monetary Theory: Interest, Influation and Growth in the World
Economy Goodyear, 1971, pp , 5-13.
[4] --: «The Appropriate Use of Monetary and Fiscal Policy for Intrnal and External
Stability», IMF Staff Papers, nn. 70-79, March 1962, reprinted in MUNDELL R.A.:
International Economics, New York, MacMillan, 1968, pp. 233-9.
[5] --: «The Dollar and the Policy Mix: 1971», Princeton Studies in International
Finance, June 1971.
[6] WANNISKI JUDE: The Way the World Works, Morristown (NJ» , Polyconomics,
1977.

The European Monetary System
in the World Economy
Robert Triffin
Universite Catholique de Louvain La Neuve
1.• Refonn of the International Monetary System
On January 24,
1989, I summarized my iconoclastic views
regarding the present international monetary system -
or scandal? -
before the Economic, Monetary and Industrial Policy Commission of
the European Parliament under the title of a famous French song:
«Tout va tres bien, Madame la Marquise, tout va tres bien; mais
cependant, il faut que je vous dise... .»
The first part of that title summarizes the reassuring declarations
that the repeated and growing crises of today's international "paper
exchange standard," anchored primarily on the US dollar, bring forth
from responsible officials and their experts. Its second part signifies
the conclusions that the facts imposes on them, and on the rest of us
as well.
1.1 Fifteen Years Ago
Fifteen years ago, after ten years of incessant deliberation at the
highest level -
by ministers of finance, governors of central banks,
and the most highly respected experts -
it was concluded universally
that a fundamental reform of the present international monetary

80
Robert Triffin
system, in order to rectify the defects inherent in any "paper exchange
standard," was as urgent as it was indispensable.
The danger of such a standard is that it enables the country
whose national currency is accepted by the others as the principal
instrument for their international monetary reserves, to finance, by
inflationary increases of world reserves held in the currency, excessive
and persistent deficits in its balance of payments, regardless of their
origin.
Only the currency of a country that is rich and highly capitalized
-
England formerly, the United States today, Japan and Germany
tomorrow -
is likely to have such a privilege, and such a responsi-
bility, conferred on it. The exercize of this privilege distorts invest-
ments of world reserves in a direction as absurd economically as it is
humanly. The other countries, including the poorest and those most
in need of capital to develop their economies, contribute to the
financing of a few of the richest and most highly capitalized countries,
which are then free either to re-export such capital inflows as they
wish, under conditions of their own choosing, or to use them to
increase their own civilian and military expenditures and their own
already high levels of consumption.
1.2 Today
The international monetary evolution of the last fifteen years has
confirmed these conclusions. The current account deficits of the
United States totalled more than US $560 billion over the five years
1983-1987 -
US $154 billion in the single year 1987. That is more
than US $630 per capita in the United States, the equivalent of the
total income per capita on which must live -
or die of starvation -
3.5 billion inhabitants of the Third World!
The increase in currency reserves of the central banks in the
course of 1987 was about US $188 billion, of which US $124 billion
(66% was in US dollars) enough to finance 80% of either the US fiscal
deficit of US $150 billion or its external deficit of US $154 billion.
I was taught as a university student that the worst and most
inflationary method of financing a deficit was to borrow from the

The European Monetary System ecc.
81
country's central bank. How is it then that the central banks of the
rest of the world are willing to finance the deficits of the United
States? Our official leaders offer three explanations, of which two are
correct; the third, however, is totally indefensible.
The first is that the external deficit of the United States (US $154
billion) and the almost equivalent surpluses of Japan (US $87 billion)
and Germany (US $45 billion) have resulted largely from the fact that
the United States spends proportionately far more on the military than
do the other two countries: 6.7% of GNP, compared with only about
1% for Japan and 3% for Germany.
Japan and Germany recognize that the United States is entitled
to claim from them, on the basis of its disproportionate contri-
bution to the common defence, what amounts to the financing of
its external deficits. But they cannot ask public opinion or their
respective parliaments to
vote subsidies for the US budget -
especially since they no doubt deem, and quite rightly, that the US
military budget is excessive, having more than doubled in eight
years under President Ronald Reagan despite the turnaround in
Soviet military policy since the coming to power of Mikhail Gor-
baciov. They prefer, therefore, to ask their central banks to buy
from the market the excess dollars flooding it because of the US
deficits, and to perpetuate as long as possible the "paper exchange
standard" -
unanimously denounced 15 years ago, in June 1974,
as the principal cause of the world monetary disorder, after ten
years of negotiations at
the summit by the Committee of 20
presided over by Jeremy Morse.
The second explanation for the world's willingness to finance the
US deficit is that the elimination of the deficit would cause a world-
wide depression if it were not compensated for by a more expansionist
policy on the part of Germany and Japan, leading them to reduce or
reinvest their foreign surpluses.
The third explanation -
alas! -
is the erroneous one that the rest
of the world is unable to refuse a country as powerful as the United
States an indefinite increase of loans without any prospect of re-
imbursement. The decision to lend, it seems to me, is always at the
discretion of the lenders rather than the borrowers. I shall, however,
say no more on this subject.

82
1.3 Tomorrow?
Robert Triffin
In the first place, it is as urgent and indispensable as ever that we
put an end to the "paper exchange standard" and replace it by a truly
international monetary standard, one based on reserves deposited
with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) rather than on a handful
of national currencies -
the dollar especially -
called "parallel
currencies." But the United States is not yet ready to negotiate such a
reform, which is impossible without its agreement.
Second, the countries of the European Community (EC) should
immediately accelerate their progress toward a European monetary
union in order to diminish their excessive dependence on a violently
fluctuating paper dollar -
a dollar that is sometimes highly over-
valued and sometimes markedly undervalued, to the great detriment
of the United States itself, as well as the rest of the world. The
formation of a monetary union would also enable the EC countries to
offer the United States more effective assistance in resolving the
international problem of the dollar.
Finally, there is the matter of a more equitable sharing of
military costs between the United States and its allies. I shall limit
myself to three observations:
1) the main one is that it would
certainly be a welcome development if the United States and the
Soviet Union were mutually to reduce their nuclear arsenals, of
which 1% would suffice -
according to the last report prepared at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology for President Reagan -
to
exterminate most of either country's population and reduce the
survivors to living standards unknown since the Middle Ages; 2) the
recent radical change in military policy on the part of the Soviet
Union should make it possible for the (NATO) countries to support
the costs of an adequate conventional defence, which they have
heretofore considered unsustainable; 3) let us note in this connec-
tion that most commentaries grossly exaggerate the superiority of
the conventional forces of the Warsaw Pact, not only for the reasons
frequently advanced by Helmut Schmidt, but also because they fail
to include with the armaments of NATO those of the numerous
countries that benefit from US military aid, of which some at least
would side with NATO in the event of war.

The European Monetary System ecc.
2. - The European Monetary System and the ECU
83
I hope that the brief introductory remarks that follow will lead
some readers to my more detailed article, "The Intermixture of
Politics and Economics in the World Monetary Scandal: Diagnosis and
Prescription," which appeared in the January 1989 issue of The
American Economist and, in French, in Reperes (January 1989, n.
16), the economic and financial bulletin of the Banque Internationale
a Luxembourg. I feel particularly pleased and honored to have this
translation preceded by an article by the governor of the Bundesbank,
Karl Otto Pohl, whose views on the future of European monetary
integration are practically identical to mine, though obviously far
more influential. Let me stress that they also differ radically from the
views that were responsible for the obdurate opposition of the
Bundesbank, under the leadership of Otmar Emminger, to the
European Monetary System (EMS) and the European Corrency Unit
(ECU).
Governor Pohl and I are in fundamental agreement on the
ultimate objective of full monetary union, under which the deutsche
mark and the other national currencies of the European Community
would disappeared entirely, to be replaced by a single European
currency, the ECU. Needless to say, I also agree with him that more
immediately feasible and negotiable reforms of the EMS should be
couched in a way that will facilitate progress toward that ultimate
goal.
Governor Poul has repeated these two points in innumerable
speeches and articles, with however one caveat or qualification -
that
a monetary union treaty and the creation of the European central
bank indispensable to its management must be predicated on the
agreement of the participating countries on two essential points:
1) the joint pursuit of price stability as well as exchange rate stability
and; 2) the independence of the European central bank from political
pressure from either the European Community or the national
governments of its member countries.
In the absence of such an agreement, full monetary union -
or
even the preservation of irrevocably stable exchange rates among
member currencies -
would force the surplus countries to finance

84
Robert Triffin
the deficit countries, at the cost of importing inflation from them. This
is, of course unacceptable to Germany, and it is avoided under the
EMS, as it now operates, through exchange rate "realignments" that
offset the inflation rate differentials that some countries are still
unable to avoid.
No realignment has been necessary however, since January 1987.
Indeed, even that realignment could have been avoided had the
European Community adopted a more appropriate joint policy vis-a-
vis the dollar. In the absence of such a policy, a realignment of the
exchange rate was forced upon France by an excessive flight of
speculative capital to the United States, even through French progress
toward both price stability internally and balance of payments equili-
brium externally made realignment otherwise totally inappropriate.
Note also that Germany's continental partners, as well as Ger-
many itself, have now proclaimed themselves determined not to bow
to any British veto regarding future progress toward monetary union.
Instead, all of the countries ready for union -
Germany, France,
Belgium, Luxembourg, and Italy -
will go ahead with it, leaving the
door open to Britain and other countries to join them later. This
strategy has just been spelled out politically as well as economically in
the judicious Report of the Delors committee and in the New Treaty
proposed in detail by the European Parliament under the leadership of
Otmar Franz.
A crucial aspect of these proposals is, of course, their impact
upon the international crisis of the dollar and its exchange rate
vis-a-vis the ECU and the deutsche mark.
My proposals aim specifically at enabling the European Com-
munity to help resolve this awesome dollar problem. First, they would
remove the major threat to the dollar exchange rates represented by
the enormous accumulation of short-term (US) indebtedness held
more and more reluctantly by foreign central banks. All of this
indebtedness -
and even possibly some of that held by other investors
-
should be converted into what is a most appropriate instrument for
international lending, an instrument that was widely used for that
purpose in the past: consols (srentes perpetuelles» in French), which
would not have an imperative maturity date but would provide
adequate interest earnings and exchange rate guarantees.

The European Monetary System ecc.
85
The attractiveness of consols is double: 1) they conform legally to
an inescapable fact of life: no country can repay its global debts as
long as it remains in global deficit, and no country can reduce its
global claims as long as it remains in global surplus; 2) many investors
-
and particularly banks -
have no wish to liquidate their invest-
ments at maturity and therefore must reinvest the repayments they
receive. As for those who want cash, consol obligations, like other
obligations, are negotiable at any time in what should be a wide and
relatively stable security market.
Second, my proposals recognize that the United States cannot be
expected to restore either its budgetary or its balance of payments
equilibrium overnight. They suggest therefore that the European
Monetary Cooperation Fund (FECOM), the International Monetary
Fund (IFM), and other official agencies continue to supply such
financing for a period of two or three years, but under conditions that
will ensure the full cooperation of the US authorities in restoring the
international balance of payments equilibrium -
or rather surplus -
that the richest and most capitalized country in the world should
possess.
The proponents of European integration are encouraged by the
fact that the two founding fathers of the EMS and ECU, Valery
Giscard d'Estaing and Helmut Schmidt, are major advocates today of
concrete and detailed proposals for full monetary union under the
management of a European Federal Reserve Bank.
Those who equate wisdom with skepticism, however, will dismiss
as utopian the advocacy by political and financial leaders, when out of
office, of such ambitious reforms, which they dismissed as unfeasible
when they were in office.
The reader may be more interested, therefore, in the treaty
concluded in January 1988 between the governments of France and
Germany and later ratified by their parliaments, a treaty that creates a
common defence and security council and a common economic and
financial council. The latter council is made up of the presidents of
the Bank of France and the Bundesbank and the French and German
ministers of finance and ministers of economics.
Even more important, to my mind, is the growing pressure from
private economic sectors for the development of the ECU, as a

86
Robert Triifin
transnational currency that would eliminate the unnecessary costs
and risks associated with exchange transactions. Such a currency is
indispensable in any case to the achievement of full economic union
by 1993.
I hope to live long enough to witness the completion of this
life-long dream of many Europeans!

The State of the World Economy:
Global Imbalance, Exchange Rates
and the World Debt
Gottfried Haberler
American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research
The subtitle indicates three major problems confronting the world
economy that I address in this paper. The first is global imbalances,
the persistent and large US budget and trade deficits (more precisely,
current account deficits) and the equally persistent German and
Japanese trade surpluses.
Second (and raised by speaking of balance-of-payments dise-
quilibrium) is the question of exchange rates. Is that problem, it may
be asked, not taken care of by floating exchange rates? Unfortunately,
the matter is not quite so simple with the present system of managed
-
or mismanaged -
floating rates. The third problem is that of the
world debt, the problem of the over-indebted less developed countries
(LDCs), which has again come to a boil.
For the solution of all these problems, the economic health and
policies of the large industrial countries are, of course, of paramount
importance. The US economy is now in its seventh year of a vigorous
and until recently noninflationary expansion -
the longest peacetime
cyclical expansion on record. Naturally, the longer the expansion lasts,
the more precarious the situation becomes. After the stock exchange
crashes in November 1987, many economists, including myself, ex-
pected a recession. The prompt action of the US Federal Reserve
Board in assuring the market that it was ready to act in an emergency
can probably be credited with preventing the stock exchange crashes
from causing a recession. But as the stance of tight money has

88
Gottfried Haberler
continued in 1988, the expansion has showed, interest rates have
risen sharply, ad there are ominous signs of accelerating inflation.
Before trying to put recent developments into proper perspective,
I mention a minor byproduct of recent developments. That econo-
mists do not speak with one voice in such a fluid situation should be
no surprise. Still, the reputation of economics and of economists has
suffered badly because there has not been much agreement on
important questions. In an important paper titled Politics and the
Professors Revisited, one respected member of the profession, Henry
Aaron [1] asked rhetorically whether economists can be taken seri-
ously when they give different advice on important problems. As one
might expect, this remark was stridently echoed in the popular media.
I. . Some Historical Perspectives
To put recent developments into proper perspective, first recall
that the present situation has some striking similarities to the one in
the late 1970s and early 1980s, although the general background was
different. From July 1981 to November 1982, the United States and
the industrial countries as a group experienced the severest recession
since the war. This time around a recession is widely expected but has
not yet started. What the two episodes have in common is that 1)
economists have been taken to task for giving conflicting advice on
important policy questions; and 2) more important, both the recent
slowdown and the recession of 1981-1982 have been blamed on the
US Federal Reserve Board. Everyone agrees that inflation has to be
stopped. But the critics -
monetarists and supply-siders -
say the
poison should have been withdrawn gradually.
Winding down inflation gradually would surely be the ideal
method. But doing so is a delicate, time-consuming operation that
may not be feasible once inflationary expectations have taken hold
and the problem has become a hotly debated political issue (1).
(1) See for example. HABERLER [5].
(*) Advise: the numbers in square brackets refer to the Bibliography in the
appendix.

The State of the World Economy ecc.
89
A second way to get perspective on today's economic problems is
to look at the whole postwar period (194.5-1989). It is no exaggeration
to say that has been nearly half a century of unprecedented growth
and prosperity for the whole western world, developed and less
developed countries alike. True, the National Bureau of Economic
Research registers eight recessions during the period, but none of
them was a depression -
that is, a contraction of output and
employment coming near the sharp decline of the Great Depression of
the 1930s earlier ones (2). I can do no better than to quote here, as I
have elsewhere, the world's foremost expert on economic growth,
Simon Kuznets ([12], p. 14). In his magisterial lecture, Two Centuries
of Economic Growth: Reflection on US Experience, he summed up
the results of the enormous amount of research that he and others,
many under his guidance, have done over the years: «Even in this
recent twenty-five year period of greater strain and danger, the
growth in peace-time product per capita in the United States was still
at a high rate; and in the rest of the world, developed and less
developed (but excepting the few countries and periods marked by
internal conflicts and political breakdown), material returns have
grown, per capita, at a rate higher than ever observed in the past» (3).
In a paper on growth in the less developed countries (LDCs)
Kuznets ([11], p. 41 said: «For the LDCs as a group, the United
Nations has estimated annual growth rates of total and per capita GDP
(gross domestic product at constant factor prices) from 1950 to 1972.
The growth rates of per capita product . . . for the twenty-two years
was 2.61% per year . . . Such growth rates are quite high in the
long-term historical perspective of both the LDCs and the current
LDCs».
These high growth rates are largely a recent phenomenon, the
(2) The difference between recession and depression is not merely a quantitative
one. It has been established that all depressions in modern times have been caused or
sharply aggrevated by monetary mismanagement. For example, in the 1930s the US
Federal Reserve , through acts of omission and commission, allowed the money supply
to contract by 300h. One need not be a monetarist to understand that such a deflation
will have catastrophic consequences.
(3) Kuznets's findings about growth in the less-developed countries are reported at
great length in KUZNETS [10] , [12]. His findings have been confirmed by KRAVls and
LIPSEY, [9] using data for the 1950-1980 period that become available after Kuznets
wrote.

90
Gottfried Haberler
result of the post-World War II period of comparative liberalism and
liberalization. Kuznets is, of course, fully aware of the dangers of
using broad aggregate measures of growth for the LDCs as a group,
given the great diversity among the countries in the Third World. He
discusses and carefully evaluates possible biases in the procedures.
But after everything has been said and done, he stands by the basic
soundness of his findings and is puzzled that, despite the "impressively
high growth rates in the per-capita product of LDCs over almost a
quarter of a century," the general sentiment in those countries is one
of dissatisfaction and gloom that "seems to ignore the growth achieve-
ments." He conjectures (giving ample reasons for doing so) that «a
rise in expectations has produced a negative reaction to economic
attainments which otherwise might have elicited litanies of praise for
economic 'miracles'» (Kuznets [11], p. 41).
Global statistics that have become available since the updating of
Kuznets's findings by Kravis and Lipsey [9] do not show any recent
changes for the worse. Yet the general mood in the Third World
seems to have become even more pessimistic and gloomy in this
decade. Some reasons were the two oil shocks, the global imbalance,
and the munting debt. I suppose that some of the pessimism -
and
not only that in official statements -
may be a bargaining ploy to get
more aid and other concessions from the rich industrial countries.
2.• Global Imbalances
At the center of the problem in this decade have been the
persistent US budget and trade deficits, which call into question the
international value of the dollar, and the equally persistent Japanese
and German trade surpluses. This situation is in sharp contrast to the
first 20 years after the war when the dollar ruled supreme. The dollar
is better than gold, it was said then.
That was the period when the theory of the permanent dollar
shortage flourished, especially in Britain. In his famous 1920s debate
with Bertil Ohlin about the German reparations for World War I,
Keynes argues that since the elasticity of foreign demand for German

The State of the World Economy ecc.
91
export goods was low, it would be impossible for Gennany to transfer
large sums as reparations (4).
Some 20 years later, during World War II, The Economist
(December 4, 1943) said: «It may be, in fact, that the [dollar] problem
should not be regarded as the fruit of aberrations of policy . . . but that
it should be looked upon as the result of a set of economic circum-
stances never contemplated by the textbooks -
namely, the existence
of a country which, all policy apart, needs so little from the rest of the
world, while the rest of the world requires so much from it, that an
equilibrium of accounts can be brought about by no means available
to a free, or even a tolerably free market».
It is somewhat surprising that J.R. Hicks [5], [6] and D.H.
Robertson [14] found some merit in the argument that international
demand for an industrial country's exports could be inelastic. One
would have expected that Alfred Marshall, who considered the theory
carefully and rejected it, had settled the issue in the 1920s. In Money,
Credit and Commerce, Marshall ([13], p. 171) summarized his view:
«it is practically certain that in the Ricardian example and under
modem industrial conditions the total demand of each of the two
countries for each other's goods is relatively elastic. And where a large
and rich commercial country confronts the rest of the world, this
assumption becomes absolutely certain».
And again Marshall [13], p. 354: «Nothing approaching to this
[unstable equilibrium resulting from inelastic demand] has ever
occurred in the real world. It is not inconceivable, but it is absolutely
impossible».
In the late 1960s and 1970s, the dollar lost its position of
unquestioned predominance. The main reasons were bouts of infla-
tion in the United States, and, more important, the unexpected, rapid
economic recovery of the defeated countries, Japan and West Ger-
many. Another factor was the rapid rise of the newly industrialized
countries (NICs) of Asia: Taiwan, South Korea, Hong Kong, and
Singapore.
(4) Ohlin pointed out that Keynes's analysis overlooked income effects. The
transfer problem was then discussed in a huge literature. It is, I believe, fair to say that
Ohlin was proven right and Keynes wrong. But the political consequences of the
reparations were disastrous. They poisoned the political atmosphere and helped Hitler
come to power.

92
Gottfried Haberler
3.. The US Trade and Budget Deficits
Saying that the US budget and trade deficits are at the center of
today's global imbalances suggests that there is a link between budget
and trade deficits. This is, indeed, the view of the great majority of
economists, although their description of the nature and the tightness
of the linkage varies.
3.1 Rational Expectations and Budget Deficits
Before offering my own thoughts on the matter, I must first say a
few words about the view of some members of the modem school of
rational expectations. These economists argue that budget deficits do
not raise interest rates and do not crowd out private investment -
a
position that is often called the Ricardian equivalence theorem,
although it has been shown that David Ricardo flirted with the idea,
but later rejected it as "unrealistic". The theory asserts that when the
government sells bonds to finance its deficit, the price of these
instruments will not decline because the additional supply of them will
be matched by the additional demand from domestic savings. The
reason is that rational people know that the mounting government
debt must be serviced and that, therefore, taxes will be raised. To
provide for the expected future tax labilities (their own and their
children's), rational people will save.
Discussing why additional saving and demand for bonds should
or should not be precisely or approximately equal to the additional
supply of bonds by the government would lead me too far in this brief
paper. I will confine myself to saying simply that I think Ricardo was
right when he rejected the whole idea as unrealistic. People just don't
think that way. Nobody knows what his future tax liabilities will be,
let alone those of his children and grandchildren.
All this does not mean that expectations are unimportant. To the
contrary, they are very important. But it's one thing to say that larger
government deficits will trigger inflationary expectations, which may
deprive expansionary policies of their stimulating effect. It is an
entirely different thing to say that expected future tax liabilities will
make innocuous heavy government borrowing and spending.

The State of the World Economy ecc.
93
Unfortunately, the theory is not a purely academic one. It has
been picked up by the media and may well provide a reason for
irresponsible politicians to do nothing when action is badly needed. I
give one example. On February 16, 1989, the influential Wall Street
Journal carried an article by its editor, Robert Bartley saying that
«budget deficits are pretty much irrelevant». To support his view, Mr.
Bartley referred to the Ricardian equivalence theorem and to the
writings of Robert Barro.
3.2 A Suggestion
I believe that the US government should phase out its large
structural budget deficits (structural deficits as distinguished from the
cyclical deficits that would emerge if and when the economy slides
into a recession). I do not think that there is an acute danger that
investors at home or abroad will suddenly loose confidence in the
dollar, as some experts have predicted. But worry about the mounting
foreign debt is widespread, and a credible policy of phasing out the
deficit over a reasonable period of time -
say three to five years -
would do wonders. If markets became convinced that US government
borrowing would decline immediately and stop in a few years, interest
rates would fall sharply. Given the large size of the public debt, such a
change would make a substantial contribution to balancing the
budget.
In my opinion, the easiest, cheapest and most efficient method of
balancing the budget would be a stiff gasoline tax. I know that
politically it would be very difficult to impose. Yet the advantages
would be enormous. It would solve the budget problem, and also have
a beneficial environmental impact by curbing the production and use
of oversized, gas-guzzling automobiles that pollute the air and choke
traffic. The intolerable smog and traffic jams in the Los Angeles area
indicate a trend that could be stopped by such a tax.
3.3 The US Trade Deficits and the Exchange Rate Regime
After the recession of July 1981 to November 1982, the US
economy took off on a vigorous and noninflationary expansion. It also

94
Gottfried Haberler
developed large budget and trade deficits. The deficits have declined
but are still large, and over the whole period they have turned the
United States from the world's largest creditor country into the
world's largest debtor country.
This situation is widely but not universally, regarded as a very
alarming development. What cannot be doubted is that in the short
run, budget deficits, which were the result of much needed tax cuts,
had the highly beneficial effect of lifting the US economy out of the
recession. Confidence in the country's economy and in the dollar, at
home and abroad, was restored, capital poured into the United States
from European and other countries, the dollar rose in the foreign
exchange markets, and a trade deficit emerged. in the short run, this,
too was beneficial; the higher dollar and increased imports con-
tributed to price stability in the United States, and many other
countries found that increased exports to the United States helped
them to emerge from the recession.
How about-the long run? How long can the United States borrow
heavily abroad to finance its budget deficits? Before tackling that
problem, I will discuss very briefly the implications of the events of the
early 1980s for the exchange rate regime.
4.• The Exchange Rate System in the 19805
It should be clear that if any system of fixed exchange rates had
been in effect during in the early 1980s, when capital from Europe
was pouring into the United States, the countries that were exporting
capital would have suffered large losses of reserves and have been
subjected to heavy deflationary pressure. Any system of fixed ex-
change rates, with or without a target zone, would have collapsed.
True, under exchange rates can be changed something like the
Bretton Woods system. But any system of stable but adjustable
exchange rates is very vulnerable to destabilizing speculation. When a
currency weakens, the speculators (investors) know that its exchange
rates will only hold even or go down; it cannot go up. Furthermore,
they have learned from experience that any eventual devaluation is
bound to be large (because' authorities want to make sure that they

The State of the World Economy ecc.
95
will not soon have to go through the painful operation again). Thus,
the speculators risk little. If they have guessed correctly and the
currency is devalued, they will make a large profit. If they have
guessed wrong and the currency is not devalued, they will lose only
transaction costs.
The situation is different with a regime of floating exchange rates.
A currency under pressure goes down immediately. Speculators can
never be sure whether the market has already overshot so that the
currency will go down again. In other words, under a system of fixed
exchange rates, investors making decision are speculating against the
central banks, whose hands are tied. Investors working under a
system of floating exchange rates speculate against each other, which
is obviously much more risky.
The pressure of speculation is the reason why the Bretton Woods
Agreement broke down. In the late 1960s and early 1970s, the dollar
was weak because the United States had several bouts of inflation.
Confidence in the dollar waned, and foreign central banks had to buy
billions of dollars to hold the line. The end came with dramatic
suddenness. On January 23, 1973, the Swiss National Bank stopped
buying dollars and let the franc float up. A flood of dollars swept into
Germany. During a five-day period, from February 5, 1973 to Feb-
ruary 9, 1973, the Bundesbank bought $5 billion. Then it gave up.
That was the end of the Bretton Woods system of stable but adjustable
exchange rates. Three years later, the second amendment of the
Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund (lMF)
legalized floating exchange rates.
Nevertheless,
floatig
exchange
rates have
never been fully
accepted, and in the last few years the present system of loosely man-
aged -
or mismanaged -
floating rates has come under sharp
criticism. French governments, both socialist and communist have ur-
ged a return to something like the Bretton Woods system. On February
19, 1988 a blast come from an unexpected source, Pope John Paul II
[8]. In his encyclical Sollicitudo Rei Socialis, His Holiness said: «The
world monetary financial system is marked by an excessive fluctuation
of exchange rates and interest rates, to the detriment of the balance of
payments and the debt situation of the poor countries».
Naturally, the Pope did not make concrete proposals for change,

96
Gottfried Haberler
in fact, the Encyclical says: «The Church does not have technical
solution to offer». Still, the Pope's statement has ben widely inter-
preted as a rejection of the present system of floating exchange rates.
For example, it delighted the gold bugs. The Wall Street Journal
(February 23, 1988) honored two of "the world's notable economic
thinkers", it awarded a silver medal to the Pope. (The gold medal
went to Edouard Balladur, the French minister of finance.)
All this criticism is unconvincing. There is no reason to believe
that a Bretton Woods type system would work better in the 1980s and
1990s that it did in the 1960s and 1970s. On the contrary, there are
good reasons to believe that it would work less well. Critics of floating
rates point to what they call their excessive volatility. The answer is
that a large part -
probably most -
of that volatility has resulted
from the fact that markets are mislead and kept guessing about what
governments are up to. Frequent changes in monetary and central
bank policy, semi-secret interventions in the foreign exchange market
(which are often accompanied by leaks -
intentional or unitentional)
are hardly conducive to stabilizing exchange rates or smoothing
adjustments. The same is true of the "open mouth" policies followed
by the Group of Seven (G7) and some other groups -
frequent official
statements that exchange rates are just about right that are soon
contradicted by the facts.
Although I believe that the floating exchange rate system should
continue, I do not want to exaggerate the case for it. Such a system is
merely a second best. An agreement in which two countries (or any
group of countries) agreed to fix the exchange rates of their currencies
would be the best solution, provided that two conditions were ful-
filled: first, currencies would have to be fully convertible in free
markets; in other words, there could be no exchange control, either
open or disguised (for example, as import restrictions on balance of
payments grounds). Fixed rates propped up by a battery of controls
are surely the worst possible system. Second, the fixed rate would not
impose
heavy
unemployment
or inflation
on
any
participating
country.
Unfortunately, those conditions are met only rarely in the
present-day world. They require at minimum very tight coordination
of monetary policy, which is very hard to achieve. Real exceptions can

The State of the World Economy ecc.
97
be found among the many countries that peg their currency to the
dollar, the yen, or the Deutschemark. A good example is Austria, with
its schilling pegged tightly to the Deutschemark. That means that
Austrian monetary policy is made not in Vienna but in Frankfurt by
the Bundesbank and that the Austrian rate of inflation cannot diverge
significantly from the German (5).
The European Monetary System (EMS) offers no example here
because some of its members, especially France and Belgium, still
have much exchange control, and Britain is not even a member of the
EMS. True, countries of the European Community have committed
themselves to phasing out all restrictions on capital flow by mid-1990
and to creating a single market by 1992. But it remains to be seen
whether these plans will, in fact, be carried out. The British govern-
ment maintains a healthy skepticism about them and about the even
more ambitious plans for the creation of a real monetary and
economic union laid out by the Delors Committee (the Committee of
17) for discussion at the European Summit in Madrid in June 1989.
Now consider the four uncommitted countries: the United States,
Japan, Britain and Germany (6).
The four currencies are not formally linked, but, as already
mentioned, the G7 has stated on several occasions that the then-exis-
ting rates were just about right and members' central banks have
backed up such statements with large interventions in the foreign
exchange market. I suggest that this approach is seriously flawed. It
does not promote stability of exchange rates and large interventions in
the foreign exchange market divert monetary policy from its proper
function of maintaining price stability at home (7).
The basic trouble with the activist approach is that neither
economists nor ministers of finance and central bankers, know what
(5) Austria is not a perfect example here because it still has some exchange
controls. But they are mild and are slowly being phased out.
(6) Although the position of Germany is somewhat ambivalent, both politically and
economically, since it is a member of the EMS.
(7) MARTIN FELDSTEIN [3] has expressed a similar view: «Elevating exchange rate
stability to a separate goal of economic policy could have serious adverse consequences.
Trying to achieve that goal would mean diverting monetary and fiscal policies from
their customary roles and thereby risking excessive inflation and unemployment and
inadequate capital formation...

98
Gottfried Haberler
the equilibrium exchange rate is. Time and again official statements
that the rate is right have been disproved by fact, and expert opinion is
sharply divided on how much the dollar has to decline to eliminate the
US trade deficit. (Policymakers at last are becoming aware of their
ignorance. Thus Japan's former Prime Minister Noburu Takeshita,
when asked whether the dollar/yen rate was wright, answered, "God
only knows".
The right policy for the four countries is to concentrate their
efforts on the basic domestic objective -
that is steady, noninfl-
ationary growth -
and leave exchange rates to be determined in free,
competitive markets. Some changes in those rates will be necessary
from time to time even if all four successfully maintain steady,
noninflationary growth, and large changes will be needed if there are
bouts of inflation or recession.
True, markets sometimes make mistakes. But if they overshoot,
some market participants will notice that something is wrong and the
market will correct itself. In contrast, governments, by the nature of
the political process, are slow to recognize and admit that a mistake
has been made and even slower in correcting it. (The US budget
deficit is a good example.)
5. - The World Debt Problem
The world debt problem burst on the world in the summer of
1982 when Mexico announced that it was not able to service its
foreign debt. Many LDCs followed suit. The total amount of the debt
involved is staggering, and the financial exposure of the United States
and other western banks is very large (8).
Consider some recent figures on inflation that illuminate the
economic landscape of Latin America in a flash. The IMF ([7), p. 140)
reports: «Average inflation in developing countries rose in 1988 for the
(8) Although I concentrate here on Latin America, I must mention that even some
communist countries that managed to borrow heavily in the West -
Hungary, Poland,
and Yugoslavia, for example -
have joined ranks of doubtful debtors. The exception
here is Romania. An oppressive dictator has insisted on repaying the country's foreign
debt at considerable hardship to the people.

The State of the World Economy ecc.,
99
second straight year to 58.3%, compared with 35.5% in 1987. The rise
was led by a sharp acceleration inflation in Western Hemisphere
countries -
to an average rate of 216%, compared with 117.4% the
year before. Inflation rose most rapidly in Nicaragua (to 10,205%,
compared with 911.9% in 1987), Brazil (to 682.3%, compared with
29.7%), Argentina to (343.0%, compared with 131.3%) and Equador
(to 58.2%, compared with 29.5%).
In sharp contrast, in Chile inflation declined from 19.9% in 1987
to 14.7% in 1988».
More on this revealing contrast presently, but first a few words on
the sad story of Argentina.
Argentina, a country richly endowed with a good climate and
natural and human resources, really has no business being an LDC.
Fifty years ago Colin Clark in his pioneering work Conditions of
Economic Progress, compared Argentina with Australia and predicted
that per capita incomes in the two economies would rise at more or
less the same rate. The prediction was unreasonable. What happened?
The answer is political instability and economic mismanagement by
sucessive regimes, beginning with the 1940s dictatorship of Juan
Peron who pushed industrialization and coddled labor unions at the
expense of highly efficient agriculture.
During the last few years skyrocketing inflation in Argentina and
elsewhere has called for radical reform. What was the reaction of the
United States? Driven by the fear that a series of defaults by over-in-
debted countries would threaten its own financial stability, the United
States urged its banks and the international institutions such as the
World Bank and the IMF to lend more money to the debtor countries.
The additional load did carry some economic recommendations but
provided insufficient incentives for the recepients to undertake re-
forms of their domestic policies. The result was that many LDCs
increased their total indebtedness but used all or part of the new funds
to pay the interest on the old debts. In some cases, notably that of
Argentina, part of the new money came right back in the form of
capital flight.
What are the economic reforms that are needed? Inflation must
be stopped. Doing so will require that the growth rate of the money
stock be approximately equal to the potential growth of output.

100
Gottfried Haberler
Monetary restraint is not enough. What is needed can best be
described as a general liberalization of the economy, including the
elimination of exchange controls and excessive import restrictions and
the privatization of many public enterprises, which now often grossly
inefficient and overstaffed. Allthis is now almost generally accepted in
the West, not only by conservative nations but also by socialist
governments, such as those in New Zealand and Sweden. Even in the
communist countries, some liberalization is taking place.
Such an approach has been taken in Chile, where public enter-
prises have been sold to private investors, import tariffs have been
lowered, and many regulations have been phased out. Inflation has
been sharply reduced. The economy has responded with more invest-
ment, faster growth and increased productivity. The foreign debt has
been reduced, lowering interest payments. Thus, for Chile the debt
problem is well under control.
The prescription for reform could be brief because the economics
is straightforward and widely accepted. What is difficult is to muster
the political will to do what is necessary.

APPENDIX
Early in 1989 the US dollar took off on a totally unexpected
surge. From January to may the dollar rose about 14% against the yen
and 12.5 percent against the Deutschmark, despite large interventions
in which central banks, including the US Federal Reserve, sold dollars
for other currencies in the foreign exchange market. The Financial
Times headlined "The Dazzling Dollar" (May 10), and The Economist
"The Mysterious Dollar" (May 13).
Ministers of finance and governors of central banks, as well as
private experts, were taken completely by syrprise. A leading expert
called the behaviour of the dollar "irrational"; another said that it was
not consistent with the "underlying fundamenals" and concluded that
it was just a "speculative bubble".
Others have offered various explanations of the dollar's strength,
such as high interest rates in the United States, compared with those
in Germany and Japan, and internal political difficulties of the Ger-
man and Japanese governments that have reduced the attractiveness
of the Deutschemark and the yen. A more fanciful theory says that the
US economy is on the verge of sliding into a recession, and investors
know that recessions are the classical method of bringing own
inflation and reducing interest rates. On the basis of some purchasing
power parity (PPP) calculations, some economists have concluded
that the dollar was undervalued before its recent sharp rise (9).
There is some truth in some of those explanations, but I will not
try to evaluate them, except to say that the turmoil in China has
sharply increased the attractiveness of the dollar, especially in the
Pacific area. Otherwise, I will confine myself to two points: 1) the role
of the US budget deficit in the emergence of the strong dollar; and 2)
international policy reactions to the strong dollar, which, in my
(9) In my opinion, PPP has never been a reliable measure of equilibrium exchange
rates, and its reliability has diminished with the rise in international trade of high-tech
products and services. whose prices are difficult to measure. How would one figure out
the PPP between countries that export primary products and advanced industrial
countries that produce and export, say. complicated instruments. machinery. aircraft.
and the like?

102
Gottfried Haberler
opinion, support the view that markets, if left alone, set exchange
rates better than governments do.
1. • The Strong Dollar and the US Budget
By keeping interest rates higher in the United States than in
Germany and Japan, US budget deficits have been a vital factor in
bringing about the strong dollar. This causality is paradoxical because
a loose fiscal policy usually makes a currency weak, not strong. The
fact is, however, that the United States is in a unique position. Despite
its large trade and budget deficits, investors around the world have
confidence in its basic economic and political stability.
That attitude could change, however. At any rate, the United
States should not go on and on adding to its already large foreign
debt. That the richest country in the world should import capital from
the rest of the world to finance its budget deficits is an anomaly that
causes resentment in the illes. I conclude that phasing out the US
budget deficit is important from both the national and the interna-
tional standpoint.
The adoption of a credible program to phase out the structural
budget deficit would lead to a sharp reduction of interest rates. Lower
interest rates are a blessing becuase they stimulate investment. Low
interest rates would also lead to a decline of the dollar in the foreign
exchange market because some speculators, both domestic and for-
eign, who have been attracted by high interest rates would switch to
investments in other currencies.
The decline of the dollar from its high present level would also be
desirable because it would bring down the trade deficit and so reduce
protectionist pressures. But a declining dollar and the reduction of the
trade deficit would have an inflationary potential, intensified by the
fact the US economy is now operating at full employment levels. A
falling dollar would clearly have a direct inflationary effect on the
prices of imported and exported goods. Reducing the trade deficit
implies an expansion of the export industries and of the import-com-
peting industries -
that is, the traded-goods industries; at full employ-
ment such an expansion would obviously be an inflationary factor.)

The State of the World Economy ecc.
103
What is the solution? The trade and the budget deficit should be
phased out at the same time. The reduction of a trade deficit is
inflationary; the reduction of a budget deficit -
either by cutting
government expenditures or by raising taxes -
is deflationary. Ideal-
ly, the two reductions would offset each other.
To put same point in more formal terms: the additional demand
for productive resources of the traded-goods industries should be
matched by the additional supplies of productive resources that will
become available when the budget deficit is reduced. It can all be
brought by market forces, which will respond to a credible budget -
balancing program with lower interest rates and a lower dollar
provided that skillful monetary policy keeps the overall price level
stable.
2. - The International Policy Reaction to the Strong Dollar
When the US dollar soared in early 1989, the international policy
reactions were the usual ones: central banks made semi-secret inter-
ventions to keep it down, and leaks and conflicting policy statements
from
high officials kept the markets guessing about what the
authorities were up to. On May 18, 1989 nine central banks, including
the Federal Reserve and the Japanese and Swiss national banks,
intervened in the market, selling $1.5 to $3 billion, according to the
estimates of private traders. The next day the President of the
Bundesbank revealed that Germany had not participated in this
operation; "Germany," he said, "can live with the high dollar."
Fred Bergsten and some other experts have recommended that
the G7 push the dollar down in order to reduce the US trade deficit.
The Washington Post (May 19, 1989) reported that when Federal
Reserve Governor Wayne Angell was asked what he thought of that
proposal, he answered, "I can't imagine anything that would be more
fraught with potential disaster for the world's financial system." This
was before the dollar rose to 2DM.
The trouble with the present system is that the usual, routinely
"sterilized" interventions of central banks in the foreign exchange
markets have very little effect on exchange rates because they leave

104
Gottfried Haberler
the money supply unchanged. Suppose the Federal Reserve intervenes
to check the rise of the dollar by buying, say, $2 billion German and
Japanese securities in the foreign exchange market. But at the same
time it sells $2 billion US securities in the domestic money market.
The stock of money has not changed. The only change is the
substitution of some foreign securities for domestic securities in its
portfolio. If the German Bundesbank intervenes to check the rise of
the dollar, the story is the same: it sells dollars from its stock portfolio
in the foreign exchange market and at the same time buys German
securities in the domestic money market. The only change is a shift in
its portfolio, a substitution of German for American securities. Yet the
newspapers then write of the "unstoppable" rise of the dollar. Actu-
ally, it would be easy for the Federal Reserve to stop the rise of the
dollar. All it has to do is to stop sterilizing -
in other words, let the
quantity of money go up. This would however, risk inflation.
My conclusion is again that the best method of dealing with
global imbalances would be for the United States, Japan, Germany,
and possibly other large industrial countries to conduct their mon-
etary and fiscal policies so as to achieve basic domestic policy
objectives -
steady noninflationary growth and high employment.
The exchange rates should be allowed to float and then determined in
free competitive markets. Other countries would have the choice of
pegging their currencies to the dollar, the yen, or the Deutschemark,
as many do already, or letting them float independently.
Some people will object that the markets cannot be trusted, that
the strong dollar itself constitutes a gigantic market failure. This is not
true. We have seen that the large US budget deficits, by keeping
interest rates too high, have been a major cause of the strong dollar.
One last question. Suppose that the US budget deficit is on the
way out and interest rates have sharply declined, but capital still flows
in because of unsettled conditions in part of the world. What should
be the American reaction? My answer is that the situation would be
fine from the US standpoint. If foreign capital were no longer used to
finance the budget deficit, it would go into productive private invest-
ment. Then the United States, the capital stock and thus its produc-
tivity would increase, which would take care of servicing the growing
foreign debt.

The State of the World Economy ecc.
BIBUOGRAPHY
105
[1] AARON H.J.: «Politics and the Professors Revisited» Richard T. Ely Lecture, The
American Economic Review vol. 79, May 1989, pp . 1-15.
[2] BARTLEY R.: «Budget Deficits: A Third View», The Wall Street Journal, February
16,1989.
[3] FELDSTEIN M. : «NBER», Working Paper, n. 2838, February 1989.
[4] HABERLER G.: «The Economic Malaise of the 1980s: A Positive Program for a
Benevolent and
Enlightened
Dictator» in
FEllNER W.
(ed. ): Contemporary
Economic Problems, Washington (DC), American Enterprise Institute, 1982.
[5] HICHS J.R.: «Inaugural Lecture» Oxford Economic Papers, 1953.
[6] --: «The Long-Run Dollar Problem», Essays in World Economics, Oxford,
1959.
[7] IMF: «Inflation Up in 1988 in Developing Countries», IMF Survey, n. 18, May
1989 , p. 140.
[8] JOHN PAUL II, POPE: «The Social Concerns of the Church», Encyclical Sollecitudo
Rei Sociau. February 19, 1988 .
[9] KRAVIS I. - LIPSEY R.: «The Diffusion of Economic Growth in the World Economy,
1950-1980", in KENDRICH J. (ed): International Comparisons of Productivity and
Causes of the Slowdown, Cambridge (Mass .), Ballinger, 1984, pp. 109-52.
[10] KUZNETS S.: Economic Growth of Nations: Total Outpt and Production Struc-
ture, Cambridge (Mass. ), Harvard University Press, 1971.
[11] - -: «Aspects of Post-World War II Growth in Less Developed Countries", in
TANG A.M. - WESTFIELD E.M . - WORLEY J.E. (ed .): Evolution , Welfare, and Time in
Economics: Essays
in
Honour
of Nicholas
Georgescu-Roegen,
Lexington,
(Mass.), Lexington Books, 1976.
[12] --: «Two Centuries of Economic Growth: Reflections on US Experience,
Richard T. Ely Lecture". The American Economic Review, n. 67, February 1977,
pp . 1-14.
[13] MARSHALL A.: Money, Credit and Commerce, London, MacMillan, 1924, 1973.
[14] ROBERTSON D.H .: Britain in the World Economy, London, Allen & Unwin, 1954.

Monetarism Yesterday and Today
Phillip Cagan
Columbia University
The volatile financial environment of the 1980s has revived
doubts about the reliability of monetary targets, reversing the growing
acceptance monetarism had attained in the 1970s. Long-time oppo-
nents of monetarism see its fall from favor as overdue justification of
their opposition; its proponents see a serious but not fatal setback. A
middle view is that the
monetarist proposal of constant money
growth no longer inspires confidence in its capacity to stabilize output
and the price level, but that monetarism's considerable influence on
monetary theory and policy continues. I shall comment on those
developments and on the current status of monetarist ideas.
1. - Monetarism as a Reaction to Keynesianism
Monetarism took form as a school of thought in the early 1950s
as a reaction to the low importance accorded monetary effects in early
Keyesian theory (1). That theory properly emphasizes that central
bank operations inject new money into the economy through financial
markets. It follows, said the keynesians, that such injections do not in
the first instance affect expenditures on goods and services (as is
implied by the simple quantity theory of money). The injections
(1) The importance of the quantity of money on prices and economic activity has
long been recognized. For the roots of monetarism in earlier monetary theories, see
MUNDEll (1968); CAGAN [7] ; and MAYER [18] . The Term "Monetarism" was first used by
Brunner [3].
Advise: the numbers in square brackets refer to the Bibliography in the appendix.

108
Phillip Cagan
instead change asset prices and interest rates and thus only indirectly
affect borrowing and expenditures on capital goods. Thus this mon-
etary link to aggregate demand can be weakened by an insensitivity of
investment to changes in interest rates; indeed, the initial empirical
studies reported a low or nonexistent sensitivity (Meade and Andrews
[21]). Keynesian theory also supposes that the public's money bal-
ances are sensitive to interest rates: large changes in the money stock
may be hoarded or dishoarded with little effect on interest rates, thus
preventing even substantial changes in money from affecting invest-
ment.
Monetarists sawall this differently. For them, monetary changes
have quite significant effects on interest rates, and investment expen-
ditures, broadly conceived, are sensitive to interest rates and the
availability of loanable fonds (2). Monetarists recognized, however,
that investment expenditures generally involve considerable planning,
so the response to changes in interest rates can take time. What
Keynesian theory saw as no response, monetarist theory saw as a
sizable if variable time lag.
These alternative interpretations implied important differences in
policy. Keynesians dismissed monetary policy as ineffective for stabi-
lization goals; they turned to fiscal policy, which in practice has
proven a clumsy instrument unsuccessful as a stabilizer except in the
automatic, cyclical response of tax revenues. Thus for the key to price
and output stability,
monetarists focused instead on
controlling
money growth. They saw, however, that because of lags in the effects,
an active monetary policy would often be ill-timed and add to
instability. They proposed a constant growth rate, which would avoid
timing errors and had the added attraction of generating expectations
of long-run price stability that would work to dampen any transitory
inflationary pressures.
Two episodes in the United States, one in the early 1950s and
another in the 1970s, provided timely empirical confirmation of the
monetarist view and helped influence opinion. The first was the
gradual removal of the country's wartime bond supports, which had
(2) Recent theories that interest rates govern intertemporal substitutions of con-
sumption probably go too far, however.

Monetarism Yesterday and Today
109
straitjacketed monetary policy by necessitating inflationary increases
in the money supply. Proponents of continuing the bond supports
argued that their removal would lead to large capital losses by the
financial institutions that held the bonds and thus produce a serious
liquidity crisis; continued support, they claimed, kept interest rates
down and economic activity humming (3). In fact, removal of the
bond supports did not produce a crisis, and the reduction of money
growth brought down the inflation rate, just as the early monetarists
had claimed it would.
The second episode, in the 1970s, involved the Phillips curve. This
extension of Keynesian theory imagines a tradeoff between unemploy-
ment and the inflation rate. Aggregate demand policy can choose a
lower rate of unemployment but only by producing somewhat higher
inflation through money creation. At first it looked as though a little
creeping inflation would be a small price to pay for the benefit of
putting more people to work. But the tradeoff required a reduction in
real wages, which was accomplished in the model by raising prices
ahead of each increase in nominal wages. In practice the lag in the
response of wages to inflation could not be maintained, and that
failure proved the undoing of a stable tradeoff. Increased inflation
pulled up the expected rate of inflation, and as a result wages
accelerated to reestablish the equilibrium real wage. Persistent efforts
use the tradeoff to reduce unemployment led to ever-increasing rates
of inflation to stay ahead of the accelerating wages. Since the reduc-
tions in unemployment did not last, the Phillips curve was not stable
and kept shifting outward. The easily perceptible shifts in the curve
during the 1970s showed the crucial importance of money growth for
inflation.
(3) This view reflected what can be called the "twig theory" of monetary effects:
taking monetary contraction too far would break the twig and send the economy into a
tailspin. Supposedly, monetary restraint had no effect until it reached a certain
threshold, at which it would precipitate a financial crisis. For example:
There appears to be a legitimate basis for the fear that if powerful monetary restraints
are applied rapidly enough to check increasing expenditures within a short period of
time they may be so disrupting to the capital markets as to cause a severe collapse of
expectations and precipitate a decline in economic activity. If they are applied gently
and gradually, on the other hand, they will effectively check increasing expenditures
only after the liquidity of banks and other economic units has been gradually worn
down. Before this point is reached a significant rise in prices may already have occurred
(SMITH [26] , and alzo SELTZER [23]).

110
Phillip Cagan
2. - The Triumph of Monetarism
During the 1970s, consensus emerged that the escalating inflation
of the time could be reduced only by eliminating the support of high
money growth. It was recognized that such a disinflationary policy
would involve a protracted contracting of economic activity and
employment. The disinflation of the early 1980s confirmed the predic-
tions of such a contraction, but the cost in terms of reduced output
and employment proved far smaller than earlier pessimistic forecasts
based on the faulty implications of a stable Phillips curve (Cagan [6]).
The importance of the money supply has now been universally
accepted. Theoretical and empirical models of the economy, once
based on Keynesian theory and thus assigning no significant role for
money, are today mainly driven by a variable denoted as M acknow-
ledging the predominance of the money supply in policy decisions.
The momentum of the monetarist revolution has even carried
some theorizing full circle to the classical paradigm and beyond. The
latest models of the economy assume not only instantaneous market
clearing but also rational expectations. In these neoclassical models,
anticipated money growth is fully absorbed by equilibrium price
movements and leaves output unaffected. Since systematic govern-
ment policies to counter departures from full employment would
supposedly be anticipated, they would not affect output, say these
theorists; unanticipated policy actions would be unsystematic and
necessarily unrelated to economic activity and, therefore, would be
destabilizing. Neoclassical theorists thus share with monetarists the
view that active monetary policy would be suboptimal, although the
two groups differ as to their reasoning. Monetarists believe monetary
changes to affect output in the short run, but that a countercyclical
policy would, on balance, be destabilizing because of the unpredic-
table length of its lags.
In acknowledging monetary effects on output in the short run,
monetarists now ironically find themselves more in agreement with
the policy views of the neoKeynesians than those of the neoclassicists.
Yet the agreement does not go far: neo Keynesians still see an active
countercyclical monetary policy as feasible and desirable, while mon-
etarists reject it as destabilizing and inferior to stable money growth.

Monetarism Yesterday and Today
3. - The Recent Volatility of Velocity
111
The foundation of the monetarist policy of constant money
growth is a predictable velocity, which means in practice that it shows
only minor deviations from an unchanging trend. From 1953 to the
mid-1970s, US velocity fluctuated cyclically around a fairly stable
trend. Most of the fluctuations were attributed to instability in money
growth and so would be largely eliminated by a constant-growth
policy. This experience and a comparable one in Canada led to the
announcements of annual monetary targets, beginning in the early
1970s in the United States and in 1975 in Canada.
Confidence in a predictable velocity was first damaged in the
United States during the second half of the 1970s by growing overes-
timates of money demand -
known at the time as the "case of
missing money (Goldfeld [14]). A similar overestimate of demand for
Ml occurred at the same time in Canada. Confidence totally collapsed
in the United States with a dramatic departure from trend after 1980;
velocity first declined in an unprecedented manner for several years
and then resumed a wobbly movement upward but well below the
previous trend of 3.25% per year. Canadian Ml velocity trend did not
decline in the 1980s, but the introduction of attractive substitutes
made it less reliable than it had been (Freedman [13]).
Thus ended the credibility of a constant money growth rule, at
least until a new stable trend appears and gives evidence of permanen-
ce. For now, the authorities have downgraded monetary targets, even
though the reduction of such targets has been acknowledged as
having been important in reducing inflation during the early 1980s.
The US and Canadian central banks still announce a monetary target,
but only as one of various objectives, and they readily depart from the
target or announce a new one whenever they judge that developments
warrant a change. The dominant view is that policymakers must have
the discretion to make adjustments for unpredictable changes in
velocity.
Before 1980, the trend of US velocity , had been fairly stable for
almost three decades. The major break in that trend clearly reflected
substantial institutional changes. Financial development that pro-
duced new substitutes for money were mainly responsible. They

112
Phillip Cagan
played a crucial role in the United States, where deposit-rate ceilings
began to generate competitive pressures. First introduced in the
1930s, these ceilings did not seriously bite until 1970s inflation raised
market interest rates to
historically high levels.
As competitive
pressures to circumvent the ceilings intensified, innovations gave US
Eurodollars, money market mutual funds, NOW accounts, and many
others. The competition forced the authorities to raise the ceilings and
eventually eliminate them. In 1980, Ml was redefined to include new
interest-bearing checking deposits, such as ATS and NOW accounts
(Simpson [23]). Their inclusion partly accounts for the "missing"
money of the 1970s, but it does not do so fully (Cagan [4], [5] ;
Scadding 1987); other substitutes apparently also played a role (4).
The dramatic decline in US velocity in the 1980s appears to have
been at least partially related to the redefinition of Ml to include NOW
and super-NOW accounts, which spread nationwide contemporan-
eously. Their low turnover shows that they act not only as transaction
balances but also as savings. Thus, including them in Ml attracted
into it a sizeable amount of savings deposits and other assets. Thus,
one suspects that the US decline in Ml velocity in the early 1980s and
its subsequent low growth trend reflect a combination of positive
growth in the turnover of transactions balances and zero growth in
the turnover of savings deposits.
Nevertheless, the ratio of GNP to broader monetary aggregates
(M2, M3, L, and even total debt), which include most of the likely
sources of the shift into NOW accounts, also declined sharply in the
early 1980s. So it is clear that more than this shift was at work.
Another contributor to the decline was a fall in nominal interest
rates, as well as fear of runaway inflation, which made all financial
assets more attractive. The interest rate elasticity of the demand for
money, as estimated from earlier decades, was not, however sufficient
to account by itself for the 1980s rise in money demand. Nevertheless,
(4) The
globalization
of
financial
markets
has
played
an
unclear
role
in
destabilizing velocity. Greater substitutability between national currencies can produce
shifts in money demand. Eurocurrencies, which are not counted in the money supply of
any country. may add to a world money supply and increase world inflationary
pressures. The question is the extent to which changes in deposit balances outside the
country affect the demand for domestic money and expenditures. The results of tests to
confirm such effects empirically remain unclear.

Monetarism Yesterday and Today
113
some recent studies attribute the recent volatility of velocity to an
increase in this interest-rate elasticity. Did the elasticity itself increase?
Perhaps the new close substitutes for money raises its sensitivity to
opportunity cost. Yet, even an increase in elasticity would not explain
the 1980s decline in the velocity of the broader monetary aggregates.
Substitutions among financial assets cannot explain an increased
demand for all of them. Apparently other changes in financial instru-
ments and practices also occurred. The nature of these changes
remains unclear. As for as we know they may continue, so no
assurance can be given that US monetary velocity will stabilize and
hold to a constant trend.
In Canada the 1980s of daily-interest checkable savings deposits,
which are included in M2 but not Ml, interrupted the downward
trend of M2 velocity. It is interesting that these deposits spread in
Canada at the same time that NOW accounts and the like became
popular in the United States even though Canada never had ceilings
on deposit interest.
4. - Monetarist Responses to Volatile Velocity
Since constant money growth cannot, in view of an unpredictable
velocity, guarantee price stability, monetarists have looked for a
fallback position. In their view, the important thing is to guarantee
long-run price stability by a policy rule that the monetary authorities
can not deviate from. Without a stable velocity, such a rule has to
allow for adjustments.
A rule can specificy its own adjustments. In this case, they can be
based on past changes in velocity and, therefore, involve delays in
adjusting to velocity changes. The problem of delays is illustrated by
two earlier suggestions for a rule with built-in adjustments.
1) Fellner [10] proposed that the money growth target be
adjusted automatically every four or five years in accordance with any
change in the trend of velocity over the preceding business cycle.
Cyclical fluctuations in velocity would average out, he said, and any
change over the full cycle would largely reflect permanent changes in
trend.

114
Phillip Cagan
The problem with this proposal is that before each adjustment,
money growth could be badly out of line with changes in the trend of
velocity. Such misalignments might produce several years of inflation
or recession before a new adjustment occurred. To maintain secular
price stability each adjustment would have to offset the accumulated
misalignments. These necessity of imposing monetary expansion or
contraction to correct misalignments would be very disruptive and
makes this rule unappealing.
2) Bronfenbrenner [1], [2] chose frequent adjustments pre-
cisely in order to avoid the buildup of errors. Proposing that the
money growth target be adjusted each quarter to offset velocity
changes in the preceding quarter, he presented statistics to show that
this rule would have provided more stability in output that did the
discretionary policies that where actually followed during the post-
world War II period in the United States.
The difficulty with Bronfenbrenner's rule is that although full
quarterly adjustments would prevent a buildup of errors, they would
run the danger of whipsawing money growth as velocity fluctuates in
short-run reversible movements. Even if, as some studies claim (for
example, Gould and Nelson [15] (5), velocity follows a random walk
(which implies that most changes are permanent and not reversible),
the danger remains because money changes affect GNP with a lag of
several quarters or more. Suppose an exogenous rise in GNP raises
measured velocity (GNP/ M). An immediate monetary contraction to
reverse this disturbance would initially raise velocity further. The
contraction would continue until GNP began to respond bringing
down the initial rise in velocity. At that time the adjustment rule
would call for expansions, and, against because of lagged effects, it
would overshoot in the other direction. Thus, Bronfenbrenner's rule
would introduce serially correlated movements in money and velocity
that are not present in the historical data produced under a different
(5) For an opposing view, see FRIEDMAN - SCHWATZ [13] , pp. 208-15.
Recent considerations of econometric testing show that tests indicating the exist-
ence of random walks have low power. It now appears doubtful that aggregate series
such as velocity can be described as random walks. See, for example, DE JONG and
WHITEMAN [9].

Monetarism Yesterday and Today
115
operating policy. Since his historical analysis does not allow for lags in
monetary effects, it does not prove the superiority of this rule.
Recently, the formulation of a monetarist rule has received
renewed
attention.
The
most
interesting
proposal comes
from
McCallum [20]. It relies on a feedback mechanism to adjust for
permanent changes in velocity without overresponding to transitory
changes. The optimal feedback response is estimated from historical
data on monetary effects. For example, the formula estimated from
the 1954-1935 period adjusts each quarter for the average change in
velocity over the preceding 16 quarters and for one-fourth of the
deviation during the preceding quarter of nominal GNP from its
desired level. (That is, a full adjustment for deviations from desired
GNP would take a year). The rule uses the monetary base, on the
grounds that it will be not subject to changes in composition no
matter how the media of payment evolve in the future (6).
Since such a rule dictates monetary adjustments in response to
past changes in the velocity of the monetary base, misalignments
would still occur, though they would be fully corrected within a year.
Statistical analysis suggests that this rule would outperform the actual
policies followed in recent decades. The statistical analysis to support
this conclusion avoids the bias in Bronfenbranner's analysis by, in
effect that including an estimate of the lagged response of GNP to
monetary changes. That response is estimated from several macro-
economic models; to
avoid ideological bias,
they are chosen to
represent the range of present professional opinion (neoKeynesian,
neoclassical, and real business cycle models, and an unstructured
vector autoregression system). The four models endorse this par-
ticular monetarist rule as superior to the actual historical policies.
Although these models are small, simplified versions of the
economy and so would misrepresent the results of a real-life experi-
ment, my guess is that they do not greatly distort the likely outcome of
following such a policy rule. A more serious problem is revealed by
estimates, produced from hystorical analysis, of the deviations in real
GNP from trend that this rule would produced. The average quarterly
(6) For an objection to use of the base here see FRIEDMAN [II].

116
Phillip Cagan
deviation is at least 3.5 to 4% (McCullum [20], Table 4). Such
deviations are not minor. (Moreover, they may be underestimated
since they reflect a rule estimated from a past period (1954-1985), and
future experience will usually call for a somewhat different adjust-
ment coefficient. (Conceivably, the optimal rule could be re-estimated
every decade or so, though doing so would add an unattractive
complication. Even then the rule would always be somewhat out of
date.)
An average deviation of
3~5 to 4% means that some deviations
would be considerably largem -
in theory, up to twice as large if GNP
can be assumed to follow a normal distribution. To be sure, deviations
of that size would be a major improvement over some of the egregious
errors of past policies, such as the 1929-1933 contraction or the
inflation of the 1970s. And the rule would, in fact, produce long-run
price stability, for a given long-run growth in output. But it would tie
the hands of the authorities in the face of recessions, financial crises,
and supply shocks such as the OPEC oil price increase. It is hard to
believe that the public and the government would or could patiently
allow monetary policy to force a protracted contraction on the
economy to correct for an error in projecting the trend of velocity. A
discretionary response to disturbances can not be relied on to give a
better total outcome, but justifications for departing from rules at a
time of distress always seem overwhelming. A similar impatience
stands in the way of that other once-accepted monetary rule, the gold
standard, as well as radical alternatives such as privatizing money
issue (7).
Thes monetary authorities continue to rely on a variety of
indicators to make informed guesses about the combination of interest
rates and money growth that will most likely counteract pressures
pushing the economy away from noninflationary stable growth. In a
particular period, the outcome of this procedure may be better than
could be achieved under an adjustable monetarist rule, though in
many historical periods discretionary policies have done worse. Past
mistakes have been instructive, and the conduct of policy may be
(7) See CAGAN [7] for my discussion of the problems of maintaining stability under
the gold standard or private money supplies.

Monetarism Yesterday and Today
117
improving. Nevertheless, without a rule, present policy guarantees
nothing and policymakers can decide to do anything. The extent to
which inflationary pressures will be accommodated is completely
uncertain.
5. - Recent Developments in Statistical Tests of Monetary Effects
In matters other than the search for a a policy rule to guarantee
long-run price stability back the monetarist movement has not been
unsucessful. It has brought money back to the center of macro-
economics -
probably much sooner than Keynesian orthodoxy
would have rediscovered money on its own. Accumulating evidence of
the crucial role of money in major depressions and inflations has given
support to the idea that there must be control over monetary growth.
Although the role of money in ordinary business cycles remains
controversial, its contribution to major cycles means it must have
effects in minor cycles. But its importance there remains unclear
because the endogeneity of the money supply in ordinary minor cycles
obscures the cause-and-effect relationship (8).
New statistical tests have been proposed to settle the causality
question (Granger [16]; and Sims [25]). After numerous applications
in the literature (for a review, Cagan [8]), the Granger-Sims causality
tests appear to support the causal role of money in general, but its
statistical significance turns out to be at best marginal. It shows up in
many of these studies as having a small or no effect at all on output
and sometimes even none on prices. The reason for these puzzling
results is that most of the fluctuations in money are statistically
endogenous and, therefore, are not recognized as a possible causal
influence. This seems to support the new theory that only un-
anticipated, unpredictable changes in money affect output.
A look into the statistical technique is clarifying. Causality tests
remove the statistical correlations of a time series from their own past
values and those of other related variables thereby eliminating any
(8) Endogeneity means that money correlates with other variables that could be
the initiating source of what we mistakenly interpret as monetary effects.

118
Phillip Cagan
movements that could be attributed to prior movements in other
variables. After the extraction of serial and cross-correlations, the
items in the time series are reduced to random blips that have
occurred independent of past movements in any of the other variables
considered. These blips meet the condition of exogeneity, and thus
they provide statistical evidence of causality only if they correlate with
future blips (of output in this case) (9). It is the weak relation between
these blips in money and output that puts to question the importance
of money.
The problem here is that the statistical procedure removes all the
systematic movements in money -
the trend and cyclical fluctuations
that correlate with other macro variables. But it is these cyclical
fluctuations in money, not the random blips,
that affect output
(because the blips are smoothed out by financial markets and only
cumulative changes in money build up to affect output and later
prices). In eliminating endogenous movements, causality tests take
out the very movements in money that produce its effects.
The new neoclassical theory argues that the systematic move-
ments in money should indeed be separated and disregarded, on the
argument that they are anticipated and are therefore fully absorbed by
prices, leaving no effect on output (10). Here the monetarists and the
neoclassicists part company. Everyone agrees that prices ultimately
absorb all changes in the money stock, but how long does this take?
Neoclassicists say prices respond in "one period." (Their theory
defines one period as the time for information to be collected; in
practice it means one month or one quarter). Monetarists, in contrast,
agree with the Keynesians that prices are sluggish in the short run. On
empirical grounds it seems to them that monetary changes initially
affect output and are then absorbed by prices gradually over the
duration of a typical business cycle. Thus variations in money growth,
whether exgenous or not and whether anticipated or not, are for
(9) Assuming expectations do not produce an effect before the expected causal
influence appears in the data, which is not likely for monetary effects with several
quartiers' lang.
(10) Many studies find, contrary to the new theory, that anticipated monetary
changes affect output CAGAN [8]. But this finding is not conclusive: since anticipated
changes are, by definition , endogenous, their correlation with output cannot be
considered causal by the Granger-Sims criterion.

Monetarism Yesterday and Today
119
monetarists a leading source of fluctuations in output as well as in
prices.
The causality tests, even if flawed, point to a serious empirical
problem. All economic time series are endogenous in that their
movements reflect a combination of economic relationships. The
Granger-Sims causality test is one method of identifying causal influ-
ences, but it is highly misleading because it ignores the variety of
relationships existing among a group of variables. If some variable
affects output by working through money, we cannot disregard the
link from money to output. If a change in money occurs for some
other reason, its effects on output still operate. For example, the
Federal Reserve Bank had prevented the US bank runs of the early
1930s from producing an endogenous decline in the money stock,
would the contraction in activity have been as severe? Certainly not .
Statistical eridogeneity does not preclude a variable from supplying a
crucial link, such that its changes can be expected to exert an
important effect no matter what causes it to change.
Yet the Granger-Sims methodology forces US to recognize that
structural econometric models do not help to identify the effect of
such changes. Most of the techniques used to circumvent the problem
of endogeneity in econometric models assume that lagged variables
are exogenous, but that approach completely ignores the serial correl-
ation in time series. The variables are endogenous, a fact that
contradicts the assumption of regression analysis that independent
variables be exogenous. The consequence is that nearly all time series
regressions are unreliable, which explains why econometric studies so
often contradict one another. Perhaps this is one reason why the latest
research fad is to look for the effect of random supply shocks on
output. If such shocks exist and are important, they are , in theory,
exogenous and so represent one effect that time series regressions can
legitimately test for, assuming the shocks can be properly isolated.
That is all very well, but it is no help in studying variables that have
important trend and cyclical effects.
The alternative empirical procedure for establishing the direction
of economic effects is to focus on particular historical episodes in
which important exogenous events can be identified. For example,
money growth decreased in 1966 and again in 1969 because policy

120
Phillip Cagan
makers
decided
to
combat
inflation.
Following
both
actions,
economic activity and prices contracted, phenomena that cannot be
explained other than by the monetary contraction. These episodes
provided isolated evidence on the dynamics of monetary effects. Time
series regressions covering many years mix such revealing episodes
with many ordinary cyclical fluctuations in which changes in money
and other variables are correlated and provide no basis for identifying
cause and effect. It is the unusual episode, which time series regres-
sions obscure, that allows some identification of cause and effect.
6. - Conclusions: the Legacy of Monetarism
To sum up, everyday cyclical movements do not permit a formal
statistical test of the role of money, and opinion varies on its contri-
bution to fluctuations in output. Consequently, age-old controversies
about monetary policy remain unsettled. Would stable money growth
eliminate an important source of instability in the economy? Is
monetary policy capable of moderating more sources of instability
than it would add? The recent volatility of velocity has weakened the
case for stable money growth without strengthening the case for
discretionary countercyclical policies. Whether the conduct of mon-
etary policy is ready for a scientific rule or should continue as the
discretionary judgment of wiseheads remains an issue more unresol-
ved than ever. Yet, although the monetarist goal of stable money
growth appears unattainable, its legacy has brought recognition of the
importance of monetary policy for economic stabilization and the
necessity of controlling its growth.

Monetarism Yesterday and Today
BIBUOGRAPHY
121
[1] BRONFENBRENNER M.: «Statistical Tests of Rival Monetary Rules», Journal of
Political Economy, n. 69, January 1961, pp. 1-14.
[2] -
- .: «Statistical Tests of Rival Monetary Rules: Quarterly Data Supplement»,
Journal of Political Economy, n. 69, December 1961, pp. 421-25.
[3] BRUNNER K.: «The Role of Money and Monetary Policy», Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis Review, n. 50, July 1968, pp. 8-24.
[4] CAGAN P.: «Current Problems of Monetary Policy· Would the Gold Standard
Help», in FELLNER W. (ed.): Contemporary Economic Problems, Washington
(DC), American Enterprise Institute, 1982.
[5] -
- : «Monetary Policy and Subduing Inflation», in FELLNER W. (ed.): Essays in
Contemporary Economic Problems: Disinflation, Washington (DC), American
Enterprise Institute, 1984.
[6] - -:
«Containing
Inflation» in
CAGAN
P.
(ed.) : Essays
in Contemporary
Economic Problems: the Impact of the Reagan Program, Washington (DC),
American Enterprise Institute, 1986.
[7] - -: «Monetarism», in EASTWELL J. - MILGATE M. - NEWMAN P. (eds.): Palgrave
Dictionary of Economics, New York, Stockton Press, 1987, pp. 492-97.
[8] -
- : «Money Income Causality - A Critical Review of the Literature Since A
Monetary History», in
BORDO M. (ed.) : Money, History, and International
Finance: Essays in Honour of Anna J. Schwartz, Chicago: University of Chicago
press for National Bureau of Economic Research, 1989, pp. 117-51.
[9] DE JONG D.D. - WHITEMAN C.M.: «Trends and Randon Walks in Macroeconomic
Time Series: A Reconsideration Based on the Likelihood Principle», University of
Iowa, Economics Working Papers Series, n. 89, February, 1989.
[10] FELLNER W.: «Criteria for
Useful Targeting», Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking, n. 14, November 1982, pp. 641-60.
[11] FREEDMAN C.: «Financial Innovations in Canada: Causes and Consequences», The
American Economic Review, n. 73, May 1983, pp. 101-6.
[12]
FRIEDMAN B.: «Conducting Monetary Policy by Controlling Currency Plus Noise»,
Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy, n. 29, 1988, pp. 205-12.
[13]
FRIEDMAN M. - SCHWARTZ A.J.: Monetary Trends in the United States and the
United Kingdom: Their Relation to Income, Prices, and Interest Rates, 1867-
1965, Chicago, University of Chicago press for National Bureau of Economic
Research, 1982.
[14] GoLDFELD S.M .:
«The Case
of
the
Missing
Money», Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, n. 3, 1976, pp. 683-730.
[15] GoULD J.P. - NELSON C.R. : «The Stochastic Structure of the Velocity of Money»,
The American Economic Review, n. 64, June 1974, pp. 405-18.
[16] GRANGER C.W.J.: «Investigating Causal Relations by Econometric Models and
Cross Spectral Methods», Econometrica, n. 37, July 1969, pp . 424-38.
[17] JUDD J.P. - SCADDING J.L. : «The Search for a Stable Money Demand Function: A
Survey of the Post-1973 Literature», Journal of Economic Literature, n. 20,
September 1982, pp . 993-1023 .
[18]
MAYER I. (ed.): The Structure of Monetarism, New York, Norton, 1978.
[19] MCCALLUM B.I.: «Robustness Properties of a Rule for Monetary Policy», Carnegie.
Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, n. 29 1988, pp . 173-203.

122
Phillip Cagan
[20] --: «Targets, Indicators and Instruments of Monetary Policy», in Monetary
Policy in an Eva of Change, forthcoming, Washington (DC), American Enterprise
Institute, 1989.
[21] MEADE J.E. - ANDREWS P.W.S.: «Summary of Replies to Question on Effects of
Interest Rates», Oxford Economic Papers, n. I, 1938, reprinted in WILSON T. -
ANDREWS P.W.S. (005.): «Oxford Studies in the Price
Mechanism»,
Oxford
Economic Papers, 1951, pp. 27-30.
[22] MUNDEU R.: «The Origins and Evolution of Monetarism», in JANSEN K. (ed.):
Monetarism , Econom ic Crises and the Third World, London, Frank Cass, 1983,
pp.43-54.
[23] SELTZER L.H. : «Is a Rise in Interest Rates Desirable or Inevitable?», The American
Economic Review, n. 35, December 1945, pp. 831-50.
[24] SIMPSON T.D.: «The Redefined Monetary Aggregates», Federal Reserve Bulletin, n.
66, February 1980, pp. 97-114.
[25] SIMS C.A.: «Money, Income and Causality» , The American Economic Review, n.
62, September 1972, pp. 540-52.
[26] SMITH W.L.: «On the Effectiveness of Monetary Policy», The American Economic
Review, n. 46, September 1956, pp. 588-606.

II . TRADE BALANCE,
STOCK MARKETS,
AND FOREIGN EXCHANGE RATES

Trade Balance
and Exchange Rates (*)
John s. Chipman
University of Minnesota
One of the most remarkable facts about the development of
international economics in the past 50 years has been the persistence
of the belief that a country can improve its balance of trade by
devaluing its currency. More generally, it is believed that just as a
profit-maximizing monopolistic firm producing under constant costs
can improve its sales and thereby its profitability by lowering its costs
and thus its selling price provided the elasticity of demand for its
product is greater than unity, a country can be become more
"competitive" and improve its balance of trade by cutting the prices of
its export goods provided the sum of its elasticity of demand for
imports and the foreign elasticity of demand for its exports exceeds
unity. (For brevity, the terms "balance of trade" and "trade balance"
are used rather improperly throughout this paper to stand for the
balance of payments on goods and services. The term "foreign
balance" has an equivalent meaning.)
In this paper, I argue that that this doctrine, which emerged in
the 1930s and was widely prevalent in the 1940s and 1950s, is based
on some logical misconceptions and is valid only in limited circum-
stances. It is logically equivalent to the doctrine that by cutting prices
a country can "outcompete and undersell the rest of the world all
(*) This work was supported by the [US] National Science Foundation, grant
SES-8607652.
(1) It should be noted that
HABERLER ([22], p. 396n) stressed his analysis of
depreciation applied to a situation in which a country had a deficit in its total balance of

126
John S. Chipman
along the line" (Haberler [23], p. 437), a doctrine that Haberler
showed is at variance with the law of comparative advantage and that
Robinson [50] showed is inconsistent with the dynamic stability of the
Humean adjustment process (Hume [28]). Curiously, the logical
equivalence was overlooked, and many writers who rejected the
dostrine of the possibility of a general underselling accepted, and
indeed strongly advocated, the particular form of it stating that such
underselling could be accomplished by means of currency depreci-
ation (1).
In the next section I review the "elasticity approach" to the
balance of payments and argue that, as developed by Robinson [49]
and Machlup [39], it was a theory of how, in a flexible exchange rate
regime, the exchange rate would adjust so as to bring the current
balance into equality with the capital balance in response to autonom-
ous capital movements in 1940s, however, this theory was used to
reverse the causal relationship between capital movements and ex-
change rates and to apply to a pegged exchange rate regime (Lerner
[38], pp. 377-8). The notorious "Marshall-Lerner condition" (Hir-
schman [27]) -
which states that the world excess demand for a
country's exportable good is a decreasing function of that country's
exchange rate -
is a condition for dynamic stability in a world
economy in which the exchange rate will depreciate whenever that
commodity is in excess world supply. The "improved" balance of
trade that results when a country's currency is below its equilibrium
value is necessarily a disequilibrium balance, one that will disappear if
the dynamic adjustment mechanism is allowed to own its course. The
theory of the effect of currency depreciation in a pegged exchange
rate regime is, therefore, necessarily a disequilibrium theory (Mundell
[45]), and the question of the consequences of altering the exchange
rate cannot be answered without taking account of the different
means by which it may be pegged. Different means generally result in
different consequences. In any case, the theory of the consequences of
payments -
that is, was losing reserves -
and expressly denied that he would prescribe
this remedy for a country that had merely a current-account deficit. Thus, his analysis
may be interpreted as coming under the heading of the first of the three mechanisms
discussed in the section of this paper on the Elasticity Approach.
Advise: the numbers in square brackets refer to the Bibliography in the appendix.

Trade Balance and Exchange Rates
127
varying adjustable pegged exchange rates is inapplicable to a flexible
exchange rate regime such as we have today.
In the following section I discuss other mechanisms by which a
currency depreciation might improve a country's balance of trade;
these are mechanisms by which, in accordance with Alexander's [1]
seminal formulation, a currency depreciation can change the differen-
ce between income and absorption. One of these mechanisms requires
that wages be initially above their market-clearing levels, resulting in
unemployment, and that the marginal propensity to save be positive.
Then depreciation lowers real wages and increases employment in
export and import-competing industries, causing unemployment in
competing foreign industries; the fall in income abroad causes a fall in
saving to match the increase in saving brought about by the increased
income at home. Clearly, such a mechanism is peculiar to a situation
of world unemployment. Another mechanism involves adjustment of
cash balances, producing an essentially temporary effect on the trade
balance. A third mechanism involves using currency depreciation, via
inflation, to lower the real value of a country's budget deficit and to
redistribute income from low to high savers.
The main conclusion of these sections is that for depreciation to
improve a country's foreign balance it must, in all but a few excep-
tional cases, give rise to a reverse capital movement. This movement
brings about resource reallocation in both countries that may (but
need not necessarily) entail changes in relative prices, but any that
occur are the consequence, not the cause, of the improved trade
balance. Greater competitiveness does not improve the trade balance;
rather, it is an improved trade balance that increases competitiveness.
Further, I argue that under present conditions it is only under special
circumstances that one can expect a currency depreciation to improve
a country's trade balance, and even then the improvement is likely to
be only temporary. This argument is not, of course, a revolutionary
thesis but merely a reaffirmation of the classical doctrine according to
which, in Mill's ([44], p. 175) words, «a depreciation of the currency
does not affect the foreign trade of the country». The most obvious
way in which the United States can attain a sustained improvement in
its foreign balance by depreciating the dollar (and then only when that
balance is measured in foreign currencies) is by letting the consequent

128
John S. Chipman
inflation reduce the real burden of government expenditures, particu-
larly the interest on the foreign debt.
In the last section, I analyze some data presented by Klein [36]
on the US current-account and federal budget balances as well as on
price competitiveness (the inverse of the «real exchange rate») and
conclude that there is very slender empirical support for the hypoth-
esis that a decline in the value of the dollar will improve the US
current-account balance and that this hypothesis has been becoming
less and less credible in the face of a declining dollar and continuing
external deficits.
1. - The Elasticity Approach
The story begins with the classic papers by Robinson [49] and
Machlup [39]. In Robinson's ([49], p. 188): "The theory of the
exchanges may be regarded as the analysis of the manner in which
movements of the balance of trade and the balance of lending are
equated to each other". In the analysis that ensues, it becomes evident
that the "balance of lending" is to be considered the exogenous
variable and the "balance of trade" the endogenous; thus, p. 201: «A
change in the desire to lend abroad can bring about a change in the
balance of trade (and consequently in the actual rate of lending) only
by way of its effect in altering the exchange rate» .
She ([49], p. 183n) had stated at the outset that "it will be
obvious that my main endeavour is to elaborate the hints thrown out
by Mr. Keynes in his Treatise on Money, Chap. 21"; in that chapter,
Keynes [34] provided the theoretical basis for his earlier [32] treat-
ment of the transfer problem in an analysis in which he expressed his
indebtedness to Taussig [56] by saying that "his treatment of the
influence of international investment on the price-levels in different
countries is far in advance of any other discussion of the subject (2).
(2) It would be misleading not to mention that preceding this statement Keynes
remarked: «Professor Taussig is, I think, a little too ready to assume that exports and
imports adjust themselves to the other factors in the situation, rather than -
in part -
the other way round» , Yet,
KEYNES'
(pp,
332-6) own analysis started from the
Taussigian premise: «Let us then suppose that the attractions of investment increase in
country A but not in country B.,

Trade Balance and Exchange Rates
129
Thus, the proper way to interpret Robinson's paper is, I believe, as a
contribution to the theory of the transfer problem, that is, to the
theory of how the balance of trade adjusts to autonomous capital
movements (3).
For the special case of an infinite elasticity of supply of exports
the model can be briefly set out as follows Chipman [13]. Suppose
that each country produces, at constant costs, only an export good
and a nontradable good. Country 1 produces commodities 1 and 3; it
exports commodity 1 to and imports commodity 2 from country 2.
Likewise, country 2 produces commodities 2 and 3; it exports
commodity 2 to and imports commodity 1 from country 1. Then the
equilibrium price ratio pZ/ pt is fixed for k = I, 2 (where p~ is the
price of commodity j in country k, denominated in country k's
currency). Suppose further that (as fairly explicitly assumed in Tauss-
ig, [56]) each country pursues monetary policies designed to stabilize
the price of the domestic (nontradable) good; then the price of the
export good will also be stabilized. Defining the exchange rate, e, as
the price of country 2's currency in terms of country l's and assuming
that arbitrage equates prices between countries, we have e = PYrlJ for
both tradable commodities i» 1, 2. Combining this with the price
stabilization assumption we have:
(1)
pj
e=-
PI
pj
p~
_0_=
p~
PI
pj
p~
p~
-
0 -ex-,
p~
PI
PI
where pj andmare the stabilized prices of countries 1 and 2's export
goods. Thus, in this case, the exchange rate is proportional to country
(3) The theory of the transfer problem as such originated as the theory of how
countries' economies adjust to a unilateral transfer (such as a reparations payment)
from one to an other. Taussig's analysis, however, treated private capital movements as
exogenous and in every way as one would treat a unilateral transfer. One might think of
this relationship as being embedded in a recursive model in which capital movements
are in turn influenced by intertemporal comparative advantage. as indicated by
differential rates of return to capital in their absence. Of course, a loan ar direct
investment from one country to another comes with the expectation of future payment
of interest and principal and thus has wealth effects that distinguish it from a gift. These
effects may be very important. They were, however. neglected by Taussig, Keynes. and
Robinson and are similarly neglected in my analysis.

130
John S. Chipman
2's terms of trade. This is the one case in which it is legitimate to
"confuse" the exchange rate with the terms of trade.
Now, as shown in Chipman [13], we can set up for each country
a "trade-demand function":
(2)
k _
k
k (
k
k Zk)
Z j = x j -
Y j PI, P2,
,
expressing the net import z~ of commodity j by country k, equal to the
difference between consumption xkj and production Y~, as a function
of the prices of the two tradables and the deficit Zk in country k's
balance of trade. We postulate the dynamic adjustment process,
(3)
del:I
-I
-2
2
1:2
-I
-2
2
-
00 nl (PI, e P2 , -
e L ) + n2 (PI / e , P2, L )
dt
where L2 = Z2 =
- z' / e is a loan or transfer from country 1 to
country 2, denominated in country 2's currency (Chipman [13] , p.
752). Equation (3) states that the rate of change of the exchange rate
-
which by equation (1) is proportional to the price of commodity 2
relative to the price of commodity 1 (denominated in either currency)
-
is proportional to the world excess demand for commodity 2. Now
the relation (3) remains valid if one multiplies the terms on the right
by ~ to obtain the dynamic adjustment process:
(4)
Equation (4) states that the rate of change of the exchange rate is
proportional to the value (in country 2's currency) of the world excess
demand for commodity 2. Now,
using the budget equation for
country 2's trade utility function:

Trade Balance and Exchange Rates
131
and substituting it in equation (4), we obtain the equivalent dynamic
adjustment process:
(6)
where:
(7)
is country l's demand for country 2's exports of commodity 2,
denominated in country 2's currency, and
(8)
-I
n2
2
PI cz -I
-2
2
lJl (e, L ) = -
nl (PI / e, P2 , L )
e
is country 2's demand for its own imports of commodity 1, denomi-
nated in its own currency (4). The functions (7) and (8) (the former
augmented by L2) correspond to Machlup's [39] formulation of
country l's demand for and supply of foreign exchange; in Robinson's
formulation the difference between (7) and (8) is described as the
"balance of trade", which is to be equated to the "balance of lending"
_
L2 •
It is at this point that the unwary fall into a trap of terminology.
In Graph 1, the functions Dl (e, L2) + L2 and IX (e, L2) are shown for
a given L2 ; when the tradable goods are normal that is therefore gross
trade substitutes), the first of these functions is downward sloping and
the second upward sloping. What about stability? If the exchange
rate, e, is above its equilibrium value, eO = e(L2), we want it to fall. If
the exchange rate is below that equilibrium value, we want it to rice.
(4) See DORNBUSCH ([15], p. 898) for a formula similar to (6). Dornbusch's formula
expresses the excess demand as functions of the exchange rate (terms of trade) and the
countries' national incomes, which is not quite correct since the latter are dependent on
prices and cannot legitimately be treated as parameters. The above formulation in terms
of terms of trade-demand functions avoids this problem. The general point being
developed in the text, which I believe was first made by Dornbusch, is unaffected by
this error.

132
John S. Chipman
DEMAND FOR AND SUPPLY OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE
AS FUNCTIONS OF THE EXCHANGE RATE
GRAPH
Exchange
rate
Value of exports or imports
That is, we want de / d t 00 ~ (e, L2) to have the sign opposite to
e -
eO; hence we want 3 ~ / ~ e < O. In particular, this means from
equation (6) that we want the balance of trade function, D~ (e, L2)
-
zn (e, L2) , to be a decreasing function of the exchange rate, which
requires that the supply curve in Figure 1 intersect the demand curve
from below (5). This desire is often phrased by saying that "a decline
in the exchange rate will improve the balance of trade". But this is a
very dangerous use of words. What increases is the value of the excess
demand for commodity 2 the value of country 2's balance of trade
function. It is quite fallacious to say that a fall in the exchange rate
below its equilibrium value will improve the equilibrium balance of
trade; on the contrary, the postulated dynamic adjustment process
ensures that the excessive balance of trade produced by a below
(5) This, of course, yields the so-called Marshall-Lerner condition for stability
(HIRSCHMAN [27]), generalized to allow for a nonzero initial trade balance. Note that the
generalized formula given by Hirschman is fautly (CHIPMAN [13] , p. 754).

Trade Balance and Exchange Rates
133
equilibrium exchange rate will automatically be elirninted as time
progresses, in other words, the excessive balance of trade surplus over
the equilibrium level cannot be sustained (6).
Specifically, suppose the equilibrium exchange rate is equal to eO
as indicated in Graph 1, and that for some reason it temporarily drops
to e' . Then the demand for country 2's currency exceeds the supply;
the fact that it does so follows from the Marshall-Lerner stability
property stipulated above. But the reason this is a stability property is
that, as by equation (4), if the demand exceeds the supply, the
exchange rate will rise. Consequently, the drop in the exchange rate
and the corresponding improvement in the balance of trade must be
temporary; this is what is meant by dynamic stability. Likewise, if for
(6) The fallacy appears to have its roots in LERNER'S ([38] , p. 347) discussion of
exchange rates. Lerner initially described stability conditions applicable to a flexible
exchange rate regime and explained how trade imbalances would have to be tern-
porary. At the point at which he introduced the famous elasticity formula (LERNER [38],
pp. 377-8), however, the earlier stability argument appears to have been forgotten. The
most likely explanation is a terminological confusion between a desired (ex ante)
balance of trade function and an equilibrium (ex post) balance of trade.
So beguiling was this argument that is has dominated thought on the theory of
exchange rates for the last 50 years. It was quickly accepted by HANSEN [25] , who took
up Lerne's theme of "elasticity pessimism " (a term later coined by MACHLUP [40]) , and
followed up by HABERLER [21] , who supported the optimistic view concerning the
elasticities, noting the equivalence (which holds in the special case of as infinitely elastic
supply of exports) of Lerner's stability cond ition to MARSHAll.'S ([43], p. 354) -
a
condition that, in fact, goes back to MILL ([44]. p. 158). The approach was further
developed by HIRSCHMAN [27]. It is important to keep in mind the context in which
Hansen and HaberJer wrote; they were concerned with the International Monetary
Fund concept of "fundamental disequilibrium" and with the quest ions of how to define
it and to remove it once it arose. The arguments that were used for currency
depreciation are not fallacious if they are presented as applying to a disequilibrium
situation and if one is careful to describe the nature of the forces preventing equilibrium
from taking place . The fallacy consists in interpreting the argument as a proposition in
comparative statics (involving the comparison of two equilibria), and in neglecting to
specify the machanism by which the exchange rate is pegged and then extending the
proposition to all situations involving a change in the exchange rate.
To my knowledge, the nature of the terminological fallacy was first brought to light
by DORNBUSCH ([15]. p. 898), who referred to the "popular misconception" that "gives
the Marshall-Lemer condition as the criterion for a successful devaluation" and
explained: «The misconception here is to indentify the world excess demand for
exportables with the balance of payments and the terms of trade with the exchange rate
und the failure to recognize that only in equilibrium will foreign excess demand for
exportables equal the domestic excess supply of that commodity and, conversely, for
importables»,
It is astounding that seven years later DORNBUSCH ([17] , pp. 58-67) appears to have
completely forgotten this perceptive insight.

134
John S. Chipman
some reason the exchange rate is "overvalued" as indicated bye" in
Graph 1 -
that is, if the supply of country 2's foreign exchange
exceeds the demand -
then it must necessarilly fall back to its
equilibrium value.
It might be argued that if the model is modified so as to allow the
exchange rate to be pegged at e", then pegging it at a lower rate (say,
at eO) will improve the trade balance, and that in this sense we can say
that a currency devaluation improves the balance of trade. This is a
treacherous argument, however, since it depends very much on the
mechanism by which the exchange rate is pegged. Let us consider
three distinct mechanisms (not pretending that these are exhaustive):
1)
possibly the overvalued exchange rate is propped up by
country 2's running down its reserves or engaging in short-term
borrowing; then pegging it at a lower rate will allow equilibrium to be
restored. Within the framework of model, this is the only logical
meaning that can be attached to the proposition that a devaluation
improves the balance of trade. But it applies only to a regime of
pegged exchange rates in which the dynamic adjustment mechanism
is not allowed to function.
Even then, the description just given is very incomplete. We have
to ask ourselves, why was the country running out of reserves in the
first place? One possible reason is that the government had been
running a budget deficit and the country was living beyond its means
(7). If the devaluation was accompanied by austerity measures or an
incomes policy to reduce this deficit, then it is to these measures and
policies that one should properly attribute the restoration of balance.
As will be indicated presently, this kind of change would be better
analyzed in terms of shifts, rather than movements, along the curves.
The drop in the exchange rate (or the possibility of its being pegged
sustainably at a lower rate) would then be an incidental consequence
(7) Adherents of the monetary approach to the balance of payments. Stress that
balance of payments deficits can only be sustained by continued credit creation
(JOHNSON [29]. p. 157). If all countries pursue such policies simultaneously, however,
they will obviously not all have simultaneous balance of payments deficits. Thus, the
kind of situation envisaged by Johnson must be one in which other countries are
simultaneously engaging in credit contraction. In this case, we have an example of what
MACHLUP [42] called "involuntary lending" from the contracting to the expanding
countries, enabling the latter to live beyond their means (CHIPMAN [10l , p. 75).

Trade Balance and Exchange Rates
135
of the austerity measures that were the real cause of the improvement
in the foreign balance (8). On the other hand as I argue in the next
section, one can expect that a currency depreciation will directly
reduce the real value of a government's budget deficit and there by
improve its foreign balance (at least, if that balance is denominated in
foreign currency); the fall in the exchange rate then operates through
the capital account, rather than the current account, in restoring
balance.
To be sure, a reduction in the budget deficit will directly affect
both the current and capital accounts. On the current account, it will
result in an increased supply of exports (since less is spent on
exportabies at home) and a reduced demand for imports -
that is it
will directly shift the country's balance of trade function downwards
-
and this may be expected to exert a downward pressure on prices
of both tradables (and in the model at hand, in the country's terms of
trade, since the reduction in demand for nontradables will cause
resources to move from nontradables to tradables, increasing the
supply of exports). But this change in relative prices alone will not be
enough to induce the foreign country to reduce its export surplus
(reduce its excess of income over expenditure); for this, some induce-
ment must come from the capital account. On the capital account, the
reduction in the devaluing country's budget deficit will directly lower
its demand for loanable funds from the foreign country, and this will
release the funds previously lent by the foreign country for use in
consumption expenditures. Of course, the natural price to achieve this
result is the rate of interest, although it is not included in the simple
model introduced above. Only in this way will the foreign country be
induced to reduce its export surplus. Thus, it is essential that the
currency depreciation (and associated austerity measures) act first by
bringing about a reverse capital movement toward the foreign
country.
(8) Commenting on empirical studies of the effects of devaluations during the
Bretton Woods era, BLACKHURST [5], p. 63 wrote: «The problem with such studies is
that they beg the key question of the individual contribution of the exchange-rate
change. What would have happened to the trade balance if the wage restraints, the
restrictive monetary and fiscal policies, and so forth had been introduced in the absence
of a devaluation? In other words, what difference did the devaluation make?»
I was able to locate only one empirical study that addressed this question.

136
John S. Chipman
In short, the only way country 2's exchange rate could have
become overvalued at e" is through a rise in absorption -
financed by
foreign borrowing -
and the only way to peg it back to the equilib-
rium level, eO, is to reduce absorption so that the country can live
within its means (9). But for this mechanism to yield a world
equilibrium, country 1 must be induced to increase its absorption
according, which requires that the reduced absorption in country 2 be
translated into a capital outflow to country 1 (or a fall in capital
inflows from country 1).
If this is how the argument is understood, it is logically unobjec-
tionable, but the absorption implications for of pegging the exchange
rate at different levels are rarely stated explicitly. In any case, the
method of analysis is unnecessarilly awkward since the changes in
absorption and the resulting induced capital movements are better
handled in terms of shifts of the curves;
2)
another wayan overvalued currency could be supported is by
means of exchange controls or similar trade restrictions, preventing
the realization of the excess of country 2's demand for imports Jif (its
supply of its own currency), over the foreign demand for its currency
including the loan payment), d! + L2 • In such a case, one would have
to be very careful to modify the model to take account of the means
by which the controls are implemented and the expenditure is
diverted from imports. That this was a typical situation during the
Bretton Woods era was a point stressed by Sohmen [52] (10);
(9) This could (but does not necessarily) mean that absorption should be reduced
to equality with income -
that is, that the original equilibrium position, eO, corresponds
to balanced trade (L2 = 0). It is more reasonable however, to allow for long-term
capital movements in one direction or the other.
(10) Some subtle theoretical points need to be mentioned here. A mere restriction
of imports will simply result in an equal fall in exports measured in external prices. A
tariff or quota will worsen the trade balance denominted in internal (but not external)
prices , by the amount of the tariff revenues or profits of holders of import licences;
further, it will in general improve the country's terms of trade and hence, in the model
being considered here, strengthen its exchange rate. Thus, under a flexible exchange
rate regime, the removal of a tariff or import quota will simultaneously reduce the trade
deficit reckoned in internal prices and the exchange rate, but it will have no effect on
the balance of trade reckoned in external prices. The argument, therefore, has to be
that in a pegged exchange rate regime, a devaluation accompanied by removal of
import controls will improve the trade balance denominated in domestic prices, but it
will have no effect on the trade balance denominated in foreign prices.
Noted further that the validity of this argument is limited to a model, such as the

Trade Balance and Exchange Rates
137
3)
a third interpretation might be that the monetary authorities
support the overvalued exchange rate by purchasing the country's
own currency and selling foreign currency. They can do this only for a
limited period of time (since the stock of foreign currency is finite).
Mosecover it will entail a fall in the money supply -
which is
incompatible
with
the
a
priori
assumption
that
the
monetary
authorities are stabilizing the price of the export and nontradable
good. The same point applies if the monetary authorities try to
devalue the currency, moving from the equilibrium rate, eO, to the
lower exchange rate, e', by printing more money and purchasing
foreign currency. Although this operation could go on forever, the rise
in the money supply would violate the assumption of stabilized
domestic and export prices or, equivalently, would result in shifting
the curves downward in such a way as to nullify the effect on the
trade balance (11).
It is clear that in each of the three mechanisms described, some
other variable must change along with the exchange rate. That
variable differs in each case. The first requires a fall in national
expenditure (absorption), the second the removal of exchange or
import controls and, the third an increase in the money supply. Many
of the controversies in the 1940s and 1950s concerning the effects of a
devaluation remained unresolved owing to the failure to make these
three mechanisms (or others) explicit. Although all three mechanisms
were involved during the Bretton Woods era (no doubt explaining
why countries such as France experienced "successful" devaluations
while others such as Great Britain did not), in the present era of
flexible exchange rates, only the third one is available.
From the above analysis, it follows that the concern with "elas-
ticity pessimism" (Lerner [38], p. 379; Machlup [40]) is misplaced.
Many critics of policies to depreciate the exchange rate tend to base
one developed above, in which the exchange rate is proportional to the terms of trade.
In general, although the removal of import restrictions will worsen the terms of trade
and improve the balance of trade denominated in domestic prices, it need not have any
effect OR the exchange rate; hence a currency depreciation may be irrelevant.
(11) For a proof in the case L2 = 0 as well as the case in which the autonomous
change in capital movement is denominated in country 1's currency, (that is, the shift
parameter is L1 = e U , rather than L2 , see CHIPMAN ([13], p. 761). See also HABERLER
([24], p. 213), who recognized this possibility and thus presented his analysis as
describing the "impact-effect of the depreciation" ([24], p. 197).

138
John S. Chipman
their arguments on allegedly low values of the elasticities, rather than
on the kind of arguments advanced above. In those terms, as will
become clear in the next section, one can be an "elasticity optimist"
and yet believe that a depreciation will have little or no effect or even a
negative effect on the balance of trade (12). Conversely, one can be an
"elasticity pessimist" and yet believe that a depreciation can have a
very substantial positive effect on the balance of trade (see, for
example, Polak [47]).
It is sometimes argued that those who deny that a currency
depreciation will improve a country's balance of trade must believe
that exchange rates are not important or that relative prices do not
matter. Certainly, such a charge cannot be levelled against this writer
(Chipman [10], p. 74). In the analysis of the previous paragraphs, it is
clear that: 1) one cannot expect changes in relative prices of imports
and exports to affect economic agents' current budget constraints (as
opposed to the allocation of their expenditures under their given
budget contraints), and 2) the nominal exchange rate cannot by itself
affect relative prices, except indirectly by affecting the real value of
capital movements. The fallacy in popular reasoning comes from
confusing the role of endogenous and exogenous variables (13). The
(12) As shown in CHIPMAN ([13] , pp. 763·4) , if a country initially has a surplus in its
balance of trade, denominated in its own currency, then a depreciation will lower the
foreign-currency value of this surplus. (worsen its trade balance), causing an inward
transfer to the country and thus, in the model under consideration. an improvement in
its terms of trade. And this is fully in accord with the fulfillment of the Marshall-Lerner
conditions.
(13) DORNBUSCH ([16], p. 281) has given a formulation that tends to obscure this
point: «It is quite obvious that an exchange rate change . . . exerts real effects because it
is accompanied by a policy which ensures that the exchange rate change will cause the
relative price of traded goods to change in terms of nontraded goods . It will increase at
home and decline abroad. The internal balance policy ensures, too, that absorption
declines in the home country and increases abroad. and it therefore "validates" the real
effects of the exchange rate change». I interpret this statement to mean that the
announcement of a fall in the exchange rate triggers. in accordance with a predeter-
mined government policy. a fall in absorption at home and a rise in absorption abroad
or, equivalently, a transfer from the home country to the foreign country (for example,
following the announcement, the US Congress immediately increases taxes and foreign
governments immediately reduce (DORNBUSCH [16]. p. 283). This transfer improves the
trade balance and brings about ("validates") the fall in the exchange rate that had
previously been announced. Ergo. the fall in the exchange rate caused the improvement
in the trade balance.
We are here in the realm of philosophy, not economics. I agree that. in strict logic
under the circumstances described. it could be said that the announcement of the fall in

Trade Balance and Exchange Rates
139
Robinson theory is a logically impeccable theory of how the exchange
rate adjusts to exogenous changes in capital movements so as to
equate the balance of trade to the balance of lending; the capital
movement is the exogenous variable, and the exchange rate is the
endogenous variable. As Kemp [30], pointed out however, it is simply
a logical fallacy to turn the theory on its head and interchange the
roles of these two variable.
The comparative statics of the Robinson-Machlup model are
illustrated in Graph 2. Assume a transfer in the amount of L2 from
country 1 to country 2 (in the latter's currency. If the transfer is
increased to L2 + .1 L2, both curves shift to the right as shown
(showing incidentally that these curves do not move independently
and hence are not very useful constructs). The result is a new
equilibrium exchange rate, e (L2 + .1 L2) , which is generally higher
than old one, e (L2) (14). Under the special assumption that the
exchange rate is proportional to country 2's terms of trade, when
country 2 receives more payments not only will it increase its
expenditures on its exportable good (say, by the same amount that
country 2 reduces its expenditures on this good-commodity 2), but it
will also increase its expenditures on the nontradable good. The
increase will require diverting resources from the export to the
the exchange rate caused the improvement in the balance and the actual fall in the
exchange rate. But I do not see how one can conclude that these results were caused by
the actual fall in the exchange rate. Given any sensible use of words, it was the transfer
and the resulting improvement in the trade balance that caused the fall in the exchange
rate. And one may ask how this type of reasoning would be applied to a model in which
a transfer has no effect on the exchange rate .
(14) Under the given assumptions supplemented by similarity and separability
assumptions on preferences, Vi + L2 shifts more than IX since SAMUELSON'S [51]
transfer criterion applied to the trade demand functionsm1} Ji~ / 1}z2 > p~ 1} Ji~ / 1}ZI ; is
satisfied; that is, a transfer improves the receiving country's terms of trade (which in
this model is proportionate to the exchange rate). This is because of the decomposition
1} Ji~
1}h~
1} Ji~
1}h~
aJ
1}hJ
--=-; --=-+ ---
1}ZI
1}y1
1}Z2
1}y'l
a~
1}y'l'
where 1} h~ / 1} y'l is the partial derivate of country 2's demand for commodity i with
respect to its disposable national income y'l, and a~ is the amount of labor required per
unit of output of commodity i in country 2. If 1} h~ / 1} y1 = 1}~ / 1} y'l and 1} hJ / 1} y'l
>
0, then country 2 will have a higher marginal trade propensity to consume
commodity 2 (its export good) than country 1. For details, see
CHIPMAN ([13], pp.
751-2).

140
John S. Chipman
GRAPH 2
SHIFfS IN DEMAND AND SUPPLY CURVES OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE
RESULTING FROM A CHANGE IN CAPITAL MOVEMENT
Exchange
rate
e
Value of exports or imports
domestic industry; to make up for the fall in output of the export
good, country 7 will have to increase its demand for it by more than
country l 's reduction in demand. This rise will result in a relative
increase in world demand for commodity 2 and hence in an improve-
ment in country 2's terms of trade (and the exchange rate). Thus,
when capital movements are exogenous and the exchange rate is
endogenous in the balance of payments adjustment process -
as is
the case in a flexible exchange rate regime -
relative prices and
exchange rates can be very important.
Relative prices and exchange rates need not be important in the
adjustment process however. This conclusion follows from the type of
reasoning that goes back to King ([35], pp. 85-6 and Bastable [2] for
the case in which all goods are tradable and from a result of Chipman
[9], pp. 58-9; [12] , p. 946) for the more general case. If two countries
each produce three commodities with two factors of production, one
of these commodities being a nontradable in each country and the
other two tradables, and if the production functions are identical and

Trade Balance and Exchange Rates
141
homogeneous and citizens' preferences identical and homothetic
between countries, and if factor rentals are initially equalized between
countries, then it follows that a transfer will leave all relative prices
unaffected. This would be a case in which a pure purchasing power
parity theory would be valid Cassel [8].
Even in this kind of a model, temporary changes in relative prices
might be needed to facilitate movement of resources between sectors
of tradables and nontradables, so one could expect a transfer to result
in a temporary rise in the receiving country in the price of nontrad-
ables relative to tradables (which could be brought about by an
appreciation of the exchange rate).
What does the empirical evidence show? There has been extra-
ordinarily little empirical work on this question since the time of
Taussig [55]
and his followers. Graham [20] found that capital
movements between
Britain
and the
United States during the
1862-1879 period confirmed the Taussigian theory that prices of
nontradables would rise relative to those of tradables in the receiving
country and fall in the paying country and that the terms of trade
would tend to change in accordance with the orthodox Millian
presumption. Viner [57] found confirmation of the Taussigian theory
for Canada during the 1900-1913 period. Wilson [58] found signifi-
cant movements not so much in the terms of trade as in the relative
prices of tradables and nontradables in response to capital inflows into
Australia during 1871 to 1930. In recent times, I am aware only of my
own study Chipman [11] of capital movements into and out of West
Germany (1958 to 1979) and Sweden (1971 to 1979); the conclusion
was that capital movements had no detectable effects whatsoever on
relative prices in these countries.
2. - The Absorption Approach
The leading alternative approach to establishing the effect of a
currency depreciation on the balance of trade is that pioneered by
Polak [47] and Alexander [1], who perceived that the foreign balance
is equivalent to the difference between total income and total expen-

142
John S. Chipman
diture ("absorption" in Alexander's terminology (15). I shall examine
three applications of this approach.
2.1 . Devaluation under Conditions
of Keynesian Unemployment
Analysis of the case of devaluation under conditions of Keynesian
unemployment originated with Robinson [49] (who treated it in terms
of the elasticity approach) and was formulated in a precise manner by
Harberger [26]. The following
is my own interpretation of the
mechanism of adjustment.
There is initially a state of Keynesian underemployment equilib-
rium in which the nominal wage rate is above the market-clearing
level. In order for this situation not to result in the unemployment of
all labor, we assume that there is an additional factor (capital) so that
labor is employed up to the point at which its nominal wage equals its
marginal value productivity. It is also assumed that there may be
production of import-competing goods; hence the exchange rate is not
proportional to the terms of trade. A currency depreciation, made
possible by an increase in the money supply used to purchase foreign
currency, causes all domestic prices except the wage rate to rise; thus,
it is equivalent to a cut in the nominal wage rate. Since the real wage
rate falls, employment increases. The real income of previously
employed workers falls, but that of the newly employed workers, as
well as that of the capitalists, rises. If workers and capitalists have
identical homothetic preferences, we may suppose that there is a rise
in potential welfare (as measured by a community utility function). If
all income is spent, then, as Harberger showed, there is no improve-
ment in the trade balance; however, if part of the increase is saved,
then aggregate expenditure (absorption) rises less than income. In the
latter case, the excess saving presumably causes the world real
interest rate to fall, and hence the foreign country is induced to
borrow and cut its spending (and the home country to save less) until
an equilibrium is reached in which the foreign country has lower
(15) This tenninlogy originated with BoULDING ([6]. p. 402; [7]. p. 231) and was
apparently first used in the theory of international trade by KINDLEBERGER (1950. p.
180).

Trade Balance and Exchange Rates
143
income and employment and hence lower saving and thus a lower
trade balance to match the home country's increased trade balance.
To the extent that the resulting capital outflow worsens the home
country's terms of trade, real income rises less than initially, and, if
the presumption of Laursen and Metzler ([37], p. 286) is correct (16),
the propensity to save out of a given income will fall; hence, in the
final equilibrium, the net increase in saving and thus the net improve-
ment in the foreign balance resulting from the devaluation may be
quite small.
With the story told this way, one can see that the primary wayan
exchange depreciation brings about an improvement in the foreign
balance is by causing a capital outflow, that is by increasing the rate of
saving and inducing (via the interest rate) the foreign country to
increase its rate of borrowing by a corresponding amount. That is, the
mechanism operates through the capital account, rather than the
current account.
This explanation is contrary to the usual view, according to which
the mechanism operates through the current account. In this latter
view, the mechanism works as follows Robinson [48] . The devalu-
ation leads in the first instance to higher domestic prices of tradables.
The result is increased employment in export and import-competing
industries and therefore increased output of exportables and import-
ables, which must be balanced against increased domestic consump-
tion of both. Since consumption rises less than income, the result is an
improvement in the scheduled balance of trade, which may be
effectuated by temporarily lower foreign prices of both export goods
and import-competing goods. Since the foreign country thus suffers a
temporary worsening of its balance of trade, it experiences a decline
in employment and income and therefore a decrease in saving to
offset the increase in the home country's saving; this makes the
temporary deterioration of its trade balance permanent (17). In this
(16) For an intertemporal analysis of this effect, see SVENSSON and RAzIN [54].
(17) At this point it is worth observing that there appears to be an error in
Robinson's analysis. She states, that "An increase in the balance of trade of one country
at best leaves the level of employment for the world unaffected". This, statement
overlooks the fact that the multiplier effect in the country that initiates the depreciation
is necessarily greater by the amount of the initial increase in net foreign investment,

144
John S.·Chipman
version of the story atthough the effect of the depreciation is trans-
mitted through the current account, the essential part of the adjust-
ment mechanism is not relative prices (except possibly the temporary
initial fall in the foreign-currency prices of the home country's
exportables and importables relative to those of the foreign country)
or the terms of trade (which need not change at all) but the changes in
employment and income that equilibrate the two countries' net rates
of saving. Although relative prices change, they follow rather than
precede, the improvement in the balance of trade.) Thus, income
takes the place of the interest rate in bringing about equilibrium in the
world capital market. But it is still crucial that there be a mechanism
to bring about equilibrium in the capital market.
In the first of these two versions of the adjustment process, the
causality runs from devaluation to increased saving to a reduced
interest rate to a reverse transfer and thence (possibly but not
necessarily) to a change in relative prices, including perhaps the terms
of trade; the transmission of the effect from one country to the other
goes through the capital account. In the second version, the causality
runs from devaluation to a temporary improvement in the balance of
trade accompanied by increased employment and income in the
devaluing country and decreased income and employment in the
foreign country; because .-
and only because -
these income effects
increase saving in the devaluing country and reduce it in the foreign
country, the temporary changes in the balance of trade become
permanent. In neither case is there a need for permanent changes in
relative prices; changes in equilibrium relative prices mayor may not
take place, but they are irrelevant to the mechanism. What is essential
is that either the interest rate or income (or both) bring about
equilibrium in the capital market.
Both versions of the mechanism go contrary to the usual theory,
which posits a causal relationship from devaluation to a change in
than that in the country that responds to the induced change in the balance of trade.
Where this not the case, it would follow that the world, by allowing wages to fall to
market-clearing level, could not move from unemployment to full employment. Thus,
as far as competitive depreciation is concerned, Robinson appears to have been
mistaken in concluding that the game of beggar-my-neighbor necessarily leads to a
shrinkage of world trade and economic activity. The same holds for the argument given
in LERNER ([38], pp. 386-7).

Trade Balance and Exchange Rates
145
relative prices (as between different commodities) to an improvement
in the balance of trade. Rather, the causality runs from devaluation to
improvement in the balance of trade to changes in relative prices. And
an essential part of the story is that wages were initially above
market-clearing levels. Should workers respond by pushing their
money wages up to the previous level of the real wage, then, of
course, the entire mechanism will break down.
2.2 The Portfolio-Balance Approach
According to what can be called the portfolio-balance approach
(Alexander [1]; Negishi [46]; Kemp [31]; Dornbusch [16]), a cur-
rency depreciation will, because of its inflationary effect, reduce the
real value of cash balances in the depreciating country, inducing the
public to increase its hoarding temporarily in order to build cash
balances back up to their previous level in relation to income.
Dornbusch ([IS], p. 906) assumed that the foreign country simultane-
ously deflates; hence its real cash balances will rise and the public will
dishoard temporarily to reduce them. Under these circumstances,
there will be equal and opposite differences between absorption and
income in the two countries.
It could be said that is this case the currency depreciation
operates directly on the current account to effect a temporary transfer
from the devaluing to the foreign country, and that no change in
relative prices need take place. Yet, there appears to be no reason to
assume such symmetry; although the devaluing country must increase
its money supply, the foreign country does not have to reduce its
money supply. What we have here is the same type of problem as in
the previous subsection: the temporary hoarding in the devaluing
country must somehow induce equal temporary dishoarding in the
other country. As in the previous case, we can imagine two mechan-
isms, one operating through the capital account and the other
through the current account. In the first, individuals in the devaluing
country desiring to build up their cash balances sell assets abroad,
lowering their prices and increasing interest rates, thus calling forth
the requisite cash from abroad (at the existing new pegged exchange
rate). In the second these individuals instead sell goods and services

146
John S. Chipman
abroad, which requires a temporary fall in their prices (Alexander
[13]). Note, however, that although changes in relative commodity
prices are involved in the second of these two mechanisms, they are
not induced by the depreciation itself but rather by the portfolio
adjustment necessitated by the depreciation. In either case, the
correct causal sequence is not from depreciation directly to a fall in
export prices followed by an increase in exports and an improvement
in the foreign balance but from depreciation to an increased supply of
exports that is then followed by the sequence described. The distinc-
tion may seem minor, but it is important for clearly understanding the
process. One must add that the first of the two mechanisms is
certainly more plausible, since the problem is one of portfolio balance
(18).
It needs to be emphasized that the mechanisms just described are
purely temporary; the adjustments might all take place within one
month or less. Thus, this approach cannot readily be used to justify
the expectation of a currency depreciation's sustained effect on the
balance of trade.
2.3 The Fiscal Approach
The approach pioneered by Polak [47] stresses not only a depreci-
ation's direct effects (via inflation) on the budget deficit but also its
(18) It is of interest, therefore, to inquire why the conventional procedure in the
literature has been to limit attention to the second type of mechanism. ALEXANDER ([1],
p. 271) stated, "Capital movements are ruled out here; if they were allowed they might
change or eliminate the cash balance effect". MACHLUP ([41). p. 263) echoed this by
saying: «The offer of assets and debt securities at reduced prices would attract foreign
buyers -
which would greatly help matters -
but we have excluded any autonomous
[sic] capital movements from our analysis. With foreigners ruled out as buyers -
because we wish to abstract from capital inflows in order to concentrate on the trade
balance -
and with banks ruled out as buyers -
because we have excluded additional
credit creation -
there are only nonbank residents left as buyers. The increased interest
rates will have the effect of cutting down investment expenditures of business and
consumption expenditures of households».
Here we see that both Alexander and Machlup went to extreme lengths to rule out
a priori the most likely empirical outcomes of a depreciation since they would be
inconsistent with
the
theory (both
the elasticity approach
and
the
absorption
approach!), which insists that the effects of a depreciation can be transmitted only
through the current account. This serves to confirm the main thesis of this paper, which
is that in most cases, the only way a depreciation can affect the trade balance is by
giving rise to capital movements.

Trade Balance and Exchange Rates
147
effect on the propensity to save, an effect brought about by the
redistribution of income. Inflation, according to this analysis, will
redistribute income from low-saving workers and rentiers to high-
saving entrepreneurs and thus tend to increase the rate of saving.
(Polak admitted that it might also raise the rate of investment.) As far
as the budget deficit is concerned, "bracket creep" would obviously
increase revenues. For this effect to succeed in producing a sustained
improvement in the trade balance, however, it must, of course, be
assumed that successive devaluations always keep ahead of measures
to rectify income distribution or reform the tax laws.
This approach also reveals an important effect on government
expenditures, one that appears to have first been noted by Corden
([14], p. 12). Take two countries -
say, the United States and a
nondollar trading partner. If the nondollar country has a government
budget deficit that is used at least in part to finance social welfare
expenditures (denominated in the national currency), then a currency
depreciation, accompanied by the increase in the money supply
necessary to purchase and bid up the price of dollars, will lower the
dollar value of these expenditures and thus of the budget deficit, it
will, therefore, improve the balance of trade reckoned in dollars.
Since the depreciation will cause domestic inflation, it will lower the
real value of the domestic social welfare payments, and it is thus
equivalent to a nominal cut in these benefits. This route is a way to
achieve a sustained improvement in the balance of trade, provided the
recipients of the welfare payments do not exert political pressure to
restore the real value of their benefits. The United States cannot, of
course, lower the dollar value of its trade deficit via this route of
currency depreciation;
nevertheless,
to
the
extent that welfare
benefits are not indexed, it constitutes a way to lower their real value
and is equivalent to a nominal cut in government expenditures. It will
lead to an improvement in the balance of trade but only as measured
in foreign currencies.
Although a depreciation cannot reduce the burden of external
debt for other countries, it can be an efficacious means for the United
States to do so. Here again. the mechanism goes from currency
depreciation to a decrease in the difference between absorption and
income and thus to a reverse transfer and only then (if at all) to a

148
John S. Chipman
change in relative prices. But a depreciation will produce these results
only when it is inflationary. if the dollar is bid up or down by
speculators, there is no reason to expect the difference betweem
income and absorption ("real hoarding" in Alexander's terminology)
and therefore in the foreign balance to be affected in one direction
more than another. On the other hand, if the dollar is pushed down by
the deliberate actions of the monetary authorities, the depreciation
will require an increase in the money supply; the above results can
then be expected to follow. But this shows that it is very misleading to
attribute the improved foreign balance to depreciation; it is simply the
consequence of inflation. Those who advocate a deliberate policy of
depreciation
implicitly
advocate
inflation;
it
is
obviously
safer
politically to advocate the former than the latter (even though the
policies are equivalent), especially since there is so much confusion
(even among economists) about the manner in which the exchange
rate affects the foreign balance.
In none of the three cases that we have considered does a
depreciation operate directly on relative prices, which in turn affect
the trade balance. In fact, it is only in rare cases, which usually
involve the existence of substantial unemployment, that the mechan-
ism operates through the current account at all. In the vast majority of
cases, it operates through the capital account and thus gives rise to
the classical transfer problem. Changes in relative prices, to the extent
that they are involved in the process, are a consequence of the
transfer induced by the depreciation, not a cause of it.
3.. Empirical Evidence
It is time to look at the empirical evidence from the last 25 years.
Table 1 below furnishes data on three series, covering the years 1960
to 1987, taken from a recent paper by Klein [36] -
himself a
proponent of the thesis that a currency depreciation will improve the
trade balance. The first two series are the US balance of payments on
current account and the US federal budget balance. The third is a
series on US "price competitiveness", which is defined as the ratio of
world to US export unit values, it is, in other words, the reciprocal of
what is commonly called the «real exchange rate».

Trade Balance and Exchange Rates
149
TABLE
1
US TRADE AND BUDGET BALANCES AND PRICE COMPETITIVENESS
1960-1987
(Billions of current US dollars)
Balance of payments on
Federal budget
Price
current account
balance
competitiveness (*)
(worldexports/US exports 1980 = 100
1960
2.83
0.25
89.8
1961
3.83
-
3.47
88.7
1962
3.38
-
7.23
88.9
1963
4.41
-
4.76
90.2
1964
6.81
-
5.92
90.3
1965
5.41
-
1.60
89.1
1966
3.03
-
3.79
88.5
1967
2.59
-
8.70
87.3
1968
0.59
-
15.18
85.2
1969
0.42
5.44
85.4
1970
2.32
-
11.88
84.8
1971
-
1.45
-
24.80
86.8
1972
-
5.78
-
17.37
92.1
1973
7.07
-
7.95
95.6
1974
1.92
-
10.88
93.2
1975
18.13
-
75.40
92.9
1976
4.17
-
56.60
89.6
1977
-
14.49
-
51.05
93.5
1978
-
15.49
-
44.18
98.6
1979
-
0.95
-
27.91
100.0
1980
-
1.84
-
76.18
100.0
1981
6.87
-
78.74
88.1
1982
-
8.64
-125.69
84.0
1983
-
46.28
-202.53
80.5
1984
-107.09
-178.26
77.4
1985
- 116.43
-212.11
77.7
1986
-141.46
-212.60
88.3
1987
-160.67
-156.00
86.2
(*) The ratio of world to us export unit values, both expressed relative to 1980 values,
multiplied by 100. "World" value is a weighted average of the export unit values of the
export unit values of the major industrial countiries, including the United States,
converted to US dollars at current exchange rates.
Source: KLEIN [36]. The data on export unit valuesfor industrialcountries and for the United
States are given on p. 310; from them, I computed the series in column 3.
The three series are plotted in Graph 3. A noteworthy feature of
the chart is the strong association between the current account
balance and the index of price competitiveness during the 1980-1985
period.
Many writers have used this association to support the

150
John S. Chipman
GRAPH 3
US TRADE AND BUDGET BALANCES
AND PRICE COMPETITIVENESS, 1960-1987 (*)
so..,.-----------------------r 105
-so
-100
-1SO
-200
--'
'.., , .....,
:
,
\
:
A
:
./
.·0' _'-"0
Federal budget
.0
o••¥'
.0
,
~
••-
e. ..
~
.
-.-
: \
.._............:
~\
e..
_. ,
...........
-.,
t
.~
.
Competitiveness
'""
:
I
-. '£-'
....
85
90
85
80
75
1984
1987
1980
1972
1976
Year
1968
2964
- 2SO+----r---"""T'"--......,.----,,....---.,---...,---+
1960
(*j Data for budget and current account are platted against left-hand scale; data for price
competitiveness index are plotted against right-hand scale.
Source: Table 1.
hypothesis that a currency depreciation will improve the balance of
trade. Thus, Klein
([36], p. 310) states: «During the 1980s . . . our
competitiveness fell markedly, and the trade gap widened». A much
stronger causal inference is drawn by Feldstein ([18] , p. 796) : «The
primary reason for the deteriorating trade imbalance is the 70% rise of
the dollar that occurred between 1980 and the spring of 1985. This
unprecedented increase in the exchange value of the dollar dramati-
cally increased the price of American products relative to foreign
products, causing the volume of US exports to decline while mer-
chandise imports increased by nearly 50%».
Likewise, Summers ([53], p. 427) states: «The dollar was ex-
tremely strong through 1985, rising by about 60% between 1981 and
1985. This led to the.large trade and current account deficits that we
are still suffering» .
These inferences have been used to draw prescriptive con-
clusions. Thus, Feldstein ([18], p. 800) states: «The dollar must .,.

Trade Balance and Exchange Rates
151
continue to decline and the cumulative fall below its current level
must be substantial. -
Again -
Sooner or later it will ... be necessary
to recognize that the real value of the dollar must fall further to shrink
the US trade deficit to a level that can be financed by private capital
inflows.... So the dollar must fall in real terms -
that is, by more
than the inflation differential -
to bring the trade back toward
balance and to shrink the current-account deficit to a financeable
level». And according to Bergsten [4]: «A number of studies show that
another 10% to 15% decline in the average value of the dollar, with
domestic demand abroad continuing to grow at current rates and US
domestic demand growing more slowing [sic], would reduce the US
deficit to a sustainable level».
A look at Graph 3 shows, however, that the close association
between the index of price competitiveness and the current-account
balance did not continue beyond 1985; on the contrary, the rela-
tionship was reversed. And the 1960-1978 period saw very substantial
variations in price competitiveness while the current account hardly
changed.
Various special reasons have been given for the lack of a positive
correlation since 1985. Klein ([36] , p. 310) remarks: «The new
element in the situation is that the United States is a net debtor nation;
our interest payments to foreigners for debt service are very large. this
means that we cannot rely on competitiveness in financial capital
services, as before; this is one reason why dollar depreciation is less
potent». Feldstein ([18], p. 800-1) provides a similar explanation of
why the US dollar must fall all the more in order to reduce the trade
deficit».
Other authors invoke lags; thus, Bergsten ([3], p. 774) states: «It
normally takes 12 to 18 months for currency changes to produce
improvements in recorded trade balances, and the lag could be even
longer this time because the dollar was so overvalued at its peak that
foreign firms built enormous profit margins and did not have to raise
their prices for some time» . Do the data support this view?
Graph 3 lends some support to Bergsten's observation for the
1980-1985 period, but it provides no confirmation for the turning
point in the index of competitiveness after 1985. On the other hand,
for this period there is a close association between the index of

152
John S. Chipman
competitiveness and the federal budget, which would be in con-
formity with the hypothesis that the latter is the exogenous variable
and the former (or the real exchange rate) the endogenous variable.
What is especially noteworthy about the chart is the high correlation
displayed between the federal budget and the current-account bal-
ance.
If lags are ignored, a simple regression of the current-account
balance, P, , against the budget balance, B, , and the index of competi-
tiveness C, yields the fitted equation:
P, =
-43.497 + 0.5356 B, + 0.6163 C, + e, (If = 0.684)
(-0.4303)
(6.115)
(0.558)
where the numbers in parentheses are the t ratios. This results in the
budget deficit's supplying the overwhelming explanation for the trade
deficit, the real exchange rate being statistically insignificant.
If lags are introduced, some weight is given to competitiveness. A
linear regression with three lags for each of the independent variables
yields the fitted equation
P, = - 260.6 -
0.0366Bt +
0.2954Bt -
1+ 0.2222Bt _ 2 + 0.1784Bt _ 3
(- 6.587)
( - 0.464)
(3.698)
(2.788)
(1.933)
+0.7748Ct -
0.0858Ct - 1+ 0.8749Ct - 2 + 1.3059Ct - 3 + e,
(1.683)
(- 0.124)
(1.036)
(1.981)
with an If of 0.979. The Fstatistic for the joint significance of the four
budget coefficients is 140.32, which (with 4 and 26 degrees of
freedom) is highly significant even at the level 10- 16 (the inverse F
distribution having the value 127.39 at 1 -
10- 16 ) . The F statistic for
the joint significance of the four competitiveness coefficients is 14.72,
one-tenth as great; however, it is still statistically significant at the
level 0000021, though none of the individual coefficients i significant
at the 5% level.
The real test is or will be whether, now that four years have
elapsed since US competitiveness started to improve dramatically, the
current-account balance wilJ
'ol~ ;rin to show substantial improvement.

Trade Balance and Exchange Rates
153
There must come a time when, instead of giving special reasons for
why this has not happened while the federal deficit has remained
large, analysts must surely recognized that there is something wanting
in the theory that what is needed is an improvement in competi-
tiveness (a fall in the exchange rate), rather than a reduction in the
budget deficit.

154
John S. Chipman
BIBUOGRAPHY
[1] ALEXANDER SIDNEY S.: «Effects of a Devaluation on a Trade Balance», Interna-
tional Monetary Fund Staff Papers, n. 2, April 1952, pp. 263-78.
[2] BASTABLE C.F.: «On Some Applications of the Theory of International Trade» ,
Quarterly Journal of Economics n. 4, October 1989, pp . 1-17.
[3] BERGSTEN C. FRED: «Economic Imbalances and World Politics», Fereign Affairs, n.
65, 1987, pp. 770-94.
[4] - . - : «The G-7 Should Drive the Dollar Down», Wall Street Journal, n. IS, May
1989.
[5] BLACKHURST R.: «The Relation Between the Current Account and the Exchange
Rate: A Survey of the Recent literature», in DE GRAUWE P. - PEETERS T. (eds .):
Exchange Rates in Multicountry Econometric Models, London, MacMillan, 1983,
pp.58-99.
[6] BoULDING KENNETH E.: Economic Analysis, 2nd ed., New York, Harper & Row,
1948.
[7] - . -: A Reconstruction of Economics, New York, John Wiley & Sons, 1950.
[8] CASSEL G.: «The International Movements of Capital», in CASSEL G. et AL.: Foreign
Investments, Chicago , University of Chicago Press, 1928, pp. 3-93.
[9] CHIPMAN JOHN S.: «The Transfer Problem Once Again», in HORWICH G. - SAMUELSON
P. (eds.): Trade, Stability, and Macroeconomics, New York, Academic Press,
1974, pp. 19-78.
[10] - . - : «A Reconsideration of the 'Elasticity Approach' to Balance-of-Payments
Adjustment Problems» , in DREYER S. (ed.): Breadth and Depth in Economics,
Lexington (Mass.), Heath, 1978, pp . 49-85.
[11] -. -: «Relative Prices, Capital Movements, and Sectoral Technical Change Theory
and an Empirical Test», in JUNGENFELT K. - HAQUE D.: Structural Adjustment in
Developed Open Economies, London, MacMillan Press, 1985, pp. 396-454.
[12] - . - : «International Trade» , in EATWELL J. - MILGATE M. - NEWMAN P. (eds.): The
New Palgrave: A Dictionry of Economics, vol. 2, New York, Stockton Press, 1987,
pp.922-55.
[13] - . - : «The Classical Transfer Problem and the Theory of Foreign Exchanges», in
FElVEL G.R. (ed.): Joan Robinson and Modern Economics, New York University
Press, 1989, pp. 739-73.
[14] CORDEN W.M.: Inflation , Exchange Rates, and the World Economy, Oxford,
Clarendon Press, 1977.
[15] DORNBUSCH R.: «Currency Depreciation, Hoarding, and Relative Prices», Journal
of Political Economy, n. 81, August 1973, pp . 893-915 .
[16] -. - : «Alternative Price Stabilization Rules and the Effects of Exchange Rate
Changes», Manchester School of Economic and Social Sciences, n. 43, September
1975, pp. 275-92.
[17] -. - : Open Economy Macroeconomics, New York, Basic Books, 1980.
[18] FELDSTEIN M.: «Correcting the Trade Deficit», Foreign Affairs, n. 65, Spring 1987,
pp. 795-806.
[19] -. - : «Redefining Dollar Stability», Wall Street Journal, n. 19, September 1988.
[20] GRAHAM F.D.: «International Trade under Depreciated Paper: The United Slates,
1862-79», Quarterly Journal of Economics, n. 36, February 1922, pp . 220-73.

Trade Balance and Exchange Rates
155
[21] HABERLER G.: .Some Comments on
Professor Hansen's Note», Review of
Economic Statistic, n. 26, November 1944, pp. 191-93.
[22] - . - : «Currency Depreciation and the International Monetary Fund», in HARRIS
S.E. (ed.): Foreign Economic Policy for the United States, Cambridge (Mass.),
Harvard University Press, 1948, pp. 384-96.
[23] - . -: «Dollar Shortage? , in HARRIS S.E. (00.): Foreign Economic Policy for the
United States, Cambridge (Mass.), Harvard University Press, 1948, pp. 426-45.
[24] - . -: «The Market for Foreign Exchange and the Stability of the Balance of
Payments», Kyklos, n. 3, 1949, pp. 193-218.
[25] HANSEN A.: «ABrief Note on 'Fundamental Disequilibrium'», Review of Economics
and Statistics, n. 26, November 1944, pp. 182-84.
[26] HARBERGER A.C.: «Currency Depreciation, Income, and the Balance of Trade»,
Journal of Political Economy, n. 58, February, 1950, pp. 47-60.
[27 HIRSCHMAN A.D.: «Devaluation and the Trade Balance: A Note», Review of
Economics and Statistics, n. 31, February 1949, pp. 50-3.
[28] HUME D.: «Of the Balance of Trade», in HUME D.: Political Discourses, Edinburgh,
A. Kinkaid and A. Donaldson, 1752, pp. 79-100.
[29] JOHNSON H.G.: «Towards a General Theory of the Balance of Payments», in
JOHNSON H.G. : International Trade and Economic Growth, London , Allen &
Unwin , 1958, pp. 153-68.
[30] KEMP M.C.: «The Exchange Rate,
the Terms of Trade and the Balance of
Payments in Full Employed Economies», International Economic Review, n, 3,
September 1962, pp. 314-27.
[31] - . -: «The Balance of Payments and the Terms of Trade in Relation to Financial
Controls», Review of Economic Studies, n. 37, January 1970, pp. 25-31.
[32] KEYNES J.M.: «The German Transfer Problem», Economic Journal, n. 39, March
1970, pp. 1-7.
[33] - -: «A Rejoinder», Economic Journal, n. 39, June, 1929, pp. 179-82; .A Reply»,
Economic Journal, n. 39, September 1929, pp . 404-80.
[34] KEYNES JOHN M.: A Treatise on Money, 2 voll., London, MacMillan, 1930.
[35] KING P.: Thoughts on the Effects of the Bank Restrictions, 2nd ed., London,
Cadwell and Davies, 1804.
[36] KLEIN L.R.: «Components of Competitiveness», Science, n. 241, July 1988, pp.
308-13.
[37] LAURSEN S. - METZLER L.A.: «Flexible Exchange Rates and the Theory of Employ-
ment», Review of Economics and Statistics, n. 32, November 1950, pp. 281-99.
[38] LERNER ABBA P.: The Economics of Control, New York, MacMillan, 1944.
[39] MACHLUP F.: «The Theory of Foreign Exchanges», Parts 1 and 2, Economica, n. 6,
November 1939, pp . 375-97; n. 7, February 1940, pp. 23-49.
[40] - . -: «Elasticity Pessimism in International Trade», Economia Internazionale, n.
3, February 1950, pp. 118-37.
[41] - . -: «Relative Prices and Aggregate Spending in the Analysis of Devaluation»,
American Economic Review, n. 45, June 1955, pp. 255-78.
[42] -. - : Involuntary Foreign Lending, Stockholm, Almqvist & Wiksell, 1965.
[43] MARSHALL A.: Money Credit and Commerce, London, MacMillan, 1923.
[44] MILL J.S .: Principles of Political Economy, 2 voll., London, Parker J.W., 1848.
[45] MUNDELL R.A.: «The International Disequilibrium System», Kyklos, vol. 14, n. 2,
1961, pp. 153-72.

156
John S. Chipman
[46] NEGISHI T.: «Approaches to the Analysis of Devaluation», International Economic
Review, n. 9, June 1968, pp. 218-27.
[47] PolAK J.J.: «Depreciation To Meet a Situation of Overinvestment», International
Monetary Fund, Research Department, Rappoto RD-707, September 10, 1948.
[48] ROBINSON J: «Beggar-My-Neighbour Remedies for Unemployment», in ROBINSON
J.: Essays in the Theory of Employment, New York, MacMillan , 1937, pp. 210-28.
[49] - . - : «The Foreign Exchanges», in ROBINSON: Essays in the Theory of Employ-
ment, New York, MacMillan, 1937, pp. 183-209.
[50] - . - : «The Pure Theory of International Trade», Review of Economic Studies, vol.
14, n. 2,1947, pp. 98-112.
[51] SAMUELSON P.A.: «The Transfer Problem and Transport Costs: The Terms of Trade
when Impediments are Absent», Economic Journal,
n. 62, June 1952, pp.
278-304.
[52] SoHMEN E.: «The Effect of Devaluation on the Price Level», Quarterly Journal of
Economics, n. 72, May 1958, pp. 273-83.
[53] SUMMERS H.A.: «Tax Policy and International Competitiveness», in SPENCE A.M. -
HAZARD H.A. (eds.): International Competitiveness, Cambridge (Mass.), Ballinger,
1988, pp. 399-430.
[54] SVENSSON LARS E.O. - RAzIN AssAF: «The Terms of Trade and the Current Account:
The Harberger-Laursen-Metzler Effect», Journal of Political Economy n. 91,
February 1983, pp. 97-125.
[55] TAUSSIG F.W.: «International Trade under Depreciated Paper. A Contribution to
Theory», Quarterly Journal of Economics, n. 31, May, 1917, pp. 380-403.
[56] -. - : International Trade, New York, MacMillan Press, 1927.
[57] VINER J.: Canada Balance of International Indebtedness, 1900-1913, Cambridge
(Mass.), Harvard University Press, 1924.
[58] WILSON R.: Capital Imports and the Terms of Trade, Melbourne, Melbourne
University Press with MacMillan, 1931.

Fiscal Stimulus and Employment at
Home and Abroad in a Real
Two-Country Customer-Market Model (*)
Edmund s. Phelps
Columbia University
In what can be called the monetary approach to unemployment
fluctuation, even real shocks -
of demand and of supply -
depend
for their effect on a monetary mechanism: the interest elasticity of the
demand for money and the laggard or wayward behaviour of money
wages or money prices. That approach has proved a durable part of
Keynes' legacy, accepted in most monetarist, new classical, and
neo-Keynesian models, and it is so well assimilated into the thinking of
practicioners that it is hardly ever explicit in their discussions. This
theoretical slant has given powerful support to the thesis that fiscal
stimulus in a country expands employment at least in the near term,
with much of that expansionary effect spilling overseas if the economy
is open and finance internationally mobile (1) . Econometric analyses
have tended to confirm such expansionary effects over a one- or
two-year horizon. But empirical research has not yet spoken clearly
about the medium- and longer-term effects of consumer and govern-
ment stimuli to aggregate demand.
(*) The research for this paper was made possible by a grant from the National
Science Foundation.
(I) In a nutshell, using the IS-LM apparatus supplied by Hicks. the stimulus to the
IS curve pulls up the nominal rate of interest. and this increase in the opportunity cost
of holding idle balances fuels a rise in the velocity of money. driving up output and
employment until the nominal wage and price level 5 are high enough to neutralize this
effect.
Advise: the numbers in square brackets refer to the Bigliography in the Appendix.

158
Edmund S. Phelps
Areal theory of the business cycle that is neoclassical in character
more accurately, neo-classical -
has been refined in this past
decade. Robert Barro, Robert King, and Edward Prescott are some of
the leaders of this school. Yet it is far from clear, at least to me, that
this type of non-monetary theory can plausibly account for the
peculiar features of the 1980s slump in much of the world or indeed
for the depression of the 1930s (2). It is a serious shortcoming of that
theory that its premises exclude the existence of involuntary unem-
ployment in either of the two existing senses of that term (Keynes's
meaning and the job-rationing notion). I am also inclined to regard as
counterfactual its tenet that high real interest rates and high real wage
rates are important mechanisms for high employment.
A contrasting line of non-monetary models, which I have taken to
calling structuralist, seek to explain low-frequency employment fluc-
tuations by appeal either to real wage rigidity, suitably generalized by
the notion of an equilibrium real wage locus -
a modernist surrogate
for the supply curve -
or to real wage stickiness resulting from the
time
needed
for
prevailing lifetime
labour
contracts
to
adjust
completely to real shocks in the structure of costs, markups, or
demand. In their infancy, this line of models did little more than point
to the possible sources of shift in the marginal productivity schedule
derived from an aggregate production function -
£.111 (K, N, 1) in
more or less familiar notation. Michael Bruno and Jeffrey Sachs were
the pioneers in the exploration of this kind of theoretical setup.
A series of my recent papers Phelps [4], [5], [8], [9] seeks to
re-examine the consequences of real aggregate demand shocks, such
as increases of consumption demand induced by fiscal stimulus, from
the point of view of the structuralist theory. Thus far, the results from
closed-economy models uniformly show that fiscal stimulus is con-
tractionary for employment in the short term. The reasoning is that
the consequent shift of consumption demand serves only to drive up
(2) In this theory, fiscal stimulus tends to expand employment by driving up the
real interest rate , of which the labour supply is an increasing function. If the stimulus
takes the form of a tax cut, an additional result is an increase of the after-tax wage rate ,
which may also increase the labour supply. If, instead, the stimulus takes the form of a
balanced budget increase of government spending, the second effect clearly operates in
the opposite direction.

Fiscal Stimulus and Employment at Home ecc.
159
real interest rates, not to elicit increased output from producers of
consumer goods. In models with capital goods, the resulting fall in the
real prices of the capital assets produced by the investment-goods-
producing sector has a chilling effect on the willingness of its firms to
produce them, causing an immediate drop of employment there and
thus in aggregate employment. In customer-market models,
the
resulting fall of share prices encourages firms to attempt to raise their
markups, and the implied fall in the real wage offered (when unchan-
ged employment requires and unchanged real wage) actually con-
tracts output and employment throughout the economy.
We can interpret this result as predicting contraction (relative to
the initial reference path) over some medium term, an effect that
would be visible to econometric analysis after the initially favourable
monetary effects had been largely worked off by inflation
or
countervailing monetary policy. It is perhaps obvious that the long-
run effect is also contractionary if the real wage does not make the full
downward adjustment needed to restore the unemployment rate to
the path it would otherwise have taken.
What are the implications of using structuralist models for a
world of open economies linked by a perfect international financial
market? This is the world inhabited by Fitoussi and Phelps [1], [2],
but in keeping with the "real" nature of the present paper, let me first
note the more recent non-monetary inhabitants. In a recent paper
(Phelps [4]) on the small, open economy operating in a worldwide
customer market, I showed that a country-specific increase of foreign
demand -
and hence an increase in the export demand for the output
of the country's firms that leaves the world real interest rate undis-
turbed -
is expansionary in the short term but less so in the long
term. Yet in another paper (Phelps [6]) on a two-sector world without
customer markets, I showed, echoing the Fitoussi-Phelps proposi-
tions, that an increase of world demand originating abroad and
driving up the world real interest rate contracts employment in a
small, open economy by reducing (or deferring) production in the
investment-goods-producing sector. The simple interest-rate mechan-
ism underlying this result -
contraction at home from consumption
stimulus abroad -
can be presumed to produce the same result in a
customer-market model. In a paper still in process (Phelps [9]), I find

160
Edmund S. Phelps
conditions under which a small, open, customer-market economy
suffers a contraction as a result of a rise in the world real interest rate.
(We can deduce from the results of the closed-economy, customer-
market model that if all the world's countries generate an increase of
consumer demand, the result must be a rise of the world real interest
rate and a worldwide decline of employment.)
This non-monetary modelling leaves a gap: what are the interac-
tions between large countries or large aggregates of countries? If a
positive shock to demand occurs in a part of the world that is large but
substantially smaller than the whole world, what is the effect employ-
ment there and what is the effect the rest of the world where no
internal, exogenous shift of demand has arisen? (3). I am especially
interested in learning whether the results from a study of two-country
models will parallel the Fitoussi-Phelps finding that the demand
stimulus is expansionary in the country of origin but contractionary
for the other country. The answer, I believe, is not implicit in the
Fitoussi-Phelps models since it is not clear that their customer-market
model (the first of their three models) or their two-sector model (their
third model) will survive in some recognizable form once money and
the short-run non-neutrality of money are removed. In particular, it is
not obvious why increased consumption stimulus would be expan-
sionary for the home country if there is no velocity of money to be
increased and no nominal wages and prices behaving rigidly or
stickily. Thus, I need the present paper, whether or not anyone else
does!
Accordingly what I analyze here is a two-country extension of the
closed-economy, customer-market model referred to above. After
laying out the model, I discuss the near-term effects at home and
abroad of fiscal stimulus in one of the countries. Then I examine the
long-term or permanent effects.
Thus this paper can be seen as a report on the extent to which the
Fitoussi-Phelps explanation of the slump in Europe.is robust to the
(3) The end of the previous paragraph describes the effect on a small, open
economy of a consumption stimulus in the entire rest of the world. The effects, to
repeat, are a contraction in the rest of the world (because it is essentially the world
economy and, therefore, virtually a closed economy) and a contraction in the small
economy.

Fiscal Stimulus and Employment at Home ecc.
161
exclusion of monetary mechanisms or, better, to the neutrality of
money. This study is also an inevitable step in grasping the impli-
cations of the structuralist theory for the workings of the international
economy (4)..
1. - The Two-Country Customer-Market Model
The one-country, customer-market model is constructed from
known building blocks, including the Phelps-Winter model of the firm
operating in frictional competition in the product market. Recast in
the notation to be used here, the one-country model reduces to a
system of three equations in the price of shares, q, consumption per
customer, e, and the real interest rate, r:
dq/dt = rq -
[1 -
u(e)], u'(e) > 0
de/dt = e{r -
Q -
m[(q + b)/e]}, m> 0, Q ~ 0
q = Q (c), Q ' (e)e/Q (c) > 1
The first equation is a Fisherine differential equation determining
the appreciation on the real value of shares as a function of interest
and cash flow per customer, where u denotes real unit labour cost.
Behind this equation is the premise of constant costs at the firm level
and increasing costs at the industry level, owing to the positive slope
of the equilibrium real wage employment rate locus derived from a
Calvo-Bowles shirking model. The second equation, which arises from
Blanchard-Yaari consumption dynamics, is a differential equation in
consumption per customer involving the real value of the outstanding
shares plus public debt per household (and thus per customer), q + b.
The parameter m is composed of the time preference rate, Q, and the
age-independent death rate. Finally, on the supply side there is a
(4) This paper ventures a more formal consideration of the dynamics of interna-
tional competition than any that so far appeared. but the emphasis is on the main ideas
rather than a rigorous statement of the model or a thorough analysis. and I hope it will
be read in that spirit. For research purposes. one would have to study alongside it the
1970 Phelps-Winter paper and my 1988 and 1989 papers on a real customer-market
model of the small, open economy.

162
Edmund S. Phelps
timeless relationship between c and q that comes from the Phelps-
Winter [10] static maximization of the firm at each moment of the
appropriate Hamiltonian function; it involves the real shadow price of
customers and current cash flow, but the shadow price can be treated
as equal to the real price of shares (by keeping the number of shares
equal to the number of customers). This equation gives the supply
pice, or the required price of customers -
equivalently, of shares, q
-
needed to induce firms to supply the expenditure per customer
specified. A higher expenditure here entails higher employment and
thus a higher real wage in the economy as a whole.
The three-equation system is reducible to a single differential
equation in q, or equivalently in c, in which there are no state
variables whose evolution would move q over time. It can be shown
that, under the hypothesis of perfect foresight over the remaining
future, q simply jumps at once to the steady state value corresponding
to the given parameters.
1.1 The Full Dynamic Model
The two-country generalization is represented by the system of
equations in table 1. Notice that country A and country B each have a
subsystem. Together these subsystems contain eight equations, not six
as one might have expected, because of two consequences of interna-
tional competition. First, country A has nationals -
equal in number
to XA -
of whom XBA are currently customers at firms in country B,
leaving XAA = 1 -
XBA as customers of the home firms. As a result,
there is a differential equation for consumption per customer abroad,
CBA, as well as one for consumption per customer at home, CAA. The
second consequence is that it is appropriate to distinguish between the
values -
qBA and qAA respectively -
of the two types of customers,
national and foreign, found in country B since they have different
demands arising from their generally different real incomes. For
clarity, it can be supposed that the firms in country B actually issue
the two types of shares, impute the corresponding earnings on each
correctly, and make stock dividends or buybacks so as to keep the
number of shares of each type equal to the number of its customers of
that type. That feature provides an explanation of why the interest

Fiscal Stimulus and Employment at Home ecc.
163
TABLE 1
THE PROPER lWO-COUNTRY GENERAUZATION
(2)
dcAA/'dt =
(rA -
QA) CM -
mA {[qAA [XA -
XBA) +
+ eqBAxBA + eqBBsBBA] (lIxA) + bA}
(4a) dqBAldt =
(rB
(4b) dqBsldt =
(rB
(Sa) dCBAldt =
(rB
QA) CBA -
rnA {[(lie) qAA (XA -
XBA) +
+ qBAXBA + qBBSBBA] (lIxA) + (lie) bA}
(6)
(qBBXB + qBAXBA)/(XB + XBA) = OS [(CBBXB + CBAXBA) /
/ (XB + XBA) CBBXB + CBAXBA' e)
(7)
rA = rs + (de/dt)/e
(8)
(dXBAldt)/XBA =
gBA(e), gBA (1) = 0, gBA' (e) < 0
rate in the equation for the valuation of each type of customer and the
corresponding share (which is a claim to the income stream that the
type of customer generates) appears net of the growth rate, g, of the
stock of customers: if the stock is growig, share owners are receiving
pro rata capital gains. Note finally that each firm in country H, being
unable to distinguish and discriminate between the two types of
customers, sets the same real price for both; thus the weighted

164
Edmund S. Phelps
average amount supplied per total number of customers is functional-
ly related to the weighted average share price.
In addition, the model has the familiar arbitrage equation in the
two real interest rates, where e denotes the real exchange rate
(American
definition);
the
Phelps-Winter
differential
equation
governing the motion of XBA; and finally a differential equation
governing the accumulation of shares in country B firms by wealth
owners in country A. The portfolio preferences here follows a simple
rule: the public debt of one's own country is the first choice, then
shares of firms in one's own country, then shares corresponding to
compatriot customers overseas, and last shares representing claims to
the earnings from the domestic customers of the other country's
firms. Country A is a net creditor country, and country B a net debtor,
so A has wealth left over to hold some shares in B firms . Let SBBS
denote the number of domestic customers of B firms whose shares are
held by nationals of A. We can suppose that, at the initial moment,
SBBA is positive, though perhaps small. It is clear that in steady states
xBA is positive if and only if SBBA is positive because ownership of the
earnigs from country B's foreign customers would not suffice to pay
their import bill (it would pay the profits but not the wages generated
by sales to those customers).
As in the closed-economy model, a country's shares serve as the
numeraire for measuring the money prices of goods and labour. The
nominal exchange rate is then the amount of country A's money
needed to buy one unit of country B's. Multiplying this rate by the
nominal price level in B gives the price of goods supplied by B's firms
in terms of A's money; then dividing by the nominal price of A goods
in A's money gives the real exchange rate, which is denoted bye.
One other comment. A strength of the customer-market view of
products markets, with its emphasis on incomplete information, is
that it rationalizes two-way trade in the same product. But as
modelled here, the battlefront between the firms of country A and
those of country B is found in the territory of one camp or the other
-
A's territory in the present case (5). This asymmetry in market
(5) The motive for modeling in this function was simply to avoid adding to the
number of state variables in the dynamic system, which has been held to two.

Fiscal Stimulus and Employment at Home ecc.
165
penetration is unattractive, but, I believe, it is not a critical drawback.
One can assume, if one likes (and as I will in discussing the short run),
that the initial attachment of A customers to B firms is arbitrarily
small.
1.2 A Simplified Version of the Two Country Model
Although the model just described may be the theoretically
appropriate way of extending to two countries the one-country model
summarized earlier, a simplified version is more convenient for
analyzing the near-term response of the system to shocks. The
simplification is the elimination in country B of the two classes of
stock corresponding to the division of foreign and domestic customers
there. In country B there is now one class of shares, with price qB and
growth rate gB, which is a claim to the average earnings per customer
from the representative mixture of foreign and domestic customers.
Table 2 gives this simplified model. I believe that the reader will find it
sufficient to have a brief look at this system.
2. - Interest and Employment
in the Near and Far Tenn
In this part of the paper, I analyze the determination of employ-
ment and interest in the model both in the near term and in the
equilibrium steady state that is presumed to be approached in the far
future.
2.1 The Short Run Under Static Expectations
If one adopts the hypothesis of perfect foresight over the future
remaining after any shock that may have just occurred, the analytical
task is to solve for the functions that show how the jumpy costate
variables -
gA, gB, e, and the rest -
depend upon the henceforth
time-independent parameters, such as bA, and the two state variables
of the system, XBA and SBA. The results indicate how, under perfect
foresight, the paths of qB and the other variables would jump with,

166
Edmund S. Phelps
THE SIMPliFIED TWO-COUNTRY MODEL
TABLE 2
(1)
dqAld.t =
[rA -
8'A(e)] qA -
{I -
UA [CM (XA- XBA)]} CM
(2)
(dcAAidt)1eM = rA-Q- rnA {[qA (XA- XBA) +
+ eqBsBA] (lIXA) _+ bA} (11cAA)
(3)
qA = Q" (CM' CM (XA -
XAB),e), e), Q1 > 0, 01 < 0, 01 < °
(4)
dqaldt =
[rB -
8'A (e)] qB -
{J -
UB [CBBXB + CBAXBA]}
(CBBXB + CBAXBA)/(XB + XAB)
(Sb) (dCBsldt)/cBB =
rB -
QB -
rnB {[qB (XB + XBA -
SBA)
(lIXB) + bB] (lICBB)}
(Sa) (dCBAldt)/cBA = rs -
QA -
rnA {[(lIe)qA (XA -
XBA) +
+ qBSBA] (lIXA) + (lie) bB] (lICAB)}
(6)
qB = QB [(CBBXS + CSAXSA) I (XB + XAB), CBBXB + CBAXBA' e),
QBt > 0, QB2 < 0, QB3 >0
(7)
(rA = rs + (deldt)le
(8)
dxBAldt= gSA (e)XBA' gSA (1) = 0, gBA' (e) < °
(9)
dsBAIdt = {I -
UB [CBSXB + CBAXBAl}
[(CSBXB + CBAXBA)/(xs + XBA )]SBA -
CSA XSA
where:
say, a step increase in the parameter bA, which we can interpret as a
helicopter drop of public debt onto the citizenry by the government of
country A. (I use "helicopter drop" as a stylized way of representing a
burst of deficits rained down on the citizenry as the result of a
temporary tax cut.) At this point, we take into account the effect on gB
of the adjustment of XBA and SBA that is set in motion and implicitly

Fiscal Stimulus and Employment at Home ecc.
167
how the anticipation of that adjustment modifies the initial jump of
qB. Unfortunately, the present model appears to be somewhat too
dense in interrelationships to make it feasible to calculate these results
within a reasonable period of time. In part as a compromise and in
part because it may be that markets underestimate the speed with
which prices will be driven by the adjustment of the state variables, I
instead analyze the short-run effects of disturbances under the
hypothesis of statistic expectations regarding e and the q in each
country. In this short run, the customer stocks are taken as given.
Given
the
hypothesis
of
static
expectations,
the
short-run
behaviour of the simplified model reduces to the static model shown
in table 3. The expected rate of change of the real exchange rate is
always nil, so the real rate of interest in one country, which is defined
in term of the goods supplies by the firms of that country, must equal
the real interest rate in the other country to satisfy the arbitrage
equation (7). Thus, there is a common world real interest rate, r. The
expected rates of change of the two share prices are likewise nil.
Therefore, equation (1) and its counterpart (4) become static equa-
tions in the real interest rate-equations (1') and (4'). It can also be
shown that if the expected rate of change of the real wage and of the
TABLE 3
THE SHORT RUN UNDER STATIC EXPECTATIONS
(2') CAAXAA =
xAAmA [0'" (CAA' e) + e(/3 (CBB' CBA' e) SBAX"A1 +
+ bA]/(r-
QA)
(4') r = {[l -
UI!..CBBXB + CBAXBA)] [(CBaXB + CBAXBA / (XB + XBA)]/
/ QB (CBB' CBA' e)} + gB (e)
(5') CBBXB +
CBAXBA =
xBmB [(/3 (CBB' CBA' e) (XB - SBA)X"B1 +
+ bA] / (r -
QA) + xBAmA [(lie) ir (CAA' e) +
+ QB (-) SBAXA 1 + (11e)bA](r -
QB)

168
Edmund S. Phelps
unemployment rate are nil, the resulting consumption function for
each type of customer is identical to the steady state relationship
obtained by setting the rate of change of consumption equal to zero in
equations (2), (Sa) and (5b); the result is equations (2') and (5'). (Note
that it is not supposed that the expected growth rate of the customer
stocks is always nil; it would contradict the logic of the model to
assume that producers believed fate would freeze their customer
stocks regardless of their actions.)
~.2 The Short-Run System in IS-LM Space
Equation (1') in the short-run system actually descends both from
the static version of equation (1) and from equation (3), which shows
how the shadow price of customers required to elicit a specified
output depends on the quantity of that output. Equation (4') is
obtained in the corresponding way. In a recent paper on non-
monetary IS-LM, I took similar equations as analogous to the IS
equations in Hicks's IS-LM reduction of Keynes's theory. My reason
for doing so was that equations such as (l') and (4') give the rate of
interest that firms are willing to pay, as IS curves do . Yet there is an
important sense in which these two equations play the role of the LM
equations in the Hicksian system. In both cases, the equations
describe the quantity of output or employment that the system -
the
monetary mechanism (in
Hicks's
case) or the customer-market
mechanism (in my case) -
will support at successively higher levels of
the interest rate -
the nominal interest rate (in Hicks's case) or the
real rate (in my case). The striking thing about the equation in the
case here. however, is that it is downward sloping in the output/in-
terest-rate or (Z, r) plane, not upward sloping as the Hicks curve is.
The explanation is that an increase of, say, ZA increases the qA
required to induce firms to supply more output to their customers;
since the supply of output is inelastic with respect to q, as indicated in
the closed-economy model, a doubling of ZA, even if it doubles profits
in the numerator of the right-hand side of equation (1'), more than
doubles qA in the denominator and thus lowers the rate of return on
the share price. On this account, r must fall. In addition, with an
industry supply curve rising because of the higher real wage and

Fiscal Stimulus and Employment at Home ecc.
169
higher shirking at greater levels of employment, doubling output less
than doubles the numerator. On this account as well, rA must fall.
Consider now the other pair of equations in the short-run system.
Equation (2'), to take first the simpler of the pair, gives the level of
consumption expenditure on domestic product of country A as a
function of rA-QA and the wealth of domestic customers (who are all
nationals). But here again, (3) is used to express wealth as a function
of consumers' expenditures at the firms, so share wealth drops out.
Now one can say -
as my aforementioned IS-LM paper did -
that
this curve, and not (1'), is the true analogue of the LM curve since it
gives the rate of interest that wealth owners require (to be more
accurate, that they require if consumers are planning a consumption
path that is flat to a good approximation). In an important sense
however this equation and its counterpart for country A are analogous
to Hicks's IS equations: they indicate how high the real interest rate
must be to trim consumption demand for domestic product and hence
to drop aggregate demand to the level that would be provided by the
specified level of domestic production (after netting out the amounts
of output to be purchased by the government and by firms, from
which I have abstracted here). Furthermore, these equations will shift
up with an increase of local public debt but the other pair will not . So
one can equally well regard them as IS equations.
Which way do these latter two equations slope? If ms; = 0, so we
are in the so-called Ricardian case, the corresponding interest rate -
the rate read off the curve -
is simply the rate of pure time
preference, QB, so the curve is flat, meaning parallel to the output
axis. Obviously, this paper rules out the Ricardian case.
For rnA > 0, equation (2') makes the rate of interest an increasing
function of consumption expenditure and hence, of the level of output
-
provided that the level of public debt is not too far above zero. The
reason is that, according to the Blanchard formula, the steady state
interest rate is an increasing function of the wealth-consumption ratio,
while the latter (more precisely, the ratio of real share wealth to
consumption) is an increasing function of the level of consumption
expenditure by virtue of the fact that according to equation (3), the
share price must rise more than proportionately with output to induce
firms to supply increased output. Hence, the curve of equation (2')

170
Edmund S. Phelps
has a positive slope, provided the debt is not too large (6). It is true
that the case for an upward slope is somewhat weaker for country B,
where some of the domestic shares are held by foreigners. Nothing is
lost however, by admitting a downward slope, provided that theslope
is not sharper than that of the companion curve corresponding to
equation (1').
Thus the system for the short run under static
expect~ti,ons,
shown in table 3, consists of four equations in e, r, and the respective
output levels in the two countries. To forestall (or terminate) con-
fusion I will refer to equation (l') and (4') as the expected return
equations, moving as an abbreviation, and to equations (2') and (5') as
the required return, or RR, equations.
Figure 1 graphs the four equations of the short-run system in a pair
of back-to-back diagrams in the interest-rate/employment plane -
in
IS-LMspace. Robert Mundell [3] used the same apparatus in his two
country Keynesian model, so this figure provides a clear view of the
differences between the monetary approach explored by Mundell and
the real approach taken here. The downward sloping curves ERA and
ERa correspond to equations (l') and (4') respectively, and the
upward sloping curves RRA and RRB refer to equations (2') and (5')
respectively.
An alert reader will have noticed that country A's RR curves
make the interest rate depend on the other country's output level, ZB,
as well as its own through the supply-price effect of ZB on the price of
shares in B held by A's nationals who are customers in their own
country. Even in country B, where nationals do not hold foreign
sharese, foreign customers hold such shares so the interest rate in B
depends on foreign output, ZA' To simplify the discussion and to avoid
muddying the results of the analysis with effects that one can pressure
to be small between large trading areas, I arbitrarily assume XBA and
(6) The proposition that the required rate of return is increasing in output and
hence output is in a sense increasing in the rate of interest may seem contradicted on its
face since a glance at equation (2') suggests that a rise of r reduces the righthand side
and thus reduces the left-hand side, which is output. This analysis overlooks the point
that the required real shadow price of shares on the right-hand side is an increasing
function of output with elasticity greater than one . As a result, if the public debt is small
enough, the curve of the right-hand side when plotted as a function of output in a cross
diagram slices through the 45 -
degree line from below. So a rise of r, in shifting down
that curve, actually shifts out its intersection with the 45 -
degree line.

Fiscal Stimulus and Employment at Home ecc.
171
GRAPH 1
THE SHORT RUN
ERs (eO)
ZA
-------.1.------------ Zs
o
SBA to be small. As a result, all the terms in total wealth that involve
multiplication by e or 1/e are taken to be negligible. (The sole
disadvantage of this procedure, as far as I can see, is that the effects of
a fiscal stimulus cannot include an initial widening of the trade deficit
of appreciable magnitude; such a widening will take time to develop.)
Nevertheless, the real exchange rate, e, is still a variable being
held constant in the construction of any pair of RR curves since e
figures in the supply-price functions 04 and oB appearing in the
underlying equations, (2') and (5'). Also, e affects the customer-stock
growth rates figuring in the ER curves, so there too a shift of e will
shift the curves.
The exchange rate is determined as follows. For a given e -
at
least, any e in the relevant range -
we may assume there is an
intersection of the two curves in the right-hand panel, the (r,
ZB)
plane, and an intersection of the two curves in the left-hand panel, the
(r, ZA) plane. The solution value of the variable e is determined by the
condition that it be at such a level as to make the intersections occur
at the same value of r. (This is not the equilibrium exchange rate since
expectations in that regard are fundamentally "off.") The effect of a
change in the exchange rate on the intersections is analyzed below.

172
Edmund S. Phelps
2.3 The Effects of an Increase
of Public Debt in Country A
Let us now study the consequences of fiscal stimulus in country A
for employment, consumption, and so on in both countries. Assume a
helicopter drop of public debt rained down on the citizenry of A.
Insofar as the model is applicable to the unemployment pattern that
developed in the 1980s, one can identify country A as the United
States and country B as Britain and the rest of Europe (7).
A step increase in bA affects only one curve, the RRA curve; a
propagation mechanism is involved in the determination of the gen-
eral equilibrium effects. The effect is an upward shift of that RR curve;
hence there is a rise of the "required" interest rate in country A at the
initial level of ZA' With the ERA curve unchanged the shift in the RR
curve implies a rise in A's interest rate if we take the exchange rate as
given. A corollary that is paradoxical for Keynesian thinking is the
corresponding negative impact on output in A (again given the
exchange rate) . This much is simply the result obtained from closed-
economy models of the customer-market economy: the higher real
interest rate discourages firms from investing so intensively in future
customers, and the consequent jump of the desired markup has the
side effect of contracting employment until the desired markup and
the real wage associated with the prevailing employment level are
again consistent.
For country B the increase in bA does not produce a shift of the
curves so there is no change of the interest rate there. Absent a change
of e, the increase in A means a disparity between the interest rates in
the two countries in favour of A. To restore interest rate parity, it is
necessary to have a real depreciation of the exchange rate in B -
that
is, e must fall. Equivalently, there must be a real appreciation in A.
In the stripped-down, model the real appreciation in A operates
through two mechanisms to correct the interest rate disparity. First,
by reducing the competitiveness of A firms, the appreciation reduces
(7) Of course, "the rest of Europe" has any number of honorary members, such as
Australia and New Zealand. Canada, and some portions of Latin America and Africa.
Some other countries of the world were predominantly influenced by other external
shocks or internal forces and so do not fit the model well or fit it for different reasons.

Fiscal Stimulus and Employment at Home ecc.
173
the algebraic growth rate of the stock of customers in A -
from zero
if the world economy was initially in steady state equilibrium to some
negative growth rate, as domestic customers began to drift overseas
having located cheaper suppliers there. In country B, therefore, the
effect of this real exchange rate response is a rise in the growth rate of
the customer stock -
from zero initially to some positive growth rate.
On this account, ERA in Graph 1 shifts down, lowering the initially
elevated interest rate in A, and ERE shifts up , raising the interest rate
prevailing in B.
Second in view of the consequences of appreciation for competi-
tiveness an appreciation in A can be assumed to reduce the markup
that firms in that country require at a given output. Thus the output
they are willing to supply at a given customer shadow price (and a
given real wage) is increased; equivalently, the shadow price of
customers, qA, required to induce them to supply a given output (at a
given real wage) is reduced (8). It follows that, with implied real
wealth down at any given output level, the required real interest rate
in country A at a given output level there is reduced; RRA shifts back
down. Yet the implied decline of the share price tends to raise the
expected return; on this account RRA shifts up. The latter shift by
itself, exacerbates the interest rate disparity. We can assume however,
that this effect is overcome by all the other effects, which operate in
the other direction to lower the interest rate in A. A similar analysis
applies to E, of course.
(8) Theoretically, the real appreciation has two effects here , one of which actually
operates to reduce the output supplied. When foreign suppliers and domestic suppliers
were providing of units of the good for a dollar say, six days in the resort hotel or six
scoops on the ice cream cone, a decision by domestic firms to go five days or five scoops
for the same money represents a bigger percentage or relative worsening of competi-
tiveness than if, as a result of the increased competitiveness of overseas suppliers, the
foreign suppliers now supply seven days or seven scoops. Taken alone, this effect means
that an increase in supply by foreign competitors induces a decreaseed in supply by
domestic firms.
The other effect operates in the reverse direction, however. If depreciation abroad
has improved the alternatives for customers of a domestic firm, it will respond by
sweetening its offer (though not by so much as to nullify the decline of competi-
tiveness). The greener the pastures elsewhere, the more slowly diminishing returns to
sweetening a firm 's terms set in. This effect, taken alone means that increased supply by
foreign competitors induces domestic firms to emulate them by increasing their own
supply.
The text assumes that, empirically, the latter effect outweighs the former effect.

174
Edmund S. Phelps
Moreover, if country A's nationals hold appreciable quantities of
shares in country B's firms, the real appreciation in A will have the
additional effect of reducing the real wealth of A's nationals who are
customers in their own country; thus the appreciation will operate
just like a decrease of bA moderating the rise of the interest rate in A.
Similarly, holdings by B's nationals of shares in A's firms will appreci-
ate; this effect will operate like an increase of bB, shifting the RR curve
up in B and thus causing a rise of the interest rate there. Hence, a rise
of e will also tend to restore interest rate equality, acting through its
effects on the wealth of the foreign customers of A's firms.
One conclusion can be drawn immediately: increased debt in
country A causes a rise of the world real interest rate. The success of
real appreciation in removing the interest rate disparity comes partly
from its effect in raising the interest rate in country B. (If the effect
through RR on r did not tend to dominate the theoretically ambiguous
effect through ER, an appreciation of the exchange rate in country A
would be a move in the wrong direction.)
Some more novel conclusions concern employment in the two
countries. First consider the effect in country B. Unless the rise in the
prospective growth rate of customers has a strong effect on ERE,
moving it up by more than enough to offset the contractionary effect
of the rise of RRB, the fiscal stimulus in country A contracts employ-
ment in country B. After the Fitoussi-Phelps work, this result is no
longer stupefying.
Now consider the effect in country A. In this model, it is
theoretically possible that the supply effect of the real appreciation in
A will be sufficiently expansionary for employment to overcome the
initial contraction caused by the increase of the public debt there. At a
geometric level, the explanation resides in the fact that the consequent
reduction in the real shadow price of customers needed to induce a
given level of output operates to shift outward both of the curves in
the left -
hand panel of Graph 1-
the upward-sloping one down and
the downward-sloping one up.
This theoretical possibility -
output increased at home, de-
creased abroad -
has, I believe, the following explanation. On the
one hand, in both countries the higher interest rate drives firms to
discount the future more heavily and hence to sacrifice less present

Fiscal Stimulus and Employment at Home ecc.
175
cash flow via moderation of their markup in the interest of gaining
future customers, a move that is equivalent to offering a reduced real
wage for the same level of production. Since the workers "require, as
the optimal incentive to combat shirking, an unchanged real wage for
an unchanged level of employment, the result is a reduction of
employment to the point at which the two real wages are reconciled.
On the other hand, the real exchange rate appreciation in country A,
the origin of the fiscal stimulus, introduces an asymmetry that further
discourages supply in country B and actually encourages supply in
country A. This latter effect is the one operating through the peculiar
supply curve that makes the amount of output supplied an increasing
function of the shadow price of customers -
a sort of supply price. Of
course, we must not forget we also found that the appreciation has a
demand effect that works in the opposite direction; it lower expecta-
tions of customer growth in A, thus lowers the expected return curve,
thus also lowers the demand price for customers, and thus moves the
economy downward and leftward along the supply curve. I believe
that, at the very least, this demand effect is dominated by the supply
effect -
recall that we are talking about medium-term projections of
an economy largely back at its (variable!) natural rate -
though it is
an empirical question whether the net effect of the appreciation
needed to equalize interest rates will be big enough to offset the
contractionary effect of the increased public debt.
Potentially, theorefore, the results of this model are similar to
those reached in the Fitoussi-Phelps analysis of a customer-market
setting, as well in the two other models studied there. That analysis
implied that the fiscal stimulus in A is expansionary for that country,
in stark contrast to its effect in country B. The Fitoussi-Phelps models
have an easier time generating an expansionary effect in the country
where the fiscal stimulus originates because they allow some degree of
short-run monetary non-neutrality, especially in that country, so the
higher nominal interest rates resulting from the fiscal stimulus have an
expansionary effect.
Note in passing that the appreciation in country A will set in
motion a gradual outflow of customers from A to B. Yet it would be a
non sequitur to conclude that the medium-term future will witness an
ongoing attrition of market share in A. If A's wealth owners, laden

176
Edmund S. Phelps
with their newfound windfall, sooner or later begin selling off some of
their shares in B firms to B's wealth owners, the steady state import
bill of A that can be financed by foreign income will tend to erode. So
one must expect that in the long run A will gain, not lose, market
share, as more customers are repatriated to A firms.
2.4 The Steady State Under Perfect Foresight
To check the conjecture of the last paragraph let us proceed to
analysis of the long run. There exists, generally speaking, an equilib-
rium (that is, a correct expectations) stationary state solution to the
model, and I will take it that the economy approaches that equilib-
rium after the initial shock. What are the salient features of such a
steady state, and how will the new one differ from the old?
Since the rate of change of XBA equals zero in this steady state, it
follows from equation (9) in table 2 that e = 1 in this state and rA =
rB. Since the rates of change of eBAand eAA are both zero and e = 1, it
follows from equations (2) and (Sa) that eBA =
eBB. (If that last
equality were not to hold, the customer allocation would still be in
flux, and so the steady state would not be in place.) With these
solutions, the remaining system reduces to five equations in r, ZA, ZB,
XBA and SBA.
This system can be analyzed with the aid of back-to-back dia-
grams of the IS-LM type in the (ZB, r) planes (Graph 2). The four
curves generated by these four equations are generally indexed by XBA
and SBA. We can think of XBA as provisionally given here and employ
SBA to shift up or down the right-hand intersection -
the real interest
rate as determined in country B -
so as to achieve interest rate
equalization. This line of thought leads to conceiving a companion
diagram, in the (SBA, XBA) plane, in which there is a required SBA for
each given XBA' In the same diagram (which is not shown here), we
can graph the relationship that shows XBA depends on SBA.
It is now clear how the equilibrium steady state is disturbed by
the increase of the public debt that we have been studying. The result
in terms of Graph 2 is an upward shift of the steady state RR curve in
the (ZA, r) plane. To restore equality of the interest rates given XBA' it is
necessary, to have a decrease of bB and in A like a rollback of some of

Fiscal Stimulus and Employment at Home ecc.
177
TABLE 4
THE EQUIUBRIUM STEADY STATE
(11) r = HI -
UB (ZB)] I rUB (ZB) -
MRB]} [- [s: (1)]
(12) r = QB + M B {fQB (,) (1 -
XAB) + QA (,)SAB + bB] I [(ZB +
-
GB)1(1 -
XAB)]}
(13) r = HI -
UA (ZA )] I
[UA (ZA) -
MRB] [- lA' (1)]
(14) r =
QA + rnA HQA (,) (1 + XAB - SAB) + bAJ I
I(ZA - GA) I (1 + xAB)l}
(15) [(ZB -
GB) I (1 -
XAB)] XAB =
= [1 -
UA(ZA)] [(ZA -
GA) I (1 + XAB)]SAB
where: Q(Z, c) = (- 1/j' )(dcl dP )[u(Z ) -
MR], and P = 1,
and MR is presumed independent of Z.
the increase of bA. The steady state RR curve is thus shifted down in
country A and up in country B. The equalization must therefore,
occur at a world real interest rate that is higher than the one that
prevailed in the equilibrium steady state before the shock.
A steady state result of the fiscal shock is, then, a leftward shift of
the curve giving SBA as a function of XBA in the (SBA, XBA) plane, The
other curve in this plane, the one giving XBA as a function of SBA, is
unambiguously upward sloping. Hence, the leftward shift of the
former curve implies a downward and leftward movement of the
intersection of the two curves -
and thus a final decline of SBA,
mutatis mutandis, which pulls XBA down with it -
if and only if the
former curve is either downward sloping or steeper than the latter
curve. This seems to be the relevant empirical case.
I believe the following propositions can be shown, though I
cannot give the full arguments here since doing so would require
presenting a more detailed version of the model. First, there is a rise in
the steady state world real interest rate by virtue of the fact that the
increase in the public debt in country A ultimately drives up the

178
Edmund s. Phelps
GRAPH 2
THE STEADY STATE
r
RRb(SIBA)
RRi (SlBA)
ERA(X'BA)
ERA(x' BA)
ERB(X'BA)
ZA ----------'------------- ZB
o
required interest rate curve, RR, in both countries. As a result, both
countries move up their IS curves -
more precisely (in view of the
ambiguity about which curve a is best understood as the IS curve), up
their negatively sloped ER curves. Second, there results a contraction
of output in both countries in the steady state. (This conclusion is less
theoretically certain owing to the possibility that the ER curves
themselves may move in response to the redistribution of market
shares.) If, as assumed, the end is a net reflux of customers from
country B country A and if such a reallocation lowers the interest rate
in A and raises it in B, the rise of the world interest rate will be
moderated and SBA decrease less than would otherwise have been
required to restore interest rate equality. The rise of the world interest
rate cannot, however, be reversed by this process since the rightward
shift of the curve giving sBA as a function of xBA moves to the left
only because a higher interest rate is required in B to match the
increase in A. (If, counterintuitively, xBA actually increases, that
change will pull the interest rate up in A and push it down in B, and so
the rise of the world interest rate will be worsened and sBA will
actually be increased.)

Fiscal Stimulus and Employment at Home ecc.
179
There seems to be no escape from the conclusion that in the
equilibrium steady state, increased debt in country A decreases
employment in both countries. If it is granted that the world real
interest rate is increased in the steady state, it will be readily agreed
that the real wage in both countries must be reduced in the new
steady state. Then it can be seen that a lower real wage can mean only
a downward and therefore leftward movement along the equilibrium
real wage-employment locus arising from the incentive wage theory of
labour market unemployment equilibrium used here. This finding is a
contraction of the hypothesis of steady state employment.
3.. Concluding Comments
Two reactions to this paper seem appropriate. The first is that the
structure of the model is not very hospitable to the rigourous analysis
needed to resolve many of the questions about the behaviour of this
kind of theoretical economy. The second is that the above analysis has
merely scratched the surface of what is there to be examined. On this
second point, the obvious observation is that there is an intermediate
period between the near term and the far term. What is happening in
that intervening time? In particular, if the final tendency is for both
xBA and sBA to be decreased by a debt increase in country A, so that
the initial tendency of a flux of customers from A to B must sooner or
later be reversed and actually exceeded by reflux from B to A, there
must be a period, following the glorious strength of the real exchange
rate in A in which that rate is weak. This hypothesis, if true, suggests
that the contraction in B that Occurs early in the response to the fiscal
shock in A will tend to be followed by a period of expansion, possibly
even to boom levels of employment.
My final comment is to remind the reader that the model
presented here is not the only one capturing the interaction between
countries that occurs through the world capital market. There is, for
example, the sort of two-sector setup, with a consumer good and a
capital good, that Fitoussi and I in the third of our models. Let us
touch briefly on a variation of that sort of model, one invoking the
traditional assumption of differential factor intensiveness betzeen the

180
Edmund S. Phelps
sectors, with the consumer good being the more capital -
intensive
and the capital good more labour -
intensive. Assume that capital is
perfectly shiftable between the two sectors. Suppose that country A
undergoes a shock that shifts out the excess supply of the investment
good. This will cause a decrease in the real price of the investment
good, which will, in tum, lower the real demand price for labour at
any specified level of aggregate employment in country B since
production of the investment good is relatively labour -
intensive.
The decline in the real wage offered, given an invariant real wage
equilibrium locus, spells a decline of employment in B.
It is not hard to specify shocks of this nature in A that have the
additional effect of raising employment in A that country. A student at
Columbia University, Hian Hoon, has worked out an example of this
kind, a positive technological shock in the investment -
good sector
in A. Presumably a subsidy in A to the production of capital goods
would have similar effects.
Thus, there are a variety of models capturing the interaction of
countries through the world capital market and the price that it
determines, the world rate of interest. Only empirical research will tell
which of these models (more likely, which blend of these models) is
the most pertinent description for the explanatory purposes at hand.
Of these various sorts of models available, the customer-market one is
possibly the most "ornery" and inelegant. Yet I wonder whether it is
possible to understand events over a medium-term horizon without
recognizing the informational frictions that impede adjustments in the
product market and without taking carefully into account their
myriad system effects.

Fiscal Stimulus and Employment at Home ecc.
BIBUOGRAPHY
181
[1] Fn'oUSSI JEAN-PAUL - PHELPS EDMUND S.: «Causes of the 19805 Slump in Europe»,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, n. 20, 1986.
[2] - -: The Slump in Europe: Open Economy Theory Reconstructed, Oxford, Basil
Blackwell, 1988.
[3] MUNDELL ROBERT A.: International Economics, New York, MacMillan, 1968.
[4] PHELPS EDMUND S.: «AWorking Model of Slump and Recovery from Disturbances
to Capital-Goods Demand in an Open Non Monetary Economy», in NELL EDWARD
J. - SEMMLER WIW, (eds.): Nicholas Kaldor and Mainstream Economics, London,
MacMillan, Forthcoming, 1989.
[5] - -: «An Extended Working Model of Slump and Recovery from Disturbances to
Capital-Goods Prices in an Overlapping-Generations Closed Economy: 'I5-LM'
without Money», in CARSTEN HEYN-JOHNSON (ed.): IS-LM after Fifty Years, lon-
don, MacMillan, Forthcoming, 1989.
[6] --: «A Working Model of Slump and Recovery from Disturbances to Capital-
Goods Demand in an Open Non-Monetary Economy», American Economic
Review, vol. 78, n, 2, 1988, pp. 346-50.
[7] - -: Aggregate Demand in the Equilibrium Theory of a Non-Monetary
Economy, (Rev. version), mimeograph, New York, Columbia University, 1989.
[8] - -: The Effects of Productivity, Total Domestic Product Demand, and 'Incent-
ive Wages' on Unemployment in a Non-Monetary Customer-Market Model of the
Small Open Economy, Roma, Dipartimento di Economia, Seconda Universita,
Forthcoming, 1989.
[9] -
- : Fiscal Stimulus and Employment in a Real Customer-Market Model of the
Small Open Economy, Roma, Dipartimento di Economia, Seconda Universita,
1989.
[10] PHELPS EDMUND - SIDNEY G. WINTER Jr.:«Optimal Price Policy under Atomistic
Competition», in PHELPS E.S. et AL. Micro-economic Foundations of Employment
and Inflation Theory, New York, W.W. Norton, 1970.

III . THE EUROPEAN MONETARY
AND COMMERCIAL AREA

EC 1992: Prospects and Problems
Herbert Giersch
Kiel Institute of World Economics
Five hundred years after Europeans discovered North America,
Europe is to form an integrated market by removing all border
controls between the 12 members of the European Community (EC).
This is what project 1992 is about. It can be interpreted as the last and
most important step in a series that started four decades earlier with
the formation of the European Coal and Steel Community under
French leadership in 1952. The last step is to bring about the removal
of all obstacles to cross-border trade in goods and services and to the
free mobility of capital and entrepreneurship, including the human
capital of professionals.
The intermediate steps were: a) the formation between 1958 and
1968 of the EC customs union, which covered industrial products and
mainly promoted intraindustry trade; b) the accession to the EC of
Britain, Ireland, and Denmark in 1973; c) the arrangements for free
trade in industrial goods with the European Free Trade Association
(EFTA)
countries
(Austria,
Finland,
Iceland,
Norway,
Portugal,
Sweden, and Switzerland) in 1973; and d) the entry to the EC of
Greece in 1981 and Spain and Portugal in 1986.
The movement toward freer trade has so far been limited to
industrial goods, and it has suffered from protectionist setbacks.
Non-tariff barriers against imports from third countries were imposed
by individual member states; they would have been circumvented had
they not been supplemented by intra-EC border controls. They were

186
Herbert Giersch
applied to textiles and steel, but, for instance in the case of France,
also to cars and machinery. Moreover, there are -
or were -
quantitative restrictions or import prohibitions on pharmaceuticals,
alcoholic beverages, and products that do not meet national standards
and norms.
Two different views or paradigms of Europe's integration move-
ment, have been in conflict from the beginning. One paradigm is what
Hayek calls "constructivism" or "constructivist rationalism." Its focus
is on institution-building, bureaucratic integration, political unifi-
cation, and centralism -
some form of French planning. Its philo-
sophical roots go back to Descartes and have been nourished up to the
time of Delors by what Hayek termed the "pretence of knowledge"
(Hayek [9]) (*). As central planning is out of the question nowadays,
the paradigm favours regulation and the harmonizations of institu-
tions, taxes, and norms before the removal of border controls. This
policy paradgm comes close to Europe's corporatist traditions, which,
of course, go back to the medieval guild society. When applied to the
EC in the beginning, these corporatist and centralist tendencies were
severely attacked by the German neoliberals of the 1950s, including
Wilhelm Ropke and Ludwig Erhard, who was the Bonn government's
first economics minister and second chancellor (Giersch [6]).
These critics held the opposite view, in recent years most openly
pronounced (though unfortunately with some nationalistic overtones)
by Margaret Thatcher in her famous Bruges speech. This view holds
that markets know better than bureaucrats, that productivity arises
from diversity rather than uniformity, and that harmonization will
come about, to the extent that it is useful. by the pressures of
evolutionary competition,
which is interpreted as
a process of
discovery (Hayek [8]). Competition helps to identify the cheapest
supplier of a product or service, the best location for a firm, the most
suitable means of communication or payment, the institutional
arrangements most suitable for productivity growth, and the combin-
ation of taxes and public goods preferred by the relevant public.
Instead of politicians and bureaucrats, the last word in the choice of
(*) Advise: the numers in square brackets refer to the Bibliography in the appendix.

Ee 1992: Prospects and Problems
187
money and norms, of institutions and goods, can and should go to the
consumer, who is to be seen as needing no paternalistic guidance.
"Exit" rather than "voice" is the means of voting that will become
predominant once the obstacles to the free movement of goods and
services, people and capital have been removed. Currency competi-
tion would be the best means of finding out to what extent the
Common Market needs a common currency, just as participants
decide by themselves what language to use in contracts. Esperanto, by
the way, would not suggest itself as a viable solution to the linguistic
part of the communication problem, and from this a parallel could be
drawn to money.
Exceptions to the rule of market superiority are obvious: they
concern market failures in the form of negative external effects, such
as on health or the environment. On the other hand, increasing
returns from scale are no such externality, as we know, so technical
norms will gain ground in a competitive process without needing any
government support or coercion. Centrally imposed technical norms
are even dangerous; they are easily used as a basis for administrative
protection against imports from third countries.
In the present German policy discussion, one term has emerged
that describes the comprehensive nature of institutional competition
well: "Standortwettbewerb" -
competition among locations. Cities
compete with cities, regions with regions, countries with countries.
And they compete for the mobile resources: for investment and
human capital, for entrepreneurs and good taxpayers. We also see
central banks competing with each other for the holders of their
money. All of these institutions can improve their competitive posi-
tions -
for the benefit of the immobile resources -
by offering good
services and public goods at low cost. The mobile resources will vote
with their feet. And governments that behave irresponsibly by running
deeply into debt will observe in the capital market how their ratings as
borrowers go down. This experience will improve fiscal discipline.
Workable competition for mobile resources, however, requires that
governments be prevented from setting up common funds and for-
ming cartels under such appealing names as unification or harmoni-
zation.
According to this view -- which I happen to share -
the best that

188
Herbert Giersch
Europe can expect is that the harmonization agenda will remain
unfinished on December 31, 1992, and that border controls will
nevertheless be removed the next morning, just as governments have
promised.
The European Court achieved a breakthrough for harmonization
under the pressure of market competition when it ruled against the
German government in deciding that domestic regulations fixing the
ingredients of liquor, beer, and sausages must not be abused to
prevent the import of such products from other EC members (Court
of Justice [3]). Consumer protection had, of course, been invoked as
an argument for what was actually producer protection. The ruling of
the European Court means a shift from the principle of the country of
destination to the principle of the country of origin. What is legally
produced in the country of origin must be accepted as legally pro-
duced in the country of destination. ac members have now agreed to
respect each other's norms in the Single European Act. But they are
still reluctant to put the country-of-origin principle into practice; they
leave it to the court to decide in specific cases.
Competition is the key to faster productivity growth. If EC
Europe should have more competition -
in the goods and factor
markets, among regulatory systems, and in the field of public goods
and taxes -
then the old continent can look forward to a reacceler-
ation of economic growth in the 1990s. Calculations published by the
EC Commission promise a once-and-for-all gain in Europe's potential
output of 2 to 3% from the removal of border controls alone and
another gain of the same order of magnitude from the improvement
in the general competitive climate (Commission [2]). To put it
differently: with a trend rate of growth of potential output in the range
of 2.5%, EC Europe could have growth rates of actual output ranging
between 3 and 4% for half a decade. But this is not the upper limit.
My guess is that Europe has a good opportunity to lift the rate of
growth of potential output from 2.5% at present to 3.5% in the
foreseeable future and to add a once-and-for-all gain of 5% on top of it
over half a decade, so that actual growth rates in the mid-1990s would
be in the range of 4 to 5%, as they were in the golden 1960s.
The general reason for my optimism is that, in matters of
long-run growth, we can rely on some forms of mutual causation.

Ee 1992: Prospects and Problems
189
There are virtuous and vicious circles. Europe had and induced
productivity acceleration during the post-war process of decontrol and
liberalization, of reconstruction and catching-up with the United
States. A productivity deceleration, still largely unexplained by tradi-
tional economics, followed when the long upswing came to an end
after 1968 -
with a wage revolt in Europe, with the oil price shocks,
and with the awareness that owing to environmental damage rapid
growth could no longer be permitted. Instead of making the market
system more flexible, to permit quick adjustments, European govern-
ments expanded in size at the expense of the private sector and took
refuge in a protectionist policy, international and domestic. This
whole process can now be reversed. If it is not reversed on the
occasion of the 1992 supply shock, Europe will have missed her
greatest opportunity in decades. To repeat: The growth rate of trend
productivity (per manhour) can well be raised from 2 to 3%. With
some increase in employment, the trend rate of growth of output
could be 3.5% instead of 2.5%. Europe's rates of actual output -
for a
few -
could then well be in the range of 4 to 5%.
Let me briefly sketch some specific reasons for my optimism:
1) twenty
years
of relative
stagnation since
1968 have
mitigated the real wage pressures that brought the long post-war
upswing to an end;
2) oil prices have declined;
3) we have digested the new costs associated with environ-
ment a concerns, at least to a considerable extent;
4) inflation, which during the 1970s permitted the accommo-
dation of the great cost push, has now abated;
5) real interest rates have been high enough long enough to
make investors aware once again of the need to choose projects with a
high capital productivity;
6) returns on investment in Europe are no longer below what
firms can earn form investing in financial assets;
7) wage moderation has helped to make current growth
employment-intensive again;
8) an increase in the demand for labour has made the labour

190
Herbert Giersch
market more flexible, encouraging employers to engage in search
activities and in investment in human capital. A positive hysteresis
effect is, therefore, possible in the future;
9) the
pressure of (investment) demand
against existing
capacities should reduce protectionist pressures;
10) governments may learn that present inflationary dangers
can best be fought by removing restrictions on the supply side, in
contrast to producing a recession by suddenly restricting monetary
growth. European prosperity, supported by domestic liberalization,
would also improve the prospects of worldwide liberalization and of a
successful outcome of the Uruguay Round of GATT -
provided that
Europe can solve its agricultural problem as outlined below.
There are already signs that European businesses are preparing
for more intense and innovative competition after 1992 -
a develop-
ment that should increase the trend rate of labour productivity in
Europe. Some of these signs are as follows:
a) casual empiricism
suggests that firms are already speeding up investment in preparation
for 1992; b) competition is increasingly interpreted as innovational
competition and time competition: speed up innovation, shorten the
product cycle;
c) more and more firms recognize innovation to
improve the location of production -
locational innovation -
as a
new element in evolutionary competition: if you cannot reduce costs
for old products where you produce them now, you had better either
purchase them from low-cost producers elsewhere or produce them
yourself in low-cost locations. This approach will make better use than
is made non of the catching-up potential of low-wage areas or
countries in Europe and elsewhere; d) time competition will press for
better use of the computer and its productivity potential, both for
innovation and for the decentralization of decision making; e) organiz-
ational innovations are high on the agenda of firms . Although I deeply
distrust the synergy arguments brought forward in discussions about
mergers, I must mention them here as a potential source of temporary
productivity improvements that could be made permanent in combin-
ation with organizational efforts to decentralize routine decisions.
The general point about productivity advance in this context is
that productivity can once again start to rise faster than real wages in

EC 1992: Prospects and Problems
191
order to produce a wage lag similar to what Europe had in the 1960s.
Monetary policy should, of course, accommodate better growth
prospects or even anticipate them if the 1992 supply shock turns out
to be accompanied, as I hope, it will be, by deregulation that raises
Europe's supply
responsiveness.
Though many fellow economists would disagree with me, I would
be quite happy if Europe were to make itself so attractive on world
capital markets ofter 1992 that it would import capital from the rest of
the world and run a current account deficit, at least for a couple of
years. In fact, the marginal efficiency of business investment in
Europe has already improved, a development that is likely to reverse
the outflow of capital and to attract capital from abroad. Foreign
direct investment in Europe will be induced by the trade diversion
effect of Europe 1992 as well. And under the pressure of locational
competition, regional and local communities in Europe will increase
the volume of infrastructural investment and thus add to the demand
side of the capital market.
The capital inflow will help to reduce Europe's capital shortage
unemployment (by creating jobs that are sufficeintly productive to
match prevailing minimum wages and that also provide learning
opportunities to less experienced workers), and the worsening of
Europe's current account will, one hopes, mitigate protectionist
pressures abroad and encourage a better international division of
labour worldwide.
The decline of unemployment and the overall prosperity after
1992 should make it easier to combat internal protectionism in the
form of excessive regulations, job pretection, and preference for
nearby suppliers in public procurement. A demand pull on the labour
market wourd greatly reduce -
or even overcome -
"Eurosclerosis."
This scenario is the opposite of the vicious circle that was
observable in Europe in the 1970s; indeed, it looks like a parallel to
Europe's long upswing in the 1950s and 1960s, which was similarly
supported by decontrol and deregulation, liberalization, and the
completion in 1988 of the EEC customs union.
Europe's new prosperity it should make it easier to solve the
continent's agricultural problem. A switch to world market prices is
not unrealistic. It could be facilitated by giving farmers full compensa-

192
Herbert Giersch
tion for the net income loss they are likely to suffer and by capitalizing
future income transfers for this purpose by offering landowners or
farmers interest-bearing government bonds that they could sell in the
market in order to make investments for better land use, including
re-forestation. These arrangements would improve resource allocation
and growth in Europe and could contribute to the success of the
Uruguay Round of GAIT negotiations.
The greatest risk emanating from constructivist thinking has to do
with is what has been termed "the social dimension" of Europe 1992.
The phrase implies prior harmonization of labour regulations in order
to avoid "social dumping", as the German unions call it. Such harmon-
ization would deprive backward areas and countries of their catching-
up potential. Instead of attracting capital and productive jobs, these
regions would demand subsidies from common funds and would offer
fewer opportunities for the young, who would then emigrate and cre-
ate a guest-worker problem in the advanced parts of the EC. Finally,
the less developed parts of the EC, such as Portugal, would demand-
and certainly receive -
protection against imports from less developed
countries in the Third World. Corporatism and constructivism are thus
likely to promote tendencies toward a "fortress Europe".
Some 15 years ago, I was afraid that a common currency, by
offering a common denominator for wages, would lead to excessive
wage equalization in Europe (Giersch [4]). This possibility need not be
feared any longer, since the EC has become much larger and labour
unions are not as strong as they used to be. In this respect, Europe has
become more like an optimum currency area.
Does Europe need a common currency? Constructivists say yes.
They are right in asserting that a single currency for a single market
would save transaction costs, thus facilitating market integration.
They join with corporatists who think that the best means toward this
end would be a merger of central banks arising from increasingly
closer cooperation under the rule of fixed exchange rates. This cartel
solution is likely to be adopted, perhaps with a view to giving the
emerging EC central bank an independent status similar to the
Bundsbank's independence from the Federal Republic's government.
Opponents of constructivism and corporatism do not deny the
argument of lower transaction costs. Money is a means of exchange

Be 1992: Prospects and Problems
193
just as language is a means of communication. But it is for market
participants to decide what money and language they want to use in
their contracts (Vaubel [10]). A monetary Esperanto might not prove
fit to drive out competing means of exchange or communication even
if it were imposed as the exclusive instrument for legal transactions.
The reason is that contracts have a time dimension and hence money
must also serve as a standard of deferred payments. Lower transac-
tion costs will not be desired if their advantage is outweighed by
uncertainty about the future value of the means of payment and the
unit of account. This uncertainty arises if the issuer of money has
monopoly power that it can exploit in the pursuit of a maximum
seignorage gain or inflation tax. Non-constructivists who are opposed
to such monopoly power are, therefore, highly sceptical about any
money that is not subject to the controlling forces of currency
competition. Free trade in money should, in their view, supplement
free trade in goods. And if there is a case for a separate European
currency, this currency ought to conquer its market as a parallel
currency, which it would do only if it promised to be more stable than
the national currencies it was supposed to replace.
Such a currency could be a cocktail of currencies like the
European currency unit (ECV). The ECV's definition can and should
be improved so that this unit of account promises stability in terms of
goods and services. The formula would be quite simple: whenever the
price index in France, measured in French francs, went up by xOAJ, the
number of French francs in the currency cocktail or basket would
have to be increased by xOAJ. The same formula would apply, of course,
to any other currency constituting the ECV. Holders of ECVS would
thus not be subject to any inflation tax, and the demand for ECVS
would rise at the expense of national currencies unless the latter, on
their part, became stable in terms of goods and services. This simple
idea has, of course, no appeal whatsoever to European central
bankers, who prefer the (presently discussed) path from an exchange
rate cartel to a monopoly by merger.
Another red herring in the European debate is the supposed need
for tax harmonization. Most governments want it because they are
afraid of tax competition as a form of competition of location. And the
business community instinctively favours it because it instinctively

194
Herbert Giersch
hopes thut it will contribute to the harmonization of costs as a basis
for price cartels.
My earlier plea for competition of location among governments
prevents me from supporting tax harmonization as a citizen. A tax
cartel is likely to impair fiscal discipline and lead to higher tax rates,
since there will still be government competition of location on the
expenditure side. Moreover, we do not know what the optimum tax
system that tax harmonization should approximate is. In fact, the
optimun system certainly varies from place to place and from time to
time.
An argument recently put forward by a spokesman for the
German ministry of economic affairs was that without tax harmoniz-
ation we could not move toward a system with lower direct and
higher indirect taxes. Such was the agreed objective, he said, based on
agreement among economists. How does he know this? Who can
assert that a consensus, even among experts, comes close to the truth
about a matter that is basically normative and must be left to people's
preferences? Perhaps the issue of direct versus indirect taxes will turn
out to be irrelevant, since both are taxes on efficient behaviour
whereas our concern has shifted to inefficiencies, including an inef-
ficient use of the environment. A harmonized system is as inflexible as
a cartel, whereas fiscal competition offers wide scope for experiments
as a source of new knowledge.
Most people think that VAT levels ought to be harmonized in order
to avoid distortions when it becomes impossible, after 1992, to levy
VAT on imported goods and to reimburse VAT when goods are
exported. This is an erroneous proposition. The VAT is not a pater-
nalistic consumption tax introduced to compensate for distorted
preferences of domestic consumers, but rather a tax like the income
tax or any other direct tax raised to finance the supply of public goods
that are inputs in domestic production. Yet no one has suggested that
direct taxes be refunded when a product is exported and that
domestic direct taxes be levied on goods imported from abroad. It is
the present, VAT system that has a bias.
This system discriminates against tourism in countries with high
VAT levels, since it allows these countries to have an overvalued
exchange rate. The exchange rate can be overvalued because exports

Ee /992: Prospects and Problems
195
are promoted by a heavy refunding of VAT as then cross the border,
where as imports are hampered by the levying of the (relatively high)
VAT. This refunding and levying is not applied to tourist services that
foreigneres consume within the country; hence the discrimination.
If border controls are removed and refunding and levying is
stopped, countries with excessive VAT levels will have to devalue to
make exports (almost) as competitive as they were with refunding. On
the other side, import prices will go up to compensate for the fact that
the protective VAT is no longer levied. At the same time, the country
will become more competitive in the field of tourist services.
Instead of devaluing, a country with relatively high VAT levels
can compensate for the switch by wage moderation or by a fall in
land values.
Either alternative would leave real factor remunera-
tion unchanged and would benefit the domestic tourist sector as
well.
The business community is concerned with taxes on corporate
profits. In this field, tax competition is likely to bring about, fairly
quickly, a kind of harmonization on a lower level. Governments are
sensitive in this respect because firms are likely to become more
multinational and to shift the tax base, and even the locus of
production, to countries with lower profit taxes. This downward
harmonization need not be of concern in the longer run. Firms do not
really bear taxes; they merely raise them from their customers or, if
they cannot shift them forward, from the factors of production
employed, notably from landowners and immobile labour. Indeed, it
is the immobile factors of production that have the greatest interest in
an efficient fiscal system, local, regional, or national. The mobile
factors exert the competitive pressures.
In the last analysis, the case against fiscal harmonization rests on
the diversity of cultural traditions in Europe. Tastes and habits are
different; and so is tax loyalty. These factors may become more
uniform as time goes on, but we cannot predict the pattern that will
evolve . Hence there is no way to define it in advance, as would be
necessary for ex ante harmonization.
Western Europe's historic contribution to modem civilization
arose from its diversity, as we can gather from a comparison with the
homogeneous empires on the less diverse land masses in the eastern

196
Herbert Giersch
parts of the Eurasian continent (Weede [11]). The fertile diversity of
Western Europe, supplemented by the smallness and openness of its
states in the pre-nationalist period, is worth being preserved and
should not be sacrificed in the name of some continental unity.

Be 1992: Prospects and Problems
BIBUOGRAPHY
197
[1] CoMMlSSIONE DEU.E CoMuNrrA EUROPEE: «Completing the Internal Market-, White
Paper from the Commission to the European Council, Brussels, 1985.
[2] - -: .Research on the Costs of Non-Europe, Basic Findings», vol. I, European
Economy, n, 35, March 1988, pp. 122-47.
[3] COURT OF JUSTICE OFTHE EUROPEAN COMMUNmES: .Urteil voms, Rechtssache, n.
120, 1979.
[4] GIERSCH H. et AL. European Economic Integration and Monetary Unification,
Commission of the European Communities, Brussels, Chapter D., 1973.
[5] -
- : .Internal and External Liberalisation for Faster Growths, Brussels, Commis-
sion of the European Communities, Economic Papers, n. 54, 1987.
[6] --: «Liberal Reform in West Germany- Ordo, n. 39, 1988, pp. 3-16.
[7] - -: «Anmerkungen zum Denkansatz weltwirtschftlichen»,
Weltwirtschafli-
chten Archiv, n. 129, January 1989, pp. 1-16.
[8] HAYEK F.A.: «Der Wettbewerb als Entdeckungsverfahrens, Kiel, Kieler Vrtraege,
n. 56, 1968.
[9] --: .The Pretence of Knowledge», Nobel Memorial Lecture, Stockholm, 1974.
[10] VAUBEL R.: «Strategies for Currency Unification», Tubingen, Kieler Studien, n.
156, 1978.
[11] WEEDE E.: -Der Sonderweg des Westens., Zeitschriit fur Sozlologie, n. 17, June
1988, pp. 172-86.

The European Monetary System
and Its Predecessors
Marcello de Cecco
Universita di Roma «La Sapienza.
There are two ways of approaching the subject of my paper: the
"fundamentalist" way and the "political economy" way. I shall take
the second way first.
As I write, the world is witnessing an unusual phenomenon: the
almighty deutsche mark is under presure, and yet West Germany's
external trade-balance shows a huge and continuing surplus. There
have been two other episodes of weakness in the career of the Mark
since the 1950s. The first, however, occurred, as a result of a weak
German trade balance or, at least, in conjunction with it. And when
the second episode occured, in the late 1970s, the United States
virtually imposed expansion on the recalcitrant Germans. This time
we are watching a new ball game. The mark, the famed "nominal
anchor" of the western European monetary sub-system, is weak
because the German monetary authorities want it to be weak. They
have consciously refrained from raising real interest rates and are
maintaining a negative real interest differential vis-a-vis the us dollar.
They are also
cooperating with the Group of seven
monetary
authorities to keep currency markets orderly and thus to allow the
dollar to rise in an orderly fashion. For once, they are not sterilizing
their exchange market sales of dollars in the hope that this strategy
will cool down the German economy in the medium run without
penalizing German exports.
In the short run -
that is, until the next elections in Germany
-
the Bundesbank is deferring to the German government and

200
Marcello de Cecco
willingly refraining from raising interest rates to a level that would
keep the dollar-mark exchange rate stable. It is deferring to the
imperative of not disturbing the ruling political coalition with a
drastic interest rate policy that would unbalance the already dis-
turbed German financial market and cause unemployment and
recession for German industry.
Where today are the bards, domestic and international, who for
three decades, sang to the skies the heroic, unshakeable, pristine
virtues of Bundesbank autonomy, allegedly an example to us all?
On the other hand, the Bank of Italy and the Bank of France, so
well-known for their political bias, have for the last five years allowed
their currencies to experience very substantial real upward valuations
and their real interest rate to rise above the German rate.
A new era seems to have dawned. The nominal anchor and its
immediate neighbours and satellites, the Swiss franc, and the Dutch
florin, seem to have abdicated their role and humbled themselves, as
they did in the 1950s, to his majesty, the
US dollar.
This is the more extreme view. The less extreme view foresees a
strong US dollar until the end of 1989. It will start to weaken when
President George Bush, as he is expected to do, pronounces the
T-word -
that is, when he strikes a fiscal deal with Congress and
relieves US monetary policy of its present role. US fiscal tightening
and monetary thaw, it is alleged, will make the mark strong again.
This prediction assumes, of course, that the German ruling coalition
will win the elections. If it does not, the mark may go on being weak,
and the German economy strong, in spite of US economic policy.
Recent events have pretty well put paid to most current interpre-
tations of the origins, nature, and functions of the European Monetary
System (EMS). As a careful reading of the alarmingly large mass of
papers on the subject will show, the prevailing view among econo-
mists is that the EMS was launched, back in 1978 (it did not formally
get under way until March 1979), to provide an area of monetary and
exchange-rate stability in Europe after the wild gyrations of the US
dollar in currency markets in the 1970s -
gyrations that were the
result of double-digit inflation in the United States and the reneging by
the United States of the responsibilities it had allegedly assumed at
Bretton Woods.

The European Monetary System and Its Predecessors
201
The image is summoned up for us of a club of responsible and
stability-loving countries whose leaders finally stood up to the repre-
hensible and immoral behaviour of their spendthrift hegemon. It is an
old story in the monetary annals of the world: the subjects, who have
no say in the sovereign's monetary policy, finally can stand no more
taxation without representation and set up a money shop of their
own. Yet as valid as this image may be as a depiction of other
historical instances, it is false in the extreme as a representation of this
origis of the EMS.
The EMS concludes rather than begins a period in which a part of
Europe stood up to US monetary hegemony. Throughout the 1970s
Germany stood nearly alone supported only by the small satellites of
the mark bloc, as a bulwark of monetary stability and orthodoxy
against American double-digit inflation. It paid a very high price for
sticking to its monetary principles. The mark constantly went up in
value against the dollar and the currencies of the other large
European countries. The latter currencies presently jumped ship, and
the European snake was transformed into a mark bloc. The result was
a dangerous decline in Germany's trade balance. Unemployment rose
and industrial capacity fell idle. It was a new experience for a country
that had relied on export-led growth for almost 30 years.
The ruling Social Democrats were convinced by their advisers
that a policy of currency appreciation would speed up the inevitable
process of change that was taking place in the international division of
labour. German labour costs were simply too high -
it was argued -
to stand competition from cheap-labour countries in labour-intensive
products and industries. An expensive mark would be the midwife of
structural change for German industry moving it away from semi-
proletarian modes of production and toward those paramount special-
ities of German industry, state-of-the-art investment products and
top-of-the-line consumer durables. It was a good plan, one that would
have brought the world of international trade back to Ricardian
complementarity and moved the German economy away from the
ridiculous, almost humiliating position it had been assigned by mili-
tary defeat which had lunged it back into producing labour-intensive
goods like any industrial upstart.
like many another good plan, however, this one misfired. It was

202
Marcello de Cecco
not the direction that was wrong; it was the timing. Moreover, the
planners had overestimated both the strength of the German economy
and the ability of a democratically elected government to stand mass
unemployment. They had also overlooked the fact that the German
banking system, unlike those of most other developed countries, was
the owner of German industry's vital core and that German industry
was still mainly financed by bank loans. A restructuring of German
industry that involved massive plant closures would have intolerably
weakened the German banking system. This was why the German
monetary authorities had always rejected the stop-and-go policies
practiced in Britain in favour of a slower but much steadier rate of
growth, which avoided the heavy deflations that would be lethal to the
German industrial-financial complex.
German industrial restructuring had been planned by its Ricar-
dian fathers either to take place in a timeless dimension or simply to
take a rather long time. But the freedom of capital movements that
prevailed in the 1970s -
a consequence of the oil crisis and the
complexities of US policy -
sped the process up so much that it
jumped off rails. Capital inflow caused a faster and steeper rise in the
mark than was able to bear. Plant closures and massive unemploy-
ment followed. Exports plunged. Moreover, the US government was
dissatisfied. For its own domestic policy reasons, it had to find a
scapegoat for the rapid decline of the dollar as capital moved to
Germany. The scapegoat was the Germans' supposedly excessive love
ofmonetary stability, which, accordingtotheAmericans, was
destabilizing the rest of the world. The Germans were told that more
demand had to be pumped into their economy if Germany wanted to
remain a responsible member of the western alliance and continue to
be defended by American arms.
Presently, a spy scandal displaced Willy Brandt from the German
chancellorship. His successor, Helmut Schmidt, understood that Ger-
many's attempt to reacquire economic sovereignty had to be called off
before it brought down the coalition and the German economy.
The EMS was an elegant solution to
Germany's problems.
Schmidt and Giscard, who planned it, were able to represent it as an
attempt by Europe to restore stability to a world that the wild
gyrations of US policy were reducing to a gambling casino. The EMS

The European Monetary System and Its Predecessors
203
was advertised as an alternative to a dollar area shaken by intolerable
tremors. And such was the credibility of German monetary virtue that
the other EMS participants went to the utmost length, in negotiating
the EMS agreement, to exorcise as much as they could of the
deflationary bias that German monetary hegemony was supposed to
impart to the system. They wanted to have as much "symmetry" as
possible; they did not want to follow the mark on its almost inevitable
spiral of appreciation.
It was a masterstroke on the part of Chancellor Schmidt. He
founded the system in order to terminate the era of German currency
appreciation and to keep what was left of Germany's industries and
their workers, who were his party's voters. The mark would hencefor-
ward be shielded from the dollar by a layer of weaker European
currencies. Germany would stop being reviled in the American press
and Congress as the institutional culprit responsible for keeping good
American working-class families out of employment and American
industry's profits lean.
If German political economic motives in founding the EMS were
clear, those of the other countries of the European Economic Com-
munity (EEC) were equally clear. And particularly clear were French
motives. EEC had been based at its inception on the Bretton Woods
assumption of stable exchange rates. All of its common policies
assumed fixed exchange rates. Above all, fixed rates were taken for
granted by the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), which was and still
is the most remarkable example of a giant supernational policy. Run
by international bureacrats and consuming up to 90% of the EEC
Commission's budgetary resources for the benefit of farmers who,
owing to gerrymandering, are still very important in Europe's political
geography. By devising a policy that guaranteed high prices and
protectionism for European farmers, the CAP designers ensured that
marginal farmers would survive and efficient ones prosper. The
administration of the policy, moreover, provided a very capacious
pork barrel for European politicians.
These considerations were especially important to France, the
largest and most efficient agricultural producer in the EEC. As the
Common Market had given German industry a chance to develop in a
Europe without internal trade barriers so the CAP would give French

204
Marcello de Cecco
agriculture a secure and prosperous future. Moreover, this prosperity
would not occur at the expense of other European fanners. European
taxpayers would foot the bill, and efficient non-EEC agricultural
nations would lose their traditional export markets in Europe.
This delicate balance, which had promoted European reconciliation
and fostered economic integration and growth to an extent never
attained before, was put in grave danger by the exchange rate
fluctuations that started with the floating of the dollar in August 1971.
Germany's satellites followed Germany and allowed their currencies
to appreciate, but the other major European currencies followed the
dollar, though not at an even pace. Intra-EEC exchange oscillations
wrought havoc with the CAP. A remarkable system called the Mont-
ants Compensatifs was hastily devised; it prevented farmers in the
countries whose currencies had lost value from selling all of their
crops to the CAP administrators of the countries whose currencies
had appreciated. The latter countries were thus accorded compen-
sating balances that restored farm prices to equality more or less, and
prevented the perverse price movements that would otherwise have
occurred.
The great weight of these balances and the cumbrousness of the
mechanism threatened to destroy the very essence of the CAP. They
were rapidly turning almost folkloristic agricultural districts in the
appreciating countries, and particularly in Germany, into powerful
food producers. It was thanks to these compensating balances, for
instance, that Germany become the largest milk exporter in Europe.
France could tolerate the ruin of the CAP even less than Germany
could tolerate the erosion of its industrial market share in Europe and
in the world as a whole. Hence the collaboration of France and
Germany in creating the EMS.
These were the real origins of the EMS. And the system has
worked as it was supposed to. It has helped to keep the European
community together in a turbulent world economy. It has stabilized
and reversed German industrial decline. It has maintained France as
the agricutural powerhouse of Europe. European agricultural man-
power has continued its slow but quiet and happy decline while the
agricultural sector continues to make a lot of money by producing
very abundant crops at a very high cost to the European taxpayer.

The European Monetary System and Its Predecessors
205
And European politicians (the German now paramount among them)
are still very reluctant to alter in any way the mechanism of the CAP,
which has proved to be such an excellent political and social stabilizer.
It is expensive, but it works.
Viewed from this angle, the success of the EMS looks reasonably
clear. What has this success consisted of? The member countries,
exchange rates have converged, and intra-European exchange rate
stability has been assured. This, and this alone, was what the EMS
was supposed to accomplish. And it has accomplished it, thereby
rescuing European integration from almost certain collapse.
Almost all of the other merits that have been attributed to the
EMS have been successfully challenged by careful analysis. It has
been called an asymmetrical system, run by German monetary policy.
The nth country argument has been wheeled out and used . But it has
been shown that in fact EMS interest rates do not really follows
German rates any more than German rates follow US rates. Indeed, it
is possible that German rates might have kept following the trend
established by US monetary policy.
The EMS is also supposed to have restored ,price stability to
inflation-ridden European economies such as the French and the
Italian. In the same period, however, other inflation-prone countries
have recovered even more remarkably from price instability. One is
tempted to think that it was Paul Vo1cker's dramatic monetary
squeeze that quelled the inflationary fires in the United States and the
rest of the world.
In terms of almost all other success indicators -
that is, in terms
of the relative dynamics of the key macrovariables -
the EMS
countries do not score particularly well in comparison with either
themselves in pre-EMS years or other countries in the 1980s.
It is better, therefore, to call things by their real name and
describe the EMS as a reasonably successful holding operation,
concocted by the political authorities of the two leading EEC coun-
tries in order to maintain the delicate political and economic balance
in Europe during a period of world turbulence -
turbulence caused
by the painful transition of the United States from the inflation of the
Vietnam War to a peacetime world economy in which it was neces-

206
Marcello de Cecco
sary to accomodate the new Japanese industrial power, which the
Vietnam War had done much to create.
Although the EMS can be regarded as a successful holding
operation, two important questions remain: 1) how much did that
success depend on the US macroeconomic policy mix in the 1980s?;
2) what were the costs of the operation for Europe and for the rest of
the world?
It is obvious that had the United States not stumbled upon a
policy mix that induced a violent and heavy appreciation of the dollar,
the EMS countries would have had a pretty horrible time. Counterfac-
tual history is generally considered to be pointless; nevertheless, it is
true that the Europeans could not have imagined, even in their wildest
dreams, that they would be steered to a safe haven by two such dei ex
machina as Paul Vo1cker and Ronald Reagan. Not every country is
willing, we have just seen how Germany was not willing, to get rid 01 a
large part of its industrial capacity and to transform a good portion of
its youth into a cohort of service workers -
all of which the United
States accomplished in less than two decades. Had the dollar not hit
the roof, the members of the EMS would have had to engage in
beggar-thy-neighbour policies against one another, since in that case
the giant US market would have not been thrown open to them,
Japan, and the newly industrializing countries. We can reasonably
doubt that with
a lower dollar Italian
and
French
economic
authorities,
industrialists
and
workers
would
have
shown
the
olympian equanimity that they did shows when their currencies were
overvalued vis-a-vis the mark. Moreover, for the reasons I gave above,
greater exchange rate instability in Europe would have have compel-
led the EMS countries to radically modify the CAP. The depreciation
of the dollar since 1985 could be accepted because of the previous
bonanza. European firms stuck as firmly as they could to their shares
of the US market even if it meant reduced profits, in order to maintain
economies of scale effects at work. Recently, the have also benefited
from a higher rate of domestic growth in Europe, which has allowed
then to replace US sales with domestic ones. It must not be forgotten,
moreover, that US imports have continued to rise. It will be interest-
ing to see what happens when the US economic authorities decide to
allow the US economy to deflate.

The European Monetary System and Its Predecessors
207
The costs of the EMS must not to be overlooked either. First of
all, in order to have their respective real exchange rates appreciate
vis-a-vis the mark, France and Italy have been obliged to maintain
tight controls over their foreign exchange markets. If it is true that
foreign exchange controls generate distortion, then distortions arising
from this cause have occurred in these two countries.
It is also possible that the renunciation of the use of seignorage by
the Italian and French authorities has obliged them to increase
domestic public debt. Although the delicate balance that the CAP
guarantees to status quo politics in Europe is treasured by those who
benefit from it, it is not clear whether the taxpayer would agree that
the cost is worth paying.
The EMS has also fostered the accumulation of trade imbalances
in Europe -
that is, of German trade surpluses with other EMS
members, which can be tolerated in the long run only
if the EEC
makes a drastic leap toward complete economic integration. This is
the meaning of what is generally called "1992." Will full European
economic integration be an advantage for the rest of the world
economy?
Some
economists
argue
that the
EMS has
already
destabilized the international monetary system -
that the price of
internal EMS stability has been more instability in the rest of the
world. It is possible to argue among similar lines about the conse-
quences of the EMS for the markets in other goods and factors. I leave
the question unanswered, but I feel that it should be asked.
Which of its predecessors in the realm of international monetary
regimes des the EMS most resemble? This is the question I had in
mind when I started this paper. It was necessary to describe the beast
at length in order to be able to compare it with other beasts. If I could
rely on a consensus of opinion about what those other regimes were
like and how they actually worked, I would now be in a position to
undertake this comparison confidently. However, no such consensus
exists. There are theoretical models of the gold standard and of the
gold exchange standard, but I do not think I can use them for my
purpose. However, many people are convinced that they do fairly
represent historical reality, so I shall not be able to ignore them either.
The EMS is clearly a subsystem, a part of a large international
monetary systems (lMS). This was not true of the Bretton Woods

208
Marcello de Cecco
system, from which only the socialist countries were excluded. Does
the Bretton Woods system still exist? Not in its original form certainly,
but a modified version of it is still with us. This latter-day version of
Bretton Woods resembles the IMS as it existed in the second half of
the nineteenth century and until the First World War. The interna-
tional gold standard was only one of several elements of the IMS of
those days. There was also an important silver standard, comprising
tackward countries such as China and India. The adherents of
bimetallism included the Latin Monetary Union countries and for a
times the United States. Finally, a large chunk of the IMS consisted of
inconvertible currencies.
A currency that was based on a metallic reserve -
or better, one
that consisted wholly of metallic coins -
would fulfil the old dream of
constitutionalizing the monetary sovereignty of the state, of making
money respect the same laws of production and distribution, supply
and demand, the govern other commodities. If monetary sovereignty
is strongly resented, it is because it is often abused. Monetary subjects
will try to become monetary free citizens by adopting a metallic
standard. They will opt agains what they consider to be an iniquitous
state policy and for the free market behaviour of precious metals
production.
In historical reality, metallic coins represented total or almost
total monetary circulation for a very long time indeed. It does not
follow, however, that these systems were not managed or not subject
to sovereignty. It was possible, in various artful ways, to make mint
pars and market prices diverge and this practice was the basis of most
monetary policy of those days. After the Bank of England assumed the
task of keeping the metallic reserve of the whole country, and bank
money largely replaced metallic circulation in England, other coun-
tries were moved to imitate a policy that seemed to be one of the
cause of British economic success. In these countries, as in Britain,
the creation of metallic reserves was seen as a way of managing
money and preventing market forces from operating freely. The gold
standard and bimetallism were therefore two alternative ways of
introducing centralized national systems of monetary management.
The gold standard countries believed that the price of silver ought to
float freely. The bimetallist countries believed that pegging silver to

The European Monerary System and Irs Predecessors
209
gold (with an adjustable peg) would be more reasonable, since for
historical reasons both metals were important circulation media for
their economies and gold, even when its price declined in relation to
the price of silver, was always a much more expensive currency
medium for a country without a developed deposit banking system.
Gold was a good asset rather than a good circulation medium.
The market prices of gold and silver oscillated strongly for the
best part of the nineteenth century. These oscillations, and the threat
they posed to real and financial integration, were the origin of the
Latin Monetary Union, which was formed by international treaty in
1865. The countries that formed it, France, Italy, Belgium, and
Switzerland, had been united under the First Empire. After its dissol-
ution, they kept the bimetallic system that France had adopted as far
back as 1785, and that Napoleon had extended to the others. The four
countries also enjoyed a remarkable level of real and financial integr-
ation. The center of the area was France, and the Banque de France
functioned as lender of last resort for other banks of issue in the area
France was also the main foreign market for the other three countries
and usually ran a large trade, deficit with them; it also exported
long-term capital to them, and collected short-term capital from them.
When silver-gold market parity began to oscillate violently in the
early 1860s, as a result of US gold exports to pay for the Civil War, the
four countries all reduced the silver content of their coins; the
intention was to prevent the export of coinage and hence a dangerous
shrinkage in the amount of coinage in circulation. Each of the four,
however, chose a different silver content. The ensuing arbitrage
wrought havoc in the markets and endangered the existing economic
integration of the four countries. This threat brought them together in
a very extensive monetary union whose purpose was to maintain the
monetary intercirculation and economic integration that already
existed. France hoped that the bimetallic system would eventually
include other countries as well. The Latin Union had a chequered
existence, but it lasted until 1928. In the eyes of contemporary
observers, the bimetallist bloc was an essential feature of the pre-1914
IMS, and it is possible to argue that its weakening, precipitated by the
heavy fall of silver prices from 1875 onward, greatly unbalanced the
functioning of the IMS. When the Latin Union countries had to close

210
Marcello de Cecco
their mints to silver coinage the Gold Standard bloc was reduced to
dumping its silver production in India and China. In a world where
banking was underdeveloped and subject to dreadful instability, it was
only the discovery of gold in South Africa that reduced the defla-
tionary impact of the enlargement of the Gold Standard Bloc.
It is more reasonable, I think, to compare the EMS to the Latin
Union that to either the gold standard bloc or Bretton Woods. Like the
EMS, the Latin Union was formed by international treaty, was an
attempt to preserve existing economic and financial integration
against an exogenous problem (the vagaries of gold-silver parity),
included few countries, and had a core country. Here the parallel
stops, however, since France and its central bank were a better centre
for the Latin Union than Germany and the Bundesbank have been for
the EMS. The Banque de France was the lender of last resort for the
whole Union, whereas the Bundesbank has refused to be anyone's
lender of last resort. Moreover, the France of the Latin Union, unlike
the Germany of the EMS, ran a deficit with the rest of its group of
nations.
Above all, the evocation of the Latin Union from historical
oblivion puts the EMS into a more limited and realistic perspective.
As I have noted, both the apostles of the Gold Standard and those
of international bimetallism regarded the division of the pre-1914 IMS
into two camps as a great misfurtune. These two very opinionated and
universalistic monetary schools filled the second half of the nineteenth
century with their heated debates and their inspired propaganda.
International conferences were organized with a view to converting
the most important countries to bimetallism. The supporters of gold
believed with equal force that gold was the metal of the future since it
was more precious than silver, a smaller quantity could express large
values thus it was better able to accomodate the growth in the value of
transactions that came as a result of economic development.
Other observers, however, pointed out that the countries that had
chosen the "strong currency option" after silver started its precipitous
fall in the 1870s had been able to do it essentially because other
countries had stuck to silver or to bimetallism. It was the exisence of a
second, and weaker, monetary metal that allowed countries to
express their monetary virtue without being propelled into transform-

The European Monetary System and Its Predecessors
211
ing it into a strong deflationary bias for themselves and the whole
world economy. Had all countries chosen gold, even the South
African mines might not have generated enough liquidity to keep the
world economy on a non-deflationary path.
The persistence of the silver standard and bimetallism allowed the
deflation-inclined
countries
to
have
what they
wanted without
breaking the whole IMS. Had all countries gone onto gold, the
resulting deflation would probably have compelled most of them to go
off it again in a very short time. A strong curency presupposes a weak
one.
The EMS, like the Latin Monetary Union, has allowed the centre
country to solve its monetary problems. The Latin Union countries did
not really want to have silver as the numeraire: they believed gold was
a safer bet, since its price at the time was low relative to that of silver.
But France had a huge silver circulation and the Banque de France a
huge silver reserve. Had the union been started on gold, both would
have been substantially depreciated. The Latin Union countries did
however have the possibility of using the Banque de France to
rediscount when the gold part of the IMS of the time expressed its
deflationary tendencies or when a banking crisis arose. It must be
remebered, in fact, that in the gold countries, banks created the
currency that replaced silver as the main part of the money in
circulation. And banks multipliers had in those days an inclination to
expand and contract suddenly and traumatically, producing violent
shocks to interest rates that spread to silver countries and that the
Bank of France's rediscounting facilities served to moderate some-
what as far as the Latin Union countries were concerned.
The Latin Union, however, was not without its internal problems.
The Italians in particular, oscillated between trying to achieve more
monetary and financial independence from France and enjoying the
advantages of extensive integration with the French economy. When,
in 1882, they joined the Triple Alliance, the French resorted to a
financial warfare against them that they carried on for more than 10
years, effectively sinking the Italian attempt to return to full conver-
tibility with a loan negotiated mainly with British banks.
The problem with financial liberalization is that it encourages
strong countries to use international financial flows as instruments of

212
Marcello de Cecco
power politics. This certainly happened before 1914. It was widely
deprecated
by
contemporary
observers,
who
noted
that
such
behaviour greatly increased the instability of the IMS (1). Now that
both France and Italy have liberalized capital flows and are experien-
cing a great inflow of German funds, encouraged by exchange rate
stability in Europe and by interest differentials, it is possible that we
shall again see the use of holdings of foreign financial assets as
political instruments, Indeed I am afraid that this outcome is almost
inevitable unless Europe achieves political unification, in the form of a
federation of the EEC countries. If this does not happen, the experi-
ence of the Latin Union is there to admonish us that economic
integration can be substantially reduced if it is not accompanied by
political union. Italy and France did not abrogate the Latin Union
during their decade of economic warfare, which drastically reduced
their economic integration. And the Italians were not interested in
returning to normal economic relations with France until they had
bought-back almost all of their foreign-held national debt, which was
largely in French hands. The old links were not re-established until the
first decade of the twentieth century.
(1) As is well known, Luigi Luzzatti came to promote an international monetary
agreement that included a clause according to which the recycling of international
short-term capital between banks was to be compulsory.
As can be easily imagined, the proposal put forward by Luttazzi met the general
approval of the public opinion, but was not actually brought about.

Policy Coordination in Europe
Norbert Walter
Deutschebank
1. • Some Thoughts on Worldwide Issues
The world at large is presently faced with a unique combination
of challenges. Perestroika and glasnost are questioning the concept of
the East-West confrontation. The growth of trade is unsettling the
GATT concept of the most-favoured-action approach. The debt prob-
lem of the less developed countries (LDCs) continues to upset the
world financial order. Environmental issues, worldwide in their impli-
cations, assert themselves with vigour.
Although these challenges demand forceful action, the industrial
countries are anything but unanimous in their views on how to
address them. Macro -
and micro-misalignments prevail in the
industrial countries and keep the academic, business, and political
elites busy, so that the more important subjects go unattacked.
Japanese and Europeans suggest that the twin US deficits are the chief
obstacle to better-balanced development. The United States argues
that Japan and Germay enjoy a free-rider position: by guaranteeing
their military security, the United States allows them to serve on
defence; by creating excess world demand, it has provided them with
a rich opportunity to promote export industries.
The latter view of the present state of the world economy is
widely held on the East Coast of the United States, whereas the
criticism of the United States is largely confined to financial circles,
particularly in Japan and Europe. Without doubt, some of the
criticism on both sides is well founded. It is wrong, however, to argue

214
Norbert Walter
that the current account deficits and surpluses that have developed in
recent years are (solely) a reflection of unsustainable disequilibria. A
number of other arguments -
some of which are not virtually
exclusive -
can be put forward to explain the existence of deficits and
surpluses: 1) some deficits reflect an effort by certain regions and
nations to catch up with the more developed parts of the industrial
world. Spain and Portugal are examples; in a world in which the less
developed countries have lost their creditworthiness, some deficits
reflect a second-best solution; namely, the direction of capital flows to
the industrial nations that are "youngest" in terms of long-term age
composition and population dynamics. The
United States is the
primary example in this category; some deficits reflect a response to
supply-side policies that have enhanced the profitability of investment
(tax reduction, privatization, deregulation). By adopting courageous
supply-side measures, certain countries have made themselves more
attractive as locations for productive investment. Owing to the income
effects associated with these measures, the countries in question have
increased not only their capital imports but their imports in general.
An obvious case at present is the United Kingdom; 2) some surpluses
reflect a failure to improve economic incentives as much as other
countries have (1) or even an unthinking creation of new disincent-
ives. The withholding tax in Germany, for example. The resultant
outflow of capital depresses the exchange rate and serves -
at least
temporarily -
to increase the export surplus; 3) some surpluses
reflect an enhanced productive potential combined with a "natural"
weakness of demand dynamics. A situation of this kind emerges when
a substantially increased labour force has been fully educated and
population stops growing, as it has in Europe at present. A reversal of
this tendency is in the pipeline, partly as a consequence of unexpected
immigration (for example the inflow of ethnic Germans to the Federal
Republic) and partly as a consequence of a strongly enhanced propen-
sity to spend (for consumer durables and housing) among the nume-
rous "younger generations", whose population share in Europe is
larger today than it has been at any other time during the post-war
(1) The DECO notes this failure in the case of economic policy in Germany (DECO
[5]).
Advise: the numbers in square brackets refer to the Bibliography in the appendix.

Policy Coordination in Europe
215
period; 4) some surpluses are the consequence of deliberate decisions
by economic agents who live in countries faced with a greying
population. These countries tend to invest in regions, firms, and
countries that promise to be dynamic for an extended period. This
tendency probably plays an important role in Japan, which is facing its
greying earlier than the other industrial nations. A high level of
savings and investment abroad is but a "natural" reaction for a
country in this situation.
2. - The European Issues at Present EC 1992: the Focal Point
Western Europe, which borders on the East, participates in
NATO, and is fully integrated into the West, has begun to develop its
own momentum. Although the creation of the European Monetary
System (EMS) was probably a reaction to the US dollar's loss of its
proper function as an anchor for the world currency order, the Single
European Act was a genuinely European development. Europe has
overcome its phase of "Europessimsm" and "Eurosclerosis." It is
determined to open its own internal borders, harmonize fully its
divergent standards and norms, reduce its diversity in indirect tax-
ation, and permit Europe-wide public
procurement. This encom-
passing program for deregulation is not only a fitness program for
European business, but also a convincing program for political pro-
gress in dealing with distribution coalitions (Mancur Olson). Although
no political body in the individual European nation-states is in a
position to challenge, much less seriously weaken, the lobby groups
(farmers, miners/mining, the energy industry, steel), the European
Commission or the European Court (2) can successfully dismantle
protection and reduce subsidies. Thus the European Community (EC)
can supply Europe with "competition" as a pubic good. National
politicians can "blame" the European level of administration for
enforcing unwelcome policy measures.
The 1980s will be described in history books as a decade of low
growth, insufficient investment activity, and, above all, unacceptably
(2) See the far-reaching Cassis de Dijon [I].

216
Norbert Walter
high levels of unemployment. Although the decade started with the
"uncharming" effects of the second oil price explosion, it did not
exhibit the "unholy" macroeconomic policy adjustments that took
place after the first oil price hike. Indeed, a U-turn in economic
policies occurred. Monetary policy moved into an anti-inflationary
position, irrespective of potential costs in terms of lost (short-term)
growth. This tendency in Europe was substantiated by similar moves
in US monetary policy (such as the Volcker decision of October 1979)
and the Japanese decision to not accommodate the second oil price
shock. What is more important, however, the ambition to fine-tune
economic development by deficit spending came to an end.
Discretionary demand-management policies lost public support as
a consequence of ever-increasing public deficits. Supply-side policies
long favoured by economists began to dominate policy making. The
United Kingdom was the forerenner in this regard, and the United
States followed after 1981. The continental EC countries embarked
upon supply-side policies later and more hesitantly. France even took
an extra demand-management loop after Francois Mitterand's elec-
tion and embarked upon a socialist program. Once its failure was
obvious even to socialists, however, Europe moved ahead with a
market-oriented approach. Thus a European consensus emerged that
a policy of revitalization was crucial and should be adhered to.
3. - A Basic Institutional Framework for Policy
In the years since the Treaty of Rome , the EC Commission and
the EC Council have taken over a number of responsibilities from
national governments, especially in the area of trade policy. During
the 1960s -
the heyday of demand management -
the coordination
of monetary and fiscal policies was discussed in great detail.
3.1 Monetary Policy
The Werner Report, issued at the turn to the 1970s, embodied the
first attempt to form a European economic and monetary union. The

Policy Coordination in Europe
217
Report developed a nwnber of instruments for monetary and fiscal
policy and established an institutional framework for consultation.
However, owing to the breakdown of Bretton Woods an other
perceived failures of economic policy structure, the report received
only lukewarm response and proved difficult to implement. Neither
the European snake nor -
the "wurm" -
two predecessors of the
EMS -
fulfilled the expectations of Europeans who had hoped for an
institutional breakthrough.
The foundations of the present institutional framework were laid
in 1978. The EMS, opposed by many market-oriented economists and
the Bundesbank alike -
they were suspicious of a system that
reduced sanctions against inflationary policies -
proved in practice to
work, and work successfully, in favour of anti-inflation policies. The
Bundesbank dominated the system, and the Deutschemark was
effectively established as an anchor. Policies became more and more
coherent, a development that helped to prevent realignments within
the system. When realignments were necessary, they were far from
being drastic enough to trigger massive speculative moves. Changes in
parities have more and more often been only "intra-marginal." Re-
cently, cost and price differentials have been limited to such a degree
that realignment has been avoided for a period of two and a half
years. According to market sentiments, no realignment is pending
either.
It was long argued that only the massive appreciation of the US
dollar in the first half of the 1980s made adherence to the Bundes-
bank's restrictive policies possible, since only with the help of increas-
ing net exports could the European economies reduce internal infl-
ation without suffering from too much output restraint. Yet, after
1985, when the dollar dropped, the dominance of the Bundesbank
remained unchallenged. Thus when the Bundesbank tightened its
anti-inflationary reign recently by increasing the discount and lombard
rate for the third time since last autumn, most EMS partners immedi-
ately followed suit.
The Bundesbank's policy is obviously considered to be not only
acceptable, but even optimal. Pursuit of a sustained policy of orient-
ation to the mark has developed in financial markets credibility for
reduced exchange rate risk, which has made it possible to reduce the

218
Norbert Walter
interest rate differential between formerly weak currencies and the
mark. This outcome has been particularly pronuonced recently in the
case of the French franc.
Thus monetary policy coordination in Europe has been settled,
more or less. (3) The Bundesbank is accepted as the ultimate arbiter of
the policies to be pursued. The only important European currency
that does not belong to this system is the pound. Although Nigel
Lawson effectively fixed the pound to the mark in 1987-1988, Mar-
garet Thatcher opted at a critical point in 1988 for an independent
course, -
that is, a more restrictive one -
in order to keep UK
inflation in check.
The Delors Report, published in April 1989, fully accords with
recent experience. It calls for a theree-stage monetary unification in
Europe. Stage one would complete the EMS by adding the currencies
presently out of the system and by limiting the margins to 2,25%. The
basic instrument required for the enhancement of monetary policy
coordination is full liberalization of capital flows in Europe. This step
is scheduled for 1990, although Spain, Portugal, and Greece will be
allowed a longer transition period. Stage one would also involve
improvements in the process of consultation among the national
central banks.
In the second stage, the first institutional arrangements for a
common monetary and currency policy would be made. A reserve
pool and joint foreign exchange market interventions are considered
to be meaningful first steps toward a common monetary policy. In
addition, monetary targets would be formulated.
The third and final stage would see the establishment of a federal
reserve bank of Europe. Its board would consist of the presidents of
the national central banks plus a number of members designated by
the EC Council for a long tenure; this arrangement would ensure the
political autonomy of the European central bank. The primary func-
tion of the bank would be to preserve price stability. To this effect, the
bank would not be allowed to finance public sector deficits. The
federal reserve bank would report annually to the EC Council and the
European Parliament.
(3) On the question of international monetary coordination and the problem of
choosing targets, see WIlliAMSON [8] .

Policy Coordination in Europe
219
The main elements of the proposed European institutional set-up
for monetary policy are not unlike those of the Bundesbank or the US
Federal Reserve. The political chances for this solution are relatively
good. France and Germany will be especially supportive. The true
obstacle is the United Kingdom, which is still convinced that an
institutional solution can help to stabilize long-run market expecta-
tions and thus reduce the long-run costs of stabilization policies.
3.2 Economic Policy
The economic policy paradigm in Europe is certainly different
from what it was 15 years ago. On the other hand, it would be an
exaggeration to say that supply-side policies have replaced, in a
number of countries, demand management. The persistence of strong
tendencies toward industrial policies is evidence of limited confidence
in market forces. Tax reductions and the dismantling of regulations
and subsidies, however, are hints that governments have come to
accept that their ability to steer certain processes is limited. The
economic policy paradigm is best described as being in transition
OECD [6].
In any case, no simplistic theoretical concept has a chance of
forming a basis for cooperation, let alone for the construction of
common policies. These days not every country with a budget surplus
is criticized for pursuing a beggar-thy-neighbour policy. Obviously the
Undited Kingdom's budget surplus does not lead to a dampening of
overall demand or to current account surpluses. In practice, at any
rate, the demand for fiscal cooperation has been reduced in scope.
For the most part, it does not extend beyond an expectation that a
country with an excessive government sector will enhance its incent-
ive system by reducing that sector -
that is, by reducing government
expenditures and taxes. The only coordination asked for in this
long-run effort to reduce state intervention to an acceptable level is in
the timing of necessary measures: in setting policy, individual coun-
tries are expected to take the cyclical position of the economy into
account.
However, recent forecasting failures (such as everyone's expecta-
tion of a recession after the 1987 stock market crash) have called into

220
Norbert Walter
question the necessity of even this limited measure of coordination.
For example, the increase in excise taxes in Germany in 1989 -
originally aimed at reducing the government deficit in the course of a
larger income tax reform process in three stages (1986, 1988, and
1990) -
was considered cyclically ill-timed for 1989, since a slow-
down was expected. Surprisingly, however, the European economy
was healthy and vigorous during the first half of 1989. Thus criticism
of policies on the basis of cyclical consideration, so plausible until
recently, has proved to be groundless.
In the Delors Report on European economic and monetary
integration, monetary experts stress the need for a more encom-
passing economic policy convergence as a prerequisite for any suc-
cessful attempt at full integration. In the course of this argument, they
put forward a nwnber of "old-fashioned" proposals for demand
management coordination. The repeated mention in the Report of
regional and structural policies to enhance the process of economic
integration leads one to expect some revival of technocratic coordi-
nation efforts designed to strengthen "Economocracy" (Okonomok-
ratie), as Wilhelm Ropke (1958) called it 30 years ago. Similarly, there
are hints about pan-European industrial and technological programs.
This point of view is frequently advanced by the "Roman" groups with
the European Community. Strong opposition comes from Margaret
Thatcher. Germany, long a stronghold of the market approach,
continues to speak to that effect but fails to act consistently.
The EC Commission (with a few exceptions) and, to an even
greater extent, the European Court are presently the strongholds of a
market-oriented approach in Europe. This holds true for a number of
issues, certainly for trade policies (see the second directive on bank
regulations, where for practical purposes reciprocity has been given
up as a concept).
A very concrete obstacle to the coordination of policies in Europe
has emerged in connection with the issue of the harmonization of
indirect
taxation. Although
some
observers
(such
as
Margaret
Thatcher and Herbert Giersch) argue that national sovereignty must
prevail and that markets should be left to search for the optimal
solution, the EC Commission has opted for harmonizing indirect
taxes.

Policy Coordination in Europe
221
If one changes from a system of segmented markets (border
controls and limited freedom to trade and transfer capital) to a free
market and yet taxation continues to vary from country to country,
the obvious result is "distorted" trade. One does not need the system
of discovery called the market to find this out. What amounts to
making capital obsolete would be avoided, however if taxes were
harmonized in conjunction with the dismantling to physical borders.
Otherwise the low-tax countries might be misled into propping up
investment, and the high-tax countries into disinvestment. If this were
done, then the second round (the "correction" of capital investment)
could be avoided as well as the first («market-induced» tax harmoniz-
ation). In short, all participants would be better off if tax policies were
coordinated in advance.
Excise taxes should differ from country to country only if trans-
port costs are high enough to avoid trade distortions. Value-added
taxes should not be further apart than transport costs and other
"natural" market imperfections allow.
Since islands -
the United Kingdom, for example -
are better
"protected" naturally than other places, the EC Commissions pro-
posals in this regard should not be too narrow. But countries that
share a border should be advised to bring their tax rates into even
closer harmony that the commission recommends in its present
proposals.
Debates like the one about indirect taxation indicate that Europe
has moved away from the fine-tuning of demand mangement policies
and is now addressing the more important question of the "rules of
the game" policies called Ordnungspolitik in Germany.
Can Europe live with its disequilibria?
a) The shift toward the more fundamental issues of policy
coordination occurs at a time when inflation rates are converging on
the relatively low German levels; b) unemployment rates remain
relatively high, despite some reduction recently; c) current account
disequilibria within Europe are widening, and growth rates -
after
being extremely low during the first half of the 1980s -
are recov-
ering surprisingly well.
Many outside observers view this combination of circumstances
as unacceptable and unsustainable. Consequently they expect {or

222
Norbert Walter
recommend) a dramatic correction of exchange rates and other policy
variables (4). Although developments of this kind are certainly a
possibility, they are hardly the only option.
First of all, the above description of the economic situation in
Europe is, of course, a snapshot of European economy in transition.
Many of the supply-side measures adopted in Europe have begun to
work, but they are far from having had their full impact. The EC 1992
program has just begun to exert its stimulative effect on investment
activity. The changes in the demographic profile, which have so far
kept unemployment high, are now helping to reduce it. (Growth of
the labour force will decelerate in the coming years. Shortages of
labour inclines business to hire in advance and to provide training
rather than complain about the lack of skills in the market. Thus even
long-term unemployment will tend to decline).
Whether European current account deficits will decline over the
next year is an open question. Although a cooling-off of the UK
economy and a possible weakening of the pound may help to diminish
the UK's high current account deficit, most other countries' imbal-
ances will probably not change for quite some time. The basis for this
judgment is the existence of strong voluntary capital flows into the
current account deficit countries, most of which have excellent
growth prospects in the unified European market. This is particularly
true of Spain and Portugal. To some extent, the United Kingdom
continues to be attractive for the same reason. Germany will remain
for some years the "natural" choice for the surplus country, exporting
capital goods, finance, and to some extent stability, since the mark is
the anchor within the EMS; that is, the currency that does not adjust
to inflation differentials, which though declining still exist.
The higher the share of direct investment or private capital flows
attracted by high yields, the more stable such a situation will be. (5) As
to the latter, this argument might be a circular one. It will be validated
only if the borrowers in the debtor countries eventually "earn" the
(4) In regard to the presumed need of the European surplus countries to adjust
their exchange rates vis a vis the United States, see INSTIl1JTE FOR INTERNATIONAL
EcONOMICS [4], and Amex Bank Review, n. 4, 1989.
(5) This point applies as well to the financing of the us current account deficit; see
GERMAN COUNCIL OF ExPERts [3].

Policy Coordination in Europe
223
high yields. Otherwise a correction of policies is bound to follow, a
consequence that will frustrate present expectations in the financial
markets; high interest yields will then be (over) compensated by
depreciation. Although this outcome is a distinct possibility, it ha been
frustrated in recent years. Thus the alternative, a continued dynamic
disequilibrium of the type mentioned above, is at least as probable.
Europe at large does not pose a macroeconomic adjustment
problem to the world. Its current account is balanced, its growth
substantial, and its price development moderate. (6) The fact that its
unemployment is still high should not bother other countries, since
unemployment benefits are financed at home. The outside world
would be at risk only if Europe developed into a fortress and gave up
its free trade policies. GATT negotiations should be used to avoid this
outcome.
(6) For the adjustment policy of the community. see EUROPEAN EcONOMIC COM-
MUNITY [2] .

224
Norbert Walter
BIBUOGRAPHY
[1] CASSIS DE DUON: Decision of the European Court, 20 February, 1979.
[2] EUROPEAN EcONOMIC COMMUNITY: Annual Economic Report 1988.
[3] GERMAN COUNCIL OF ExPEKI'S: Annual Economic Report, 1988.
[4] INS1111JTE FOR INTERNATIONAL EcONOMIC: American Trade Adjustment: The Global
Impact, Washington (DC), The Institute for International Economic, 1989.
[5] ORGANIZATION FOR EcONOMIC CO.QPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT: Economic Surveys:
Germany, Paris, OECD, 1988.
[6] -
--
: Economics in Transition: Structural Adjustment in Oecd Countries, Paris,
OECD, 1989.
[7] RoPKE W.: lenseits von Angebot und Nachfrage. Bern, Paul Haupt., 1979.
[8] WILLIAMSON J.: Targets and Indicators: A Blueprint for the International Coordi-
nation of Econom ic Policy, Washington (DC), Institute for International Economic,
1987.

Ten Reasons to Fear
Fortress Europe
Gerard Curzon
University of Geneva
Assume for the moment that the European Community (EC) is
about to realize its old dream of creating a single economic space,
unhampered by frontiers, that runs from Denmark to Portugal, from
Ireland to Greece, from Germany to Gibraltar -
a space that
encompasses 12 countries,
11 currencies, 9 languages, and 320
million people. What is the likelihood that this unit will turn in upon
itself?
The question is worth asking because of the sheer size of the unit:
it tends to be other countries' largest, or second largest, trade partner.
And it is worth asking because there is a high level of uncertainty (not
necessarily diminished by what follows) about the answer. Three
years away from the magic date of December 31, 1992, the com-
munity itself does not know. Because of the complex composition of
the EC, which comprises both free-traders and protectionists, the
outcome is bound to be in balance, and the EC has been unable so far
to give a clear reply one way or the other. What follows will be in the
nature of a check-list of items to reflect upon.
1. - The Official Position
For the community, it is "business as usual" as far as its external
trade policy is concerned. It sees the consolidation of external
commercial policies to non-tariff barriers as a simplification, an
undertaking not different in nature from the earlier consolidation of

226
Gerard Curzon
national tariffs in a single Common External Tariff schedule. That the
new undertaking may lead to trade diversion detrimental to third-
country interests is not officially acknowledged; the general agree-
ment on tariffs and trade (GATT) makes no provision for compensa-
tion for any loss of market access that may result from initiatives of
this kind.
Not only is access to the EC market to be simplified, but once
goods are inside they can expect to be given "national treatment";
that is, they can circulate as freely as EC goods. Outsiders, according
to the official EC view, will therefore benefit from 1992 almost as
much as insiders will. The single market project is a massive program
of deregulation aimed almost entirely at sweeping any internal inef-
ficiencies. Its consummation will result, unambiguously, in a world-
wide rise in welfare; everyone will benefit.
In areas not covered by GATT, or only imperfectly circumscribed
(services, public procurement, mutual recognition of standrds certi-
ficates and perhaps even of standards themselves), the EC has declar-
ed itself ready to negotiate with its trade partners on the basis of
reciprocity.
What more do people want? Are we not participating actively in
the Uruguay Round? There is a certain air of injured innocence in the
EC's rare pronouncements.
So why do outsiders persist in their skepticism?
2. - Ten Reasons Why Outsiders Remain Unconvinced (*)
2.1 Expansion of the EC
to Include Notoriously Protectionist Countries
It is no secret that Spain, Greece, and Portugal have an unin-
terrupted tradition of protection, corporatism, and state intervention.
Had Spain and Portugal been EC members in 1985, it is most unlikely
that the single market project would ever have been adopted. As it is,
(*) For inspiration (and confirmation) in costructing this list, I have found
HENDERSON [1] and ToVlAS [3] to be extremely useful.
Advise: the numbers in square brackets refer to the Bibliography in the appendix.

Ten Reasons to Fear Fortress Europe
227
it is southern Europe's fear of the painful effects of competition on its
antiquated and inefficient industry that gives rise to the fairly wide-
spread notion that doing away with internal frontiers implies rein-
forcing the external ones, in order to buy these countries off.
Be this as it may, the new southern members must find 1992
rather more than they had bargained for when they applied to join in
1976, and one will certainly not find them arguing on the side of freer
trade. Given the EC's new decision-making process, the protectionist
elements within the EC will at all times be able to muster a blocking
minority and may often be able to form an active majority.
2.2 Trade Diversion
The sheer size of the EC means that part of the cost of trade
diversion is likely to be passed on to third countries via a deterioration
in their terms of trade. And this deterioration will apply not just to
what remains of their trade with the EC, but to trade with the rest of
the world as well. Note that trade diversion will occur even if the
average rate of (non-tariff) protection does not change, and even if it
diminishes as a result of the Uruguay Round. It is simply an
inevitable part of creating a customs union. However, this inevitability
does not make it any easier for non-members to bear.
Furthermore, the consolidation of non-tariff barriers such as
individual quotas on Japanese automobiles into a single EC quota, or
individual voluntary export restraints (VERs) into a single EC-VER,
raises .the spectre of the EC's using its monopoly power to extract
much better terms from its victims than it could when these matters
were left to member states to decide individually.
It is incidentally interesting to note that a consolidation that
simply takes an average of existing restrictions may well end up being
more protectionist than were the dispersed restrictions in place before
consolidation. The reason is that in a free trade area the highly
protected, high-price-level market attracts imports from the low tariff,
low-price-level partner country until there is no further price differen-
tial between them (law of one price). In the low-price country,
producers may even shift 100% of their output to the high-priced
market: local demand can always be met by imports from the rest of

228
Gerard Curzon
the world. In essence, in a free trade area (or a customs union with
individualistic non-tariff barriers), the highly protectionist countries
feel the wind of competition indirectly. For example, France may
restrict Japanese automobiles to 3% of its market, but it has to take in
as many Volkswagens as Germany can produce -
and the Vol-
kswagens have to meet Japanese competition in Germany without
(much) protective clothing. They are therefore close to world-level
competitiveness, and Renault has to meet this standrd in order to
survive. However, by restricting Japanese automobiles by the same
amount everywhere, protection will rise in Germany and fall in
France. Volkswagen will be able to relax and so will Renault.
2.3 The EC's Past and Current Behaviour
with Regard to Agriculture
The single market project obviously includes agricultural goods
and indeed requires a major reform of the Common Agricultural
Policy (CAP) in order to phase out the notorius Monetary Compensa-
tion Amounts that are paid. collected, or both at frontiers between
member states. Also, a good quarter of the 300-odd measures that
need to be taken in order to realize the single market refer to
veterinary and phytosanitary regulations and controls. In the field of
agricultural trade, however, the real threat to outsiders comes less
from the single market than from the community's expansion to
include Spain, Greece, and Portugal.
The EC's record on agriculture speaks for itself: variable levies,
guaranteed prices, export subsidies, community preference -
all help
to provide a watertight market for the benefit of its members' farmers.
This system is now to be extended (with some modification, it is true)
to the South. The transition period for Mediterranean-type agricul-
tural products will end by the mid-1990s, by which time Spain in
particular will have had time to expand output to meet all expected
future demand. From being a net importer of these products, the
community is almost bound to reach self-sufficiency and may even
repeat its amazing performance with respect to temperate-zone pro-
ducts by becoming a net exporter of warm-climate fruit and veget-
ables as well. North Africa, the southern United States, and sub-

Ten Reasons to Fear Fortress Europe
229
tropical developing areas will find it increasingly difficult to achieve
access to the European market in any but a very artificial way. The
community has already offered a number of "preferred" countries
(see point five below) tariff-free quotas based on their 1980-1984
average export performance in perpetuity, thus guaranteeing to its
own producers all future growth in the market (as is only right and
proper in a single market) and ensuring that both its domestic and
international trade is neatly cartelized (as is only logical for such a
sensitive sector). Mer all, one cannot sit back idly when French
farmers spill e~ght tons of Spanish strawberries on the A7 motorway.
2.4 The BC's Past and Current Reputation
in Dealing with"Sensitive" Manufactured Goods
To make third countries bear at least part of the burden of coping
with such situations is by now an ingrained habit with many member
states. Once a product is designated as "sensitive," all rational thought
is suspended: it becomes sacred. Exactly how a product achieves this
special status is, in Europe, largely shrouded in mystery. We do not
have North America's open public debate on trade policy. However,
the facts are there. The member states of the EC, and sometimes the
EC as a unit, make frequent use of VERs, and not just in textiles
either. For instance, Boonekamp has determined that of a total of 99
non-MFA VERs, the community is responsible for 53. This suggests
that the community's free and open market is a fair-weather affair.
Markets remain open as long as the prices and quantities are "right."
The minute they are "wrong" the product becomes "sensitive," and
the VERs appear in due course, sometimes after the product has spent
a short period on the list of products under antidumping investigation
(see point 2.6 below). This means that VERs not only cartelize the
markets to which they apply directly but may also have the effect of
cartelizing those to which they apply only potentially. "Self-discipline"
must be exercised on all fronts if one is to avoid constant trouble.
All of this is well known. The trouble is that outsiders see no
reason to believe that an EC transformed into a single market will
behave any differently. On the contrary, they fear that the leverage
applied by the 12 member states acting simultaneously would be

230
Gerard Curzon
much more daunting than that applied by them individually (see also
point two above). No amount of earnest denial on the part of officials
of the Commission of European Communities manages to eradicate
the community's past reputation for avoiding competition whenever it
hurts.
2.5 The Least-Favoured Nation Principle
The community has never really taken on board the notion of a
multilateral, non-discriminatory trading system. This omission is
understandable, perhaps, in the case of a unit that expresses itself
toward the outside world in terms of trade policy.
If one places the EC at the centre of an imaginary planetary
system, the closest and most favoured satellites are clearly the
European Free Trade Association (EFTA) countries, which are linked
to the EC via bilateral free trade areas that cover industrial (but not
agricultural) goods. Next comes Turkey, with associate status that will
lead to full customs union at some unstated time in the future. Then
come a dozen non-member Mediterranean countries, which are liked
to the EC by a series of bilateral, often non-reciprocal agreements that
cover both industrial and agricultural goods, and make generous use
of that great instrument of free trade, the tariff quota. Then come the
60-odd countries of the African, Caribbean, and Pacific regions of the
globe with similar links to the EC but with less capacity to exploit
them. Then we have, of course, the broader nebula of countries that
benefit from the General System of Preferences. After these countries
comes a select group comprising the United States, Canada, Australia,
and New Zealand, which are neither favoured nor actively discri-
minated against. One could add to the outer orbit of this group
eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. Still further out, in the colder
reaches of this solar system, one may discern the newly industrializing
countries, frequent victims of VERs and phony antidumping investiga-
tions. Finally comes Japan, the ultimate pariah.
We are so used to this state of affairs that no one remarks upon it
any more. But one may be sure that Europe of the single market will
also establish a hierarchy. Indeed, the EFTA countries have been told
not to worry about 1992 and North America too is assured that it has

Ten Reasons to Fear Fortress Europe
231
nothing to fear -
the fortress will be open to the west. We know
which side our bread is buttered on, after all.
Our one-sided fortress is nonetheless a fortress, and a very
effective one at that. By excluding only the most efficient and
competitive products, it enjoys a quiet life while keeping up free-
trading appearances. One can almost hear the disclaimer: «What!
Europe a fortress? You must be joking. Look at how much we import
from the United States».
2.6 The Ee's New Anti-Dumping Mechanism
Having observed the United States' anti-dumping and counter-
vailing duty process at work (420 cases in this decade), and realizing
what a powerful tool of trade policy it could be, the community
modernized its own antidumping procedures in 1984 (330 cases over
the same period). Brian Hindley's detailed study of how the new
procedures have been applied (Hindley [2]) shows just how arbitrary
the calculation of the margin of dumping can be . Hindley finds
dumping margins of 30, 40, 50, and even 70% on Japanese products
such as excavators, dot-matrix printers, and electronic typewriters.
Why Japanese producers should be so keen on virtually giving these
goods away remains mysterious. In any case, as Hindley shows, the
commission "constructs" the prices from which it calculates the
dumping margin in such a way that overheads, R&D, and marketing
costs are deducted from the landed import price but not from the
Japanese local market price. This is why the margins are so large.
Furthermore, Hindley notes, it is now "policy" not to negotiate VERs
with Japan, but to go through with a full anti-dumping investigation
and subsequent imposition of the appropriate duties if (as is not
unlikely) dumping is found to exist.
2.7 Discrimination Among Firms
on the Basis of Their Head-office Locations
The idea that all firms that are legally constituted within a
member state have a right to non-discriminatory treatment has taken
a few knocks lately. For example, Nissan UK has been told by France
and Italy that its automobiles will be considered Japanese for the

232
Gerard Curzon
purpose of applying the unilateral grandfather quotas imposed by
these two countries. Although the commission has since ruled that
cars produced by Nissan UK must be considered European because
they contain "sufficient" local value-added (60%), and although Fran-
ce (but not Italy) has reluctantly agreed to abide by this decision, the
very fact that the "Europeanness" of a product made in the com-
munity by a community subsidiary of a foreign firm should revolve
around the degree of value-added is, in itself, the application of a
double standard. There are a great many products, made by European
European firms, that require substantial non-EC inputs, starting with
our pride and Joy, the European Airbus. But no one is suggesting that
they should be subjected to this discriminatory value-added scrutiny.
Only Japanese firms qualify for this special treatment. In addi-
tion, it looked for a while as though the EC intended to treat "real"
European banks differently from foreign EC-resident banks. The
banking directive proposed in 1988 was ambiguous in this respect: it
wanted to make non-community countries "pay" for their banks'
access to the big single market in terms of improved access for
community banks to their markets. Since then the community has
backtracked, but it still says that it intends to use its bargaining power
to negotiate freer markets for services with other countries on the
basis of reciprocity. This is all very well as long as the EC is successful
in its endeavours. But what if it fails? What punishment will the EC
inflict on its trading partners if they should fail to open their services
markets? Presumably, discrimination of some kind within the single
market against their banks; it is difficult to think of anything else.
Constant references to reciprocity in this context therefore suggest a
willingness to discriminate among service firms on the basis of the
nationality of their principal shareholders. Discrimination of this kind
flies in the face of generally accepted notions of civilized behaviour, in
particular national treatment and equality before the law.
2.8 Technical Standards
The community's "new approach" to the harmonization of tech-
nical
standards,
which relies
much
more
heavily
than
earlier

Ten Reasons to Fear Fortress Europe
233
approaches did on the principle of mutal recognition, could become
an important non-tariff barrier against third countries.
The "new approach" involves: a) the establishment of minimum
essential requirement at the community level (basic objectives to be
met by regulation); b) in some cases, the drawing up of more detailed
specifications by industrial standards bodies; c) in other cases, mutual
recognition and accreditation of existing (different) national standards
as meeting the conditions laid down in a) and/or b); and d) the mutual
recognition of test certificates issued by approved standards bodies
and valid throughout the community.
The question is whether products from third countries can plug
into the community's certification system at any convenient point and
thereby automatically receive EC-wide recognition, or whether they
will have to repeat the process 12 times, as is the case (for everyone)
at present. As far as this writer is aware, the community itself does not
yet know the answer to this question. Clearly, it would prefer to
negotiate "mutual recognition" treaties with its principal trading
partners, rather than hand them the automatic right of single-point
access on a platter. The EFTA countries are taking no chances. They
are active participants at stage b) and have announced their willing-
ness to proceed to stages c) and d) on a reciprocal basis. However,
nothing has occurred to indicate how the United States or Japan plans
to tackle the problem, apart from Mr. Mobascher's suggestion that he
be offered an observer's seat in the EC Council of Ministers.
2.9 Government Procurement
Great improvements in efficiency are expected to flow from the
plan to pool public sector demand by forbidding EC government
purchasing agents to discriminate against competitive bids from
partner countries. In fact, this plan is a cornerstone of the whole
single market edifice. Industry, the commission, and the member
state governments are one in believing that what stops, for instance,
the European telecommunications industry from being efficient is that
there are 11 producers -
one for every member except Luxembourg.
What stops the most efficient among them from investing in more
capacity in order to reap known economies of scale is the sure

234
Gerard Curzon
knowledge that they will be unable to sell to their next-door neigh-
bours, even at half the price and twice the quality. So everyone
remains inefficient.
Doing away with these inefficiencies mayor may not propel
European industry into the high-tech Nirvana of the Twenty-First
century, but one thing is sure -
the intention is to favour community
firms. It is for them, not for the Americans or (heaven forbid) the
Japanese, that the single market is being created. We Europeans have
taken Paul Krugman's new trade theory to heart and intend to apply it
to the best of our ability. Thus, although the Uruguay Round may
well address the problem of government procurement, this writer
would be prepared to bet that the community will reserve a broad
swathe of hightech products as being non-negotiable, and concentrate
the negotiations on opening up public sector contract for coffee cups
and paper clips.
2.10 Subsidies and Industrial Policy
The Commission has always hankered after an industrial policy
worthy of its status. Its ambition has been restrained by the member
states, loath to hand over to the commission such a unique source of
privilege and power. Nevertheless the realization that no single
European country, not even France, could master alone the whole
range of new
technologies emerging from
the electronics and
communications revolution led in 1982 to the launch of a experimen-
tal program called ESPRIT (European Strategic Program for Research
and Development in Information Technology). It started with a small
budget ($30 million), but its main thrust was not money. It was to
mobilize the energies of 12 of the largest community companies
involved in "informatics" (plus a host of smaller companies, research
institutes, and universities) to pursue jointly some 200 carefully
selected "pre-competitive" R&D projects. The Commission provided
the coordinating function and made sure that the agreements between
firms formed under ESPRIT did not get caught by any overzealous
antitrust investigation.
ESPRIT's purpose was to put Europe on the map as far as
chip-making was concerned -
in which it has been successful, since

Ten Reasons to Fear Fortress Europe
235
we now have JESSI (Joint European Silicon Structures Initiative),
which
coordinates
technological
and
manufacturing skills at
a
European level, although one suspects that one should not ask what
European chips cost.
In 1984, a larger ESPRIT progrom was allocated US $400 million
over five years, and ESPRIT III, running from 1987 to 1991, has
attracted over US $2.5 billion in public funds. In the meantime,
ESPRIT has been joined by BRITE (Basic Research in Industrial
Technologies for Europe), RACE (Research into Advanced Communi-
cations in Europe), SPRINT (Strategic Program for Innovation and
Technology Transfer), and many other programs covering R&D re-
lated to the environment, biotechnology, energy, marine resources,
AIDS, satellite TV, space vehicles, and so on. A total of US $8 billion
will be devoted to funding hundreds of industry-led projects under
these programs on a parity basis with industry between now and
1991; and presumably a whole department has been entrusted with
the task of thinking up the appropriate acronyms.
The point, of course, it that these projects are hugely popular -
with the commission, with governments (now that they have got used
to the idea), with industry. The Commission enjoys supervising them
(who would not?), member state governments like the feeling of
belonging once more to the very select group of nations that can fund
and master a
full range of new technologies, and industry is
discovering (perhaps sometimes rediscovering) the joys of working
together for a common purpose.
Furthermore,
these
community-led
programs
to
beef
up
European R&D were joined in 1985 by President Francois Mitterand's
Eureka scheme (propelled into orbit by President Reagan's Strategic
Defense Initiative), which has proved even more popular with indus-
try because it encourages European firms to collaborate on using the
high-tech they have developed under the first lot of programs to
produce actual goods and services. Although not strictly speaking a
community program (it includes the EFfA and Turkey), Eureka is a
logical extension of the EC's undertakings.
The next logical extension would be to develop an overall
framework into which to fit all of these programs -
that is, an
industrial strategy. In short, the single market is almost bound to give

236
Gerard Curzon
birth to a kind of European Mm ala Japonaise by the middle or the
next decade.
Let it be said immediately that this is no more and no less than
what the Ee's main competitors have done in the past or plan to do in
the future. But that is not the point. The trouble with Europe's love
affair with industrial policy is that one does not transform a rather
backward, slow-moving, high-cost industrial structure into a set of
lean and mean firms by letting them pool ideas and resources. So the
likelihood of getting high-quality, low-cost, and competitive products
out of the system is rather slight. Instead, we shall produce goods and
services that will ask for and get (temporary) protection. It would
scarcely do to throw all that money down the drain, would it?
And indeed, is not a large domestic market, some initial help
from government to overcome capital market skepticism (known as
market failure), and temporary protection from established outside
producers exactly what the new trade theorists prescribe? Perhaps it
will work, but in any event we must be prepared for complaints from
US high-tech firms that they are being deprived of their rightful
European markets. It will be the Airbus dispute multiplied many times
over.
But all is not necessarily bleak. As a counterweight to what has gone
before, one can cite the following:
3•. Five Reasos of Optimism
3.1 - The Uruguay Round may be successful in reducing tariffs
and non-tariff barriers, in reducing support for agriculture and in
liberalizing services. In fact , a successful Uruguay Round would be
the best possible deterrent to the erection of Fortress Europe.
3.2 - The single market, if it is to be successful, will be obliged to
be universal- that is, if internal frontiers go, they will go at least for
all community goods and services and in part (subject to the doubts
expressed above) for non-community goods and services too. If, on
balance, the process does produce more trade creation than trade

Ten Reasons to Fear Fortress Europe
237
diversion, the EC industry should emerge from its restructuring more
efficient than it was when it went in and perhaps less inclined to shout
for protection. This result would come as a surprise to, say, the
Spanish or the French, who on the whole do not believe in the
curative powers of competition. Quite the contrary: as was mentioned
earlier, it is from France and Spain that one hears the argument that
the community's external frontiers need to be reinforced in order to
"compensate" producers for having to put up with 1992. However,
radically improved efficiency may well be the actual outcome. If so,
and especially if the Uruguay Round is successful, the community
may suddenly find that the protectionist clamour has died down.
3.3 - The dynamic effects of 1992 are expected to be substantial.
The Community of Twelve fulfills most of the Vinerian conditions for a
successful, welfare-enhancing customs union (always assuming a
reasonably successful Uruguay Round), which means that real in-
comes will rise. The commission has estimated that 5 million new jobs
will be created by the end of the century, an outcome that will add
something on the order of the GNP of the Netherlands to the
community's output. What outsiders lose on the trade diversion
swings they may gain on the dynamic roundabouts.
3.4 - European industrialists, who played a large part in launch-
ing the single market, and who much looked forward to using it as
their "own" domestic base from which to take the world by storm,
may realize in time that a market of 320·350 million fairly rich people
is just too small. Only global markets and global competitiveness
matter any more, and if one has to confront the competition abroad,
one may as well confront it at home too.
3.5 - Ultimately, the community is too dependent on world trade
to make a substantial step backward into protection. Although tactical
protectionist moves may be made from time to time for political
reasons, the basic understanding exists that competition and open
markets are good for you -
otherwise, why go for the single market
at all?

238
4. - Conclusions
Gerard Curzon
Where the balance between these various forces will finally come
to rest is at present mere speculation. One can only re-emphasize the
importance of bringing the Uruguay Round to a successful con-
clusion, of enhancing GAIT's disciplines and extending its principles
to new areas such as services and old ones such as agriculture. In the
past, whenever Europe lurched forward in its long-standing ambition
to create or extend a "common" market, a major GAIT round
followed at the initiative of the United States. This time around, the
single market initiative (1985-1993) contains a major GAIT negotia-
tion
(Uruguay
Round:
1986-1990).
This
coincidence
has
its
drawbacks (in that the community may stall over a number of issues
on the ground that it is still in the process of formulating its internal
market policies), but it also has its advantages: there is a ready-made
forum in which third countries can air their worries and affect
outcomes. However, the writer suspects that a successor to the
Uruguay Round had better be conceived as soon as possible, in
readiness for the mid-1990s, so that steady pressure on the com-
munity to remain open to both West and East can be maintained.
This is by far the best strategy for non-members and one that, if
pursued relentlessly,
will bring us close to a frontierless world
economy before the next century is very old.

Ten Reasons to Fear Fortress Europe
BIBUOGRAPHY
239
[1] HENDERSON D.: «1992: The External Dimension», New York, Group of thirty,
Occasional Papers, n. 25, 1989.
[2] HINDLEY B.: «Dumping and the Far East Trade of the European Community», The
World Economy, n. 11, December 1988, pp. 445-63.
[3] Tovrss A.: The Impact of the On-Going Progress in the Economic Integration of
Western Europe on Her Status in the World, Paper presented to the International
Annual Conference at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 6, 7, and 8 Jule 1988.

IV . THIRD WORLD DEBT

World Disequilibrium
and Third World Debt
Harold Lord Lever
House of Lords, Westminster
The issue of Third World debt must be seen as one aspect, and by
no means the most important, of the wider and more threatening
problem of global disequilibrium. The world's leaders and their
advisers have not so far addressed this problem with the necessary
historical understanding or with a firm grasp of clear principles.
Indeed, they have still to recognize and define the global interests
involved, interests that have long required purposeful action. If they
were to do this, it would become clear that any solution to the
complex of problems involves collective responsibility, which in turn
means that all major countries would accept risks and potential costs
in order to protect their joint interests.
I . . General Global Disequilibrium
At the end of the Second World War there was a trinity of
economic issues on which the world started to find but then lost its
way -
trading arrangements, parity management, and trade deficits.
An elite of thinker persuaded the us and other governments to
recognize that the post-war world was likely to see political and
economic interdependence increase greatly. It was rightly seen that
the world's wealth would be increased by a continued stimulus to the
international division of labour, that innovation and adaptation would
flourish in the developed areas, and that the poorer countries could
develop more rapidly than in the past. It was also recognized that

244
Harold Lord Lever
liberalization of trade between nations would greatly encourage these
developments.
These proposals were a bold attempt to apply the wisdom of
Adam Smith's principles to twentieth century circumstances. Smith
wrote: «The Government has the duty of erecting and maintaining
certain public works and certain public institutions which it can never
be to the interest of any individual or small number of individuals to
erect and maintain because the profit could never repay the expense
to any individual or small number of individuals though it may
frequently do much more than repay it to a great society». like Smith,
they recognized that competitive private enterprise would be the
mainspring of growing wealth creation. But like Smith they saw that
this "invisible hand" would achieve its benign results only if the
competitive system operated within an appropriate legal and institu-
tional framework provided by governments -
insights that Smith
expounded at length but that tend to be only in part recalled or
applied today. They recognized in particular that we would need,
through public institutions, to supplement, support, and discipline
private-enterprise operations required to finance the correcting of
inter-country imbalances in a manner and over a period that avoided
unnecessary dislocations.
GAlT was set up to promote and sustain freer trade. But the
thinking that inspired GAlT and the mechanisms on which it relied
was incomplete. Everybody was in favour of more free trade, but not
enough thought was given to the pace at which domestic production
could accept replacement by imports or to the disruptions that this
process would cause. There was little attempt in government or
academic circles to elucidate likely political and economic difficulties
or to develop a coherent set of principles to apply to them.
The con~nsus in favour of freer trade was supported by recogni-
tion that this would require exchange rates that reflected fundamental
economic factors. It was understood, too, that a collectively sup-
ported finance mechanism would be required to mitigate the injurious
consequences of trading imbalances, for the sake not just of the
country in difficulty but also of all its trading partners. The Interna-
tional Monetary Fund (IMF) was therefore set up to help regulate
exchange rates and to soften the tendency of payment imbalances to

World Disequilibrium and Third World Debt
245
produce unnecessary contractions in economic activity and trade.
Bretton Woods and the IMF were set- up as a first step in supporting
these objectives. In practice the operations of the IMF were too
limited and short term. More damaging, they were focused on what
were assumed to be temporary problems of deficits of advanced
countries. Credit facilities were not advanced to finance advanced
countries when their rhythm of imbalance was more prolonged than
conventional wisdom supposed or to deal with the likely problems of
the deficits of developing countries.
Bretton Woods was set up to deal with the currency problem but
made little or no provision for dealing with the impact of capital flows
that began increasingly to distort currency patterns and that, against
the background of remarkable advances in the global economy,
helped produce imbalances larger and longer than any foreseen. By
the mid-1960s Bretton Woods manifestly required modernization to
respond to the great advance of world interdependence and the
realities of capital movements. The System needed also to deal with
US inability to influence its own exchange rate or to cover its external
monetary imbalances by gold payments in the manner provided for by
Bretton Woods. Yet when this situation reached a crisis in the early
1970s, instead of bringing Bretton Woods up to date, the leading
countries of the world precipitately abandoned it. The world's leaders
opted for floating rates while still pledging that, "in full cooperation
with the International Monetary Fund and those who trade with US,
we will press for the necessary reforms to set up an urgently needed
new international monetary system". That pledge confirmed that
there was no agreed sense among governments that floating rates
provided a basis for a superior or permanent monetary system. The
pledge continues to be unredeemed.
There is now growing realization that the decision to float the
leading currencies was a dangerous move away from the development
of collective monetary discipline to a blatant unilateralism, which
would pass money power into the hands of the unpredictable interna-
tional restlessness of capital movements. The apostles of floating rates
had failed to anticipate that exchange rates would become dominated
by capital movements and would be for long periods at levels wholly
unrelated to comparative economic advantage. They failed to see that

246
Harold Lord Lever
the underlying rationale of a liberal trade and investment order would
be undermined. Monetary instability since then has continuously
weakened the whole fabric of post-war achievement. Prolonged defor-
mation of exchange rates has helped produce vastly greater, more
anomalous, and more persistent imbalances in trading and current
accounts, and dangerous inadequacies in their financing abound,
greatly imperilling the banking system, deficit countries, and world
trade.
The reflex responses of a dynamic world economy to all this have
left
the
world
with
powerfully
entrenched
industrial
patterns
compatible only with these enormous trade imbalances. Unless this
situation is corrected, the years ahead will undoubtedly witness
serious financial, economic, and political dislocations. But the malign
process outlined above has now reached a point where it has become
impossible to achieve this correction without major advances in
present economic thinking and practice. The actions of the GS and the
G7 since 1984 have, without clear analysis and comprehension of the
problem, shown an uncertain and inadequate awareness of this fact.
They have given the world a precarious breathing space which must
be used to develop the required systemic intervention by public
authorities, inspired by clearly recognized collective purposes.
Adam Smith's wisdom on the duty of government has been
universally recognized in domestic financial and monetary arrange-
ments (though not, unfortunately, always in a wise manner and
extent) but has not been intelligently or sufficiently applied to our
collective interest in preserving and extending the global economy.
The great technological advance of the post-war years has dramati-
cally advanced world's ability to create wealth. We now have par-
adox: communist countries are threatened by breakdown because of
the inability of their system to permit these advances, while the
free-enterprise world is endangered by its success in doing so without
having created adequate financial structures to accommodate and
sustain the process.
All this must be seen in the context of a world problem which has
not yet been solved. In the immediate post-war world, US dominance
was able to ensure at least the minimum leadership required for
increasing economic interdependence and to support the promising

World Disequilibrium and Third World Debt
247
institutions developed to this end after 1945: Bretton Woods, GAIT,
the IMF, and so on. The Marshall Plan demonstrated that the world
had begun to learn the lesson of German reparations after the First
World War and that the "sacrifices" required by a more enlightened
view produced immediate benefits to both donors and recipients. But
the waning of US dominance has seen a transfer, from a power
broadly able and willing to make coherent decisions in support of
interdependence, to unco-ordinated plural power of a number of
countries as yet neither able nor willing to do so. The result has been
failure to develop, and in some aspects grave weakening of, the
promising institutions set up in 1945. The transfer to plural power has
not as yet been accompanied by willingness of those who wield it to
accept the growth of responsibility that must accompany growing
power, and the United States itself has not learned to move from
dominance to leadership.
The global economy now has insufficient continuous leadership.
At best, plural power is exercised with a sense of the common interest
only in response to crisis (that is, after damage) and only to the extent
that avoids disaster rather than yields enduring solutions. We are
therefore in a state of high unpredictability and instability in inter-
country financial and economic relations, all of which threatens
serious political consequences.
2.• Third World Debt
As with these wider issues, discussions about Third World debt
have lacked historical perspective or a search for clear principles.
Throughout the post-war period, governments recognized that
the advanced countries had important collective interests, political
and economic, in assisting the development of countries in Latin
America and elsewere by the transfer of funds; that is, resources. They
saw, too, that in many cases this could be undertaken only to a limited
extent on a purely commercial basis without government commit-
ment.
Even before 1974 the aid and loans, provided by governments
and their agencies, were far less effectively deployed than they might

248
Harold Lord Lever
have been. Among other shortcomings, there was no attempt to
influence recipient governments away from propensities to create
misguided areas of state enteprise or state regulation calculated to
prejudice severely wealth creation by their private enterprise sectors.
But the methods adopted did not at any rate result in financial crisis
either for the borrowing countries or for the lending or donating
governments.
The oil cartel's actions in 1974 brought about a new situation in
which the transfer of funds required was clearly greater than could be
contemplated within existing budgetary conventions. Private banks,
however, loaded with oil money and encouraged by their govern-
ments and regulators, undertook to recycle massive funds by way of
lending to Latin American and other countries. This unregulated
recycling process helped bring about expansion of the so-called
Euro-currency market. This market was itself a world-wide area of
banking, virtually free from the regulation that every modern govern-
ment had for long applied to domestic banking systems, and added to
the anarchic monetary conditions that came into being as Bretton
Woods broke down.
The delusion, shared by everybody concerned, was that just as
advanced countries were able to borrow unlimited amounts in their
domestic currencies, these countries borrowing in foreign currencies
would be able to refinance their obligations for an indefinite period
ahead. But foreign-currency loans require an export surplus if they
are to be serviced in real terms. There was no attempt by private
banks, central banks, or the governments of creditor or debtor
countries to assess whether or when the borrowings could be serviced
in real terms without prejudicing the debtor economies (or indeed the
creditor economies that would have to receive the necessary export
surpluses involved if they materialized). The whole operation was
based on the delusion that continuous refinancing would be available
indefinitely to cover new borrowings and service at compound interest
the old ones.
Predictably this process lost credibility and resulted in a halt to
new lending in 1981 and, indeed, to a reserve transfer of funds in
order to meet the resulting crisis. It is perhaps worth pondering why
governments and central banks saw their role only as cheerleaders of

World Disequilibrium and Third World Debt
249
this process and why, in a world never richer in economic institutes,
full-time professional advisers, and commentators, so few voices were
heard expressing concern between 1974 and 1981. Since then there
has been no acceptance by the governments of the advanced countries
or their central banks of the basic principles that will have to govern
the parties if we are to achieve a satisfactory outcome from these
difficulties. My own view of these six basic principles can be stated
thus:
1) the advanced countries, governments, and peoples (yes,
including their taxpayers) have important interests in the economic
and political progress of the debtor countries, to say nothing of their
responsibilities for ensuring the safety of the world's banking system.
They have a limited ability to influence events favourably. The main
responsibility for their economic and political achievements will
always depend upon the actions of the debtor countries themselves.
But our political and economic objectives require that, as far as we
can, we support development of democratic and stronger economies
and healthy private enterprise within these countries. For this purpose
they undoubtedly need funds, at least to cover the interest on
outstanding debt;
2) a net flow of resources to the Latin American and other
debtor countries for a considerable period ahead will advance our
interests and theirs: a premature net flow of resources from them in
the years immediately ahead will be prejudicial to their interests and
ours;
3) the ability of most Third World debtor countries (notably,
the Latin American debtors) to service debts at compound interest and
in real terms to the extent and within the time scale required by an
unsupported commercial operation is wholly unpredictable. The
mountain of unserviceable debt already piled up and rising ought to
have made any renewal of such a concept wholly unthinkable;
4) therefore, if it is judged that substantial new credits to these
countries are appropriate and relevant to our interests and theirs, it is
dangerously speculative to expect that their interests can be served by
a purely commercial operation in the years immediately ahead. Our
objective must be to provide new lending on a reliable basis sufficient

250
Harold Lord Lever
to end at the earliest possible date the premature export surpluses of
the debtors, which are against the interests of debtors and creditors
and of world trade. Until 1982 the governments of the advanced
countries unanimously recognized that a positive transfer of resources
to Latin America and other Third World countries would promote our
interests and theirs. But since 1982 they have been forced, by the
failure of the erroneous methods of recycling, to bring about a
premature and damaging reverse transfer from these countries. Thus,
what started out as a consensus of the advanced countries govern-
ments to assist these countries has degenerated into the very opposite.
This was not intended and is neither sustainable nor desirable;
5) most governments still recognize the need for new money to
be provided. What they have not recognized is that lending on the
scale required cannot be achieved in the years immediately ahead
without government backing. The view held by governments and the
IMF -
that private banks could be expected to resume voluntary
lending in the near future -
is the central reason why there has been
no real progress in resolving this problem. It is neither feasible nor
desirable to expect private banks to resume lending on a voluntary
basis for many years ahead. Moreover, private banks can not by
themselves either influence the outline economic policies of the debtor
countries or control the total amounts of borrowing or its direction.
The misguided and futile attempts by the leading countries after 1981
to persuade the banks to undertake unsupported new lending would,
if successful, have prepared an even greater crisis later on;
6) private bank lending will be required, but it must be con-
trolled in its extent and terms: it must be supported as well as
disciplined by the institutions of the advanced countries. The debtors
for their part must submit economic policies designed to strengthen
their economies in the long terms, not, as at present, to create an
export surplus long before this can be achieved without prejudicing
their economies and politics. Continuous IMF approval would be the
basis for arranging the necessary guarantees by international institu-
tions which would ensure a flow of genuine new loans from the
market sufficient to meet that part of the interest at present being met
by export surpluses. The lending would by no means be purely for use
of governments, though the foreign currency received would, of

World Disequilibrium and Third World Debt
251
course, be available to them to meet their external commitments.
Steps must be taken to ensure that private industry participated
strongly in any new funding.
The IMF's mandate should be not, at present, the short-term one
of exacting a premature export surplus from the debtors, but the
longer-term one seeking, with agreement of debtor governments,
reforms likely
to
promote sustainable economic growth, within
which, over a lengthy period, export surpluses could be developed.
For the poorest countries, a more realistic system of aid will be
required, but on a basis conceived more intelligently than in the past.
The IMF's arrival will always imply some unattractive realism for
debtors, but its present mandate makes it the precursor of riots. What
I am proposing will not merely invite debtors to accept disciplines that
are in their own long-term interest but also offer the immediate
advantages of new funding. The Baker and Brady Plans signify
movement in the direction of recognizing the realities I have outlined,
though in an imperfect and inadequate manner. Their ideas must be
encouraged and developed.
3. - Conclusions
Past lending was undertaken under a delusion shared by govern-
ments, regulators, and private banks. Important global interests were
in fact served during this period, but in a profligate and unsustainable
manner. The result is a greatly exposed banking system and Latin
American and other governments saddled with an unmanageable level
of debt. Emergency actions included enforcing a premature export
surplus from debtors, but one insufficient to cover interest on the old
debts. Hence the debt continues to increase and the economies and
politics of the debtor countries, as well as world trade, are all injured.
The leading banks have to deal with increasingly incredible debt
claims on their books. They will require years to make provisions to
bring their books into accord with market realities.
Our objectives in respect of past and future debt must be
threefold: 1) to end as early as possible all anomalous, premature

252
Harold Lord Lever
transfers of resources from debtors; 2) ultimately to achieve a positive
flow of new resources to many debtor countries for a period ahead
until each country can achieve an export surplus without prejudicing
its economic growth or world trade balance; and 3) to achieve these
objectives while protecting the fundamental interests of the private
banking system.
An outline of one of the possible ways in which we could achieve
these objectives is as follows. Subject to IMF approval of debtor-coun-
try policies case by case, appropriate government agencies must
provide guarantees that ensure new funding to the debtors to the
extent necessary to remove the negative transfers from them without
further prejudicing the banks. In return, the banks must accept the
obligation to continue to make provisions against the existing stock of
debt over the coming years by a percentage of their future profits. It
should be understood that the flow of foreign currency to the debtors
provided by governments, the IMF, and the World Bank is even now
an indirect but important contributor to the receipt by banks of
interest. Money is fungible. The additional action I am proposing
would reliably ensure a flow of funds to meet interest in full. It would
be fair and in the banks' own long-term interest, in return for this
consideration to agree to transfer the debts to an appropriate interna-
tional agency, at the then-written-down book value when required at
some time in the future.
The flow of new funds would ensure debtors' ability to maintain
interest payments without depriving them of a sizeable part of their
export earnings. The banks would be able to make provisions against
the debt every year at an increasing rate as the debt diminished. At the
appropriate time in the future -
say, in 10 to 15 years -
an
intergovernmental agency would take over existing debts at their then
value after provisions and would reduce the debtors' obligations
accordingly, taking into account each debtor country's position at that
time.
Debtors would be adding to their foreign currency debts by new
borrowing to replace their export surplus, but within arrangements
that ensured that the total debt would be ultimately reduced by the
provisions being made by the private banks in respect of existing debt.
On the one hand, debtors would increase their indebtedness by new

World Disequilibrium and Third World Debt
253
borrowing, which would make it possible for them to use their export
expansion to finance internal economic development. On the other
hand, they would be assured of an ultimate massive reduction of
existing debt, to a fraction of its present size. With these arrangements
the debtors' immediate gains would support motivations for economic
reform and gain time within which these could fructify. The banks for
their part would be receiving their full interest, thus enabling them to
increase provisions in relation to their debt each year out of future
profits. We would thereby be creating a sound and realistic basis for
the resumption of new voluntary lending, as each debtor country, at
varying pace and with improved economic and financial policies,
brought about the required economic growth.
The present arrangements result in a steadily mounting dollar
debt of increasing incredibility, chronic tension between debtors and
creditors, serious internal political and economic damage within
debtor countries, and injury to world trade. Action governed by the
principles outlined above would reconcile the long-term interests of
the creditor and debtor countries and of our banking system. It would
share the burden in a fair and practicable manner between them. If
my proposal, or action to the like effect, were taken by governments
we would be gaining time to repair past errors and would reconcile
the long-term interests of both creditor and debtor countries.
I am satisfied that governments and bank regulators could ensure
that no bank could seek to be a free rider to these arrangements. But I
will not here go into the detailed mechanism required for this or of the
guarantee action I am proposing. What follows is merely an outline of
what would be needed:
1) the IMF would examine the economic policies of each country
case by case, on the understanding that satisfactory policies would
allow them to recommend export credit or other governmental
agencies to provide guarantees for new borrowing within a specific
total for each period and each country. The totals would in any year
be such as to limit the use of the debtors' export surpluses to a level
compatible with their economic growth;
2) any country that had won the IMF's seal of approval would
know that the agencies of the advanced countries would be prepared

254
Harold Lord Lever
to guarantee bank lending within prescribed amounts. Given the
guarantees, there would be no difficulty in achieving the required
funds from the markets;
3) a small intergovernmental agency would be set up to co-ordi-
nate the actions of the government agencies of different countries,
mainly to ensure that lending was within prescribed limits and
enjoyed the continuous supportive recommendation of the IMF,
based on its revised mandate;
4) governments and central banks would have to act in cooper-
ation with the other agencies to ensure that existing bank creditors
accepted the conditions to write down existing debt and undertake to
transfer it to an appropriate international agency, on demand at a
future time, at the then-written-down value.
Governments have still not recognized that, in this area and in
this period, one cannot support these important global economic and
political interests without taking some collective responsibility for the
risks and losses involved and influencing debtor countries' economic
policies, so far as is realistically possible. Conventional wisdom has
great difficulty in accepting that in this area commercial agencies
must be used to achieve social purpose, but on a basis that requires
the intervention of public authorities to both discipline and support
the operation. This principle has been taken for granted in many other
areas, such as export credits and the financing of small businesses
domestically. What I have proposed is no departure from sound
principle but a necessary extension of it to our international concerns.

v - THE REFORM OF THE
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY SYSTEM

International Nominal Targeting (INT):
A Proposal for Overcoming Obstacles
to Policy Coordination (*)
Jeffrey A. Frankel
University of California, Berkeley
The central theorem about the economic gains from international
policy coordination which has very strong implications for the design
of the international monetary system is that if countries in general set
their policies jointly they will be better able to attain their economic
objectives than if they set them independently. (The alternative non-
cooperative equilibrium, in which each country independently sets
own policies, taking the politicies of the others as given, is its termed
the Nash equilibrium). The coordination theorem appears to be a
strong argument for policy makers to set up the machinery for regular
meetings and cooperative setting of macroeconomic policies, and the
entire issue has been a popular research topic in the academic
community since at least the early 1960s.
Since September 1985, when the finance ministers of the Group
of five (G5) countries struck their Plaza Agreement, international
coordination has become popular in the policy making community as
well. Although that agreement concerned only the exchange value of
the dollar, it formalized the process of cooperation, which was
broadened to include the rest of macroeconomic policy management
(*) I thank Julia Lowell for highly efficient research assistance and Ralph Bryant ,
Doug Purvis, and John Williamson for comments and suggestions. Summary versions of
the paper are available as FRANKEL [15] and [17] .
Advise: the numbers in square brackets refer to the Bibliography in appendix.

258
Jeffrey A. Frankel
at the Tokyo Summit meeting of The Group of seven (G7) leaders in
May 1986.
Just as international coordination has caught on among policy
makers, however, some academic economists have turned skeptical
(at the public level, beginning with Feldstein [10] [11]). They have
come up with a variety of obstacles to coordination, points that
invalidate the universality of the theorem that coordination must
always leave countries better off. These obstacles fall into three
categories: the enforcement of compliance with any given agreement,
the inflation-fighting credibility of monetary policy, and uncertainty.
Consequently, this paper begins with a review of the obstacles to
successful coordination. It then takes the more constructive route of
offering a modest proposal for the form that successful coordination
might take. The proposal is for an international version of targeting
nominal GNP (or aggregate demand) that I call international nominal
targeting (NIT) (1). It is designed to have a better chance of over-
coming the three kinds of obstacles to coordination than the current
system established by the G7 leaders at Tokyo. A key element of the
proposal is that it could begin with nations' sacrificing only a very
small amount of national macro-economic sovereignty -
that is, with
very wide bands around the target. Trust and confidence in the
institution could build slowly, and then nations could progress to
higher degrees of coordination if they so desired.
The essence of the argument for the need for coordination is the
existence of international externalities or spillover effects. If they did
not exist -
that is, if each country were unaffected by changes in
other countries -
the decentralized, non-cooperative solution for
obtaining economic objectives would be optimal, and there would be
little role for international meetings or a supranational institution to
coordinate policies (just as there would be little role for government
intervention in the domestic economy if domestic markets functioned
competitively and without externalities). If, for example, floating
exchange rates insulated each country from others' disturbances,
there would be no need for coordination. Since this sort of insulation
(I) The INT proposal appears in brief form in FRANKEL [IS] and in a longer version
in FRANKEL [16] .

International Nominal Targeting ecc.
259
does not exist, spillover occurs, and so, says the theory, coordinations
preferable to non-cooperation (2).
One cannot know, however, whether or what kind of coordi-
nation is desirable without first knowing the nature of the
exter-
nalities. Is the Nash non-cooperative equilibrium too contractionary
because of a proclivity toward beggar-thy-neighbor policies? Then
joint expansion is called for . (This was the logic of the "locomotive
theory" that gave rise to the 1978 Bonn Summit meeting (3). Or is the
existing equilibrium overly inflationary? In that case, joint discipline is
called for. (This is the apparent motivation underlying the founding of
the European Monetary System -
EMS). Perhaps the problem is
"competitive appreciation". Each country seeks by its policy mix to
raise real interest rates, attract capital inflows, and appreciate its
currency, thereby reducing the consumer price index for any given
level of output and employment. Or perhaps it is "competitive de-
preciation" (as was feared at Bretton Woods in 1944 on the basis of
the experience of the 1930s). If either of the last two such externalities
is important, it points to a need for coordination schemes that give
more emphasis to exchange rate stability than does the proposal
developed in this paper, for schemes like those of McKinnon [35] and
[36] , Williamson [46], and Williamson and Miller [47], [38]. Yet if
the problem is thought to be monetary policy that is overly contrac-
tionary or expansionary, then a switch toward a regime of greater
exchange rate stability would likely exacerbate the problem by in-
creasing the international transmission of disturbances.
One premise of the INT proposal is that the relevant externalities
concern the overall degree of expansion of macroeconomic policies -
that is, monetary and fiscal policies are too tight or too loose. The plan
(2) The standard formulation of the Theorem contains a second technical qualifica-
tion for the optimality of coordination. Each country must have more economic
objectives (such as trade balance equilibrium. output equal to the full employment level.
and zero inflation) than it has independent policy instruments (such as monetary and
fiscal policy). If each has as many instruments as targets, then each can offset the
actions of the others so as to attain its optimum and issues of conflict and cooperation
among countries do not arise. In practice, countries seldom feel that they have enough
freedom to be able to attain their optimum positions.
(3) The history of the Bonn Summit and the other annual meetings of the leaders
of the G7 countries is given in PurNAM and BAYNE [41].

260
Jeffrey A. Frankel
does not address the proper mix of monetary and fiscal policy or the
resulting real interest rate (4).
Some people object that a plan for using monetary policy to
target nominal GNP would have done little to prevent the major
disequilibrium that arose in the early 1980s, the US budget and trade
deficits. But I agree with Feldstein [10] that this disequilibrium was
not a failure of coordination, -
that the US government did not
pursue the policies it did as result of insufficient expansion by its
trading partners. (Indeed, until after 1985, the administration did not
even want Europe and Japan to expand). No international bargain
would have brought about a US fiscal correction. Only a recognition
by the administration and the Congress of the link between their fiscal
policies and the trade deficit (together with the political will necessary
to make difficult budget choices) would have done so. By the same
token, neither INT nor any other proposals for coordination should
now be allowed to distract attention from the point that the most
important policy changes to be made in the coming decade can be
made unilaterally by the United States (5).
1.
Obstacles to International Policy Coordination
As already mentioned, the obstacles to implementing a successful
regime of macroeconomic policy coordination are of three sorts:
enforcement, the need for time-consistent inflation-fighting credibility,
and uncertainty. In this section, I deal in tum with each and related
topics.
1.1 Problems of Enforcement and the G7 Indicators
Difficulties of enforcement and credibility have received the most
attention from economists. Even when a coordination package guar-
(4) Such questions are described by the next section of this paper in its review of
the obstacles to coordination (except in the discussion of inflation-fighting credibility.
which applies only to questions of overall economic expansion).
(5) Such thoughts are supported by the findings in FRANKEL and RocKET!' [19] and
FRANKEL [14] and [15] that the gains from coordination would usually be smaller than
the gains from the United States' discovering the true model and unilaterally adjusting
its policies accordingly.

International Nominal Targeting ecc.
261
antees that each member country will be better off than it would be in
the non-cooperative equilibrium, a country will be able to do better
still if it unilaterally deviates from the agreement. If the agreement
calls for joint expansion, for example, an individual country may be
tempted to hold back somewhat and let its partners bear the burden of
expansion (that burden being a trade deficit or a depreciation of the
currency).
It is worth recalling, however, that saying a country will be able
to do better by deviating from the agreement refers to the short run
and holds under the assumption that the other countries keep their
policies as agreed. In future periods, those other countries will
presumably retaliate by also abandoning the agreement. Thus, econo-
mists have probably overemphasized the difficulties of enforcement
(6).
Norms for behaviour -
"peer pressure" in the language of US
Treasury official David Mulford after the Tokyo Summit (quoted in
Funabashi [23], p. 131), or the formation of "reputations" in the
language
of economic theory -
may
be
sufficient to
enforce
compliance with an agreement, provided it meets two conditions:
1) the agreement must specify explicitly what is required of each
party in terms of observable economic variables. Since each party has
an incentive to cheat, it is hard enough to enforce a clear-cut
agreement; enforcement is hopeless if the parties have not even
spelled out what is required of them; 2) the constraints embodied in
the agreement must be specified in such a way that unilateral cheating
in any given period would give a country a short-term gain that is
small relative to the potential future loss (when the cooperative
agreement breaks down) of the grains over the Nash non-cooperative
equilibrium.
If these two conditions are met, it is unlikely that one country will
cheat just because it can gain a bit more over the cooperative
equilibrium.
(6) KENEN ([29]. pp. 31-6) thinks so. HOLTHAM and HUGHES HALLETT ([28] , p. 130)
agree: economists have perhaps focused on moral hazard problems because of their
interesting logical character rather than because of their empirical importance. It seems
likely that uncertainty and model disagreement are greater obstacles to international
cooperation.

262
Jeffrey A. Frankel
At the Tokyo Summit of May 1986, it was decided that the
finance ministers of the GS countries (thenceforth, the G7 countries)
would focus in their meetings on a set of ten "objective indicators":
the growth rate of GNP, the interest rate, the inflation rate, unemploy-
ment, the ratio of the fiscal deficit to GNP, the current - account and
trade balances, the money growth rate, international reserve holdings,
and exchange rates (7).
The list was further discussed and somewhat trimmed down at
subsequent G7 meetings. By the time of the Venice Summit in June
1987, it had apparently been reduced to six indicators: growth,
inflation, trade balances, government budgets, monetary conditions,
and exchange rates (8). Nevertheless, US Secretary of the Treasury
told the annual meeting of the International Monetary Fund (lMF) in
October 1987 that: «the United States is prepared to consider utilizing,
as an additional indicator in the coordination process, the relationship
among our currencies and a basket of commodities, including gold».
And at the Toronto Summit of June 1988: «the G7 countries wel-
corned the addition of a commodity price indicator and the progress
made toward refining the analytical use of indicators» (IMF Survey,
September 26, 1988, p. 292).
At no time have the 67 members made any pretense that they will
rigidly commit themselves to specific numbers for the indicators -
not in the sense that sanctions will be imposed on a country if it
deviates far from the values agreed upon. But the plan does include
the understanding that "appropriate remedial measures" will be taken
whenever there develops significant deviations from the "intended
course". This language seems to suggest that the indicators are not
intended to be mere national forecasts and that the system is intended
to include some substantive bargaining over policies, rather than be
simply an exchange of information. Thus the current G7 system can
be viewed as an attempt at small-scale coordination sacrificing just a
(7) The story of the Tokyo Summit is recounted in both PuTNAM and BAYNE [41']
and FUNABASHI [23] .
(8) This list did not appear in the official communique but rather in comments to
the press by US Assistant Secretary of the Treasury David Mulford. FUNABASHI ([23],
esp. 130 ff.) offers a fascinating account of the machinations of the G7 mechanism from
1985 to 1987.

International Nominal Targeting ecc.
263
little national macroeconomic sovereignty, a necessary stage for
building confidence before moving on to more binding forms of
coordination.
The G7 list of indicators, be it six or ten, is not, however,
especially well suited to workable coordination described above. It is
difficult to imagine a G7 meeting applying moral censure to one of its
members for, say, having experienced a higher rate of real growth or
a lower rate of inflation during the year than had been agreed on in
the previous meeting.
The main problem with the list is that it is too long to be practical.
When each country has six or ten indicators but only two or three
policy instruments, it is virtually certain that the indicators will give
conflicting signals. Thus, the national authorities will feel little con-
straint on their setting of policy instruments. Frenkel, Goldstein, and
Masson ([21], p. 22) note that one argument for choosing a single
indicator is that when multiple indicators send conflicting signals,
authorities can hide behind the confusion. They also observe that
multiple indicators can encourage "overcoordination"; setting a single
indicator allows each country to retain some degree of freedom in
setting its monetary and fiscal policies. In this light, a serious coordi-
nation scheme might begin in the 1990s by setting only one indicator
and progress to commitments to multiple variables only when and if
sufficient political consensus and confidence has developed to justify
more sacrifice of sovereignty.
Another problem with the G7 indicators is that they are kept
secret. It is difficult to reconcile optimistic statements about the
amount of substantive coordination already taking place with the fact
that G7 meetings do not publicly announce the agreed targets for the
indicators. How can any pressure (be it moral persuasion, embarrass-
ment,
effect on long-term reputation, or outright sanctions) be
brought to bear on countries that stray from targets that have not
been made public?
To take a recent example, in the Baker-Miyazawa Agreement
reached in San Francisco in September 1986, the Japanese apparently
agreed to a fiscal expansion in exchange for a promise from the US
Treasury secretary that he would stop "talking down" the dollar, plus
the usual US promise to cut the budget deficit. In the months that

264
Jeffrey A. Frankel
followed, each side viewed the other as not fully living up to the
agreement. (The episode is described in Funabashi [23]). But it was
difficult for anyone to verify the extent of compliance because the
precise terms of the original agreement had not been public.
Indeed, the G7 guards the values of the indicators with even more
secrecy than the central banks guard their foreign exchange market
interventions. Theory says that the success of a target zone is enhanced
when speculators are made aware of the boundaries (9). Why then does
the G7 keep them secret? A possible answer is that the members do not
want to lose face if their economic variables subsequently break outside
the target band. (This answer fits in well with the suspicion that the G7
meetings may, in fact, reach no substantive agreements butneverthe-
less find it politically useful to issue communiques, the public an-
nouncement being sufficiently vague that each member can interpret
them to its own advantage (10).
Thus, the need to monitor performance criteria in order to
enforce compliance with any coordination agreement suggests two
conclusions about the current 67 system: 1) it would be better for the
agreement to focus on one variable than on six or ten or eleven; and 2)
the targets for the variable should be made public.
Below, I will develop further desirable characteristics for that
variable.
1.2 Problems of Inflation-Fighting Credibility
A
nwnber
of
the
problems
that
arise
in
international
policymaking occur in the context of domestic policymaking as well.
One of them is the need to set monetary policy so as to keep the
public's expectations of inflation low.
One
way
that monetary
policymakers can do this is to precommit themselves to rules of
(9) See KRUGMAN [30] for the application of the latest "smooth pasting" technology
to this problem.
(10) It is clear from FuNABASHI [23] that the various members held differing views
as to which indicators were most important, what responses were called for if
indicators strayed from the agreed-on path, and how binding the agreement should be.
lt is also clear that each was able to interpret the Plaza and Louvre Agreements
afterwards so as to reflect its own views.

International Nominal Targeting ecc.
265
monetary discipline. To be useful, that commitment must be credible
or, in modern theoretical parlance, "dynamically consistent" (11).
Macroeconomic policymaking is always a trade-off between the
advantages of rules and of discretion. In the past, writers concerned
with either of the two problems often simplistically assumed away the
other. If the aim is to maximize economic welfare (a function of
output and inflation) for a given period only, ignoring long-run
implications for expected inflation, discretion can be shown to be
unambiguously superior to rules; after all, how can one possibly gain
by agreeing to limit beforehand the ability to respond to developments
in the economy? If, on the other hand, one ignores the possibility of
short-run disturbances, rules can be shown to be unambiguously
superior to discretion in a long-run equilibrium; macroeconomic
policy cannot affect output in the long run anyway and precommit-
ment to a nominal anchor can reduce expected inflation and thereby
reduce actual inflation.
It should be clear by now that neither extreme in the debate
represents the complete correct answer. If the political system's
policymaking process is allowed to optimize on a purely short-run
basis, the outcome will be overexpansion. Thus, some degree of
longer-term commitment to resisting inflationary temptations is in-
dicted, even if it is a decision to insulate the central bank from the
political process rather than to adhere formally to a nominal anchor
or rule (12). Yet in a world where new disturbances do come along, it
(11) A "dynamically consistent" or "time-consistent" regime is one that manages to
prevent the monetary authorities from breaking the commitment to monetary discipline
where they otherwise might have an incentive to do so in the future. For recent surveys
of the rules-versus-discretion debate and the implications of the time-consistenty
literature, see BARRO [1], FiSCHER [12], and ROGOFF [44].
(12) That Milton Friedman has had more influence on this issue than one human
being is usually able to have is justifiable. Nevertheless, two aspects of his campaign
against the Federal Reserve Board have long been puzzling. First, his argument against
discretion in monetary policy-making is largely based on the analysis in Friedman and
Schwartz that the Federal Reserve made the Depression of the 1930s much worse than
it otherwise would have been by "allowing" the MI money supply to fall. Yet in recent
decades he has campaigned for the Federal Reserve to do precisely what he accuses it of
doing in the 1930s: set a finn target for the monetary base, rather than for MI. The
second, even more puzzling aspect is that Friedman and his fellow monetarists claim to
believe that US money growth would be slower and more stable if monetary policy were
placed more under the control of the democratic political process, via the Treasury or

266
Jeffrey A. Frankel
is important that the government retain at least some ability to
respond to stabilize the economy. The solution is commitment of
some degree but less than 100% to some nominal anchor (13).
1.3 Coordination and Inflation in the Long Term
An important critique of international coordination is the point
made by Kenneth Rogoff [42]: if governments set up the machinery
for joint welfare maximization period by period, as they did at the
Bonn Summit of 1978, the cooperative equilibrium in each period is
likely to entail more expansion than would otherwise be present.
Countries may find this joint expansion advantageous within any
given period, but in the long run it will undermine governments'
inflation-fighting credibility and result in a higher inflation rate for a
given level of output. In the Rogoff view, renouncing the machinery of
coordination is one of the ways that governments can credibly
precommit themselves to less inflationary paths.
It is important to realize that the introduction of longer-term
issues of credibility, time-inconsistency, and precommitment can just
as easily run in favor of coordination as against it. If the perceived
externality or shortcoming of the Nash noncooperative equilibrium is
that it is overly expansionary, then the coordination equilibrium, even
if arrived at period by period, will entail less expansion, not more. This
is sometimes argued to be the basis underlying the European Mon-
etary System. The rhetoric that Helmut Schmidt and Valery Giscard
d'Estaing used in originally proposing the EMS in the late 1970s
suggested that they were doing so because the United States was
neglecting its duty of supplying to the world the public good of a
stable, non-inflating currency. Ten years later, many observers of the
EMS (for example, Giavazzi and Pagano [25]) have decided that its
the US Congress, than under the control of elitist central bankers such as Paul Volcker.
It is particularly ironic that when a member of the monetarists' Shadow Open Market
Committee finally became undersecretary of the Treasury for monetary affairs in the
early 1980s, his view that the money growth rate was dangerously high was overruled
by the Treasury and the White House, who sought to pressure the Federal Reserve for
faster money growth in the period leading up to the 1984 election.
(13) ROGOFF [43] shows that some intermediate degree of commitment to a target
is optimal for monetary policy.

International Nominal Targeting ecc.
267
success lies precisely in giving inflation-prone countries such as Italy
and France a credible nominal anchor for their monetary policies.
Commitment to exchange rate parity or a band vis-a-vis a hard-cur-
rency country such as Germany constitutes precisely the sort of
time-consistent, low-inflation policy sought by those who worry that
central bankers left to their own discretion will be overly expan-
sionary.
The case of the EMS does, however, offer an asymmetry. It is an
accepted fact that Germany -
because of its history or some other
reason -
places very heavy weight on price stability. Thus, the
weaker-currency countries can import inflation-fighting credibility by
pegging themselves to the greater mark area (14). In contrast, there
can
be
no
presumption
that
the
United
States
(the
natural
"Stackleberg" leader) has as much inflation-fighting credibility as do
Germany and Japan. Thus proponents of worldwide coordination
cannot automaticly presume that year-by-year coordination would
lower the average world inflation rate, rather than raise it.
1.4 The Choice of a Nominal Anchor
The implication of the credibility issue is that a scheme for
coordination is more likely to produce long-run gains if it has national
governments committed not just to each other period by period but
also, in some degree, to a nominal anchor for a longer term. The G7
list of indicators includes four nominal variables: money, the price
level, the price of gold, and the exchange rate. I will develop grounds
for choosing the nominal variable on which coordination should focus
and argue that the optimal one is nominal GNP, a variable that does
not even appear on the G7 list.
The appendix to this paper considers the problem formally. It
makes no judgment on the desirable degree of precommitment to a
nominal target, in the context of either domestic or international
(14) There is a close analogy here with the idea in ROGOFF [43] that if a particular
individual- say, Paul Volcker -
is known to have extreme aversion to inflation, then
the country can gain by appointing him as central banker, even if the country's
objective function puts less weight on fighting inflation; his tight-money credibility will
reduce the public's expectations of inflation and in long-run equilibrium will produce a
lower level of actual inflation for any level of output.

268
Jeffrey A. Frankel
policymaking, so long as it is greater than zero and less than infinity
(15). The important point is that nominal GNP (or nominal demand)
makes a more suitable target than the four nominal variables in the
G7 list.
The general argument has been made well by others (16). In the
event of disturbances in the banking system, in the public's demand
for money, or in other mechanisms that affect the demand for goods,
a policy of holding nominal GNP steady insulates the economy;
neither real income nor the price level need be affected. In the event
of disturbances to supply, such as the oil price increases of the 1970s,
the change can be divided equally between an increase in the price
level and a fall in output. (For some countries, equal shares is roughly
the split that a discretionary policy would choose anyway (17). In
general, fixing nominal GNP will not give precisely the right answer
unless the objective function puts precisely equal weights on inflation
and real growth. But where if the choice is among the available
nominal anchors, nominal GNP will give an outcome characterized by
the greatest stability of output and the price level. As demonstrated at
the beginning of the appendix,
a
nominal GNP
target strictly
dominates a money supply target, in the sense of minimizing a
quadratic loss function, regardless of how important inflation-fighting
credibility is. The appendix goes on to show that a nominal GNP
target also dominates an exchange rate or price-of-gold target (unless
extraordinarily high weight is placed on the objective of stabilizing the
exchange rate or price of gold).
To take an example from recent history, in late 1987, the US
Federal Reserve, citing large velocity shifts, decided to allow Ml to
(15) Analogously, I take as given by the political process the degree of commitment
to coordination.
(16) GoRDON [26]. HALL [27), TAYLOR (45) and MCCALLUM [32), [33) and [34) , for
example, argue in favour of targeting nominal GNP in the closed-economy context. The
idea also has proponents in the United Kindgom: BEAN (1983), MEADE [37) and BRlTIAN
[5). MILLER and WILLIAMSON ([47, pp . 7-10) propose targeting nominal demand as part
of their blueprint for exchange-rate target zones.
(17) Switzerland cn be given as an example of a country that chose to take the
adverse supply shock of 1974 almost entirely in the form of lost income and employ-
ment in order to restore price stability. Sweden was a country that chose to take it
almost entirely in the fonn of inflation, in order to preserve output and employment.
The United States fell in between.

International Nominal Targeting ecc.
269
break well outside of the previously announced target zone. From the
second quarter of 1987 to the second quarter of 1986, M1 grew 10.3%
per year, leading some observers to suggested that the Federal
Reserve was following a general policy of targeting nominal GNP. The
monetarists were furious. For four years, they decried the betrayal of
the money growth rule and warned that a major return of inflation
was imminent. In retrospect howevers, nobody can doubt that the
Federal Reserve had chosen the right course. Even with the recovery
that began in 1983 and continued through the four years and beyond,
nominal GNP grew at 8.0% per year -
more slowly than the money
supply. Thus, velocity declined at 2.3% per year, in contrast to its past
historical pattern of increasing at roughly 3% a year. If the monetary
authorities had followed the monetarist prescription of rigidly pre-
committing themselves to a money growth rate lower than that of the
preceding period -
say, 3% -
and velocity had followed the same
path, then nominal GNP would have grown much less -
at only 0.7%
a year in the example. In fact, this number is an upper bound. With
lower inflation than occurred, velocity would almost certainly have
fallen even more than it did, and the recession of 1981-1982 would
have lasted another five years!
1.5 Problems of Uncertainty
The argument that nominal GNP dominantes such variables as
the money supply as a candidate for a nominal anchor applies to
international economy policy even more strongly than to domestic
policy. The reason is that uncertainty, though it is certainly a problem
for policy makers in a closed economy, is an even greater problem in
an open economy.
Before a country can enter negotiations with other countries on
coordinated policy changes, it needs to know three things: 1) what is
the initial position of the domestic economy relative to the optimum
values of the target variables?; 2) what are the correct weights to put
on the various possible target variables?; 3) what effect will each unit
change in the domestic and the foreign macroeconomic policy vari-
ables have on the target variables; that is, what is the correct model of
the world economy?

270
Jeffrey A. Frankel
These three elements follow simply from the algebraic expression
for the economic objective function (18):
(1)
(la)
W = (1I2)(r + w xx2 + wpr)
W* = (1I2)(yrt2 +
~.X*2 +
~.p*2)
where W is the quadratic loss to be minimized, Y is output (expressed
in log form and relative to its optimum), x is the current account
(expressed as a percentage of GNP and again relative to its optimum),
P is the inflation rate, w, is the relative weight placed on the current
account objective, wp is the relative weight placed on the inflation
objective, and an asterisk, (*), denotes the analogous variables for the
foreign country.
There are two policy instruments: the money supply, m (in log
form), and government expenditure, g (as a percentage of GNP). For
the home country, the marginal welfare effects of changes in these
policy variables are then given by
(2)
dW/dm = (Y)Ym + wX<x)xm + wP(P)Pm
(3)
dW/dg = (Y)Yg + wx<x)xg + wP(P)Pg
(4)
dW/dm* = (Y)Ym* + wx<x)x m* + wp(p)Pm*
(S)
dW/d(' = (Y)Yg'" + wx<x)xg'" + wP(P)Pg'"
and it the foreign country:
(2a)
dW*/dm =
(Y*)Y~ + w~ (x*)~ + w;* (p*)p~
(3a)
dW*/dg = (Y*)Y~ + w~ (x*)x*g + w~ (p*)p~
(4a)
dW*/dm* =
(Y*)Y~. +
w~ (x*)x:. + w*p. (P*)p:..
(Sa)
dW*/dg* = (Y*)Y*g- + w*x" (X *)x *; + w*p. (P*)p*g-
where the policy multiplier effect of money on output is given by Ym,
the effect of money on the current account by Xm , and so on. To solve
(18) The specification here is a function of three target variables. One couId as
easily have more or fewer.

International Nominal Targeting ecc.
271
for the optimum, one can set these derivatives equal to zero, with the
target variables, y, x, and so on first expressed as linear functions of
the policy variables m, and g. For the Nash non-cooperative equili-
brium (in which each country takes the other's policies as given), only
equations (2), (3), (4a), and (Sa) are needed for the solution. Each
country ignores the effect that its policies have on the other country,
so equations (4), (5), (2a), and (3a) do not enter the mode. Indeed, this
is precisely the reason the non-cooperative equilibrium is suboptimal.
These cross-country effects enter only in the determination of the
cooperative solution).
Before deciding on a policy change, policymakers must at least
know the sign of the corresponding derivative. Equation (2), like all
the eight derivatives above, neatly illustrates the three kinds of
uncertainty. The first is uncertainty about the initial position of y, x,
and p (19). Position uncertainty, in turn, breaks down into three parts:
1) uncertainty about the current value of the target variable in
question (20); 2) uncertainty over the baseline forecast -
how the
target variables are likely to move during the forthcoming period
(usually a year or more) in the absence of policy changes (21); and 3)
uncertainty about the optimum value of the target variable (22).
The point is clear. Policymakers' estimates of the current values
(19) Uncertainty about the position of the economy in the absence of policy
changes is the same thing as uncertainty about the disturbance terms in the model of
the economy, such as the disturbances in the appendix to this paper. That appendix,
though it considers uncertainty in an open economy, deals only with a country's
unilateral policy-making problem. In this section, I am considering the problems that
uncertainty creates for coordination per se.
(20) This uncertainty is a genuine concern. MANKlW and SHAPIRO (1986) find that
the standard deviation from the prelirninary estimate of the real growth rate to the
revised final number is 2.2 percentage points.
(21) KENEN and
SCI;IWARTZ (1986) have studied the accuracy of current-year
forecasts in the IMF, World Economic Outlook for the last 15 years. They find that the
root mean squared error among the G7 countries is 0.773 percentage points for real
growth and 0.743 percentage points for inflation. These prediction errors, although
relatively small, are large enough to reverse the signs of the derivatives of the welfare
function equations (2) to (5). Errors would presumably be much larger for the horizons
of two years or more that are probably most relevant for policymaking. Many major
international econometric models show that the effects of monetary and fiscal policy
peak in the second year for output and not until more than six years for the price level
or current account. See BRYANT et AL. [7]
(22) Economists disagree about the correct estimates of, for example, the natural
rate of unemployment and the level of potential output.

272
Jeffrey A. Frankel
of y, x, or p in their own countries could easily be off by several
percentage points in either direction, enough to flip the signs of the
corresponding three terms -
anyone of which could change the sign
of the derivative of the objective function -
in each of equations (2)
through (5). Thus, it is entirely possible that the country could ask its
partners to expand or agree to a partner's request that it itself expand
when these changes would, in fact, move the economy in the wrong
direction.
To
take
one
historical
example,
in
the
late
1970s,
US
policymakers, looking at the available economic data, concluded that
the problem of the time was insufficient growth in the world
economy. This assumption was the basis of the 1978 Bonn summit
agreement for coordinated expansion with Japan and Europe, (Ger-
many in particular). By the end of the decade, the consensus had
become that the top priority was fighting inflation, not promoting real
growth. A natural way of interpreting the view -
widely held in
Germany at least -
that the result of the Bonn-coordinated expanion
turned out . in retrospect to
have been detrimental in that un-
anticipated developments, particularly the large increase in oil prices
associated with the sudden Iranian crisis of 1979, moved the world
economy to a highly inflactionary position where expansion was no
longer called for (23).
The second sort of uncertainty present in the equations is un-
certainty regarding the proper weights,
W x and wp , to put on the
target variables in the objective function (24). This problem is even
greater than the problem of assigning optimal values to the target
(23) Another unexpected development in the late 1970s was the downward shift in
the demand for money in the United States. This disturbance, like the oil shock, meant
that the planned growth rate of money turned out to be more inflationary than
expected.
(24) One way to obtain estimates for these weights is to follow OUDIZ and SACHS
[41]. who assume that as of 1984, policymakers were optimizing their objective
functions in a Nash equilibrium and infer the welfare weights they must have had in
order to produce the observed outcomes for output, inflation. and the current
account.The estimates turn out to be very sensitive to such things as the model of the
economy that the policymakers are assumed to have used. (To equate the inferred
weights with the actual rates. as Oudiz and Sachs do. requires not only that the
policymakers were indeed seeking to optimize in a Nash equilibrium in that particular
year but also that they knew the correct model. the correct weights, and the correct
position of the economy relative to the optimum.)

International Nominal Targeting ecc.
273
variables. In a society in which the weights that individual actors place
on inflation (or the current account) vary from zero to infinity, the
likelihood is very high that any given government is using weights that
differ from the "correct" ones that would follow from any given
criterion. One can see from the equations that, for example, putting
insufficient weight on fighting inflation has the same effect as underes-
timating
the
baseline
inflation
rate;
thus,
the
coordinating
policymaker may ask his trading partners to adopt expansionary
policies when contractionary policies are in fact called for. This is
precisely the mistake that, by 1980, some people concluded had been
made by the United States. From the viewpoint of the Republicans
who were elected to the presidency in that year or the Social
Democrats who came to power in Germany two years later, the
policymakers who had agreed to coordinated "reflation" at the Bonn
Summit of 1978 has put insufficient weight on the objective of price
stability.
The third sort of uncertainty pertains to the policy multipliers, the
derivatives Ym, Yg , and so on in equations (2) to (Sa), which reflect the
effect on the target variables of changes in the money supply and
government expenditure. Any given government is likely to be using
policy multipliers that differ substantially from the "true" ones and
that may even be incorrect in sign. Consider the tremendous variation
in multipliers according to different schools of thought and even
according to different estimates in the models of mainstream macro-
economists. They cannot all be correct, and it seems highly probable
that no single model is exactly right (25).
It is possible to illustrate in some detail the potential range of
multiplier estimates. In a recent exercise conducted at the Brookings
Institution, 12 leading econometric models of the international macro-
(25) The German view that the 1978 Bonn Summit entailed joint "reflation" that
was, in retrospect, inappropriate was used above to illustrate, alternatively, uncertainty
about the baseline forecast (the unanticipated oil shock of 1979) and uncertainty about
the objective function (the proper weight to be placed on inflation versus growth). A
third possible interpretation is model uncertainty: the Germans believe that the slope of
their aggregate supply curve turned out to be steeper than they, or at least the
Americans, thought it would at the time. This interpretation is plausible if one believes
that the German labor market is characterized by a high degree of real wage rigidity, as
was pointed out by BRANSON and ROTEMBERG [4].

274
Jeffrey A. Frankel
economy simulated the effects of specific policy changes in the United
States and in the rest of the OECD (Bryant et AI. [7]) (26).
The variation in the estimates was large, not just in magnitude
but also in sign. The effect of fiscal or monetary expansion on
domestic output and inflation was, howerver, usually at least of the
positive sign that one would expect (27). Disagreement among the
models became much more common when we it came to the
transmission of international effects, although the areas of greatest
disagreement were not those the theoretical literature might have led
one to expect. For exampt, US fiscal expansion was transmitted
positively to the rest of the OECD in 10 out of 11 models and an
expansion in the other countries was transmitted positively to the
United States in 9 out of 10, whereas in theory fiscal transmission can
easily be negative (28). The greatest amount of disagreement was on
the effect of a monetary expansion on the domestic current account
and, therefore, on the foreign current account and output level. There
are two conflicting effects here: the monetary expansion raises in-
come and therefore imports, but it also depreciates the currency,
which tends to improve the trade balance (29). It turned out that a US
monetary expansion worsened the current account in 8 out of 11
models and a monetary expansion in the other OECD countries
worsened their current accounts in 5 out of 10 models (30). Despite
disagreements such as these, what happens if US, European, and
Japanese policymakers proceed with coordination efforts? Frankel
(26) The models used were the Federal Reserve Board's Multi-Country model, the
European Economic Community's Compact model, the Japanese Economic Planning
Agency model, the Project Link model,
Patrick Minford's liverpool Model, the
McKibbon-Sachs Global model, the Sims-Litterman Var model, the OECD's Interlink
model, John Taylor's model, the Wharton Econometrics model, and the Data Re-
sources, Inc. model.
(27) Even here, there were exceptions when it came to inflation. The Var,
WHAIUON, and LINK models sometimes showed expansion as causing a reduction in the
CPI (probably because of effects via markup pricing).
(28) For example, if capital mobility is sufficiently low and a depreciation of the
domestic currency is contractional)' for the foreign country.
(29) In the Mundell-Fleming model, the net effect on the current account must be
positive because reduction in interest rates causes a net capital outflow, which under a
floating exchange rate implies an increase in the current-account balance.
.
(30) In most of the models, the rest of the Mundell-Fleming transmission mechan-
ism was also reversed: that is, the foreign current account and foreign income rose,
rather than fell.

International Nominal Targeting ecc.
275
and Rockett [19] and Frankel [14] and [15] use the Brookings
simulations and the welfare weights from Oudiz and Sachs [40] to
consider the possibilities when governments coordinate but use con-
flicting models. In general, countries will be able to find a package of
coordinated policy changes that each believes will leave it better off,
even though each has a different view of the effects and thus may not
understand why the others are willing to go along with the package.
The actual effects depend on what the true model is. If one considers
10 possible models, 1,000 combinations can be used to represent the
beliefs of the US policymakers, the beliefs of non-US policymakers,
and reality. Monetary coordination results in gains for the United
States in 546 cases, losses in 321 cases, and no effect on the objective
functions (to four significant digits) in 133 cases. Coordination results
in gains for the rest of the OEeD countries in 539 cases, losses in 327,
and no effect in 134.
Thus, a cooperative package of policy changes that each country
thinks will benefit it could, ex post, easily turn out to make things
worse rather than better. The baseline level of output may differ from
what is expected, or the optimum level (of, for example, potential
output) may vary from the anticipated level, or a foreign expansion of
monetary policy may turn out to have an effect on domestic otput that
is different from what expected.
Moreover, uncertainty greatly complicates the enforcement prob-
lem . Recall the earlier conclusion that to enable compliance to be
monitored, the agreement must involve the explicit setting of obser-
vable performance criteria. Two comments must now be made. First,
policymakers do not have direct control over the variables that
referred to here as "their policies." Central banks cannot determine
the money supply precisely because it may be subject to disturbances
within the banking system or in the wider economy's demand for
money. Nor can specific policymakers in international negotiations
determine their country's fiscal policies precisely. For this reason, it
can be difficult to hold policymakers accountable if the policy vari-
ables deviate from the cooperative bargain.
Second, ex ante uncertainty means that there will be some
countries that face an especially great temptation to cheat because
they turn out ex post to lose a lot from abiding by the agreement (a lot

276
Jeffrey A. Frankel
relative to unilaterally violating the agreement and perhaps also
relative to never having made it to begin with). In such circumstances,
the short-run gains from abrogating may outweigh the longer-term
gains from continued cooperation.
Thus, for the parties to be held accountable, the variables to
which they commit their countries must, to the maximum extent
possible, be both observable and under the control of government
authorities -
in 'particular under the control of those authorities
involved in the international negotiations (31). Otherwise, the national
authorities can always claim that a failure to satisfy a performance
criterion was beyond their control. It is not, however, essential that
the variablesbe under the precise short-run control of the authorities,
especially if compliance with the agreement is to be checked, say,
once a year at annual IMF review or at summit meetings of the heads
of state or twice a year at meetings of the finance ministers. It is
essential only that there be an unambiguous sign to the relationship
between the policy instruments that are under direct control and the
variable to which the parties commit themselves and that the lags in
the relationship not be too long. When the variable begins to deviate
seriously from the agreed-on range, the policymakers should begin to
adjust their policy instruments accordingly. Then they can be held
accountable at the end of the year for any large deviations from the
agreement.
The next condition on the variables to which policymakers must
commit themselves pulls in the opposite direction. The variables
specified by the agreement must be tied closely enough to the target
variables in the ultimate objective function so that if there is an
unexpected disturbance in one of the economic relationships (or if one
of the multipliers turns out to be different from what was expected),
the country will not be drastically harmed. If for example, a country
commits itself to a specific number for its monetary base or the money
(31) It is for this reason that when the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
negotiates a letter of intent with the finance minister of a borrowing country, the
"performance criteria" that are agreed on tend to be variables directly under the control
of the authorities, such as the growth rate of the monetary base, rather than variables
that are harder to control, such as the broad money supply, let alone the ultimate target
variables such as inflation.

International Nominal Targeting ecc.
277
supply and subsequent shifts in the money multiplier or velocity
translate that number into a severe and needless recession, it is
obvious that the country will be sorely tempted to break its commit-
ment. Just imagine if the Federal Reserve's short-lived public commit-
ment in the early 1980s to a regime of a low and stable M1 growth
rate had been made as part of an international agreement. Would the
American public have accepted prolonging the 1981-1982 recession
for another four years for the sake of an international agreement
predicated on an erroneous forecast of velocity?
There must be a similar link between the variables that party
commits itself to and the other countries' target variables. If partners
stick to their money growth targets, another country will not be much
impressed if the continued commitment turns out to be disavanta-
geous to itself (for example, because a disturbance moves it to the
overly inflationary side of full employment or because the partner's
money growth turns out to be transmitted negatively rather than
positively).
1.6 The Choice of Indicators: A Reprise
As noted earlier, the G7 list of indicators is too long to be useful
for enforcing an agreement. Could it be winnowed down to a practical
number? There seems little point in doing so since no item on the list
is a good candidate to be the single variable on which negotiation
under a future coordination regime would focus.
1. - Real output, employment, inflation, and the trade balance
are less directly affected by policy instruments than is nominal GNP;
moreover, focusing exclusively on anyone of them would destabilize
the others.
2. - The
money supply is more under the
control of the
authorities (at least on an annual basis) but is much less directly linked
to target variables; it is one unambiguous step further away from the
two fundamental target variables of real output and price level than is
nominal GNP. (That step is the existence of shifts in velocity, as
discussed above and demonstrated in the appendix). Furthermore, as
shown above, the effects of money on all three target variables

278
Jeffrey A. Frankel
(output, price level, and trade balance) in the other country are
completely ambiguous in sign. Thus, the money supply is an even less
suitable choice of focus for international coordination than for do-
mestic policymaking.
3. - Fiscal policy is more easily linked to the foreign target
variables (or would be if the high-employment deficit were used as the
indicator). But it is less directly under the control of the policymakers
than is the money supply. Among the G7 countries, the inability to
control the budget deficit has been most striking in the case of the
United States in the 1980s. Feldstein (1987, pp. 23-4) suggests why the
United States will never be able to participate in serious international
bargaining over fiscal policy: «A primary reason why such macro-
economic policy coordination cannot work as envisioned is that the
United States is constitutionally incapable of participating in such a
negotiation. The separation of powers in the American form of
government means that the Secretary of the Treasury cannot promise
to reduce or expand the budget deficit or to change tax rules. This
power does not rest with the President or the administration but
depends on legislative agreement between the President and the
Congress».
4. - Exchange rate policy is, of course, a very large topic. But
one can easily note some difficulties with its being the single indicator
that G7 countries commit themselves to instabilizing policy coordi-
nation agreements. If, say, the dollar rate deutsche mark begins to
stray outside the announced target zone, which of the two govern-
ments should suffer sanctions or a loss in reputation? The "n-l
problem" (Miller and Williamson [47]) means that one country -
presumably the United States -
would have to sit out, which is not
what is wanted. Countries could commit themselves to certain targets
for their foreign exchange intervention, or more generally to mon-
etary and fiscal policies that in theory would determine the exchange
rate. But, as already noted, the link between macroeconomic policies
and the exchange rate is fraught with even greater uncertainty than
the link between output and inflation.
One must thus raise the question of whether the exchange rate
has as great a claim as the other target variables to being in the

International Nominal Targeting ecc.
279
objective function. In the second part of the appendix to this paper,
the exchange rate is added in to the objective function along with
output and the price level. It is shown that the penalty for stabilizing
the exchange rate is being saddled with a monetary policy that
destabilizes the overall price level relative to what happens with a
regime of stabilizing nominal GNP. Thus, to opt for a fixed exchange
rate regime, one must put tremendous weight on the exchange rate
objective. (Such a person must be prepared to argue that a 10%
fluctuation in the exchange rate causes greater trouble than a 10%
fluctuation in the price level). The only other way out is to assume
that when the regime changes, much of the disturbance in the
exchange rate equation will disappear rather than having to be
accommodated by the money supply (32).
5. - Of the remaining three indicators on the G7 list (the interest
rate, international reserves, and the price of gold) the price of gold is
the only one that has been proposed as a candidate for the sole
variable around which countries should coordinate. Proponents of a
central role for gold do not seem to appreciate that shifts in the
demand function for gold and in the other economic relationships that
link it to the target variables are even more unstablizing than shifts in
the demand for money or the demand for foreign exchange, and that
they are likely to remain so in the future. The appendix's demon-
stration of the superiority of choosing nominal GNP over the price of
foreign exchange applies just as much vis-a-vis the price of gold. In a
world where there are frequent shifts in demand among money,
foreign currency, and gold, stabilizing anyone of these variables
means allowing the shifts to be transmitted more forcefully to the rest
of the economy.
This does not mean that the price of gold (or of other minerals or
agricultural commodities) is not a useful indicator in the sense of
being a good early warning signal of the likely future course of the
(32) MILLER [39] and WIWAMSON ([47], pp. 54-5; do precisely this; they assume
that there is a large "fad" component to exchange rate fluctuations under the current
floating regime.and that it would disppear under their target zone proposal. The idea is
not absurd. But it certainly stacks the deck in an empirical comparison of the two
regimes.

280
Jeffrey A. Frankel
overall price level, which is the true target variable (33). In this sense,
such prices belong with the money supply, the interest rate, the yield
curve, and many other leading indicators on the list of variables that
policymakers may want to monitor on a short-term basis in attempt-
ing to hit their targets, whether under a regime of coordination,
decentralized national policymaking with some commitment to a
nominal anchor, or complete discretion.
In short, if coordination is to go beyond the stage of rhetoric to a
small-scale commitment, which mean some degree of international
commitment to a single variable, then nominal GNP (or nominal
demand) dominates each of the indicators that the G7 have apparently
been discussing as the natural candidate for that variable.
2. . How International Nominal GNP
Targeting (INT) Would Work
The INT framework laid out in Frankel [15], [16] is a very simple
one. The G7 ministers would focus their negotiations not on the 10 or
11 indicators currently on their list but on nominal demand (defined
as nominal GNP minus the balance on goods and services). At each
meeting the national authorities would: a) commit themselves, with-
out any obsessively great degree of firmness, to target growth rates (or
ranges) for the level of nominal GNP for five years into the future, and
b) commit themselves, with somewhat greater firmess, to targets for
their countries' levels of nominal demand for the coming year.
In the first stage, -
that is, the early 1990s, there would be no
explicit enforcement mechanism. But the targets would be publicly
announced, and if a country's growth rate of nominal demand turned
out to have erred significantly in one direction or the other, the fact
would be noted disapprovingly at the next G7 meeting. (This does not
happen under the current system). If this first stage was successful, a
future stage might add another variable or two to the list, or countries
(33) Indeed, there is some evidence that the prices of gold and other commodities
react instantaneously to changes in expectations regarding whether monetary policy
will be tight or loose in the future (FRANKEL and HARDOUVEUS, [18]).

International Nominal Targeting ecc.
281
might even commit themselves firmly to specific policy responses if a
level of nominal demand begins to stray from the year's target.
A plan that called for targeting nominal GNP, rather than nom-
inal demand, might be more readily and more widely understood and
thus might stand a better chance of succeeding politically. The
advantages of focusing on nominal demand is the assumption that
when the cooperative equilibrium entails expansion, countries need to
be discouraged from the temptation to accomplish the growth of
output through net foreign demand (for example, through protection-
ist trade measures) as opposed to domestic demand. In some years,
the cooperative equilibrium might entail contraction rather than
expansion, and then a nominal GNP target could be preferable to a
nominal demand target. But it is usually thought that the political
pressure for protectionist trade remedies is greater in recessions than
in expansions, a fact that points to nominal demand as the superior
choice (34).
2.1 Monetary Policy or Fiscal Policy?
Countries could attain their nominal GNP or nominal demand
targets through any of several routes. One possibility is the Williamson
and Miller [47] blueprint, which assigns fiscal policy in each country
the responsibility for attaining a nominal demand target (and assigns
monetary policy in each country responsibility for the exchange rate)
(35). But at least one serious problem could arise with explicitly
specifying fiscal policy as the instrument with which countries are
expected to attain the nominal de~d targets that they agreed to. If
an economy strays from the target, the.authorities will claim that it is
not politically possible to adjust fiscal policy quickly. Such claims will
(34) Besides subtracting from total GNP that part going to the foreign sector (the
trade balance) it might also be a good idea to subtract the part going to inventories, as
suggested by GoRDON [26]).
(35) The Miller-Williamson blueprint also specifies that the G7 should set the
average level of their interest rates so as to attain a target for the aggregate level of their
GNPs. This part of their plan cooperative is similar to the first part of my proposal. It is
my second part cooperative yearly setting of each country's nominal demand target, to
be attained primarily through monetay policy -
that differs the most from the
Miller-Williamson plan (aside from
my setting exchange rate stability aside as a
separable issue).

282
Jeffrey A. Frankel
be completely credible -
in fact, they will generally be true (36).
Thus, an agreement is more likely to stick if monetary policy, rather
than fiscal policy, is specified as the policy iristrument countries are
expected to use .
Even if fiscal policy is assumed to be no more subject to lags and
political encumbrances than monetary policy, there is another reason
for assigning monetary policy to the nominal demand target. If
countries also pursue trade balance targets (and it seems that they do,
whether or not they should), then the classic assignment problem is
relevant. The general rule is to assign responsibility for the trade
balance target to the policy instrument that has a relatively greater
effect on it (Mundell, [39]). I agree with Boughton [3] that under
modem conditions of floating exchange rates, which work to decrease
the effectiveness of monetary policy and to increase the effectiveness
of fiscal policy with respect to the trade balance, following that rule
means assigning fiscal policy to the trade balance target and monetary
policy to the domestic target.
2.2 Consideration of Specific Instruments
What is the precise instrument of monetary policy that should be
adjusted when nominal demand drifts away from the target? The
monetary base or level of unborrowed reserves would be better than
the broader monetary aggregates because the central bank controls
the former more directly. For the same reason, the short-term interest
rate is another possible instrument.
Working
in
the
context
of
closed-economy
policymaking
McCallum ([33], p. 15) has suggested a specific feedback rule that
might do well here. His proposal is that for each percentage point that
nominal GNP deviates from its target in a given quarter, the monetary
(36) For attempts to evaluate empirically the stabilizing properties of the blueprint
plan, see Mlu..ER and WILLIAMSON [39] and FRENKEL, GoLDSfElN, and MASSON ([21 , pp.
33-49). FRENKEL and GoLDsrEIN [20] survey target zone proposals. Miller and William-
son also consider a floating rate regime and the McKiNNON [36] proposals to use
monetary policy to target the aggregate money supply -
or in a later version, the
aggregate price level -
among the G3 countries. McKiBBON and SACHS [35] also
compare these regimes . I am not aware of empirical work evaluation the likely outcome
if countries cooperatively set nominal GNP targets and use monetary policy to attain
them.

International Nominal Targeting ecc.
283
base be expanded an additional 0.25% over the next quarter. He also
suggests setting a trend growth rate in the target of 3% per year and
subtracting from this the average growth rate of the base velocity over
the preceding four years. An alternative possibility is to replace the 3%
target with «a number to be negotiated for each member of the G7
each year, with a planned long-run tendency of 3%».
The central bank would be better able to hit its annual nominal
demand target if it was allowed to respond to information in addition
to the most recent monthly figure for nominal demand itself. Ben
Friedman ([22], pp. 183-4), for example, shows that indicators such
as the money supply and the stock of credit can be used to increase
the accuracy of predictions of deviations from a nominal income
target. One could add many other leading indicators including a
number of the those from the G7 list. The conclusion seems to be that
it would be best to leave the means of attaining the nominal demand
target up to the national authorities, rather than requiring that they
follow a particular rule such as McCallum's.
On the other hand, it would be desirable to go beyond the proofs
in the appendix, which demonstrate the superiority of targeting
nominal GNP only when one knows the policy multipliers and takes as
given the ability of the authorities to hit their targets. The evident next
step is to try out the INT proposal, using simulations of one or more
econometric models of the world macroeconomy, to see how it fares
relative to other proposals.

APPENDIX
A Comparative Analysis of NIT Targeting
and Other Policy Coordination Regimes
This appendix compares four possible policy regimes: 1) floating
exchange rates, with full discretion by national policymakers (the
current regime); 2) a rigid money suppley rule; 3) a rigid nominal
GNP rule, and 4) a rigid exchange rate (or price of gold) rule (37). The
approach, which incorporates advantages to both rules and discre-
tion, follows Rogoff [43] and Fischer [12], who, in turn, followed
Kydland and Prescott [31] and Barro and Gordon [2] .
Throughout, we assume an aggregate supply relationship:
(AJ)
y = y* + b (p -
p~ + u
where y represents outps, y* potential output, p the price level, pe the
expected price level, and u a supply disturbance, with all variables
expressed as logs. Notice that, alternatively, p and pe could be the
actual and expected inflation rates respectively.
I. . Output and the Price Level in the Objective Function
We begin without the exchange rate. The loss function is simply:
(A2)
L = ap'l + (y -
ky*)2
where: a is the weight assigned to the inflation objective. We assume
that the lagged or expected price level relative to which p is measured
(37) The proponents of each of these nominal anchors of ten have in mind a target
zone system, not a rigid rule. The assumption of rigid rules is used here only to make
the analysis simpler.

International Nominal Targeting ecc.
285
can be normalized to zero. We impose k > 1, which builds in an
expansionary bias to discretionary policymaking.
(A3)
L = ap'l + [y*(l -
k) + b(p -
p~ + u]2
1.1 Discretionary Policy (Case 1)
Under a regime of full discretion, the policymaker chooses in
each period aggregate demand so as to minimize that period's L, with
IT given.
(A4)
(1/2) dL/dp = ap + [y*(l -
k) + b(p - ~ + u]b = O.
(AS)
p= [- y*(l -
k)b + lTpe - bull [a + lr]
Under the assumption of rational expectations:
(A6)
rA7)
to:
pe = Ep = - y*(J -
k)bla
So we can solve equation (AS) for the price level:
p = - y*(1 - k)[bla] - uol[a + lr]
From equation (A2), we then work out the expected loss function
fAB)
EL = (1 + lrI a)[y*(l - k)F + [a/(a + lr)] var(u).
The first term represents the inflationary bias in the system, and
the second represents the effect of the supply disturbance after the
authorities have chosen the optimal split between inflation and
output.
1.2 Money Rule (Case 2)
In considering alternative regimes, we must be explicit about the
money market equilibrium condition. (It was implicit in Case 1 that

286
Jeffrey A. Frankel
the money supply, m, was the variable that the authorities were using
to control demand.)
(A9)
m=p+y-v
where v represents velocity shocks. (We assume that v is not
correlated with u.) If the authorities precommit themselves to a fixed
money growth rule, in order to reduce expected inflation in long-run
equilibrium, then they must give up on affecting y. The optimal
money growth rate is the one that sets Ep at the target value for p,
which is zero. Thus, they will set the money supply, m, at Ey, which
in this case is y". The aggregate demand equation thus becomes:
(AI0)
p + y= y* + v,
Combining this equivalence with the aggregate supply rela-
tionship, equation (AI), the equilibrium is given by:
(All)
y = y* + (u + bv)/(1 + b),
p = (v -
u) / (l + b)
Substituting into equation (A2), we find that the expected loss
function is:
(AI2)
EL = (1 -
k)2 y*2 + [(1 + a) var (u) +
+ (a + ~) var (v)] / (l + b)2
The first term is smaller than the corresponding term in the
discretion case because the precommitment reduces expected infl-
ation. But the second term is probably larger because the authorities
have given up the ability to respond to money demand shocks. Which
regime is better depends on how big the shocks are and on the size of
the weight, a, placed on inflation-fighting.
1.3 Nominal GNP Rule (Case 3)
In the case of a nominal GNP rule, the authorities vary the money
supply in such a way as to accommodate velocity shocks. In other

International Nominal Targeting ecc.
287
words, equation (AlO) is replaced by the condition that p + y is
constant. The solution is the same as in Case 2, but the v disturbance
is dropped. Thus, the expected loss collapses from equation (A12) to:
(A13)
EL= (1- k)2y*2 + [(1 + a)/(l + b)2]var(u)
This, outcome unambiguously dominates the result of the money
rule case. Without knowing var(u) or (a), however, it is still not
possible to say that this rule dominates the outcome of the discretion
case. It is quite likely, especially if the variance of u is large, that an
absolute commitment to a rule would be unwisely constraining.
Hence, the argument for a target zone rather than a single number,
and for subjecting the chair person of the central bank to a mere loss
of reputation, rather than a firing squad, if he or she misses the target.
Yet it seems clear that, to whatever extent the country chooses to
commit itself to a nominal anchor, nominal GNP dominates the
money supply as the candidate for the anchor.
2. - Adding the Exchange Rate (or the Price of Gold)
to the Objective Function
We reconsider here a likely objection to choosing nominal GNP
or nominal demand as the focus of international coordination: that
doing so neglects the exchange rate. The alternative of setting mon-
etary policy so as to stabilize the exchange rate will not look attractive
unless the exchange rate enters the objective function, perhaps in-
directly via the consumer price index or the trade balance. Here we
confront the argument head on and include the exchange rate directly
in the loss function, along with output and the price level. Thus, we
replace equation (A2) with
(A14)
L = all + (y -
ky*)2 + cs",
where s is the spot exchange rate measured relative to some equili-
brium or target value and c is the weight placed on exchange rate
stability per se.

288
Jeffrey A. Frankel
There is no point in specifying an elaborate model of the ex-
change rate. Allthe empirical results say that most of the variation in
the exchange rate cannot be explained (even ex post) by measurable
macroeconomic variables and thus can only be attributed to an error
term that we here call e. But we must include the money supply in the
equation; otherwise, we do not allow the authorities the possibility of
affecting the exchange rate. Thus, the equation is simply:
(AI5)
s=m-y+e
where e is assumed to be uncorrelated with the other disturbances.
(Though our primary interpretation of s is as the spot price of foreign
currency, a second possible interpretation of this variable in what
follows is as the spot price of gold. It is hard to see why that price
should enter directly into the objective function, even more so than
the exchange rate, but this simply biases our results in favour of the
position of the gold bugs.)
From equation (A9), we can achieve by situation:
(AI 6)
s=p-v+e
We assume that equation (AI), the aggregate supply relationship,
holds as before. So we can write the loss function equation (AI4), as
(AI 7)
L = arJ + [(1 - kh'* + b(p - pj + U]2 +
+ c(p -
v + e)2
Now we proceed as before to consider possible regimes.
2.1 Discretionary Policy (Case 1)
We add the exchange rate to equation (A4).
(1/2) dVdp = ap + [y*(1 -
k) + b(p - pj + u]b +
+ c (p - v + e) = 0

International Nominal Targeting ecc.
Then:
(AlB)
p = [- y*(1 -
k)b + lrpt! -
bu + c(v - e)]/
/
[a + II + c] .
The rationally expected p is given by IT = Ep:
289
(A19)
IT = - (1 -
k)by* / (a + c)
Substituting into equation (AI9) yields:
(A2D)
p = - (1 -
k)y*[b/(a + c)] +
+ [c (v -
e) -
bu] / [a + II + c]
The loss function is:
(A21)
EL = [(1 -
k)y*]2[(a + II + c) / (a + c)] +
+{ (a + c)var(u) + c(a + ll)[var(v) +
+ var (e)]} / (a + II + c)
2.2 Money Rule (Case 2)
As when we considered a money rule before, the authorities set
mat y*, so that expected inflation is zero and equation (AID) applies.
Thus, the same solution -
equation (All) for y and p -
also applies.
The exchange rate is given by substituting the solution for p from
equation (All) into equation (AI6):
(A22)
s = e -
[(u + bY) / (1 + b)]
The additional s term is the only difference from equation (AI2)
in the expected loss function:
(A23) EL = [y*(1 -
k)]2 + [(1 + a+ c) / (l + ll)] var (u) +
+ [(a + II + ell) / (1 + b)2] var (v) + (c) var (e)

290
Jeffrey A. Frankel
Again the comparison of this outcome with that of a policy of
discretion depends on the various magnitudes.
2.3 Nominal GNP Rule (Case 3)
When the monetary authorities are able to vary m so as to keep
p + Y constant, the velocity shocks, v, drop out. The expected loss
function becomes:
(A24)
EL = [y*(l - k)F + [(1 + a + c) /
/ (1 + ll] var (u) + c var (e)
As before, the nominal GNP rule unambiguously dominates the
money rule.
In practice, the e shocks in the exchange rate equation are very
large. They certaintly dwarf the u shocks in the aggregate supply
equation. (The exchange rate often moves 10% in a year without
corresponding movements in the money supply or other observable
macroeconomic variables; try to imagine similar movements of real
output.) If the weight c on the s target is substantial, then the last term
in the expected loss equation may be important.
2.4 Exchange Rate
or Price of Gold Rule (Case 4)
If the authorities fix the exchange rate, they again cannot affect y
in long-run equilibrium. But now it is the exchange rate that they peg
in such a way that Ep = 0, which from exquation (AJ6) means s = o.
The ex post price level is then given by:
(A25)
(A26)
p = v-e.
From equation (AJ):
y=y*+b(v-e)+u

International Nominal Targeting ecc.
From equation (AJ4):
(A27)
EL = (a + 1l) var (v -
e) + [y*(l -
k)]2 + var (u).
291
The coefficient on var (e) is (a + 1l), compared with the coef-
ficient c in the expected loss, equation (A24), under the nominal GNP
rule. The point was made above that in practice e shocks dwarf u
shocks. Continuing this reasoning, even if v shocks are also small and
a = c (the objective function puts no greater weight on a 10%
fluctuation of the price level than on a 10% fluctuation of the
exchange rate -
which is an extremely conservative assumption -
the expected loss from fixing s will be greater than the expected loss
from fixing nominal GNP. The reason is that under an exhange rate
rule, e shocks are allowed to affect the money supply and therefore
the overall price level. Once one allows for v shocks (which are
probably between u and e shocks in magnitude), the case for nominal
GNP targeting is even stronger. One would have to put extraordinarily
high weight on the exchange rate objective to prefer an exchange rate
rule.
Under the secondary interpretation of s as the price of gold,
rather than the price of foreign exchange, the e shocks are likely to be
at least as large, and the argument for its receiving heavy weight
directly in the objective function, is even more difficult to make. In
short, the nominal GNP rule seems to dominate all the other candi-
dates for nominal target: the money supply, the exchange rate, and
the price of gold.

292
Jeffrey A. Frankel
BIBUOGRAPHY
[1] BARRO R.: «Recent Developments in the Theory of Rules versus Discretion», The
Economic Journal. n. 96. January 1986. pp. 23-37.
[2] BARRO R. - GoRDON D.: «A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural Rate
Model•• Journal of Political Economy. vol. 91. August 1983. pp. 589-610.
[3] BoUGHTON J.: «Policy Assignment Strategies with Somewhat Flexible Exchange
Rates», in EICHENGREEN B. - MILLER M. - PORTES R. (eds.): Exchange Rate Regimes
and Macroeconomic Policy. Forthcoming, 1989.
[4] BRANSON W. - ROTEMBERG J.: «International Adjustment with Wage Rigidity••
European Economic Review. vol. 13. May 1980. pp. 309-37.
[5] BRITIAN S.: The Role and Limits of Government. Rev. ed.• London. Wildwood
House. 1987.
[6] BRYANT R.: «Intragovernmental Coordination of Economic Policies: An Interim
Stocktaking•• International Monetary Cooperation: Essays in Honor of H.C.
Wallich. Princeton (NJ). Princeton University Press.
Essays in International
Finance. n. 169, 1987.
[7] BRYANT R. et AL.• (eds.): Empirical Macroeconomics for Interdependent Econ-
omies. Washington. (DC). Brookings Institution. 1988.
[8] CORDEN W.M.: «The Logic of the International Monetary Non-system. in MACHLUP
F. - MULLER-GROEUNG H. (eds.): Reflections on a Troubled World Economy:
Essays in Honor of H. Giersch. London, MacMillan. 1983. pp. 59-74.
[9] DORNBUSCH R. - FRANKEL J.: «The Flexible Exchange Rate System: Experience and
Alternativess, Washington (DC). National Bureau of Economic Research. Working
Paper n. 2464. 1988. Reprinted in BoRNER S. (ed.): International Finance and
Trade in a Polycentric World. London. MacMillan. 1988.
[10] FELDSTEIN M.: «The World Economy•• The Economist. n. 11. June 1983.
[11] -
- : «Distinguished Lecture on Economics in Government: Thinking about
International Economic Coordination•• Journal of Economic Perspectives, n. 2.
Spring 1988. pp. 3-13.
[12] FISCHER S.: «Rules vs. Discretion in Monetary Policy•• Washington (DC). National
Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper, n. 2518. 1988.
[13] --: «International Macroeconomic Policy Coordination•• in FELDSTEIN M. (ed.):
International Policy Coordination. Chicago, University of Chicago Press. 1988.
[14] FRANKEL J. : «Obstacles to International Macroeconomic Policy Coordination••
Princeton. Princeton University Press , Studies in International Finance. n. 64,
1988.
[15] --: «A Proposal for Policy Coordination: International Nominal Targeting
(INT)>>. Bald Peak. N.H .• Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Conference on Interna-
tional Payments Imbalances. 1988.
[16] - -: .A Modest Proposal for International Nominal Targeting (INT).. National
Boureau of Economic Research. Working Paper. n. 2856, Forthcoming in BRAN·
SON W. - FRENKEL J. - GoLDSTEIN M. (eds.): International Policy Coordination and
Exchange Rate Fluctuation, Chicago. University of Chicago Press, 1989.
[17] - -: «Overcoming Obstacles to Policy Coordination: International Nominal
Targeting (INT)., Cambridge (Mass) . National Boureau of Economic Research.
Conference Report. 1989.

International Nominal Targeting ecc.
293
[18] FRANKEL J. - HARooUVEllS G.: «Commodity Prices, Money Surprises, and Fed
Credibility», Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 17 n. 4, November,
1985, pp. 425-38.
[19] FRANKEL J. - RocKETT K.: «International Macroeconomic Policy Coordination
When Policy-makers Do Not Agree on the True Model», American Economic
Review, vol. 78, June 1988, pp. 318-400.
[20] FRANKEL J. - GoLDSTEIN M.: «A Guide to Target Zones», lImf Staff Papers, vol. 33,
December 1986, pp, 633-730.
[21] FRANKEL J. - GoLDSTEIN M. - MASSON P.: «International Coordination of Economic
Policies: Scope, Methods and Effects» , in Conference on National Economic
Policies and their Impact on the World Economy, Washington (DC), International
Monetary Fund, 1988.
[22] FRIEDMAN B.: «The Value of Intermediate Targets in Implementing Monetary
Policy», Price Stability and Public Policy, Kansas City, (Mo), Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City, 1984, pp . 169-91.
[23] FuNABASHI Y.: Managing the Dollar: From the Plaza to the Louvre, Washington
(DC), Institute of International Economics, 1988.
[24] GIAVAZZI F. - GIOVANNINI A.: Limiting Exchange Rate Flexibility: The European
Monetary System, Cambridge, MIT Press, 1988.
[25]
GIAVAZZI F. - PAGANO M.: «The Advantage of Tying One's Hands: Ems Discipline
and Central Bank Credibility», European Econom ic Review, n. 32, June 1988, pp.
1055-82.
[26] GoRDON R.: «The Conduct of Domestic Monetary Policy», in ANooA. et At. (eds .):
Monetary Policy in Our Times , Cambridge (Mass .), MIT Press, 1985, pp. 45-81.
[27] HALL R.: «Monetary Policy with an Elastic Price Standard», Price Stability and
Public Policy, Kansas City (Mo .), Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 1985.
[28] HOLTHAM G. - HUGHES HALLETT A.: «Internationl Policy Coordination and Model
Uncertainty», in BRYANT R. - PORTES R. (eds.): Global Macroeconomics: Policy
Conflict and Cooperation, London, MacMillan, 1987.
[29] KENEN P.: «Exchange Rates and Policy Coordination», Washington (DC), Brook-
ings Institution, Brookings Discussion Papers, n. 61, 1987.
[30] KRUGMAN P.: «Target Zones and Exchange Rate Dynamics», Washington (DC),
National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper, n. 2481 , 1988.
[31] KYDLAND F. - PRESCOTT E.: «Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of
Optimal Plans» , Journal of Political Economy, n. 85, June 1977, pp. 473-91.
[32] MCCALLUM B.: «The Case for Rules in the Conduct of Monetary Policy: A Concrete
Example, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond», Economic Review, September-Oc-
tober, 1987, pp. 10-8.
[33] -
- : «Robustness Properties of a Rule for Monetary Policy», Amsterdam (NY),
North Holland, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Revised,
February, 1988 .
[34] -
- : «The Role of Demand Management in the Maintenance of Full Employ-
ment», Washington, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper, n.
2520, 1988.
[35] McKIBBON W. - SACHS J. : «Coordination of Monetary and Fiscal Policies in the
Industrial Economies», in FRENKEL J. (ed.): International Aspects of Fiscal
Policies, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1988, pp, 73-120.
[36] McKINNON R.: An International Standard for Monetary Stabilization, Wash-
ington (DC), Institute for International Economics, 1984.

294
Jeffrey A. Frankel
[37] Mc KINNON R.: «Monetary and Fexchange Rate Policies for International Financial
Stability: A Proposal», Journal of Economic Perspectives, n. 2, Winter 1988, pp.
83·103.
[38] MEADE J.: «A New Keynesian Bretton Woods», Three Banks Review, June 1984.
[39] MILLER M.• WILUAMSON J.: «The International Monetary System: An Analysis of
Alternative Regimes», Centre for Economic and Policy Research, Discussion
Paper, n. 266, 1988, and European Economic Review, vol. 32, n. 5, June 1988,
pp. 1031-48.
[40] MUNDELL R.: «The Appropriate Use of Monetary and Fiscal Policy under Fixed
Exchange Rates», IMF Staff Papers, n. 9, March 1962, pp. 70-7.
[41] OUDIZ G. - SACHS J.: «Macroeconomic Policy Coordination Among Industrial
Economies», Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, n. I, 1984, pp. 1-75.
[42] PuTNAM R. - BAYNE N.: Handing Together: The Seven Power Summits, Cambridge
(Mass.), Harvard University Press, 1987.
[43] ROGOFF K.: «Can International Monetary Policy Coordination Be Counterproduc-
tive?», Journal of Internatinal Economics, n. 18, March 1985, pp. 199-217.
[44] - -: «The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target»,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, n. 100, November 1985, pp. 1169-89.
[45] --: «Reputational Constraints on Monetary Policy», in BRUNNER K. - MELTZER
A.H. (eds.): Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, n. 26,
Amsterdam (NY), North-Holland, 1987.
[46] TAYLOR J.: «What Would Nominal GNP Targeting Do to the Business Cycle?»,
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, n. 22, Amsterdam (NY),
North-Holland 1985.
[47] WILUAMSON J.: The Exchange Rate System,Washington (DC), Institute for Inter-
national Economics, 1983.
[48] WILUAMSON J. - MILLER M.: «Targets and Indicators: A Blueprint for the Interna-
tional Coordination of Economic Policy», Washington (DC), Institute for Interna-
tional Economics, Policy Analyses in International Economics, n. 22, 1987.

Toward a Common Monetary Standard
Through the Regulation
of Exchange Rates
Ronald I. McKinnon (*)
Stanford University
Over the past decade and a half, nothing has better illustrated the
conference theme of global disequilibrium than the erratic behaviour
of the exchange rates and long-term interest rates of the major
industrial countries. After the Bretton Woods system of pegged
exchange rates broke down in the early 1970s, the essential random-
ness and violence of exchange rate movements surprised almost
everybody at first, but they are now expected features of life, well
established in the economics literature (including the publications of
the principal monetary surveillance agency, the International Mon-
etary Fund -
IMF).
The modem experience with floating exchange rates has been
marked by high short-term volatility week to week and even day to
day. An even more striking characteristic is the extent to which
national price levels have been misaligned for prolonged periods.
Graphs 1 and 2 compare movements in the actual yen!dollar and
deutsche/mark/dollar exchange rates to the paths of their estimated
purchasing power parities (PPPs) -
those rates that would have
aligned either producer price indices (PPIs) or unit labor costs (ULCs)
between the United States and Japan and the United States and
(*) My thanks to David Robinson and Kenichi 0000 for their invaluable help in
preparing this paper.

296
Ronald L ~cKinnon
GRAPH 1
ACTUAL AND PPP YEN/DOLLAR EXCHANGE RATES
,,
.
---,
J'-
,. ,,""
~,
.
""
310
300
29Ci
280
270
260
250
240
230
220
210
200
190
180
170
160
150 J
140
~~j iii iii iii ii
i iii Iii Iii iii
i
I Iii Iii
-
PPP: purchasing power parity;
••••• PPI: producer price index;
--- ULC: unit labor cost .
Source:OHNO [21] .
Germany (1). Deviations from PPP of 20% in either direction have
been sustained, sometimes for years, with individual spikes ranging up
to 40%. In the now worldwide markets for goods and many services,
(1) How best to estimate (absolute) PPP exchange rates remains contentious, but
alternative statistical techniques lead to estimates similar to those in Graphs 1 and 2
(McKINNON and OHNO [19]; OHNO [21] . More basically, substituting long-term moving
averages of the yen/dollar and mark/dollar rates for the PPP rates in the figure would
show similarly large deviations of current exchange rates from these long-term trends.
Advise: the numbers in square brackets refer to the Bibliography in appendix.

Toward a Common Monetary Standard ecc.
297
GRAPH 2
xcrua, AND PPP MARKIDOLLAR EXCHANGE RATES
oo;"
.
\
.
--, -..
......~0--.-. \....~
o~",~,
,
...
.
.
..
\ ..~..~T'~..
-
"..
y
3,3
3,2
3.1
3
2.9
2.8
2.7
2,6
2.5
2,4
2.3
2,2
2.1
2
1.9
1.8
1,7
1,6 II.
I
I
I 1 I
I I
J I
i
j
I iii
I iii' ill
i
• i
j
, iii
j
I
I
.
j
•
I
,
i
i
1 i
I I .
i
j
I
I
.
1975
1976 19n
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982 1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
-
PPP: purchasing power parity;
o •••• PPL: producer price index;
- - -
ULC: unit labor cost.
Source :OHNO [21].
these variations represent tremendous swings in the international
competitiveness of any country's merchants and manufacturers.
Because industrialists planning long-term investments in plant
and equipment in various parts of the world cannot effectively hedge
much of this exchange risk (McKinnon [19]), certain kinds of invest-
ment are inhibited while others become shorter term and more
.defensive. Even more vulnerable to changing exchange rates is each
country's agricultural sector -
a fact that induces governments to
respond more immediately with protectionist measures.

298
Ronald [ htcKinnon
1. - Exchange-Rate Regimes
and Interest Rate Volatility in Historical Perspective
Exchange risk also affects investment indirectly through its
impact on long-term interest rates. Relative to the situation in eras
when a common worldwide monetary standard was operative, long-
term interest rates under the current regime of no-par floating
exchange rates have been remarkably volatile. During the period of
the classical gold standard, from 1879 to 1913, nominal exchange
rates were confined within their gold points -
a band width of less
than 1% (Table 1), which was expected to last into the distant future.
Graph 3 shows that long-term national interest rates were low and
close together and did not change much through time. With capital
TABLE 1
FLUCTUATION BAND FOR BILATERAL NOMINAL EXCHANGE RATES
Currency
EXchange
Parity
Lower
limit
Upper
limit
sterling
Franc
Mark
($/£)
(Fr/$)
(oM/$)
4.866
5.183
4.198
Gold standard
(1879-1913)
4.827
5.148
4.168
4.890
5.215
4.218
2.828
4.986
4.242
Bretton Woods system
(1950-1970)
2.772
4.887
4.158
2.800
4.937
4.200
($/£)
(Fr/$)
(oM/$)
Sterling
Franc
Mark
European monetary system
(1979-1989)
Franc
I (Fr/oM)
2.310
2.258
2.362
Sources: table prepared by GIOVANNINI [10] . Information on gold standard from Morgenstern
(1959); sterling points computed for gold trade from Britain to the United States (in 1879); franc and
mark points computed for trade from Paris and Berlin respectively, to New York in 1901.
Information on Bretton Woods system, from International Financial Statistics; data refer to the
year 1960. Information EMS; from European Economy; data refer to March 1979.

Toward a Common Monetary Standard ecc.
299
GRAPH 3
LONG-TERM INTEREST RATES UNDER THE GOLD STANDARD
a) Annual data
1920
1910
1900
1890
.--.......
.................. :::.~._. -'- :::::.-:-.::-:".•.~...
.............
1880
_._.
France
•••• ••• United Kingdom
. -
United States
%
151
1'Q
13 ~
12 ~
11 ~
10 ~
:~
:~
:i
31
~~
01l-----........-----r----........---"""T"""-----,.
1870
%
b) Monthly data
15
14
13
12
-
United States
11
••••••• United Kingdom
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
'" '" ..... .....•••.•...... •.•...•............•.....
2
~4r---.-----,-------,----,----r-------.---..,--
18n
Nov.
1883
May
1888
Oct.
1894
Apr.
1899
Oct.
1905
Mar.
1910
Sep.
1916
Mar.
Source: see appendix.

300
Ronald I. McKinnon
GRAPH 4
LONG-TERM GOVERNMENT BOND YIELDS, 1960-1988
a) Annual data
%
15
~
_ ._. - United Kingdon
U '
d S
~ --~
14
- - - • -
mte
tates
,'\
_
Gennany
,
\
,
13j
••••••••. Japan
I
' ... ."
12
,
l'
I
"
J\
10 1
'
I
.
9
I
,_ - ..,
' ,- ;-,--•••
8 ~
/\
,/ i
·J
·
./
.~....
:.~
7
~
/'
...:'<..-J.
.
\'.;
I·
_ • .,'"
•
<:..i
6
}~.__.... .,
n---
1960
OJ
1973
1976
OJ
0 2
1979
0 7
b) Monthly data
%
18 1
17
j
~
.]
,
16 1
':I,,,
,
15
.:::
~'}
::Ij
United Kingdom / W\ ..<:~\.:~~1
f\j
1
:
: ': 1)
l_"';~
'1
t
....'
.'\
F',~ ,''. ,.
.
j
• r:
I '
LiI \ . " ~/. "
10J
•
:l'J \~' ;
'\ '
-
I: ::,.
(
,\
... .
...0\
r.'"
\
\,/I '~'
9
-l
....:;'.
:
I
, : t--.
-\:") .•, ,'.
.. '.'i ·'
I
'\:
~,."\; : .; I
\
" _. ".
:"1fi V \ •\\
I'
tI
B 1
German
i
:
I.,· ,:(-1 .! J' \ 1
:1'.
\! t»; ;. j
7
~
~/' • \
•,.,
' J
'.i\ 1/\.
'\iV
I
....
.
, .. 7...
,
~..
' 1 ", • \ .
6 j ( " ,':"" -,,...- _/ .:,..'.1 'I
v,
\
\"'~'
"J'.;t:\
.' .'°,
5 L..,,,..
'J ' ''.'
.........;
" :,,-."v' C.I
1
':::\ /, ,.\
~ j
Japan· ·......·\:
',' .
1960
1967
1965
1968
1970
1973
1976
1979
1981
1984
1987
Source: see appendix.

Toward a Common Monetary Standard ecc.
301
even freer to move internationally in the late nineteenth century than
it is now, yields on prime grade US railway bonds remained in the
neighborhood of 4%; those on British consols were about 3% or
slightly less; French rentes (representative of yields on other European
governments' securities) were sandwiched in between.
In sharp visual contrast, Graph 4 portrays the modern experience
with long-term interest rates on the government bonds of Japan, the
United States, West Germany, and the United Kingdom. From 1973 to
1988, interest -
rate levels were much higher, sometimes often 12 to
13%, and volatility was much greater (best seen by the monthly plots in
panel of figure 4 [b]). The dispersion of interest rates across countries
was also high: a differential of 5 to 6 percentage points between the
United States and Britain on the one hand and Germany and Japan on
the other, was not unusual. During the fixed-rate dollar standard of the
1960s (which could be projected back into the 1950s), however, Graph
4 shows that long-term interest rates were somewhat closer together
and less volatile -
at least until the 1969-1971 period, when the pegged
rate system came under pressure and finally broke down.
Using historical US data on average month-to-month and year-to-
year changes, Table 2 shows a more precise comparison of interest
rate volatility under the classical gold standard, the Bretton Woods
dollar standard, and the present period of no-par floating exchange
rates. Measured either monthy or annually, the mean percentage
point change in long-term interest rates on US bonds under floating
exchange rates has been about ten times as high as it was under the
classical gold standard, and about four times as high as under the
Bretton Woods system. (The differences in volatility were considera-
bly less pronounced for short-term interest rates; they were lowest
under Bretton Woods, considerably higher under the gold standard,
and highest during the recent float .)
Although the unusually high variance in nominal (and real)
exchange rates since 1973 is now well recognized, the modern
period's extraordinary volatility in long-term interest rates -
and its
possible implications for stock prices -
is sometimes forgotten. In
exploring the differences in the behaviour of long-term interest rates
across exchange rate regimes, let us focus on the two extremes: the
classical gold standard and the current floating system. Was the

302
Ronald I A{cKinnon
TABLE 2
Standard
deviation
US INTEREST RATE VOLATIUTY
-------------1
M~c=~ute 1--------
Annual data
Short-term rates
Gold standard
(1879-1913)
Bretton Woods (1950-1970)
Floating system (1973-1988)
Long-term rates
Gold standard
(1879-1913)
Bretton Woods (1950-1970)
Floating system (1973-1988)
0.90
0.69
1.72
0.12
0.29
1.25
0.91
0.77
2.03
0.11
0.30
1.51
Monthly data
Short-term rates
Gold standard
(1879-1913)
0.40
0.57
Treasury bills
Bretton Woods (1950-1970)
0.16
0.24
Floating rates
(1973-1988)
0.47
0.77
Federal funds rate
Bretton Woods (1960-1970)
0.18
0.26
Floating system (1973-1988)
0.53
0.95
Long-term rates
Gold standard
(1879-1913)
0.03
0.04
Bretton Woods (1950-1970)
0.07
0.11
Floating system (1973-1988)
0.27
0.37
(*) The volatility measures are based on changes, annual or monthly, in percentage points.
Source: see Appendix.
success of the late -
nineteenth -
century system in keeping
long-term interest rates low and stable because the common price
level was well anchored? In fact, the common price level, as measured
by national wholesale price indices (WPIs), moved substantially dur-
ing the period (Cooper [5]). Interspersed with sharp cyclical fluctu-
ations, the drift of wholesale prices was downward by about 2% a year
from the 1870s to 1896 and upward thereafter about the same
amount until 1913, as shown in Graph 5. Whether or not any of these

Toward a Common Monetary Standard ecc.
303
price level movements should have been expected and thus registered
in interest rates has been a matter of long-standing curiosity and is an
important part of the "Gibson paradox" (Fisher [7]; Barsky [1]). But
they were not so registered, as comparing Graph 5 with Graph 3
makes clear.
Perhaps the nature of the exchange rate regime, rather than its
success in anchoring price levels, is more important in minimizing
volatility in long-term interest rates (McKinnon [18]). Consider two
facts about the classical gold standard. First, it was fully international,
encompassing all the financially important countries. No alternative
liquid financial asset (with significantly different monetary characteris-
tics) existed into which international investors could conveniently and
continually shift. Bonds denominated in sterling, dollars, francs, and
so on bore the same risk of general price level inflation or deflation.
Unless some obviously persistent price inflation seemed in the offing,
arbitrage between bonds with worldwide markets and relatively il-
liquid nonmonetary assets, such as real estate or inventories of
commodities, was simply too inconvenient to appeal to international
portfolio managers.
GRAPH 5
WHOLESALE PRICES
Index
(1900 = 100)
140 r-----------------------,
130
120
110
100
90
80 .
....
1910
1906
1900
1895
1890
1885
70 L----'--__-'--__--"-__--'-__--'
L..----l
1680
Source: see appendix.

304
Ronald I. McKinnon
Second, nations had made finn,
long-term commitments to
return to their traditional gold parities even if gold convertibility had
to be temporarily suspended because of some panic or run. Thus
investors had long-term confidence in what, say, the dollar/sterling
exchange rate could be expected to be in 20 years hence, even though
they occasionally faced some near-term uncertainty as to whether the
exchange rate would be contained within the gold points in a week or
a month. Thus, the classical gold standard avoided the continual
churning of asset portfolios that we now associate with free interna-
tional capital mobility. Because of the absence of long-term exchange
risk across otherwise economically and politically diverse countries,
long-term interest rates remained low and uniform.
In contrast, under floating exchange rates with no official parity
commitments, news of how the exchange rate may evolve in the
future is immediately telescoped back into portfolio choices in the
present; thus, both the spot exchange rate (Frenkel and Mussa [9])
and long-term interest rates (McKinnon [15]) have become more
volatile. Insofar as the market judges that some currencies are likely
to depreciate against others and that these weak currencies suffer
from general uncertainty about what their governments' long-run
monetary intentions are, the rates of interest on bonds denominated
in them will be higher. So will volatility in the interest rates of all
nations with open financial markets.
1.1 The US Dollar in the Postwar Period:
From Strength to Weakness
The financial evolution of the United States vis-a-vis Japan since
1950 nicely illustrates how this weak-currency, high-interest-rate
syndrome can develop. In the 1950s and 1960s, the United States was
the anchor of the world dollar standard, with relatively low interest
rates and a stable price level. Then dollar devaluations -
actual and
threatened -
against important "hard-money" trading partners grad-
ually increased the level and the volatility of US interest rates and, less
obviously, of US prices.
The clamour for dollar devaluation began in the late 1960s when
the traditional US trade surplus diminished; President Richard Nixon

Toward a Common Monetary Standard ecc.
305
was advised to devalue in 1971 to restore the country's international
competitiveness. The push continued through the early administration
of President Jimmy Carter; Secretary of the Treasury Michael Blu-
menthal stated that the dollar was overvalued and thus provoked
another run against the dollar in 1977 and 1978. Even during the
1981-1985 period of dollar strength from its largely accidental (and
unanticipated) overvaluation, private market participants expected -
albeit incorrectly before March 1985 -
that the dollar would fall in
order to restore the United States' international competitiveness
(Frankel and Froot [8]). In 1987, worried about the strongly growing
US trade deficit, Secretary of the Treasury James Baker warned
foreign central banks not to prop up the dollar and thus provoked an
exchange crisis in which inflows of private foreign capital dried up
(McKinnon [18]). More recently, in 1988 and so early in 1989, central
banks intervened quite heavily to keep the dollar within a range of
about 125 to 135 yen, and the foreign exchanges were relatively
tranquil. Nevertheless, with the persistent US trade deficit in mind,
influential economists such as Martin Feldstein [6]
continue to
advocate that the dollar should be devalued.
Parenthetically, the traditional argument that devaluation will
correct a trade deficit is not generally valid (McKinnon [14]). Suppose
that an economy is open so that arbitrage in goods and commodity
markets with the outside world is unrestricted. Then, a policy that
operates directly on the savings-investment balance -
say, the fiscal
deficit in the US case -
is the only way that the trade deficit can be
reduced. On the other hand, a devaluation can be effected only by
easing monetary policy -:- either current or prospective -
and
thereby increasing inflationary expectations. Because a devaluation
signals that the domestic price level will be higher in the future, it may
well induce current domestic absorption to rise relative to current
output, in what I call the "perverse absorption effect" (McKinnon
[17]). Although domestic goods become cheaper on world markets,
total domestic spending for both investment and consumption also
increases. Thus, the monetary value of the trade balance is as likely to
worsen as to improve from a policy of devaluation cum easy money.
Nevertheless, participants in the financial markets may them-
selves believe that a devaluation is likely to improve the trade balance

306
Ronald 1. McKinnon
-
the traditional elasticities model of the balance of trade (Robinson
1937 and
1950)(2). Alternatively,
financiers may anticipate that
government officials will be influenced by economists, the majority of
whom still adhere to the elasticities model. Either way, as long as the
US fiscal and trade deficits remain substantial, the threat of further
dollar devaluation is aggravated.
Because of this continuing risk of further devaluation, interna-
tional investors now demand much higher yields on dollar assets than
on those denominated in yen or marks. The dramatic transformation
of the United States from a strong-currency country in the 1960s to a
weak-currency country in the 1980s is particularly apparent in Graphs
6 and 7, which plot the cost of capital to US firms against that
prevailing in Japan and Germany respectively.
During the Bretton Woods period, as Graph 6 shows, the prime
rate for short-term lending by Japanese banks and the (controlled)
yield on long-term industrial bonds from that country were about 6 to
7% (3). While US counterpart rates stayed lower, in the range of 4 to
5%, until the commitment to fixed parities began to fray with the
threatened dollar devaluation toward the end of the 1960s. When the
exchange rate was fixed at
360 yen/dollar, inflation in the two
countries, as measured by PPls encompassing broad baskets of trad-
able goods, was virtually the same -
and only about 1 percent per
year (Table 3) (4). Thus, nominal interest rates were indicative of
(2) In an insular economy with capital controls and limited arbitrage in interna-
tional goods markets, exchange rate determination can be separated from present and
prospective monetary policy. Keeping the domestic money supply constant, the govern-
ment can undertake a controlled devaluation through sterilized intervention in the
foreign exchanges. As output (and exports) are stimulated, domestic absorption will be
constrained by increased interest rates -
unlike the situation in a financially open
economy.
(3) There is good reason to believe that the actual cost of capital to Japanese
industry was substantially higher than the prime loan rate and the rate on industrial
bonds (HORIUCHI [12]). For example, a bank often required its loan customers to
maintain a non-interest-bearing compensating balance with it.
(4) Other price indices that include nontradable services, such as the consumer
price index (CPI) and the GNP deflator, diverged much more (McKINNON and OHNO
[19]). One can make the case, however, that inflation in a broad basket of tradable
goods, and not nontradable services, is the appropriate measure of Fisher effects in
interest rates. Thus, in deflating nominal interest rates to get "real" rates, using
expected inflation in producer price indices is the most appropriate generally available
measure.

Toward a Common Monetary Standard ecc.
307
GRAPH 6
THE COST OF CAPITAL, UNITED STATES AND JAPAN
a) Prime rate (nominal)
1965
Jun.
%
NJj
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
: 1..
~-.
~ j : .
5
....J
4
3
1960
1978
Jan.
Sep.
1968
Mar.
1970
1973
Dec.
Sep.
" ,A
United ~'-
"
V
J \ .. Japan
t
_.
,."../
....•.\
.
1976
1979
1981
1984
1987
Jun.
Mar .
Nov.
Aug.
May
b) Corporate Bond Rates (nominal)
1984
1987
Aug.
May
t
United SIal"
,.
~Iri~)
j\
!
\.
Japan
: /
L\.~~~~trial Bords)
_.._---\
0 .. _
'
'- •••••
•
1979
1981
Mar. . Nov.
1976
Jun.
1970
1973
Dec.
Sep.
1968
Mar.
1965
Jun.
r ••
\....!
'\ ....
..1..·
1967
Sep:.
16 i
15 i
:~1
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4 1-.......,...-----
-
-
3'\..-_~-----:...
_.....-__.--_-~-----_
1960
Jan.
Source: see appendix.

308
RonaldL kfcKinnon
GRAPH 7
THE COST OF CAPITAL, UNITED STATES AND GERMANY
a) Prime rate (nominal)
1984
1987
Aug.
May
1981
Nov.
1979
Mar.
~
(~Y\
' United States
.\
vi
r"\J
"
)
\
i
!Gennany
,
\
I
l_·--\
1._-.......
!
..\....'-
r:
'__ I
-\!
1968
1970
1973
1976
Mar.
Dec.
Sep,
Jun.
1965
Jun.
1967
Sep,
%
21 1
~j
~~I
16
lSI
14
13
12
11
10j
9,i1
4 ·L====::-__~__~~~
---'::::::J...-...
1960
Jan.
b) Corporate bord rates (nominal)
%
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
r,
7
,/ \-.\
6
if·...
t.
.'"
~_.
a
~. ....J'.f
'~J
5
4 J"'-..........----
1960
Jan.
1967
1965
Sep.
Jun.
1968
Mar .
1970
1973
Dec.
Sep.
1976
Jun .
1979
1981
1984
Mar.
Nov.
Aug.
1987
May
Source: see appendix.

Toward a Common Monetary Standard ecc.
309
relative "real" interest rates across the two countries, with those in the
United States being lower but not very different from those in Japan.
By the 1980s, as Graph 6 shows, US nominal interest rates had
become much higher than Japanese (although the differential was
variable). In early 1989, with the dollar having fallen to about 130
yen, the Japanese prime lending rate was 3.5% whereas the US rate
was 11.5%; high-grade industrial bonds were at more than 10%in the
United States and less than 5% in Japan. From the dollar devaluations
after 1970, the United States has experienced much higher inflation in
its PPI than has Japan or Germany (Tables 3 and 4). Expectations can
differ substantially from experienced price inflation, however, and
survey data on long-term expectations of American or Japanese price
inflation -
say, those associated with 20-year bonds -
do not exist.
Thus, any precise comparison of "real" rates of interest between the
United States and its hard-currency trading partners is now much
more difficult than it was two decades ago. Now that the common
monetary standard has broken down into a regime of floating ex-
change rates, one can no longer preswne that real interest rates are
naturally driven toward equality, as they were under the classical gold
standard and tended to be under Bretton Woods.
Nevertheless, it is clear that the increase in nominal interest rates
in a weak-currency country such as the United States will shorten the
term structure of business decision-making relative to that of a
low-interest country such as Japan. Take the least favourable case for
this argument: long-term expectations of price inflation in the US PPI
TABLE 3
PRODUCER PRICES AND EXCHANGE RATES
Producer price index
Nominal
(1960= 100)
exchange rate
United States
Japan
Gennany
Yen/$
DM/$
1960 ..........
100
100
100
360
4.20
1970 ..........
116
114
114
360
3.60
1989,01 ........
349
204
219
128
1.85
Sources: Prices: OECD: Main Economic Indicators, various issues. Exchange rates: IMP:
International Financial Statistics, various issues.

310
RonaldL hfcKinnon
PRODUCER PRICES AND MONEY WAGES
(annual percent change from 4th quarter to 4th quarter)
TABLE 4
United States
1987
Wages
.
PPI
.
3.8
1.5
8.0
9.2
7.61 5.3 1
3.41 4. 1 I
3.91
1.5 1 2.2
5.9
1.5
1.9
1.3
-0.3 -4.5
4.4
Japan
Wages
.
PPI
..
11.3
1.2
11.9
I 5.9
1 4.4
I
4.31 4. 1 I
3.81
1.8 1 4.1
6.7
0.1
0.2
- 1.2
0.3
- 2.3 - 5.8
0.1
Federal Republic of Gennany
Wages
.
PPI
..
3.4
1.0
Source: OECO: Main Economic Indicators, various issues.
vis-a-vis the Japanese PPI equal the observed interest rate differential
between the two countries, with both movements expected to be led
by continual dollar devaluations into the indefinite future. So, in a
conventional sense, "real" rates of interest are equalized after all! One
can show, however, that the effective duration of finance, as defined
in any standard textbook (for example, Van Home [24]), will be
reduced in the United States. The higher the nominal interest rates -
even if they are offset by inflationary expectations, the shorter the
"real" payback time will be for any given term to maturity of
corporate debt. Take a 20-year corporate bond and compare a
company that pays 5% interest because inflation is expected to be
zero, to one that pays 15%because inflation is expected to be 10% per
year over the bond's maturity. For the second firm, most of the
(inflation-adjusted) real cost of debt service will come early in the
contract; the final repayment of principal will be trivially small after
20 years because the price level will then be so much higher. For the
first firm, the effective duration of the 20-year debt contract will be
much longer.
True, the average time to maturity of corporate debt need not

Toward a Common Monetary Standard ecc.
311
remain the same in the two cases. But insofar as heightened un-
certaintly about future price inflation reduces the nominal maturity
structure of corporate debt -
say, to less than 20 years -
the
effective duration of corporate debt in the high-interest, high-inflation
case will be further foreshortened. This reduction in the average term
to maturity of new issues of private debt is a well-known response to
increased inflation.
Here is a financial explanation for what the popular press seems
to see as a sociological puzzle. Why, relative to their behaviour in the
1950s and 1960s, have US corporations reduced the time they are
willing to wait for a payoff from investments, whether in plant and
equipment or in research and development? Why have Americans in
competition with the seemingly more patient Japanese, become less
willing to undertake the long-term risky investments necessary to hold
markets in manufacturing or even some services? The answer:
because of higher nominal interest rates and higher price inflation
arising out of continual threats to devalue the dollar.
So here is a paradox. Although largely responsible for pre-
cipitating the breakdown of the worldwide monetary standard of the
1950s and 1960s, the United States (and possibly Britain) among the
industrial countries may well have the most to gain by cooperating to
reestablish a new one. If credibly and carefully done (as described
below), a new monetary standard that linked the United States to
hard-currency Europe and to Japan could enable the Federal Reserve
System to reduce US interest rates to German levels and perhaps even
eventually to Japanese. By leaning on the now-superior financial
reputations of the Germans and Japanese (5), a new monetary pact
among the United States, the nations of Western Europe, and Japan
could be the most efficient way to eliminate with minimal economic
stress, expectations of future dollar devaluation and higher US price
inflation. Of course, the general gains from reducing exchange rate
risk and interest rate volatility would accrue to all participating
countries.
(5) Lest this comment raise the nationalist hackles of Americans, remember that in
the early 19505 both Germany and Japan leaned heavily on the then -
superior
financial reputation of the United States to stabilize their own price levels by pegging
their exchange rates to the dollar.

312
Ronald I. McKinnon
In summary, my empirical premise is that the Western industrial
economies are now sufficiently open in both trade and finance to
satisfy the conditions for being a single optimum currency area. In
particular, the United States, Germany (representing the Western
European bloc), and Japan could and should cooperate to establish a
common monetary standard that fixes into the indefinite future the
yen/dollar and mark!dollar exchange rates within narrow bands (6).
The three blocs have a strong mutual interest in coordinating their
monetary policies to approximate the conditions that would prevail in
a single currency area: fixed exchange rates leading to a common
price level in tradable goods that provides the natural nominal anchor
for the common monetary policy (McKinnon [13], chap. 10).
2.• New Rules for the Game
2.1 Rule J: Set Official Targets for Exchange Rates
Based on Purchasing Power Parity
Nominal values for the yen!dollar and mark!dollar exchange
rates should initially be targeted so that the United States, Germany-
representing the European Monetary System (EMS) (7) -
and Japan
can most easily converge to a common rate of price inflation in
tradable goods. Then, in this new steady-state equilibrium, the band of
permissible exchange rate fluctuation could be progressively nar-
rowed.
There is a problem of transition: current exchange rates are out
of alignment, and consequently, national rates of price inflation differ
(6) In emphasizing long-term continuity in the nominal exchange rate, this pro-
posal differs from many other schemes which are for reducing the scope for short, and
intermediate-run exchange fluctuations. For example, JOHN WIlliAMSON'S [25] widely
discussed proposal for containing exchange rates with a fairly wide band while allowing
the band iteself to glide or crawl gradually through time as economic circumstances
change would not pin down nominal exchange rates in the distant future. Thus,
Williamson's proposal would not eliminate excess volatility from long-term interest
rates, nor would nominal interest rates be equalized across countries as they were by
the classical gold standard.
(7) Britain should, of course, become subject to the exchange obligations of the
EMS and thus also be a party to the broader agreement.

Toward a Common Monetary Standard ecc.
313
somewhat. For the first quarter of 1989, Kenichi Ohno and I have
calculated that concurrent purchasing power exchange rates (using
PPIs as.the standard) were about 175 yen/dollar and 2.08 marks/dol-
lar when actual rates were 128 and 1.85 respectively (Table 5). If the
three countries' rates of price and wage inflation (adjusted for produc-
tivity growth) proved roughly the same in 1989, these rates could be
the announced targets. From 1986 through early 1989, however, the
prolonged undervaluation of the dollar -
that is, the overvaluation of
the yen and, to a lesser extent, the deutsche mark -
has put the
United States on a higher inflation path than the other two conuntries;
thus US producer prices have been rising at an annual rate of 8 to 10%
so far in 1989. Despite excessive inflationary pressure in the world
economy overall, the overvalued yen has kept the PPI quite stable (it
actually fell from 1986 through 1988) and depressed the normally
higher rate of growth in Japanese money wages.
TABLE 5
ESTIMATES OF PURCHASING POWER PARITY EXCHANGE RATES
(1989, first quarter)
Long-run averaging of producer prices (a)
Price pressure at producer level (b)
.
Best pooled estimate (equal weights)
.
Actual nominal rate
.
Yenl$
179
171
175
128
Dm/$
2.08
2.07
2.08
1.85
(a) Using Cassell's method, with 1975, first quarter, to 1989, first quarter, as "the" single base
year.
(b) The price pressure method, which is conceptually different from long-run averaging, is
described in OHNO [21].
Source: exchange rates: IMF: International Financial Statistics, various issues. producer prices
and unit labor costs: OECO: Main Economic indicators, various issues.
The momentum in these differential wage and price movements
can be altered only with a lag. Thus, to smooth convergence to a
common inflation rate, exchange rate targets should be set somewhat
below current PPPs say, at about 165 yen/dollar and 2.0 marks/dol-
lar. To help nudge the dollar upward through relative monetary

314
RonaML kfcKinnon
adjustments, the authorities should initially announce fairly wide
bands of targets -
say, 155 to 175 yen/dollar and and 1.9 to 2.1
marks/dollar (Table 6). Once monetary coordination becomes well
established and the large differentials in nominal interest rates are
reduced, these bands could be narrowed to, say, 1 percent on either
side of the central parities -
similar to the band that prevailed during
the Bretton Woods period (Table
1). Then, with exchange rates
known to be fixed into the indefinite future, international commodity
arbitrage would ensure convergence to a common price level (as
measured by PPIs), and financial arbitrage would eventually align
long-term interest rates.
How would nations adjust to differing rates of growth in labour
productivity once exchange rates were fixed? Growth in national
money wage claims would come to reflect more or less accurately any
differentials in productivity growth across the three countries -
as
was the case under the old Bretton Woods system of pegged exchange
rates. When the exchange rate was fixed at 360 yen/dollar (1950 to
TABLE 6
PPP EXCHANGE RATES FOR 1989
Producer price index
PPP exchange
(1985= 100)
rate
United States
Japan
Gennany
Yen/$
DM/$
1989
01
•••• ••••
•
•
'
0
107.3
92.7
101.4
175
2.08
02 .... ........
173(a)
2.07(a)
03
•
•
••••••
•
•
'0
170(a)
2.06(a)
04 ............
168(a)
2.05(a)
Suggested target rates
for
exchange rates in
1989 for
smooth con-
vergence to purchasing
power parity ... . . .. .
155-175
1.9-2.1
(a) Projected. Usingthe best pooled PPP estimates for the first quarter of 1989 (See Table 5) as
the Benchmark, PPP exchange rates in the rest of 1989 can be calculated as new PPI data become
available, as follows:
Yen
I!;PP = 175
PPI{/92.7
, Mark If,PP = 2.08 PPI
G,/101.4 .
t
PPIu~107 .3
PPIu~107 .3
Source: see Table 5.

Toward a Common Monetary Standard ecc.
315
1970), Japanese productivity growth in tradable goods was roughly
three times as high as the growth in US labour productivity. Under the
common monetary standard, markets responded by having Japanese
money wage claims grow roughly three times as fast as their US
counterparts, so inflation in each country's PPI was roughly the same
(Table 3).
2.2 Rule 2: Central Banks Should Make
Monetary Adjustments Symmetrically
To nudge exchange rates in the desired direction, a country with
an undervalued currency would slow its domestic money growth -
if
necessary, by raising its short-term interest rates relative to those
abroad -
while monetary policy in the strong currency country
became relatively expansionary. Thus, the aggregate money stock
would remain approximately unchanged.
For example, at the present time, raising the yen/dollar and
mark!dollar exchange rates toward their PPPs would require the US
Federal Reserve System to follow a fairly tight money policy while the
Bank of Japan and the Bundesbank are relatively more expansionary.
(Given the strong overall inflationary pressure in the world economy
in 1989, the adjustment should come mainly through monetary
tightening in the United States). As the mark and yen are nudged
down toward their PPP levels, inflationary pressure on prices and
wages in the United States should slacken a bit while it picks up in
Japan and Europe. The nominal anchor, the common price level
measured at PPP exchange rates, would not be upset if this monetary
adjustment was indeed symmetrical.
In contrast, the basic asymmetry in the old Bretton Woods
system became its fatal flaw. Other countries adjusted their money
growth to stabilize their dollar exchange rates, whereas the United
States did not respond -
a pattern that continued in the form of
"dirty" floating throughout the 1970s and 1980s. Hence, in the 1970s,
dollar weakness induced a net expansion in the world money supply
and inflationary pressure, and the surprising strength of the dollar in
the early 1980s precipitated worldwide deflation (McKinnon [15]).

316
Ronald I. McKinnon
The monetary control mechanism outlined above relies primarily
on symmetrical adjustments in relative short-term interest rates to
keep the yen/dollar and mark/dollar exchange rates within a well-
defined range. This control would be greatly strengthened if the three
central banks formally announced their exchange rate objectives.
Then speculation by international investors would be stabilizing.
Exchange rate expectations could coalesce around the official targets
(say, 165 yen/dollar or 2.0 marks/dollar) with relatively little actual
monetary adjustment at the national level being required. (The rela-
tively tight monetary policy pursued by the US Federal Reserve in
1989 could have boosted the dollar more easily if such explicit
exchange rate targets had been officially announced.)
2.3 Rule 3: Official Exchange Intervention
Should be Largely Unsterilized
If the monetary pact was announced and if exchange rates moved
sharply away from their official targets, the implication would be that
speculators doubted that the necessary domestic monetary adjust-
ments would be forthcoming. In such a case, direct official interven-
tion to support the unduly weak currency would be necessary. But to
be decisive and re-establish the pact's credibility, the monetary conse-
quences of the intervention should be largely unsterilized: the weak-
currency country's money supply should contract as that of the strong
country expands. This policy would not preclude internal money-mar-
ket smoothing operations by each central bank, as occurred under the
classical gold standard (Bloomfield [2]). By keeping an open discount
window at the central bank as a shock absorber, each country's
high-powered money base could change proportionately less than the
official intervention in the foreign exchanges.
Once the pact became operational, however, little day-to-day
foreign exchange intervention should be necessary. As under the"
late-nineteenth-century gold standard and the calm periods of the
Bretton Woods system, private exchange rate expectations would be
regressive within the official bands. Hence, the huge flow of interna-
tional payments could be cleared by private dealers (stabilizing specu-
lators) without direct support from the central banks.

Toward a Common Monetary Standard ecc.
317
2.4 Rule 4: Choose a Consistent Nominal Anchor
When exchange rates are successfully fixed, the triumvirate must
still monitor the upward or downward pressure on the common
(tradable goods) price level. There is, of course, the standard problem
of information lag in data collection. It is worth remarking, however,
that data on commodity prices -
even producer price indices -
become available much more quickly than GNP statistics.
The common price level thus becomes the natural nominal
anchor for the system as a whole. Because a broad index of tradable
goods prices can be approximated by producer price indices, collec-
tive monetary policy would be aimed at keeping national PPls stable.
Strong empirical evidence exists that producer (or wholesale) prices
do align themselves across countries that have maintained fixed
nominal exchange rates for some years (McKinnon and 0000 [19]).
Therefore, keeping each country's PPI stable would be consistent with
the mutual fixing of nominal exchange rates and stability in the
common PPP.
To implement this common PPI target, each central bank could
still use some estimate of normal noninflationary expansion in do-
mestic credit as its intermediate monetary target, which would
determine aggregate money growth for the triumvirate as a whole.
That growth would be collectively tailored upward or downward as
information on deflationary or inflationary pressure in the common
price level became available -
or if the exchange reserve position of
individual countries changed significantly.
Other national price indices, such as consumer price indexes
(CPI's) and GNP deflators, which include nontradable services, might
increase at slightly different rates without provoking any official
monetary response. Indeed, if the parties to the agreement have
different rates of productivity growth, cumulative divergence across
countries in these other price indices is to be expected as the prices of
nontradable services diverge -
even through nominal exchange rates
remain fixed and the common PPI for tradables prices is constant.
Thus, it might be a mistake to choose the consumer price index as the
nominal anchor. Similarly, if each national monetary authority aimed
for constant growth in money GNP as its nominal anchor, this action
would likely be inconsistent with the exchange rate agreement itself.

318
Ronald I A1cKinnon
3. - Is a Common Currency Necessary?
Would moving to a common monetary standard mean moving to
a common currency? Almost all the benefits of the scheme I have
suggested can be secured with national currencies remaining in
circulation. Each government could regulate its own banking system
somewhat differently, as was done under the late nineteenth-century
gold standard and the Bretton Woods system when exchange rates
varied within a narrow band. Bank notes denominated in marks,
dollars, yen, and pounds could continue to be issued at the national
level; commercial banks would continue to hold required reserves
with national central banks which would remain lenders of last resort.
Supervising and regulating private banks would remain unambigu-
ously the responsibility of national monetary authorities. Indeed,
introducing a common currency and a supernational central bank
might needlessly confuse lines of responsibility for assisting failing
domestic financial institutions.
Thus, under my proposal for a common monetary standard,
institutional changes in national money markets would be minimal.
To be sure, the scheme would involve major conceptual changes for
the behaviour of national central banks -
particularly for the US.
Federal Reserve System, which, in the postwar period, has been much
less internationally oriented than its German or Japanese counter-
parts. Nevertheless, the process of monetary cooperation outlined
above is fundamentally evolutionary and would involve no formal loss
of monetary sovereignty. Each individual nation would have the
option of exiting from the agreement should it prove unsatisfactory or
should some domestic upheaval make it impossible to abide by the
rules (8).
(8) SAMUEL BRITTAN [3] also emphasizes that the success of EMS arises out of its
evolutionary character -
and that leaping to
a single central bank might be
counterproductive.

APPENDIX
Data and Sources
1. - Gold Standard Period
1) Long-term interest rates: a) United States: unadjusted index
number of yields on US railroad bonds from Macaulay (1938);
b) United Kingdom: yield on consols taken from Capie and Weber
[4]. c) France: annual average yield on 3 percent rentes from Homer
(1977).
2) Wholesale prices series are taken from Mitchell [20].
2. - Postwar Period
1) Long-term government bond yields: a) United States: yield on
10-year government bonds from Citibase series FYGTlO; b) Japan:
yield on long term government bonds (seven years and over) from
IMF: International Financial Statistics, line 61; c) Germany: yields
on public authority bond (at least three years to maturity) from IMF:
International Financial Statistics, line 61; d) United Kingom: yield
on 20-year government bonds from IMF: International Financial
Statistics, line 61.
2) Prime rates: a) United States: Citibase series FYPR; b) Japan:
rate on loans secured by bills of especially high credit worthiness as
agreed by the Federation of Bankers Associations from Bank of Japan,
Monthly Economic Review; c) Germany: rate on bills of less than
DMI00,000 eligible for rediscount at Bundesbank from Deutsche
Bundesbank: Monthly Review.
3) Corporate bonds rates: a) United States: AA industrial bond
yield from Citibase series FYAAI; b) Japan: industrial bond series from
Bank of Japan, Monthly Economic Review; c) Germany: industrial
bond series from Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Review.

320
RonaldL kfcKinnon
4) US Volatility: a) gold standard short term: the commercial
paper rate in New York City on choice 60-90 day two-name paper
from Macaulay (1938); b) post-war short rate: market yield on three-
month Treasury bills or federal funds rate (where indicated); both
series from the Federal Reserve Bulletin; c) long rates: as shown
above.

Toward a Common Monetary Standard ecc.
BmuOGRAPHY
321
[1] BARSKY R.B.: «The Fisher Hypothesis and the Forecastability and Persistence of
Inflation» , Journal of monetary Economics, vol. 19, n. I, January 1987, pp. 3-34.
[2] BLOOMFlEUl A.: Monetary
Policy under the International Gold Standard,
1880-1914, New York, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 1959.
[3] BRlTIAN S.: Monetary Integration and 1992, Munich, West Gennany, 1989.
[4] CAPlE F. - WEBER A.: A Monetary History of the United Kingdom 1820·1922,
London, Allen Unwin, 1985.
[5] COOPER R.: «The Gold Standard: Historical Facts and Future Prospects», Wash-
ington (DC), Brookings Institution, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, pp,
1-45, Reprinted in COOPER R.N.: International Monetary System: Essays in World
Economics, Cambridge (Mass.), MIT Press, 1987.
[6] FEUlSTElN M.: «The Case Against Trying to Stabilize the Dollar», American
Economic Review, vol. 79, n. 2, May 1989, pp. 36-40.
[7] FISHER I. : The Theory of Interest, New York, Macmillan, 1930.
[8] FRANKEL J.• FRooT K.: «Using Survey Data to Test Standard Propositions
Regarding Exchange Rate Expectations», American Economic Review, March
1987, pp. 93-106.
[9] FRENKEL J. - MUSSA M.: «The Efficiency of Foreign Exchange Markets and
Measures of Turbulence», American Economic Review, May 1980, pp. 374-81.
[10] GIOVANNINI A.: «How Do Fixed Exchange Rate Systems Work: The Evidence from
the Gold Standard, Bretton Woods, and the EMS», New York, Center for
Economic Policy Research, Discussion Paper, n. 282, 1988.
[11) HOMER SIDNEY: A History of Interest Rates, 2nd ed., New Brunswick (N.J.)
Rutgers University Press, 1977.
[12] HORIUCHI A.: «The Low Interest Rate Policy and Economic Growth in Postwar
Japan», The Developing Economies, vol. 24, n. 4, December 1984.
(13) McKINNON R.: Money in International Exchange: The Convertible Currency
System, New York, Oxford University Press, 1979.
(14) --: «The Exchange Rate and Macroeconomic Policy: Changing Postwar Percep-
tions», Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 19, June 1981, pp. 531-57.
[15) -
- : An International Standard for Monetary Stabilization, Washington (DC),
Institute for International Economics, 1984.
[16) McKINNON: «The Exchange Rate and the Trade Balance: Insular Versus Open
Economies», Presented to the Conference on Evolution of the International and
Regional Monetary Systems, Brussels, December 1988.
[17) --: «Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies for International Financial Stability:
A Proposal», Journal of Economic Perspectives, Winter 1988.
[18) - -: Alternative International Monetary System», Economic's Department,
Stanford University, Photocopy, 1989.
(19) McKINNON R. - OHNO K. : Purchasing Power Parity as a Monetary Standard»,
Economic's Department, Stanford University Photocopy, 1989.
(20) MITCHELL BRIAN R.: European Historical Statistics 1750-1970, London : Mac-
Millan, 1975.
(21) OHNO K. MORGESTERN: The Purchasing Power Parity Criterion for Stabilizing
Exchange Rates» IMP Washington (DC), 1989.

322
Ronald I. McKinnon
[22]
ROBINSON J.: «The Foreign Exchange», in Eu.rs H. - METZLER L.A. (eels.): Readings
in the Theory of International Trade, Philadelphia, Homewood, 1950, pp. 83-103 .
[23] UNITED STATES,
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE - BUREAU OF THE CENSUS: Historial
Statistics of the United States, Washington (DC), Bureau of the Census, 1975 .
[24] VAN HORNE J.C.: Financial Market Rates and Flows, 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs
(N.J.), Prentice Hall , 1984.
[25] WIlliAMSON J.: The Exchange Rate System, Rev. ed. , Washington (DC), Institute
for International Economics, 1985 .
[26] --: «The Case for Roughly Stabilizing the Real Value of the Dollar», American
Economic Review, vol. 79, May 1989, pp. 41-5.

What Future for the
International Monetary System?
Richard N. Cooper
Harvard University
The time has come to begin contemplating a common currency
for the industrialized democracies. This idea is much too radical to
garner much political support in the near future, but it does offer a
way to overcome a number of difficulties that these economies now
face, and that are likely to become more, not less, serious in the
coming years. So despite the novelty of the proposal, a common
currency provides a focal point for analysis, one that may in turn
suggest intermediate steps to accomplish some of the same results
with less political commitment.
Before I turn to the present and the future, it is.worth considering
past international monetary arrangements. The first section of this
paper, therefore, reviews briefly six types of international monetary
arrangements that have existed during the past century. I then turn to
an evaluation of the strengths and weaknesses of the current arrange-
ment of floating exchange rates subject to ad hoc management.
(Throughout, the focus is on the arrangements among the major
economies of the day, which basically means Europe and North
America and, for the last 30 years, Japan) (1).
(1) During the earlier period, the monetary arrangements discussed here also
encompassed many peripheral areas, by virtue of their colonial status. How peripheral
countries relate to the international monetary core is an interesting and important
topic, but it is necessary first to be clear about relationships at the core , and I do not
have space to go further here.
Next I briefly describe a variety of proposals for reform, ending with my own. The
final section answers some of the arguments against a common currency for the major
industrialized democracies and points out its advantages.
Advise: the numbers in square brackets refer to the Bibliography in appendix.

324
Richard N. Cooper
Next, I briefly describe a variety of proposals for reform, ending
with my own. The final section answers some of the argwnents
against a common currency for the major industrialized democracies
and points out its advantages.
I. - Past International Monetary Systems
History is complex, and a detailed exposition of the workings of
various international monetary systems would take this paper far
afield. Yet it is worthwhile to sketch how different systems have
addressed the two fundamental questions, both in theory and how the
theory was modified in practice. The two fundamental questions
concern how the international monetary system envisions: 1) coun-
tries' adjustment to disturbances to international economic relations
(the adjustment problem), and 2) provision of adequate, internation-
ally acceptable means of payment (the liquidity problem).
The history of the past century, excluding the two world wars and
their immediate aftermath, can be divided roughly into six periods,
each of which involved a somewhat different international monetary
system covering the major countries; the gold specie standard (1879
to 1913); the gold exchange standard (1925 to 1931); freely floating
exchange rates (1919 to 1925 and 1933 to 1936); the early phase of
the Bretton Woods system (1947 to 1959); the late phase of the
Bretton Woods system (1959 to 1973); and managed flexible exchange
rates (1973 to the present).
Of course, this division inevitably involves some stylization, since
history evolves continuously. All countries have not always moved
together, and in some cases the shift from one system to another was
gradual and involved antecedents.
1.1 The Gold Specie Standard
Under the gold specie standard, national money and the accept-
able means of payment were the same namely, gold coins of standard
weight and fineness. (Foreign coins might be reminted into different

What Future for the International Monetary System?
325
national coins, or they might simply circulate domestically.) Thus,
both domestic and international liquidity were, in principle, satisfied,
by new gold production. If it proved inadequate -
as it did for
prolonged periods, most notably from the 1870s to the mid-1890s -
it
was augmented domestically by the rapid expansion of new forms of
payment, notably bank notes and demand deposits in banks (Triffin
[21]). Increased international liquidity was also partially offset by a
prolonged decline in the price level, which raised the real value (in
commodities) of a given volume of gold money. Wholesale prices fell
by 40 to 55% in all the major countries between 1873 and 1896
(Cooper [3]).
The simple theory of the adjustment mechanism under the gold
standard was clearly and concisely stated by David Hume in 1752
(Cooper [2]). A transfer (for example, reparations or a capital invest-
ment) from country A to country B raised the money stock in Band
lowered it in A. As a result, prices would fall in A and in B, and in
consequence, B would enlarge its trade surplus (or reduce its deficit),
make the real transfer in goods, and earn the gold back until
monetary and payments equilibrium was restored.
How the adjustment mechanism worked in practice is still some-
what controversial for several reasons. First, much less gold actually
moved internationally than the theory suggests (Bloomfield [1]).
Second, Viner's [22] classic study of large capital inflows into Canada
before World War I revealed that although he could discern price
movements, especially those of nontradable goods against tradable
goods, they were far smaller and worked to accomplish changes in
trade flows more rapidly than he and his teacher, Taussig, expected.
Later analysis suggested that a substantial part of the adjustment was
accomplished by changes in spending -
up in the receiving country,
down in the sending country -
associated with the transfer itself.
Recently, McKinnon [15] has argued that there can be no presump-
tion about which way a sending country's terms of trade will change,
and with a fully integrated capital market there need not be any
change in domestic (nontradable) prices. The key point is that adjust-
ment is accomplished partly through changes in spending (absorption)
and partly through changes in prices, especially the prices of nontrad-
abIes.

326
Richard N. Cooper
1.2 The Gold Exchange Standard
The adjustment mechanism under a gold exchange standard is
similar to that under a gold standard. The theory is that downward
pressure on prices in the sending country is mediated by the banking
system, which operates on fractional gold reserves. In fact, the period
of the gold exchange standard was dominated by economic stagnation
in the leading country, Britain, but that problem was related to the
exchange rate at which Britain returned to gold convertability, rather
than the nature of the standard itself. The six-year period was too
short to discover if the adjustment would really have worked.
The novelty of the gold exchange standard was that it conserved
gold by removing it from circulation and concentrating it in the hands
of the leading banks and by encouraging banks, including smaller
central banks, to hold short-term claims on other countries (mostly in
sterling, secondarily in dollars). Thus, national currencies began to
playa role as international means of payment. Moreover, this period
also saw extensive use of loans from one central bank to another as a
temporary source of liquidity. The period was too short to reveal the
potential difficulty of relying on growth of the ratio of gold-convertible
currency holdings relative to a more slowly growing stock of mon-
etary gold, a problem underlined later by Triffin [21].
1.3 Floating Exchange Rates
The floating exchange rates used twice during the interwar period
were not thought of as a system at all but rather as an unavoidable but
temporary expedient during turbulent times until a more stable
system could be reestablished. The adjustment process worked by
having market price -
the exchange rate -
clear the market for
foreign exchange, much as the price of strawberries clears the market
for strawberries. If the home demand for a foreign currency rose for
any reason, the exchange rate of that currency would appreciate to
ration the demand to what was available at the new price. The most
comprehensive examination of floating exchange rates during this
period (Nurkse [17]) found them a major source of disturbance,
rather than a source of smooth adjustment (a view that strongly

What Future for the International Monetary System?
327
influenced the reestablishment of fixed exchange rates under the
Bretton Woods system).
No international liquidity, in the sense of an internationally
accepted means of payment, was necessary under these arrange-
ments. Presidents of one country would buy the foreign currencies
they needed in the foreign exchange markets, and the banks did not
need to hold international reserves. Since the arrangement was
considered temporary, however, central banks had their eye on the
longer term and continued to hold gold. In 1919 to 1920 and again in
1929 to 1933, there were sharp drops in wholesale prices, so the real
value of monetary' gold rose. In addition, both Britain and the United
States devalued their currencies against gold (that is, they redefined
the gold content of a pound and a dollar respectively) in the 1930s,
moves that increased the monetary value of gold reserves.
1.4 Bretton Woods, Early Phase
The Bretton Woods system was the first international monetary
system to be designed from scratch. It stipulated fixed exchange rates,
but, recognizing that, in view of national commitments to full employ-
ment, "fundamental disequilibria" might arise from time to time , it
called for discrete changes in exchange rates as necessary, with
international approval. The designers took for granted that monetary
and fiscal policies would be used to achieve domestic equilibrium, as
defined by each country. International disequilibria were to be
financed in the short run, drawing if necessary from the new Interna-
tional Monetary Fund.
Major adjustments in exchange rates were made in 1949, but
thereafter exchange rate changes for major currencies were rare.
Rather, adjustment was achieved by differential liberalization of trade
and payments. Many countries were in a suppressed disequilibrium
following Would War II and maintained tight restrictions over trade
and payments. These restrictions were gradually relaxed, country by
country, as conditions permitted. Not until the end of 1958, however,
did western European countries abandon controls on current account
transactions, and many maintained restrictions on outward capital
movements long after that.

328
Richard N. Cooper
Curiously, the Bretton Woods system made no provision for a
secular rise in international liquidity. Since the United States held a
disproportionate share of the world's monetary gold reserves (more
than 70%) in the late 1940s, the gold reserves of other countries could
be built up in part by drawing on those of the United States, as well as
from new production. In addition, however, countries accrued sub-
stantial balances of US dollars, as they had under the gold exchange
standard. It should be noted that the world economy grew much
more quickly in the 1950s than anyone dared to expect in the
mid-1940s. The rapid growth in production and trade seemed to call
forth a corresponding growth in demand for international reserves,
which was satisfied in large part by US Treasury bills, thought to be
better than gold since they bore interest yet were convertible into gold
by the United States on demand. These circumstances gave rise to the
celebrated Triffin [21] dilemma: How could the world economy grow
without additional dollars and yet how could the gold convertability of
the dollar remain credible as US liabilities to foreign monetary
authorities grew continually relative to the US gold stock?
1.5 Bretton Woods, Late Phase
In its later years, the Bretton Woods system kept its original
conceptual underpinnings, but there was diminished scope for differ-
ential payments liberalization as the mechanism of adjustment. The
1960s saw some modest exchange rate adjustments made for major
currencies (the deutschmark in 1961, the pound in 1967, the French
franc in 1969), but for the most part countries were spared the need to
adjust by a large and growing US payments deficit, financed by a
buildup in central banks', holding of dollars. When this buildup
became unacceptably large, the Bretton Woods system broke down.
The basic cause of its failure was that discrete changes in exchange
rates, the key feature of its adjustment mechanism, were incompatible
with the high mobility of private capital that had again become the
norm by the late 1960s. Any anticipated change in official exchange
rates evoked a huge movement of speculative capital, which played
havoc with domestic monetary policy. The emergence of any funda-

What Future for the International Monetary System?
329
mental disequilibrium, especially in the world's largest economy, was
bound to be highly destabilizing under these circumstances.
In the late phase of the Bretton Woods system, the question of
international liquidity, omitted earlier, was addressed systematically.
The result was the creation of a new kind of international fiat money,
the special drawing right (SDR), to be held and used by central banks.
The SDR was designated to become the centerpiece of the interna-
tional monetary system, to be created as needed to serve the world's
need for international liquidity. In fact, total SDR creation has
amounted so far to only about US $25 billion, less than 10% of official
foreign exchange reserves.
1.6 Managed Floating Exchange Rates
Since 1973, the major currencies have been floating with respect
to one another, but that float has been subject to market intervention,
sometimes heavy intervention, by monetary authorities, seeking to
influence the movement of exchange rates. And since March 1979,
most European currencies have been linked through the European
Monetary System (EMS),
a system like that of Bretton Woods
combined with permissible variation in market exchange rates around
the central rates, and occasional (11 in all) changes in central rates.
Under floating exchange rate arrangements, it is supposed that
the main mechanism of adjustment are changes in real exchange rates
brought about by market-induced changes in nominal rates, sup-
ported as appropriate by changes in fiscal policy designed to maintain
overall balance in the economy. (Within the EMS, of course, adjust-
ment is similar to what it was supposed to be under the Bretton
Woods system). In fact, it is difficult to see that sort of behavior in
what has happened during the floating-rate period -
manifestly,
exchange rates have not always moved so as to reduce current
account imbalances. But interpretation of the historical record is
complicated by two factors. First, macroeconomic policies, especially
fiscal actions, have not always been conducive to international bal-
ance. On the contrary, in the early 1980s the United States pursued a
markedly expansionist fiscal policy combined with a tight monetary
policy, while Japan, Germany, and Britain introduced strong fiscal

330
Richard N. Cooper
contraction. The combination produced heavy upward pressure on
the US dollar, which, in turn, led to a sharp deterioration of the US
current account and corresponding increases in the surpluses of
Japan, Germany, and, for a time, Britain (which was also influenced
by increasing production of North Sea oil). In this instance, exchange
rate movements "disequilibriated" the current account. Yet in doing
so, perhaps they were serving the broader role of equilibriating
economies.
That brings us to the second problem of interpretation: in an inte-
grated world economy, there is no special merit in assuring balance in
each country's current-account position. On the contrary, at particular
times, for a variety of reasons some countries will be net savers, while
others will be net investors, and one of the useful functions of an inte-
grated economy is to channel savings to investment.
If the integrated economy crosses national boundaries, savings
can also be expected to cross national boundaries, sometimes for
substantial periods of time. As a consequence, we do not have a clear,
operational definition of international equilibrium. At a minimum,
"sustainable" capital movements should be set against the current
account. Unfortunately, the actual purchases of foreign assets do not
carry labels that tell us whether they are sustainable or not. Drawing
the line at "long-term" investments will not do either, since the
definition of "short-term" ("with original maturities under one year")
is itself arbitrary; moreover, in an integrated market, many financial
instruments, whatever their original maturity, may be purchased for
short-term or speculative motives, while some short-term credits (for
example, trade credits) can be expected to grow predictably in total
over time. Another dividing line that is often suggested is one between
official monetary transactions and all others. This suggestion intro-
duces the other characteristic of a monetary system, international
liquidity. Under a system of freely floating exchange rates, there
should be no need for international liquidity, in the sense of an
officially held, international means of payments. But, in fact, we do
not have true freely floating rates, and the growth of official foreign
exchange reserves during the period of managed floating rates has
been phenomenal (Table 1), despite the widespread view that liquidity
was excessive at the end of 1972.

What Future for the International Monetary System?
331
TABLE 1
INTERNATIONAL RESERVES AND COMPARATIVE DATA
(year-end figures US$ billion equivalent)
Holdings
1945
1960
1970
1980
1985
Gold (a)
••• •• ••
•
••
••
•
•• ••••
0
••
33.3
38.0
37.2
41.8
40.1
US gold holdings
•
•
00
•
••
0
•
•
••
20.1
17.8
11.1
11.2
11.1
Foreign exchange (b)
•
•
••
•
•
•
0
••
14.3
18.6
44.6
370.8
378.7
US liabilities .. .. . . . .. . ......
4.2
11.1
23.8
157.1
172.8
Other (c) . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
-
3.6
10.8
36.5
62.5
Total reserves ......". . . . . ...... .
47.6
60.2
92.5
449.1
477.7
World exports ................
34.2
113.4
280.3
1844.6
1783.0
(a) At official prices of $35/oz. before 1980 and $42/oz. in 1980 and 1985.
(b) Reported assets differ from US reported liabilities by minor differences in concept, by
measurement error, by official holdings of foreign exchange other than dollars, and by official
deposits in the Eurocurrency market.
(c) SDRs and reserve positions in the IMF.
Sources: FEDERAL REsERVE BULLEllN; INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL STATImcs.
The
growth
in
international
liquidity
has
been
satisfied
overwhelmingly by the acquisition of foreign exchange reserves. Since
1973, there has been only one allocation of SDRs (in three branches),
amounting to less than US $15 billion. The dollar has continued to be
the preferred currency, but the official holdings of deutsche marks
and yen have grown even more rapidly (starting from a much lower
base). In addition, the members of the European Monetary Compen-
sation Fund have opened unlimited lines of short-term credit for one
another. Many monetary authorities continue to hold gold, the tradi-
tional reserve asset, but it is virtually never used. (Indeed, there is no
generally accepted method of valuation, since the official price for an
ounce) remains at US $42, while the market price has ranged from US
$200 to US $800 and has been approximately US $400 for several
years.)
Much of the explosive growth in reserve holdings has been
voluntary and desired, lending support to Harrod's long-standing
contention that the demand for reserves would be higher under
floating exchange rates, not lower as economic theorists generally
contended. The voluntary acquisition of reserves makes it inappropri-

332
Richard N. Cooper
ate to consider a balance on current account plus net private capital
movements a suitable measure of payments equilibrium. Of course,
some of the reserve acquisition, particularly the large official acquisi-
tion of US dollars in 1987, took place not to satisfy a growing demand
for reserves but to brake the depreciation of the dollar against other
leading currencies, particularly the yen and deutsche mark. In other
words, increases in official foreign exchange holdings can reflect a
mixture of motives, being partly a consequence of defensive ex-
change-rate actions under a managed floating rate system.
1.7"A Brief Evaluation
What do we want of an international monetary system? I suggest
that: a) it should contribute to our basic economic objectives of
growth with low inflation; b) to that end and as an end in itself, it
should help to reduce the uncertainties economic agents face as close
as possible to the minimum intrinsic in nature and in the economic
system;
c) it should permit diversity in the national pursuit of
economic and social objectives, with a view to maintaining harmoni-
ous relations among nations; and d) it should do all this as unobtru-
sively as possible.
TABLE 2
VARIANCE OF QUARTERLY FORECAST ERRORS
FOR THE UNITED STATES (Times 1,000) (*)
Nominal
Price
Real
GNP
level
GNP
Gold standard
1890 (01). 1914 (04) ..................
2.98
0.25
2.83
1915 (01)-1931 (03) ............ ......
l.80
0.60
l.41
No clear standard
1931 (04)- 1941 (04)
••
•
•
•• •• •• ••
•
••
0
.
0
5.64
0.24
4.02
1942 (1) -1951 (01) .. .. ...... .. . ... .. ..
0.67
0.60
0.78
Bretton Woods, 1951 (02) - 1971 (03) .. .. . .
0.13
0.02
0.11
Fluctuating rates, 1971 (04) - 1980 (04) .. . .
0.13
0.02
0.14
(*) Note: Quarterly forecasts made using a Kalman filter with respect to expected level and
expected rate of change on past data for each series.
Source: Ml!lIZl!R ([16). p. 141).

What Future for the International Monetary System?
333
In terms of such aggregate indicators as real economic growth,
variability of inflation, and predictability of growth and inflation, the
Bretton Woods system, while it lasted, performed better than did the
systems of previous periods or the current managed float (Table 2). In
terms of long-term price stability, the gold standard performed best;
the reasons remain poorly understood since both short- and medium-
term price variability under this system was substantial.
1.8 Managed Flexible Exchange Rates: An Evaluation
1.8.1 The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates
Two quite different traditions argue in favor of flexible exchange
rates. The monetarist tradition (for example, Friedman [6]) em-
phasized that such rates insulate a national economy from external
monetary disturbances, in particularly from inflationary impulses that
may be coming from abroad. The monetarists point out that under
fixed exchange rates or market intervention, monetary expansion
abroad will lead to reserve outflows for the expanding country but
also to reserve inflows and hence monetary expansion for the country
that is not expanding. If the latter's economy is operating at full
capacity, the expansion will lead to domestic inflation. This imported
inflation can be avoided by eschewing exchange-market intervention
and allowing the currency to appreciate. In the smooth and friction-
less world of economic models, flexible exchange rates provide perfect
insulation against monetary impulses, positive or negative, coming
from the rest of the world.
A Keynesian tradition also supports flexible exchange rates -
or
more accurately, changes in exchange rates. It operates on the
assumption that the economic system will be hit by exogenous
disturbances from time to time; for any single country, these disturb-
ances may include the policies of other countries, to which it will then
need to adjust. Under a competitive market system with continuous
market clearing, adjustment is spread throughout the system via price
signals, and the loss of output will be minimal and short lived. But
with rigidities in the formation of prices and wages, such as exist in all
modern economies, some of the need for adjustment will be thrown

334
Richard N. Cooper
on to output and employment, thus producing economic waste. The
possibility of changing exchange rates introduces an element of price
flexibility into a system replete with price rigidities. Under some
circumstances, movements in exchange rates can substitute for pro-
duct-or labor-market price flexibility, achieve adjustments in real
wages and prices, and thereby avoid some loss in output. On this view
of the world, the possibility of exchange rate movements introduces
an additional element of flexibility into the economy.
It is noteworthy that although the monetarist and the Keynesian
schools emphasize different aspects of exchange rate flexibility, and
the monetarists underline the need for full flexibility, rather than
merely for changes in the exchange rate, the two schools are quite
compatible at this level of generalization.
1.8.2 Problems with Flexile Rates
In spite of these arguments for exchange rate flexibility, the
present arrangement of floating exchange rates subject to occasional
official management has a number of worrisome features:
1) as Tobin [20] has pointed out, major adjustments to extern-
al disturbances may require changes in the overall price level between
one country and another. To the extent that governments treat their
price levels as policy targets, adjustment via this mechanism is
thwarted. If price level targeting is wholly successful and if relative
prices are sticky (which is the starting point of the Keynesian rationale
for floating rates), national action will offset the effect of exchange
rate movements. Thus, for example, if the US dollar depreciates in
response to some external disturbance, leading to price increases in
the United States, the US Federal Reserve Board may tighten the
country's money supply in order to avoid "inflation." The Bundes-
bank, in contrast, may ease monetary action in order to avoid
"deflation." In this way, adjustment is shifted to output after all;
2) the imperfect competition that leads to sticky prices may
have a further implication as Krugman (1989), elaborating an analysis
by Dixit, recently pointed out. Fixed market-entry costs will not only
slow the process of adjustment to changes in the exchange rate but
will actually create a band of variation in which, for the relevant

What Future for the International Monetary System?
335
industries, no adjustment will take place at all. The profit incentive
must exceed a certain threshhold before entry is worthwhile. Once
entry has taken place and the costs of entry have been sunk, the profit
disincentive must move correspondingly far to make exit the proper
strategy. This difference between marginal cost on entry and on exit
will be reinforced by uncertainty about future exchange rates. If the
costs of reentry after exit are high and if there is a sufficient
probability that the conditions for reentry -
for example, a suffi-
ciently large movement in the exchange rate -
will occur in the
future, it may make sense for a firm to hold onto its market even at
prices below its current marginal costs.
The implication of this argument here is that exchange rates may
have to swing far in order to achieve real adjustment since industries
subject to significant entry and exit costs will be unresponsive to
relatively minor movements. In this respect, flexible exchange rates
are not an especially efficient mechanism of adjustment since, by a
long-term measure of comparative advantage, they may induce misal-
locations of resources that persist for a long period of time . Consider
the mid-1980s, when many foreign firms, attracted by the profit
possibilities created by an exceptionally strong dollar, entered the US
market profitably and then hung on tenaciously even after the dollar
depreciated substantially -
in some cases beyond the point at which
profitability continued;
3) a high variability of real exchange rates may reduce total
investment in the sectors of the economy open to international
competition. When a currency has depreciated strongly, profits in
tradables will be high and the cash flow will be good, but firm will be
reluctant to invest in productive capacity because they do not expect
the cheap currency to last. They will simply enjoy their windfall profits
(and perhaps invest more in market opening, as discussed above). Yet
when a currency is strongly appreciated, even if management expects
the situation to be temporary, low profits and cash flow may lead to
low investment because of credit rationing and because of skeptical,
risk-averse boards of directors. Although many factors have un-
doubtedly played a role, it is perhaps no coincidence that since the
inauguration of floating exchange rates in 1973, investment in plant
and equipment, compared with that of the 1950s and 1960s, has been

336
Richard N. Cooper
depressed throughout the area of the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development. In particular, Europe failed to invest
much in the 1983-1985 period, when profits were high and rising as a
result of a strong dollar;
4) since firms cannot use financial markets to hedge their
investment in future production (as distinguished from a particular
sale), they will do so by investing abroad, across currency zones, even
if doing so means giving up some of the advantages of cost and scale
associated with exporting from their home base or some other lower
cost location. Since some of this diversification takes place through
takeovers and buyouts, a possible consequence is greater world
concentration in certain industries, leading to a reduction of world-
wide competition;
5) at the national level, business will seek to blunt what they
consider unequal competition by urging an increase in trade barriers.
Business firms generally feel they can cope with the market uncertain-
ty that attends any growing, dynamic economy so long as their
competitors are subject to the same ups and downs. What they find
intolerable is being placed at a competitive disadvantage with respect
to their leading competitors for reasons that are unrelated to decision-
making in the firms or indeed in the industry. Present exchange rate
arrangements mean that a firm can suddenly find itself facing much
stiffer competition (2) as a result of an exchange rate movement that
has its origins in the arcane world of finance. Certainly, American
firms and organized labor greatly increased their pressure on the US
government for some form of relief against "overcompetitive" imports
during the 1983-1985 period of an exceptionally strong dollar (3).
All these factors involve a misallocation of resources arising from
the uncertainties associated with exchange rate flexibility. Whether
monetary arrangements can be improved is a complex question that
depends in part on whether exchange rate uncertainty is simply the
surface manifestation of uncertainties intrinsic to the economic sys-
(2) Or much less, but that is rarely a matter of concern.
(3) It is noteworthy that under the gold standard, although national price levels
moved substantially, they tended to move in parallel, rather than relative to one
another.

What Future for the International Monetary System?
337
tern as a whole or whether exchange rate dynamics actually add to the
uncertainties faced by those who have to make decisions about
production and investment -
that is, about the present and future
output of the economy. It also depends on whether we can find a
superior set of arrangements, one that reduces whatever incremental
uncertainties market-determined exchange rates contribute to the
economic system, while atthe same time preserving or providing an
adequate substitute for the contribution that exchange rate changes
may make to reducing the cost of adjustment to the changes that
dynamic economies inevitably have to make from time to time.
Whether high volatility in floating exchange rates reflects or adds
to uncertainties in the economic system and instabilities in economic
policies is an unresolved controversy. It is difficult to sustain the view,
however, that foreign exchange markets accurately and faithfully
reflect only disturbances exogenous to the economic system plus the
net impact of governmental actions (which, of course, by themselves
either dampen volatility or augment it). Graph 1 shows the monthly
changes in the dollar/deutsch mark exchange rate, from 1960 to
1988. The increase on the inauguration of floating rates in 1973 is
dramatic.
A growing body of evidence supports a view that practitioners
have long held: namely, that financial markets have a dynamic of their
own and are occasionally subject to bandwagon effects or speculative
bubbles, rational or irrational. Shiller [18] has shown that US stock
prices have frequently followed paths that are very difficult to explain
in terms of any economic fundamentals (4).
More recently, Krugman ([18]; 1989) has shown that the appreci-
ation of the US dollar in 1983 through 1985 cannot have been based
on fundamentals alone (although some appreciation could have been
expected on the basis of the configuration of monetary and fiscal
policies in the United States on the one hand and in Japan, Germany,
and Britain on the other). Krugman's analysis started with the
(4) Indeed. chartism, one of the principal base for stock selection by some
specialists. presupposes that stock prices follow distinctive patterns that are basically
unrelated to what is happening in the economy. To the extent that substantial numbers
of investors adopt this basis of stock selection. chartism can become self-fulfilling
provided its prices stay within the wide bounds set by the liquidation value of the firms
and the competition for funds provided by long-term yield on bonds.

338
Richard N. Cooper
GRAPH 1
US GERMAN REAL EXCHANGE RATE CHANGES (*)
I-
I
I
I
1\
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
B-,--------------r-------------.
7 -
6 -
5 -
~ -
3 -
2-
~ ~I\'" '" AA J.J
.IA ).jAM ~ .kk
-1 _II
.~ lJ w
'{'T1 r t
~~r1
-2 -
-3 -
-~ -
-5 -
-6
-7 -
-B
-9 -
-10 -t--..----.---r--,.--r---r--,--.--r----,r---r--,--...--r-'
(*) Percentage per month changes corrected for differential movements in wholesale prices.
Source: DoRNBUSCH (1988).
observation that the market must have expected a subsequent de-
preciation of the dollar at a rate no greater than the interest differen-
tial between comparable assets denominated in dollars, yen, and
deutsch mark. Using generous assumptions about the impact of such
expected depreciation on trade flows,
Krugman showed that US
external debt would have grown explosively -
that is, unsustainably.
This analysis suggests that market participants were not paying
adequate attention to the underlying fundamentals but rather were
following their own lead in a bubble until it burst in early 1985, with
help from heavy purchases of deutsch marks by the Bundesbank.

What Future for the International Monetary System?
339
Moreover, Frankel and Froot [5] have shown, on the basis of
survey data, that short-run exchange rate expectations are extrapola-
tive -
that is, they project recent rate movements forward, even
when the movement is away from the long-run (six- to twelve-month)
view of what the exchange rate will be. Thus, exchange rate move-
ments are subject to bandwagon effects in the short run. Over a longer
period, exchange rate expectations seem to regress to recent past
levels, according to the survey data. But, of course, market move-
ments are a series of short runs. So there is good circumstantial
evidence for believing that the foreign exchange
market's own
dynamic can introduce disturbances into the real side of the economy.
At least on some occasions, it adds to the uncertainties that those
making decisions about production and investment must face.
Can anything be done about the exchange rate situation? Are
there arrangements that would be superior to the unstructured
managed floating in the sense of reducing uncertainty without incur-
ring costs in some other dimension -
especially in the costs of
adjustment to the disturbances that occur inevitably from time to
time?
2. - Proposals for Refonns
A number of suggestions have been put forward. Tobin [19] has
suggested a modest tax on foreign exchange transaction to discourage
short-term transactions of low social utility; one presumption is that
doing so would reduce exchange rate volatility. Williamson and Miller
[23], Kenen [8], McKinnon [12] , [13], [14], and Cooper [4] have
proposed different techniques and emphases for introducing greater
stability into exchange rate movements directly.
2.1 A Transactions Tax
Tobin's proposal [19] is for a small tax, of, say, 25 basic points
(0.25%), to be imposed on all transactions that involve converting one
currency into another, including forward transactions. (Some go
further and suggest a small tax on all financial transactions, but that is

340
Richard N. Cooper
not discussed here.) Such a tax would raise the cost of all cross-cur-
rency transactions, but the rise would be so small that it could be
expected to have virtually no effect on trade in goods and services and
on long-term capital flows. It would, however, impose a relatively
large cost on short-term, in-and-out transactions. For instance, 50
basic points for a two-way transaction would require an interest
differential or more than 25% per annum to cover it for a weekly
turnaround, and more than 100% per annum for a daily turnaround.
Such a tax would greatly reduce the current huge volume of foreign
exchange transactions ($700 billion a day in New York alone), most of
which are interbank transactions. The aim of the tax would be to
reduce short-term exchange rate volatility and to encourage greater
emphasis on longer-term transactions, which are presumably more
valuable socially.
In fact, however, the impact of such a tax on short-term volatility
is entirely unclear. To the extent that banks, corporate treasurers, and
other short-term traders are market-makers, like securities specialists,
their activities should be stabilizing and reduce short-run volatility. In
that event, taxing them out of short-term transactions would lead to
an increase in volatility. But to the extent that these traders seek quick
short-term gains, must guess very short-run market developments,
and are, therefore, subject to bandwagon effects, their activities may
increase short-run volatility, and a transaction tax would reduce it.
In either case, a transactions tax would not prevent the emer-
gence of major misalignments, such as occurred in the mid-1980s,
except insofar as they arise from the cumulative effects of a series of
short-run extrapolative expectations that might not get started in the
presence of a tax. Presumably, one characteristic of a cumulative
exchange rate movement in the "wrong" direction is that each
participant feels that it could change at any time, even in the very near
future, but that he can reverse his position at the right moment,
before the crowd turns, or at least in its forefront. To that extent, a
transactions tax could inhibit major speculative currency movements,
but it is not clear that it would be enough to prevent them.
To be effective, the transactions tax would have to be introduced
in all leading financial centers; otherwise, transactions would simply
move to the tax-free centers, something that is increasingly possible

What Future for the International Monetary System?
341
with modern communications. Universal agreement on the tax would
riot, however, be necessary. It would suffice to stipulate that disputes
arising over foreign exchange transactions could not be adjudicated in
countries of the leading financial centers unless the tax had been paid.
Since it takes years to establish a reputation for fair and impartial
dispute settlement, a small tax would be unlikely to drive transactions
to tax-free countries without such reputations.
A tax represents one proposal for reducing exchange rate vol-
atility. Neither outcome nor the avoidance of significant misalignment
is certain, however. Other proposalsfocus 08 commitments to affect
exchange rate movements directly.
2.2 Target Zones: The Williamson-Miller Proposal
Williamson and Miller [23] have proposed that the major coun-
tries establish target zones for their exchange rates, using for each
country a calculation of a "fundamental equilibriwn exchange rate"
that, would in turn, be based on agreed-on account targets. These
equilibriwn rates would be recalculated at regular intervals so they
could move -
presumably slowly -
in response to new information.
These equilibriwn rates would, in turn, be translated into a set of
mutually consistent nominal exchange rates, which would represent
the center of the target zone. At first, the zone around these central
rates would be rather wide -
say, ± 10% -
to encompass substantial
initial deviation from the targeted current account positions. The
zones could gradually be narrowed, once the current account targets
were achieved.
Monetary authorities would intervene in exchange markets -
and, more important, adjust their monetary policies -
as exchange
rates reached the edges of the target zone. These edges could be either
hard -
well-defined rates, that were not to be supassed -
or soft -
presumptive points of intervention and leaning by authorities who had
made no firm commitment that the boundaries would never be
crossed.
With n countries and only n-l exchange rates among them, such
a system would offer a degree of freedom for monetary policy, which
could them be directed toward aggregate demand within the com-

342
Richard N. Cooper
munity as a whole. To put the point another way: if a given exchange
rate approached the edge of the zone, whether one country tightened
its monetary policy to affect the rate or the other country loosened its
policy would depend on the overall state of aggregate demand. Each
country, in addition to having a current account target, would also
have a nominal demand growth target, chosen so as to be mutually
consistent with those of other countries, and national fiscal policy
would be directed toward achieving these aggregate demand targets.
The effect of this system would be to limit the movement of
exchange rates and thus to prevent the emergence of major misalign-
ments of the type that occurred in the 1980s. It would not, however,
eliminate short-run volatility of exchange rates, and the uncertainties
that they create, unless the target zones were quite narrow (which is
not envisaged). Although it would be possible for business people to
hedge against unexpected exchange rate movements for particular
transactions, it would not be possible to hedge for an investiment or a
commitment to a marketing strategy that would take a number of
years to mature. So this source of uncertainty would remain.
The Williamson-Miller proposal is ambitious in its demands for
policy coordination among major countries and for the skillful mani-
pulation of monetary and fiscal instruments by national authorities. It
is especially ambitious with respect to the coordination of policy
targets -
equilibrium exchange rates and growth in national nominal
aggregate demand. Agreement on the key underpinnings for the
calculation of real effective equilibrium exchange rate -
current
account targets plus the bearing of exchange rates on their achieve-
ment -
would be particularly demanding, not least because the
setting of current account targets would be an intrinsically arbitrary
exercise in a world of high capital mobility and relatively open
markets for goods and services. Consider the case of Canada. As a
high income country, it should perhaps run a current account surplus,
contributing to the transfer of real resources to the developing
countries. But in every respect except income level, Canada itself is a
developing country, and indeed it has run current account deficits
throughout most of its existence as an independent state. How should
we determine what Canada's current account position should be in
the future or, for that matter, the current account position of the

What Future for the International Monetary System?
343
United States, which is also a developing country by comparison with
Europe and Japan, given its relatively rapid population growth,
increasingly through immigration as in the nineteenth century?
2.3 The Kenen Proposal
Kenen [8] advocated something like an extension of the EMS to
include the United States, Japan, and possibly other countries. He
supports hard exchange-rate margins with a band width of at least
10% -
considerably larger than the EMS band -
so that changes in
central rates, which must occasionally be made, need not affect
market rates and hence would not provide a one-way speculative
option. In an analogy with the EMS, Kenen would also increase the
visible reserves available for intervention by creating a modified
substitution account into which the United States would deposit gold
and others would deposit dollars.
Kenen takes the view that the choice of central rates is less
relevant than the procedures for changing them. If they are not right
-
that is, if an adjustment is needed -
they should be altered. He
would give weight, but not mechanical weight, to a host of indicators,
especially changes in relative price competitiveness, as does the EMS,
but in the end, changes would be discretionary and negotiated among
all the relevant parties.
2.4 Key Currency Monetary Coordination
McKinnon [12], [13] and [14] concentrates attention on the
currencies of just three countries, the United States, Japan, and West
Germany, although he assumes several other currencies would be
linked to the deutsche mark through the EMS. He would at first
confine the movement of exchange rates among these currencies
within a 10% band, like Kenen proposes, but over time he would
gradually reduce the width of the band so that their exchange rates
would eventually show little (no?) movement.
In addition, McKinnon departs from the other proposals by
designating purchasing power parity (PPP) as the guide for selecting
the central rates to which the exchange rates are to converge.

344
Richard N. Cooper
Specificly, he would construct broad-based indices of comparable
tradable goods and choose exchange rates that equate the value of a
comparable basket of these goods (McKinnon and Ohno [15]). Nom-
inal exchange rates would then remain fixed except insofar as changes
were required to offset relative changes in PPP as defined by the
baskets. Monetary policy in each of the countries would be dedicated
to maintaining the fixed exchange rates; monetary policy in the three
countries taken together would be geared to maintaining stability in
the prices of the baskets of tradable goods, as Keynes [9] advocated
more than half a century ago. Such a target would imply moderate
inflation as measured by the consumer price index. Clearly, such a
system would require that the three countries coordinate their mon-
etary policies closely.
2.5 A Common Currency
I would go a step further than McKinnon and institutionalize
close monetary cooperation in coherent management of a single
currency for the industrialized democracies (Cooper [4]). So long as
national currencies are distinct and under separate management, the
possibility of major changes in nominal and real exchange rates exists,
and that possibility will itself be a source of uncertainty to investors so
long as memories of the 1970s and 1980s persist. The most effective
way to eradicate exchange rate uncertainty is to eradicate exchange
rates -
that is, to introduce a single currency. A single currency
would, of course, require a single monetary authority, a bold, even
radical step that governments and their publics are not yet ready to
contemplate seriously, much less undertake. So, unlike the proposals
discussed above, which have been put forward with the near future in
mind, this suggestion has to be envisioned in a longer time frame -
say into the next century. Still, it carries the logic of a return to fixed
exchange rates to its full conclusion, and for that reason alone it is
worth exploring more fully.
The institutional aspects of a common currency are not so
difficult to imagine. They could be constructed by adaptation of the
US Federal Reserve System, which is an amalgam of twelve separate
reserve banks, each of which issues its own currency. One could

What Future for the International Monetary System?
345
imagine a committee for all the industrial democracies (or any subset
of them) that would decide the basic thrust of monetary policy for the
group as a whole. Call it the Board of Bank Governors. On it could sit
representatives of all member countries, with votes proportional to
GNP. At one extreme, the representatives would be ministers of
finance; at the other, they would be outstanding citizens chosen by
their governments for long terms solely for the purpose of managing
the monetary system. An obvious interim (and possibly permanent)
step would be to appoint the senior governors of existing central
banks.
National
central
banks
could
continue
as
the
national
components and agents of the new international board and indeed
could remain the issuers of currency (as the 12 District Federal
Reserve banks do in the United States). National currency designa-
tions -
pounds, marks, yen, francs, dollars -
could even be retained
for nationally issued currency if popular sentiment so demanded. The
point is that monetary policy would be out of the hands of any single
government. Governments could not finance their budget deficits
through monetary expansion, and the various national currencies
would exchange at fixed rates. Commercial transactions and bank
transactions, many of which do not now involve currency at all,
would take place in a common unit of account. A common currency
would, of course, eliminate uncertainty for financial transactions, so a
unified capital market would develop throughout the area covered by
the currency. By the same token, however, changes in nominal
exchange rates could no longer be used as part of the adjustment
process. (I will say more about this point below.)
For the participating countries, international and national cur-
rency would become identical, and liquidity needs would be satisfied
by the Board of Bank Governors' decisions to increase the money
supply.
A common currency could create major adjustment problems if
the exchange rates among the precedent currencies were not right at
the time of conversion. Thus, a move could not be consummated until
major disequilibria had been eliminated. Purchasing power parity
conditions, such as those suggested by McKinnon, would have to be
met at least approximately; in addition, uncovered interest parity over

346
Richard N. Cooper
all maturities should obtain, at least approximately, implying no
expectation of future changes in exchange rates.
3. - Evaluation of the Single-Currency Proposal
One objection that will be raised immediately against creating a
single money for the industrialized democracies is that it would
involve ceding too much sovereignty to an international entity (in my
scenario, the Board of Bank Governors). This objection is misguided.
Ultimate sovereignty would continue to reside with the national
governments. Agreeing on a common endeavor with other sovereign
nations is an exercise of sovereignty, not an abrogation of sovereignty.
The key question that should be asked is whether, on balance, the
particular exercise of sovereignty leaves the participants better or
worse off. Implementing my proposal would limit individual govern-
ments' freedom of action in the monetary arena. But the economies of
these nations are becoming increasingly interdependent, a fact that
increasingly limits the efficacy of individual actions in the areas of
macroeconomic policy, taxation, and regulation. So retaining full
freedom of action might turn out to be largely empty unless a nation
was prepared to withdraw into autarky, which would be extremely
costly. A cooperative endeavor, while reducing national freedom of
action, would restore effectiveness to joint action.
What of the adjustment process? The principal argument for
exchange rate flexibility is that it may reduce the costs of adjusting to
various economic disturbances. It should be kept in mind, however,
that the requirements for efficient adjustment depend on the nature of
the disturbance, and the nature of the disturbance, in turn, depends in
part on the nature of the monetary system. Disturbances wholly or
largely monetary in nature would be greatly diminished or eliminated
altogether if nations shared a common currency with no chance of
changes in exchange rates (short of major political disturbance).
Disturbances caused for instance, by shifts in asset preferences among
national financial claim motivated 'by expected changes in exchange
rates or by differential inflation among nations in tradable goods
would largely disappear. Differences in national wage settlements not

What Future for the International Monetary System?
347
based on changes in productivity could not be ruled out under a
common currency, but their likelihood would be reduced in the
presence of a common currency and extensive trade between nations.
So at least some disturbances for which changes in exchange rate may
be helpful would hardly exist under a common currency.
What about disturbances to the real side of the economy, such as
the discovery or exhaustion of natural resources or technological
changes that have different effects on different sectors or divergent
rates of growth between demand and supply among nations?
With respect to technological change and the discovery or ex-
haustion of resources, I can make three observations concerning
economic adjustment in the industrialized democracies. First, most of
the adjustment would have to take place within three regions: the
United States, Japan, and the European Community. Sectors are often
concentrated geographically, but these three economies, taken as a
whole, are so large and diversified that little adjustment is likely to be
required among them. Second, major global disturbances, such as the
oil price increase of the 1970s, are likely to affect all three regions in
roughly the same way (although not, of course, identically). Third,
such differential effects as remain once the first two points are taken
into account are likely to be manageable within the parameters
established by the natural growth and retirement of the labor force
and the capital stock. Changes in real income as well as in domestic
relative prices (for example, between tradables and nontradables)
would help to bring about adjustment without substantial changes in
output (5).
With respect to differential growth in national (or regional)
demand and output, such discrepancies, whether merely cyclical in
nature or reflecting more durable changes in saving behaviour, could
easily be accommodated by capital movements motivated by relatively
small differences in yield within an integrated capital market, such as
(5) In this regard, KRUGMAN (1989) exaggerates the changes in output -
or under
flexible rates, in the real exchange rate -
required to achieve a given adjustment
between two large, diversified economies. McKINNON [14]. based on JONES [7], argues
persuasively that the changes in the terms of trade need not be large (and may not be
necessary at all) to accomodate a disturbance between two multisectored economies
that are reasonably flexible.

348
Richard N. Cooper
would obtain over a common currency area under modern condi-
tions.
Possibly the greatest source of disturbance between large and
diversified economies would arise from significant and opposite
changes in fiscal policy. If one country pursued fiscal expansion while
another was contracting substantially, significant adjustment prob-
lems could arise, and changes in exchange rates might assist the
adjustment. Two things must be said about this possibility. First, it is
desirable to be able to use fiscal action, within limits, to affect
aggregate demand at the national or regional level; the adoption of a
common currency, far from preventing this approach would enhance
the desirability of fiscal flexibility. Thus, it might be undesirable to
allow exchange rates to adjust in response to discrepant fiscal actions,
since such adjustment would both affect the structure of output (say
between tradables and nontradables) and weaken the demand effects
of fiscal actions (say, by leading to a large fall in net exports attendent
on a fiscal expansion).
Second, however, fiscal deficits would have to be financed exclus-
ively in the integrated capital market. So long as a government's
credit was good, it would have no trouble borrowing. As the ratio of
public debt to tax revenues grew, however, the market would require
higher yields to be willing to take that government's securities. Thus,
market signals would indicate when one government was markedly
out of line with the others in terms of growing indebtedness. Fiscal
freedom of action would be unimpaired, but, it would be limited by
the ability to service public debt. Allparticipants could usefully discuss
the framing of fiscal policy, but formal coordination of fiscal action
would not be necessary.
The above points can be summed up briefly by saying that in the
not very distant future, nominal exchange rate flexibility among major
currencies may create more disturbances for the real productive side
of the economy than it corrects. For this reason, the creation of a
common currency for the industrialized democracies is a proposal
worth further considerations and .analysis.

What Future for the International Monetary System?
349
BmUOGRAPHY
[1] BLOOMFIELD AJmJR I.: Monetary Policy under the International Gold Standard.
1880-1914. New York, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 1959.
[2] COOPER R.N. (ed.): International Finance: Selected Readings, Hannondsworth,
Penguin Books, 1969.
[3] --: "The Gold Standard: Historical Facts and Future Prospects», Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, n. I, 1982, pp. 1·43, Reprinted in COOPER R.N.: The
International Monetary
System: Essays
in
World Economics.
Cambridge,
(Mass.), MIT Press, 1987.
[4] --: "A Monetary System for the Future», Foreign Affairs, autumn 1984,
Reprinted in COOPER R.N.: The International Monetary System: Essays in World
Economics, Cambridge (Mass.), Mit Press, 1987.
[5] FRANKEL J.A. - FROOT K.A.: "Using Survey Data to Test Standard Propositions
Regarding Exchange Rate Expectations», American Economic Review, n. 77,
March 1987, pp. 133-53.
[6] FRIEDMAN M.: "The Case for
Flexible Exchange Rates», Essays in Positive
Economics. Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1953.
[7] JONES R.W.: «Presumption and the Transfer Problem», Journal of International
Economics, n. 5, August 1975, pp . 273-74.
[8] KENEN P.B.: Managing Exchange Rates, London, Routledge. 1988.
[9] KEYNES J.M .: A Treatise on Money, vol. 2, London, MacMillan, 1930.
[10] KRUGMAN P.: Exchange - Rate Instability, Cambridge, (Mass.), MIT Press, 1984.
[11] --: «Is the Strong Dollar Sustainable», The US Dollar: Prospects and Policy
Options, Kansas City, (Mo.), Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 1985.
[12] McKlNNoN R.I.: An International Standard for Monetary Stabilization, Wash·
ington (DC), International Institute of Economics, 1984.
[13] -
- : «An International Gold Standard Without Gold», The Cato Journal, n. 8,
Fall 1988, pp . 351·73.
[14] -
-
: «Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies for International Financial Stability:
A Proposal», Journal of Economic Perspectives, n. 2, Winter 1988, pp. 83-103.
[15] McKlNNoN R.1. - OHNO K.: «Purchasing Power Parity as a Monetary Standard»,
San Francisco, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Photocopy, 1988.
[16] MELTZER A.H. : «Some Evidence on Comparative Uncertainty Experienced under
Different Monetary Regimes», in CAMPELL C. - DoUGAN W. (eds.): Alternative
Monetary Regimes, Baltimore, John Hopkins University Press, 1986.
[17] NURKSE R.: International Currency Experience: Lessons of the Inter-war Period,
League of Nations, 1944.
[18] SHILLER R.J.: «Stock Prices and Social Dynamics», Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, n. 2, 1984, pp. 457-98.
[19] TOBIN J.: "A Proposal for International Monetary Reform», Essays in Economics,
Cambridge (Mass.), MIT Press, 1982.
[20] -
- : "Are There Reliable Adjustment Mechanisms?», Toward a World of
Economic Stability: Optimal Monetary Framework and Policy, Tokyo, University
of Tokyo Press, 1988.

350
[21] TRIFF1N R.: Gold and the Dollar Crisis, New Haven (Conn.), Yale University Press,
1960.
[22] VINER J.: Canada's Balance of International Indebtedness, Cambridge (Mass.),
Harvard University Press, 1924.
[23] WIlliAMSON J. • MILLER M.H .:. Targets and Indicators; A Blueprint for the
International Coodination of Economic Policy, Washington (DC), Institute for
International Economics, 1987 .

The Global Adjustment System
Robert A. Mundell
Colwnbia University
1.• The Gold Standard and its Aftennath
The international monetary system that came into prominence in
the four decades before World War I was a system for regulating
money supplies and stabilizing, within small margins, exchange rates.
It was called the gold standard because already in 1880, but especially
by 1900, the currencies of the major world powers were convertible
into gold. But the international monetary system was by no means
monolithic. Besides the gold bloc, there were countries on the silver
standard and a few countries with inconvertible paper currencies. The
gold bloc itself embraced many different monetary forms; each
national monetary system was unique. Many countries were in the
gold currency area but did not have a gold currency; their currencies
were merely convertible into gold currencies, as in the gold exchange
standard (1). It is nevertheless true that the gold standard, especially
(1) France was not on a complete gold standard before 1914: following the closing
of its mints to silver in 1873, silver coins remained legal tender without being
redeemable in gold, and could thus be used freely for the discharge of debts and
contracts; Bank of France notes were also legal tender, but convertible into gold.
Germany went onto the gold standard de facto in 1873, but kept silver thalers as legal
tender in circulation. Italy was much further from the gold standard, having experi-
enced difficulties with its banking system (which had the right of note issue) and
convertibility crises in which it had to suspend specie payments. The United States went
onto the gold standard in 1879 de facto. Austria-Hungary in 1892 and Japan in 1897.
Germany and the United States adopted gold de jure in 1900, the former by eliminating
the overvalued (but legal tender) thalers in circulation, the latter by the Gold Standard
Act of that year. Russia went onto the gold standard in the 1890's but kept overvalued
silver and paper notes in circulation, while it built up its gold reserve .
India made the sovereign legal tender (15 rupees = 1 pound) in 1899. From 1900

352
Robert A. Mundell
between 1900 and 1913, did give the world a kind of monetary unity,
covering over two thirds of the world's monetary transactions. The
gold bloc was a currency area of fixed exchange rates, that could be
called, after Gustav Cassel, a world-wide sterling area, because of the
global importance of sterling as a unit of account, the transactions
domain of the British Empire and London as the centre of the
international capital market (2).
to 1912, IS million ounces of gold (in sovereigns) were imported, and the money supply
was divided between (silver) rupees, (gold) sovereigns and (paper) notes. The Royal
Commission on Indian Finance and Currency, on which a young Keynes had a seat and
played an influential role, recommended the accumulation of a gold reserve and an
expansion of the note issue, rather than the establishment of a gold currency; the
seigniorage from the coining of rupees was allocated to the creation of the gold reserve.
With wartime inflation the price of silver had caught up and surpassed the silver coined
into a rupee, and the rupee was threatened with melting or export. When a second
commission was appointed after the war, Keynes recommended appreciation of the
rupee, from its historic value of Is 4d to 2s, in order to spare India the increase in
rest-of-the-world inflation; he believed the consumers would gain more than the
producers would lose. Keynes argued that the rupee should be fixed in terms of gold,
not sterling, but the fixing should be done in London rather than New York. At this time
he obviously expected stabilization of sterling: «If sterling settles down, as we hope it
will, to a stable gold basis again,
- See EUZABETH Johnson (ed.): The Collected
Writings of John Maynard Keynes Volume XV Activities 1906-1914 India and Cam-
bridge, JOHNSON (ed.): Cambridge, MacMillan, 1971, pp. 281, etc .
. (2) Four conditions are met by a country on the international gold exchange
standard: 1) legal tender must be defined and convertible into gold or a gold-convertible
currency; 2) gold must be allowed to circulate internally and to be exported and
imported freely; 3) central bank note issues must be backed by gold or gold-convertible
currencies; and 4) the money supply must rise or fall with surpluses and deficits in the
balance of payments. The last condition is required for the adjustment mechanism to
operate effectively. However, with the speeding up of the adjustment mechanism due to
the growth of fractional reserve banking, central banks often acted to cushion at least
part of the effects of gold flows on the banking system in order to slow the adjustment
process.
Under a pure gold standard different currencies would be just different names for a
particular weight of gold; exchange rates between currencies were proportionate to
their metallic content and the supply of money was the monetary value of the stock of
metal in circulation. The gold standard that operated before World War I was far from a
pure gold standard. Other forms of money circulated as media of exchange and even as
legal tender: central bank notes, commercial bank notes, bank deposits, subsidiary
overvalued coinage . By the turn of the century, bank money was vastly more important
as a medium of exchange than gold coins. Paper notes issued by the central bank were
legal tender, sometimes redeemable in gold. Bank deposits were not legal tender but the
commitment to convertibility into bank notes or gold made them close substitutes for
gold coin as long as banks were solvent. The monetary system represented by the gold
bloc in the pre-war period was really a gold exchange standard even though that name
came into general use only in the 1920s to describe the practice, recommended by the
Gold Delegation of the League of Nations at the Genoa Conference in 1922, of major
countries holding foreign exchange in lieu of gold in order to economize on it.

The Global Adjustment System
353
The nineteenth century political world was organized around
empires, centered on the European cpitals and the US; Europe
was,
as
Max
Weber
said,
"the mistress
of the
world".
The
monetary systems reflected that fact. The imperial centers had
gold
currencies,
the
colonies
had
banknotes
of
the
mother
country, currency board systems or, in the case of India, silver;
the flow of seigniorage was in the direction of the mother country.
In the "periphery" outside the empires (e.g., China, Latin America
and Ethiopia) the currencies were mainly silver or inconvertible
paper.
Political ' equilibrium
within
Europe
in
the
nineteenth
century had been maintained through adherence to the principles
of the balance of power, which would prevent any single power
from dominating the Continent; but the creation of the German
Empire in 1871 upset that balance. The Triple Alliance and the
Triple Entente stared at each other in animosity or fear but it was
nevertheless widely believed that the financial interdependence of
economies bound together by the gold standard would make war
impossible.
There was no lack of controversy in the 19th century over the
monetary standard. From 1873 to the end of the century a great
monetary battle was waged between bimetallists, gold monometallists
and silver monometallists. The problem had existed earlier in the
century, but it reached its acute stage as the result of the great
increase in silver production in the 1870s. France, the most important
power on bimetallism, had suspended specie payments in 1870. The
deflationary (creditor) interests advocated the gold standard, the
opposing forces advocated bimetallism; and inflationary interests (and
silver producers) wanted a silver standard. The issue crystallized near
the end of the century when, after more than two decades of
deflation, William Jennings Bryan in the heat of the 1898 electoral
campaign could charge that the American farmer had been "crucified
on a cross of gold." But even at the time Bryan spoke events were
overtaking the silver and bimetallic advocates as the mounting sup-
plies of gold from South Africa removed the hitherto deflationary bias
of the old gold standard. Echoes of the debate would resurface in the
deflationary 1930s but the comeback of silver would be quickly
aborted.

354
Robert A. Mundell
1.1 The Long Run Stability of Gold
The case for gold rested on the alleged long run stability, on what
Roy Jastrom calls "The Golden Constant." The Kondratief index of the
gold price level registers 142 in the year 1780, 141 in the year 1794,
139 in the year 1824, 137 in the year 1838, 143 in the year 1857, 139
in 1874, and 143 in 1915. Alternatively, it was 100 in 1908, 104 in
1884, 101 in 1849 and 125 in 1789. From the standpoint of long run
price stability gold-based money was perhaps the most stable mon-
etary system of all time.
Long run stability does not imply the absence of alternating
inflationary and deflationary trends. There were pronounced infla-
tionary and deflationary movements measured on a gold basis (3).
They were so regular as to appear systematic (4). The long run
stability of gold was based on the equilibrating mechanism, operating
(3) Attempts to discredit the gold standard, as it operated in the 19th century, have
led authors to compare the peaks and troughs of price levels in terms of a particular
currency regardless of whether it was on or was not on the gold standard. Thus by
noting the price level in Britain in 1797 on a gold basis, and in 1816 on an inconvertible
pound basis, it is easy to show the British inflation of the Napoleonic War; and to
compare the same 1816 index with the price level in 1849 when Britain was on the gold
standard exaggerates the deflationary trend of gold during that period; then taking the
US price level on a gold basis in 1850 and on a greenback basis at its peak during the
Civil War, one shows terrible inflation; and then, comparing the same greenback price
level to the trough of gold prices in 1896, one shows enormous deflation; then, from
that base calculating the increase in the British price level in the 1920s one can
maximize the inflationary movement. To take an extreme case it would be rather
absurd to blame the gold standard for the rise in the Germany price level from 1914 to
1923. It rose a trillion fold during that period but only 1.3-trillionths of that inflation was
due to the instability of gold.
This exercise is both irrelevant and unnecessary to an evaluation of the perform-
ance of the old gold standard: irrelevant because it is the fluctuations in the purchasing
power of gold, not paper currencies, that must be considered; and unnecessary because
there are sufficient fluctuations in the purchasing power of gold itself to make a case
against the gold standard without engaging in unscientific distortions.
(4) The Russian economist Nikolai Kondratieff, between 1922 and 1928, published
several papers on the question of the long economic cycles. His most important paper
"Long Economic Cycles," was published in the journal Voprosi Konyunktury, vol. I, n.
I, 1925). In 1928 that paper was published by the Economics Institute in Moscow in a
book along with several critiques of his theory by other Soviet economists. The work
was translated into German, and then an English translation, abridged from the
German, was made by Wolfgand F. Stolper, and published in the Review of Economic
Studies. A new translation by Guy Daniels, with an introduction by Julian M. Snyder,
was published in 1984. See NIKOlAI KONDRATIEF: The Long Wave (Richardson and
Snyder, 1984). I have used the index presented by Kondratief for the price series based
on gold.

The Global Adjustment System
355
over the long run, by which systematic price trends bring about their
correction and reversal.
Monetary expansion under the gold standard depended on gold
production, which was in turn a function of gold-mining discoveries
and techniques. The world price level in terms of units of gold
depended on the world demand for and supply of gold. If production
of gold were in excess of demand, its value would fall, which meant a
rising price level; and if it were short of demand, gold would
appreciate, which meant a falling price level. Price-level changes,
however, brought corrective forces into play, both on the side of
supply and on the side of demand. When gold depreciates (meaning
inflation) profits in gold-mining fall, production declines and explor-
ation is diminished; these factors on the side of supply reduce the
inflation. But the effect on the side of demand is more important in
the short run; the fall in the value of gold relative to other things
increases the use of gold in industry and the arts. The opposite
changes take effect when gold appreciates and there is deflation.
In the intervals spanning the peaks and troughs of the price level
in the gold standard era, there were long swings of inflation and
deflation. For more than a century before World War I the real value
of gold fluctuated every generation: These fluctuations corresponded
to the long wave cycles explored by Kondratief. One interesting
question is why the trends were reversed. Deflations were followed by
inflations and then reversed, suggesting a stabilizing mechanism based
on gold production and consumption cycles.
The long run stability of gold was a great benefit from the stand-
point of the long term capital market. But against this long run stability
must be set the inconvenience and perhaps injustice of the troublesome
swings. These movements created disturbing shifts in the distribution of
income between creditors and debtors that led to resentment by the
losers and political controversy over the nature of the standard itself.
In this paper our major concern is the adjustment mechanism
under the gold standard and the controversies the creation of theories
of it provoked. Before developing that theme we shall look at the long
swings in price levels under the gold standard and the monetary
systems that succeeded it in order to provide the backdrop in the real
world against which economic controversies were measured.

356
Robert A. Mundell
Joseph Harris, writing in 1757-1758, was one of the first authors
to use the term gold standard and silver standard in the modem sense
of the term standard; Harris thought that Britain was on the silver
standard and should stay on it: Prior to Harris "standard" referred to
the degree of purity of gold or silver. But in the middle of the
eighteenth century the British monetary system was in a state of
transition. The overvaluation of gold in 1717, due to Newton's
recommendation when he was Master of the Mint, combined with
some cheapening of gold due to new production from Brazil, brought
Gresham's Law into play. Contracts were increasingly paid in gold
and that metal was increasingly brought to the mint for coinage.
Britain was faced with a real "choice between standards" and thus the
term came into use with a different meaning (5). Harris (6) wrote
(5) Already in 1717 Sir Isaac Newton had argued, when it became necessary to
alter the ratio of silver to gold, that the silver coins should not be altered (devalued)
because silver was the "standard;" Richard Cantillon agreed with Newton. But this use
of the term was apparently not available in the 17th century; John Locke had to find a
circumlocution to express his idea that silver should be the standard: « • • • • • •the fittest
metal to be the money of account and contract and the measure of commerce in any
country is silver» (my italics) in "Further Considerations of the Lowering of Interest and
raising the Value of Money" (1691) in Several Papers Relating to Money, Interest and
Trade, New York, Augustus M. Kelley, 1968.
Britain's choice between a gold and silver standard in the 18th century was not, of
course, the first such choice. In the early stages of monetary development every
government had to make a conscious choice among alternative standards. Once bronze,
silver, copper, tin, iron or gold had become installed as favorite materials for the
coinage, habit, convention and convenience created a history of a standard in each
country that no sovereign could ignore in his choice. In the 17th century, in the wake of
the great production of silver in Spanish America, all countries adhered to a silver
standard. Britain stumbled onto an overvalued gold price by mistake and thus was the
first major country to be in a position to consider gold as a standard.
(6) Before the 18th century "standard" referred to a specific quality ofthe precious
metals; thus standard gold meant gold 11112 or 0.9166 fine, or 22 carats. The metrical
standard for silver was 0.900 and the silver standard was 0.925 fine.
Harris used the term gold standard and silver standard in the modem use in his
Essays on Money and Coins published in two parts in 1757-8. Harris had been
appointed assay master ofthe mint in 1748; he anticipated Adam Smith on the benefits
of free trade and had a good understanding of the monetary approach to the balance of
payments. Harris believed that: «Gold and silver, for many reasons, are the fittest
metals hitherto known for hoarding: they are durable, convertible without damage into
any form; of great value in proportion to their bulk; and being the money of the world,
they are the readiest exchange for all things. and what most readily and surely
command all kinds of services. As gold is a treasure, because it decays not in
keeping
no other metals are a treasure, because they either decay in keeping, or
are in too great plenty».
See JACOB VINER: Studies in the Theory of International Trade, London, 1937, pp.
28-9.

The Global Adjustment System
357
before the partial demonetization of silver in 1774, in which the legal
tender property of silver was curtailed, foreshadowing Britain's de-
cision to move to gold in 1816.
1.2 The Inflationary Long Swing: 1789-1819
The appreciation of gold (about 2% a year on the average) in the
decade prior to the French Revolution was reversed in 1789 (7). Gold
appreciation turned to gold depreciation when other countries were
caught up in the inflationary financing of the Napoleonic wars, as
specie left France for other countries. This had the effect of reducing
the effective demand for specie and causing it to depreciate. This
meant inflation of those currencies on a metallic standard and,
according to at least two authors (8), was a great help to the US in the
first two terms of the new republic. Kondratief's index, which had
stood at 142 in 1780 and had dropped to 125 in 1789, rose to 205 in
1799, an inflation rate of 65% in the decade. The international
breakdown of monetary standards after the French Revolution made
gold unstable, as it would in future wars.
In 1797 the pound sterling became inconvertible and the pound
depreciated against both gold and foreign exchange, giving rise to the
British bullionist controversy which produced so many innovations in
monetary theory (9). The bullionists, who advocated a restoration of
(7) A important cause of the deflation prior to 1789 was the adoption of the silver
standard by India in 1766, which caused a drain of silver from several major countries,
and in Britain increased the relative undervaluation of silver that led to the deterioration
of her silver coinage and its partial demonetization in 1774. The general deflation to
which it contributed may have given India a more significant role in the American
Revolution than the Boston Tea Party suggests; it may have indirectly contributed to the
misery that led to the French revolution.
(8) See JUUAN SNYDER (loc. cit., p. 14) quotes George F. Warren and Frank A.
Pearson, who developed a theory of monetary cycles in their book Gold and Prices
(1935) to the effect that: «From 1789 prices in the United States rose 700/0 on a metal
base. The resulting prosperity had much to do with the success of the Washington
administration and the finn establishment of the Union".
(9) The English bullionists in their analysis of flexible exchange rates were
anticipated four decades earlier by Pehr Niclas Christianen in Sweden. In the 18th
century Sweden was engulfed in a substantial paper-money inflation, that had the
happy side effect of stimulating, in 1761, the economist Christianen to develop the
theory of money and inflation under conditions of flexible exchange rates. For a
discussion of Christianen's work see HUMPHREy-KELEHER (op cit. pp. 286-5), and ROBERT
V. EAGLY: The Swedish Bullionist Controversy, Philadelphia, American Philosophical
Society, 1971.

358
Robert A. Mundell
the gold standard as soon as circumstances permitted, argued that the
inflation in England was due to excessive issues of bank notes by the
Bank of England; and that the depreciation of bank notes against both
gold and foreign exchange was sufficient evidence of the overissue
(10). Although it was recognized that speculation and changes in
velocity could contribute to the inflation, the main issue was whether
or not gold had itself depreciated.
The bullionists would have been correct had gold been completely
stable. However, there is evidence that gold had itself depreciated so
prices would have risen even if Britain had stayed on gold. The Bank
of England was to blame for that part of the inflation due to the
depreciation of the pound against gold, but the rest of the inflation
was due to the instability of gold itself.
From 1803 to 1810 gold was stable (against commodities). It
appreciated in the next two years but fell again in 1914, only to rise
after the Battle of Waterloo. In 1816 Britain demonetized silver and
decided to adopt the gold standard at the pre-war parity, put into
effect in 1819.
1.3 The Deflationary Swing: 1820-1849
Britain was alone among major countries in adopting the mono-
metallic gold standard in the first half of the 19th century. Most
countries were on a pure silver standard; the word argent had for a
long time signified money on the Continent and in Latin America. But
exchange rates between gold and silver standard countries were
stabilized by the operation of bimetallism. For bimetallism to operate
effectively at least one large country must fix mint prices of both gold
and silver; the more countries that are committed to bimetallism the
more stable it is likely to be. The pivot role in bimetallism in the first
half of the 19th century was played by France, supported by the
increasingly important United States. In 1803, loaded with the plun-
der of Europe, France had re-established the bimetallic standard of
1785 at the rate of 1 mark of gold to 15.5 marks of silver, 5 franc coins
in both metals being equally legal tender for an unlimited amount. The
(10) See JACOB VINER, loco cit. p. 130.

The Global Adjustment System
359
United States, which had employed a bimetallic ratio of 1:15.25 in
1786, altered it to 1:15 in 1792, to 1:16.002 in 1834, to 1:15.988 in
1837; silver was overvalued in the early period and became the
standard, but gold was overvalued in the second period and the US
money supply had become increasingly composed of gold.
The restoration of the gold standard in Britain at the prewar
parity in 1819 overvalued the pound and caused deflation and de-
pression in Britain, provoking the flexible exchange controversy that
followed. Even before resumption (of specie payments) some econo-
mists doubted the merits of returning to gold at the old parity. Ricardo
had his doubts, thought that resumption would cause a deflation of
5%, and devised his ingot plan to economize on gold, using paper
notes for the circulation; he also thought that the gold purchases
made by the Bank of England to restore the gold standard would
cause deflation in the rest of the world (11). The deflationary period to
which resumption led was replete with plans for alternative monetary
standards and suggestions for "Keynesian" remedies for public works.
Most interesting was the Attwood brothers' proposal for a managed
pound with a flexible exchange rate (12).
(11) According to Viner, Sir W. Heygate said that Ricardo told him soon before his
death that he was wrong in predicting 5% deflation: «Ay, Heygate, you and the few
others who opposed us on cash payments have proved right. I said the difference at
most would be only five per cent, and you said that at the least it would be 25%». See
VINER: Studies, p. 176; Viner doubts the authentically of the story. The price level
dropped steeply from 191 in 1818 to 122 in 1930; it was clear that Ricardo underes-
timated the potential deflation. Ricardo worried about the effects on prices abroad of
the gold-buying policy associated with resumption; on that issue he was correct.
Ricardo probably underestimated the effects of resumption on deflation in Britain; by
following the law of one price he would assume that the British price level would fall at
the same rate as that abroad. However, what Ricardo probably ignored was that the
British deflation had to be equal to the rest of the world 's deflation
plus the
overvaluation of the pound, which must have been considerable at the time of
resumption.
(12) Thomas Attwood (1783-1856) was a member of a Birmingham firm of
bankers and the leader of the "Birmingham School," dedicated to a less deflationary
currency. Thomas Attwood believed that "falling prices were a serious evil (that
inflicted great harm on debtors and) which could not be avoided except through an
inconvertible paper currency." Regulation of the currency, Thomas thought, should be
entrusted to a legislative commission. He wavered among alternative criteria for
stabilization -
the price of wheat, the general price level, the rate of interest, the wages
of agricultural labor. While recognizing the defects of using wages as a guide, on the
grounds of a time lag between changes in the quantity of currency and the resultant
changes in wages, he concluded that a combination of interest rates , for short run

360
Robert A. Mundell
The deflationary wave that started in the 1829s and lasted until
1850, led to a world-wide search for new sources of gold. To this
scarcity we owe the travels of Alexander von Humboldt whose
striking analysis of the sources of gold on various continents made an
important contribution to the literature (13). Throughout this period,
however, annual production of gold was negligible, always less than
two million ounces and usually considerably less. Because silver
production had diminished (because of the South American Revolu-
tion) the world price level fell. Because of the scarcity of gold no
country had an incentive to join Britain on the gold standard. France,
as already noted, later joined by the US, ensured monetary unity
between the gold and silver standard countries. But there were many
developments in banking to compensate partly for the dearth of the
precious metals.
1.4 Another Inflationary Swing: 1850-1873
The dearth of gold was changed suddenly with the
gold
discoveries in California in 1847 and Australia in 1851. The wave of
deflation was transformed into a wave of inflation from 1850 to 1873.
The impact of these discoveries on gold production was dramatic. For
the preceding decade, 1841-1850, annual production in the world
considerations, with wage rates for long run consideration might be the best criterion
for determining the rate of increase of the money supply. See VINER, op. cit., p. 213.
Thomas Attwood was a convinced anti-deflationist; he considers the question, why
not increase the money supply indefinitely and answers: «Whenever
the money
of a country is sufficient to call every laborer into action, upon the system and trade best
suited to his habits and his powers, the benefits of an increased circulation can go not
farther
» Beyond that point further stimulus is "nugatory" or "injurious" (loc. cit.
n. 12, pp . 212-3). Attwood's importance gained strength from his and his brother
Mathias' political influence.
Mathias Attwood (1779-1851) was a Tory (unlike his brother) but joined him in his
views on the currency question. In 1830 Mathias proposed a double standard of silver
and gold at the rate a little higher than 15 silver to 1 gold.
John Stuart Mill devoted a page and a half to refutation of the Attwoods doctrine,
which he believes "was set afloat" by Hume in his Essay on Money. Mill's discussion
does not seem to pay sufficient attention to the extreme deflation in the 1820s or of the
lags of wages behind prices. See Principles of Political Economy, London, Ashley
Edition, 1909, pp. 550-1.
(13) Baron von Humboldt (1769-1859) published in 1838 a remarkable discussion
of the history and present state of the precious monetary metals at that time. Humboldt
argued correctly that the dearth of gold production would soon be corrected. See The
Fluctuations of Gold, New York, Maude Edition, 1990.

The Global Adjustment System
361
averaged 1.76 million ounces. Through the next decade, 1851-60, it
averaged 6.45 million ounces. The monetary gold stock of the world
doubled from 1850 to 1860, from 50 million ounces. The increase in
monetary gold caused gold to depreciate (implying inflation) but by
less than would be expected from the change in the rate of gold
production alone. The price level in Britain rose from an index of 101
in 1849 to 143 in 1857 (14), after which the price fell back to 128 in
1959.
What prevented an even greater and longer inflation? The answer
is the cushioning effect of the bimetallic system. A doubling of the
stock of monetary gold is not the same as a doubling of the money
supply in a bimetallic system. If, for example, gold and silver count
equally (by value) as monetary metals, a 100% increase in the stock of
monetary gold would increase the world money supply by only 50%.
One of the arguments for bimetallism is that it blunts the effects of
new discoveries of one metal providet that gold and silver discoveries
are to a certain extent independent (l5).
Supply shocks may be cushioned in the short run by the tendency
of one metal, after it becomes cheap, to drive the other out of
circulation in the bimetallic countries. Thus in France the depreciation
of the market price of gold made it profitable to sell gold to the mint
and buy silver, the latter being melted or (more probably with silver)
exported. The substitution of gold for silver would appear at first to
reduce the impact on the money supply of increased gold production,
insofar as it reduces the amount of monetary silver in circulation.
However that facile conclusion neglects the possible remonetization of
silver in countries on the silver standard. Much of exported silver finds
its way into the circulation of the silver standard countries and
spreads the inflation there until the prices in the silver countries have
risen as much as the prices in the gold or bimetallic countries. The
(14) The level of prices in Britain after 1855 may have been inflated somewhat by
the Crimean War.
(15) This effect seems to be ignored by economic writers after the gold discoveries.
HUMPHREY and
KELEHER, The Monetary Approach (op. cit., pp. 75·7) discuss the
contributions of Cairnes (following Cantillon) and Jevons on the subject but there is no
mention of bimetallism. See also the discussion of MICHAEL BoRDO: "John E. Cairnes on
the Effects of the Australian Gold Discoveries, 1851·73: An Early Application of the
Methodology of Positive Economics," History of Political Economy, n. 7, 1975.

362
Robert A. Mundell
cushioning effect in the world as a whole is restricted to the degree of
demonetization of the other metal in the world as a whole.
The increased absorption of gold in France temporarily blunted
the inflationary impact of the increased gold production. But after
1860 another factor was working in the other direction. After the
outbreak of the Civil War both the South and the North abandoned
convertibility, exporting gold to finance wartime spending. The export
of gold should have called into play the Thornton effect. The price
level in Britain did rise somewhat: the index rose from 132 in 1961 to
143 in 1964. But France, on bimetallism, did not experience the same
rise in prices. Marcello de Cecco points out that it was the gold
exports from the US at this time that created difficulties for the
countries on silver or bimetallism and provided a stimulus for the
creation of the Latin Monetary Union (16).
As the 1860s wore on, population and production continued to
increase while gold production peaked. From 1850 to 1870 the
average gold production was slightly over 6 million ounces. In the
early 1870s it fell to 5.5 million. As a proportion of a growing stock the
rate of gold production was thus declining. The Kondratief index
which had been at 101 in 1849 reached a peak of 152 in 1873 and
then began its long scarcely interrupted descent to 1896. The inflation
came to an end with the panic of 1873.
1.5 The Swing to Gold and Deflation: 1873-1896
The third wave, from
1873 to 1896 was deflationary. Gold
production had stabilized but growth of population and income, and
therefore the demand for gold, continued. Gold production actually
decreased to 4.8 million in the first half of the 1880s and was only
slightly higher, at 5.5 million, in the second half of the 1880s. But the
deflation of the period can be attributed only partly to the stagnation
and decline in gold production relative to the expansion in industry.
(16) Marcello de Cecco points out that "US gold exports to pay for the Civil War,"
led four countries, France, Italy, Belgium and Italy to react independently, choosing
different silver contents for their coins, leading to the international treaty of 1865
forming the Latin Monetary Union. See MARCELLO DE CECCO: The European Monetary
System and its Predecessors in this volume.

The Global Adjustment System
363
While the production of gold stagnated, the production of silver
increased by leaps and bounds. From 1811 to 1840 the annual
production of silver had been considerably less than 20 million
ounces. From 1840 to 1860 it was 25-30 million ounces. In the decade
of the 1860s it was about 40 million ounces per year, but in the first
half of the 1870s silver production averaged over 63 million ounces.
The silver avalanche was in full swing. Production steadily increased
until annual production by the 1890s had reached an average of a little
less than 160 million ounces. Given the rapid growth of income and
wealth and the demand for money in the last third of the century, the
increased silver production might have been absorbed had countries
stayed with silver or bimetallism. But this was not to be.
Prior to 1871 Britain was alone in adhering to the gold standard.
But by the turn of the century all the major countries, with the
exception of China, had shifted to gold. France, the main bimetallic
country, suspended specie payments with the outbreak of the Franco-
Prussian War. The new German Empire, bloated with the spoils of
victory and the gold indemnity of the equivalent of 50 million ounces
of gold, moved onto the gold standard, adopting, in 1873, the gold
mark of 0.3982 grams of gold as the standard of value. Soon most of
the countries of Western Europe joined Britain and Germany on the
gold standard. The shift to gold created an enormous increase in the
demand for gold and simultaneously a general dumping of silver. Had
France resumed specie payments on the ante-bellum basis, silver
would have driven gold from circulation and France would have lost
her entire stock of monetary gold. Allthe Scandinavian countries and
the members of the Latin Monetary Union including France adopted
the gold standard; and finally, in 1879, the United States -
now the
biggest country -
scrapped silver for gold.
There was at that time no chance for international coordination
of policies. In 1873 the US was caught up in economic crisis brought
on by overspeculation in railway bonds (Jay Cooke panic); almost
unnoticed at the time was the "oversight" that led to the virtual
demonetization of silver, later called "the crime of '73" (17). No one
(17) The Jay Cooke scandal was caused by overspeculation in railroads which had
already developed excess capacity at a time when there was a contraction of greenbacks
in New York. When Jay Cooke 's banking house closed on September 17, 1873 two

364
Robert A. Mundell
before the middle 1870s brought gold or silver to the mint, but, given
the fall in the market price of silver, they would have several years
before actual resumption took place had coinage not been dis-
continued. Had President Grant not inadvertently allowed the demon-
etization of silver, the US would have been spared the economic
stagnation of the 1870s and the deflation of the next two decades. Had
the US not itself demonetized silver, it might have been more success-
ful in its campaign to internationalize the silver problem (18).
thousand banks temporarily suspended payments and the New York Stock Exchange,
for the first time in its history, closed. The panic was finally allayed by the issue of $20
million of additional greenbacks by the Treasury.
(18) Signs of the move to the gold standard could already be seen at the
International Monetary Conference, called by Napoleon III and presided over by Prince
Jerome Napoleon , that assembled in Paris in 1867 and was attended by all the major
countries in Europe and the US. A basic, if unscheduled, theme of the meeting was the
desirability of a general adoption of gold as the international standard; gold was called
the "modern metal" by its proponents. Even Prussia assented to the adoption of gold,
although that country had always been on a silver standard, providing a foretaste of the
policies actually adopted by the German Empire. It was also agreed to settle on a
standard fineness (0.900) for gold; and to coordinate coinage on the basis of five francs
(England and Sweden dissenting).
Gold coins equivalent to five francs would be
accepted as legal tender in all the participating states.
In 1869 the US Congress passed a law securing that the huge public debt of the
United States be made payable in coin, although much of it had been contracted in
depreciated greenbacks. This plum for the creditor class -
the national debt at the time
was the equivalent of 150 million ounces of gold -
was followed up by the demonetiz-
ation of silver, which meant that the debt would have to be honored in gold! The
demonetization of silver took place as a result of The New Mint Code of February 12,
1873, which (inadvertently?) omitted the word «dollar" from the clause empowering
the coinage to the lesser pieces; this law was followed by the limitation of the legal
tender of all silver coins. Because these acts of 1873 were published during a period of
suspension they attracted little public notice: it was later verified that even President
Grant had not read the act he had signed. Although the Bland Act of 1878 reinstated
silver dollars as legal tender the failure to empower their private coinage ensured the
victory of gold.
The US government, however, was not blind to the enormous output of silver from
the mining states, and attempted to combine with other countries to establish an
international convention agreeing on a stable ratio of silver to gold. An international
monetary conference was convened by the United States in conformity with an act of
Congress (February 1878) inviting the governments of Europe to join in adopting a
common ratio between gold and silver for the purpose of re-establishing bimetallism.
The Congress met in Paris in August 1878 with twelve countries and all of the Great
Powers participating. The American delegation proposed the establishment of bimetal-
lism but after extensive discussion, the European powers agreed that the issue should
be left up to each country. The conference came about five years too late; in 1878 it
would in effect have been an international price support program for US producers.
Further conferences were held but without agreement on the US plan for bimetal-
lism, perhaps partly because the United States, with the overwherlming share of silver
production, was seen as the major beneficiary and the influence of Britain which, as a
creditor nation, was comparatively happy with gold monometallism.

The Global Adjustment System
365
The movement to gold was induced by the understandable fear,
not to say greed, of the creditor classes of inflation. The more
countries that left silver for gold, the more inflationary the silver
standard became, and the more deflationary gold became. The gold
price level in England, which stood at 152 in 1873, dropped to 83 in
1896.
In the first half of the 1890s gold production increased to 7.9
million ounces, the first installment of that deluge that was to come
forth from South Africa. Despite the increased gold production the
price level continued to decline for a time. Production of gold had
increased but it had not yet caught up to the growth of demand.
Demand for gold increased substantially in the 1890s due to the
movement onto the gold standard of three great powers: Austria-Hun-
gary, Russia and Japan (19), who all joined the gold standard in the
1890s. The new demand for gold on the part of these countries was
sufficient to exhaust the still small but rapidly increasing supplies
arriving from South Africa.
1.6 South African Gold and Inflation: 1897-1920
A new inflationary phase started in the second half of the 1890s,
the year 1896, an inflationary phase that was to accelerate during
World War I. The steady increase in supply of gold from South Africa
made an important contribution to the increase in prices in the years
preceding the outbreak of world war. World gold production had
risen, as we have seen, to 7.9 million ounces in the first half of the
1890s; it increased to 12.5 million ounces in the second half. Thus in
(19) Japanese coinage alternated first to gold, then to silver, and then back to gold.
The British had, in 1864, set up a mint in Hong Kong to produce a silver coin to
supersede the Mexican dollar which, as a trade coin, had dominated the Orient; but,
being unsuccessful, the mint was closed in 1868, upon which the coining plant was
bought by Japan. The Japanese mint at Osaka opened in December 1870. The new
coinage of Japan was based on the yen, which was 416 grains of silver 0.900 fine, about
the same as the Hong Kong dollar, but gold was initially the standard; by 1879,
however, the silver yen was made legal tender and the standard of value throughout
Japan, interchangeable with the Mexican dollar. In 1897, however, the Japanese'
government passed a currency law providing for a gold standard. The standard of value
was a gold yen weighing 11.574 grains of pure gold, and the coinage of silver yen was
brought to a close.

366
Robert A. Mundell
less than a decade gold production had doubled. The rate of increase
in production continued, to 15.6 million ounces in 1901-1905, and to
over 20 million ounces in the next decade. More gold was produced
from 1896 to 1914 than in all of previous human history; and since
that time the monetary stock of gold has doubled and doubled again.
The twentieth century was in this sense a new golden age.
But it was not gold alone that led to the persistent upward rise in
prices in the fifteen years prior to the outbreak of World War I. This
was a period of enormous growth in joint-stock banking. Bank
deposits had become by far the most important medium of exchange.
The great pressure on aggregate demand by the armaments race
combined with a great expansion of bank money and the increasing
gold supplies from South Africa to produce the moderate inflation
from 1896 to the First World War.
The first phase of the 1896-1920 inflation ended with the out-
break of hostilities in 1914. As a result of inflationary finance in
Europe and the inconvertibility of the European currencies, gold left
Europe for New York, where it became the reserve base for monetary
expansion in the United States. The US price level doubled despite the
fact that the United States (along with Japan) remained on the gold
standard during the war. In 1914 the Kondratief price index was 116.
By 1918 it had reached 257 where it remained for another two years
until the sharp deflation of 1921.
1.7 Post-War Paliatives and the Great Deflation
The price level in 1921 fell to 167 from 258 the year before, a
drop of over 35%. Prices in gold then held fairly steady for a few years.
A kind of equilibrium prevailed with the United States on gold and the
other countries off it. The US held more than half of the world's
monetary gold but part of this had been used to support an expanding
money stock of the United States. There was a general recognition of
the gold shortage,and the Gold Delegation of the League of Nations,
meeting in Genoa in 1922, recommended that countries use foreign
exchange in lieu of gold in reserves in order to economize on gold.
It would have been possible to establish an equilibrium exchange
rate system in the 1920s had a kind of dollar-gold standard been

The Global Adjustment System
367
developed with a limited convertibility of the dollar into gold and
other currencies convertible into dollars. But had such a system been
formally proposed there would have been powerful objections to it. It
would have offended the egos and patriotism of great or once-great
powers, who would have objected to the implicit loss of sovereignty,
putting the US in the driver's seat of the international monetary
system. Britain saw herself in the leadership role, whereas France was
jealous of British presumptions in this respect. Besides, in the US
itself, with the exception of Benjamin Strong, there was no leader
who had even a conception of a pivot role for the US in the
international monetary system. Perhaps most important of all, the US
was still remote from the European financial scene; the airplane had
not yet crossed the Atlantic and telephone communications were in
their infancy. Thirty years later, when these arrangements did mater-
ialize, none of these objections existed.
It was Germany, reeling from the hyperinflation that had wiped out
its public debt and the savings of the middle class, that first re-esta-
blished its currency on a gold basis. The reorganization of the
Reichsbank in 1924, after a trillion-for-one currency conversion,
effected the stabilization of the Reichsmark at the old parity (20). The
second currency to be restored (and without a currency conversion)
was the pound sterling in April 1925. The franc was stabilized in 1927
and devalued de jure by about 80% in June 1928. By the end of the
decade most of Europe and the rest of the world had returned to the
gold standard.
In evaluating the policy of restoring the gold standard there are
two major factors to be considered. The first problem is: Were
exchange rates correct vis-a-vis one currency and the other? We know
now that the pound was overvalued against the dollar and the mark
by, say, 15%; and the franc was undervalued against all currencies.
The second and more important question was: Were all currencies,
(20) Currency stabilization was prepared through the establishment of the Renten-
bank as a purely temporary facility while the government reorganized its finances, and
the stabilization of the Rentenmark. The stabilization was accomplished by a huge
devaluation in November 1923, the cessation of further government borrowing from
the Reichsbank, the currency conversion and a huge loan of about $200 million (about
10 million ounces of gold). On August 30, 1924 further issue of Rentenmarks was
stopped. The Reichsmark replaced the Rentenmark.

368
Robert A. Mundell
and especially the "numeraire currency," the dollar, valued correctly
vis-a-vis gold. The answer was no. If one takes at face value the idea
that the purchasing power of gold will be stable in the long run, gold
was undervalued. The US price level was 50% higher in 1924 than in
1914, and therefore gold was undervalued by one-third. Any attempt
to restore a full-fledged gold standard at existing prices was simply
asking for trouble, asking for a world-wide deflation of 33%. And with
the growth of labor unions and the increased downward rigidity of
wages, deflation spelled depression.
It is not hindsight that leads to the prediction of a coming
deflation, an "appreciation of gold." The undervaluation of gold was
known to a number of economists at the time, including John Parke
Young, who was the one-man Commission of Gold and Silver Inquiry
in the United States in 1925. In the summary of his report, European
Currency and Finance, he wrote: «The present purchasing power of
gold is about 35% below that in 1913 and about 25% below the
average for the years 1778 to 1913. A study of the present forces
tending toward an increase in the purchasing power of gold and of
those tending in the opposite direction is interesting, but conditions,
especially with respect to the demand for gold, have become so
changed that prediction as to the future value of gold are hazardous.
A large amount of control over the value of gold is now possible, and
when exercised judiciously has important possibilities. Efforts should
be in the direction of reducing short-time fluctuations in the value of
gold and permitting only long-time trends caused by forces which may
as yet be beyond control» (21).
(21) JOHN PARKE YOUNG: European Currency and Finance, Washington, Govern-
ment Printing Office, 1925), p. xvi, in press before Britain restored the gold standard.
See also in the same volume the short paper by GUSTAV CASSEL: The Restoration of Gold
as a Universal Monetary Standard, pp. 205-6. Cassel believed that a restoration of the
gold standard was a simple matter, and that «we should already have the gold standard
in a whole series of countries if it were not for the false idea that a country is bound to
restore the same gold standard that it had before the war». He goes on to say that: «The
gold standard, of course, can not secure a greater stability in the general level of prices
of a country than the value of gold itself possesses. Inasmuch as the stability of the
general level of prices is desirable, our work for a restoration of the gold standard must
be supplemented by endeavors to keep the value of gold as constant as possibile. In the
last few years the chief danger in this respect has been a fall in the value of gold caused
by the concentration of the world's gold supplies in the United States. The superabun-
dance of gold in the United States could have been used, and may still be used, for a

The Global Adjustment System
369
Unfortunately the report goes on to recommend that a fairly
stable value of gold be maintained without making clear that a
restoration of a general gold standard would force gold to appreciate
from its undervalued condition.
Much has been made of Britain's unfortunate decision to go back
to gold at an overvalued rate against the dollar. No doubt Britain
would have been much better off had she restored gold at a rate of
$4.40 or lower. That would have ensured that the pound. and British
labor, was not overvalued against the dollar. But it wouldn't have
spared Britain her share of the world-wide deflation; that would still
have occurred. As it was, Britain checked out of the subsequent
deflation in September 1931 when she let the pound fall (it later went
down below $3.50, only to rebound after the devaluation of the
dollar).
The focus of attention on the overvaluation of the pound distrac-
ted attention from the vastly more important problem of the overvalu-
ation of all currencies against gold. The disequilibrium in the 1920's
was systemic, and the problem lay not -
or not only -
with the
dollar-pound exchange rate but with the price of all currencies in
terms of gold. Had the problem been realized at the time an interna-
tional conference convened in 1924, composed of the US, Britain,
Germany and France, could have decided collectively on what dollar
price of gold would have enabled the rest of the world to go back onto
a full-fledged international gold standard without a gold shortage (22).
very considerable rise in the general level of prices. That such a rise has not been
allowed to take place is of the greatest credit to the monetary authorities of the United
States.
With the actual state of gold production it can be taken for certain that after a
comparatively short time, perhaps within a decade, the present superabundance of gold
will be followed , as a consequence of increasing demand. by a marked scarcity of this
precious metal tending to cause a fall of prices . It is in the interest of the United States
as well as of the world at large that violent movements up and down in the general level
of prices shall. as far as possible . be prevented. The amount of gold which the United
States is now keeping in reserve will perform a good service when once we shall have to
face a growing scarcity of gold».
(22) Would an international conference have come up with the "right" answers? It
is extremely doubtful. Keynes was then advocating an inflationary policy in the United
States in order to ship gold to Europe, a policy that in fact later took place. leading to
the stock market boom and its disastrous aftermath. Charles Gide at that time ridiculed
the notion of gold hunger in Europe: «Not at all; what would we do with this gold? We
should rather leave it in the possession of the United States. who. like King Midas.

370
Robert A. Mundell
The deflationary wave that began slowly in 1925 and lasted until
late in the 1930s, was caused by the acute scramble for undervalued
gold among countries restoring or newly adhering to the gold stan-
dard. The use of foreign exchange as a supplement to gold postponed
the deflation for a few years, but these balances, largely sterling and
dollars, were unstable. With
confidence shattered after the 1929
crash, the end of American lending, and the collapse of key banks in
Central Europe, sterling balances were cashed in for gold (23). The
before long will vainly seek to rid itself of it». See: "Commission on Gold and Silver
Inquiry," European Currency and Finance, by JOHN PARKE YOUNG (Washington:
Government Printing Office, 1925). Among the professors in that volume only Gustav
Cassel had the prescience to worry about the coming shortage of gold which he
predicted might come within a decade.
(23) PAUL EllING, in his Behind the Scenes of International Finance, London,
MacMillan, 1932
blames the breakdown of the gold exchange standard on the
machinations of the international financial diplomacy of France, a gross exaggeration
because the gold exchange standard was already doomed on its birthday. His argument
does, however, shed light on the relation between political and economic motives of
governments at that time. Einzig argues that the French attempted to make France
become the financial dictator of Europe using first reparations policies prior to 1927,
and then financial policies. The financial policies included first undervaluing the franc in
order to acquire a huge gold base at the expense of other countries, and then
withdrawing gold from London, to the point of creating a sterling crisis. Einzig believed
these policies were dircted mainly against the British, but also at the Americans, who
had sinned in helping Germany too much, thwarting France's aim of dominating the
continent by building a security net of alliances around Germany.
Poincare (whom Einzig considered the greatest financial statesman of the age), had
stabilized the value of the franc at 124 to the gold pound in 1926, about $.04, a
devaluation of 80%, wiping out most of French franc-denominated debt. At this
exchange rate the French price level was 20% below the world price level: it brought
about a repatriation of capital, large gold imports. and a strong economy.
In May 1927 the Bank of France withdrew gold from London, to the dismay of
England, partly because France had not yet adopted the gold standard. At a conference
of central banks, held in Washington in August 1927, the Bank of France agreed not to
make any purchases of gold, either from the Bank of England or in the open market,
without the consent of the Bank of England. The principle, that no central bank should
withdraw gold from another except with the consent of the latter, became the
cornerstone of what was meant by international financial cooperation.
But after the restoration of the gold standard in France in June 1928 France began
to draw large sums of gold from London, totalling, up to the suspension of the gold
standard in Britain in September 1931, no less than 136 million pounds sterling worth
of gold or. say, 34 million ounces. Einzig documents point by point British statements
or actions contrary to French policy followed gold withdrawals from Britain.
The failure of the Creditanstalt, announced on May II, 1931, brought into the open
the rift between France and Britain. Austria had planned to issue a loan to reconstitute
the bank and France had agreed to take up part of it; after a considerable delay, on June
17, France informed Austria that she would not support the loan unless Austria
withdrew from the proposed Awerian-German Customs Union. Austria refused and the

The Global Adjustment System
371
deflation in agricultural products started in 1928, accentuated in
financial assets with the crash of the New York stock market in 1929,
and steep general deflation in the years 1930-1934 (24). The pound,
Bank of England took up the whole amount that Austria needed, to the initation of the
French. The French then tried to embarrass the British, according to Einzig, by
withdrawing gold on private account, expecting to be able to step in at the last minute
with "the grand gesture", saving sterling, and making evident the extent of British
dependence on France. Thus the big French banks (but not the Bank of France)
withdrew between 40,000,000 and 50,000,000 pounds sterling in the two months
before the suspension. Nothing was done in France to stop these withdrawals or offset
them with countering policy at the Bank of France. By the end of July the reserve of the
Bank of England had fallen to 130 million sterling.
At this point the Bank of France reversed its policy, fearful that the threat of
collapse might bring on its actually, leading to large French losses on their sterling and
increasing Britain's competitiveness in world markets. It started to support sterling,
buying anything offered on the market; the French press was instructed to shift from
pessimism to optimism about sterling. Britain now needed a loan and the French agreed
to participate up to half provided that gold were earmarked from the Bank of England's
reserve, issuing an ultimatum to Britain to accept the French terms or suffer the
withdrawal of French support of sterling. Governor Norman, the object of animosity in
the French press because of his support for the Austrian loan, wanted to reject the
French terms but was overruled by the Directors of the Bank; Montagu Norman then
went off on an extended holiday to Canada for reasons of health and was not, as it
turned out, to be in England when Britain suspended.
Towards the middle of September France had over 125 million ounces of gold,
whereas Britain had less than 33 million. Franche had large holdings of sterling and
dollar balances and was thus in the driver's seat in the world of finance. The French
now granted credits freely to Britain, fearing that a collapse of sterling would weaken
France's power to control British policy. On September 18 a new loan was needed, and
France agreed to participate in half of it, but the United States refused. On September
20 it was announced that it was necessary to suspend the gold standard.
(24) Sixty years after its beginning there is no general agreement on the causes of
the great depression. There are several possibilities: 1) the collapse of expenditure
(Keynesian and econometric); 2) the collapse of the money supply (Monetarist); 3) the
negative wealth effect of the stock market in 1929; 4) the Smoot-Hawley tariff,
Congressional news of which reached the stock market on the eve of the crash (Jude
Wanniski); 5) the slow-down in the rate of population growth (Clarence Barber); 6) the
high real interest rates with tight money and falling prices (Meltzer); 7) the reparations
and debt problem; 8) increasing monopolies in the final stages of capitalism (Marxist);
9) secular stagnation and the decline of investment opportunities in mature cpitalism; or
10) the deflationary pressure exerted by undervaluation of gold caused by the World
War inflation (liquidity shortage theory). For a discussion of some of these theories see
PETER TEMIN: Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression], New York, Norton,
1976; and CHRISTIAN SAINT-ENTIENNE: The Great Depression: 1929-1938, Stanford:
Hoover Institution, 1984, p. 44; Wanniski's analysis is presented in his The Way the
World Works. Meltzer's contribution is contained in "Comments on the Great Depress-
ion", in KARL BRUNNER (ed.): Great Depression Revisited, Boston, Nijhoff, 1981, pp.
148-64.
Only the liquidity-shortage theory explains the cause and precise timing of the
collapse, but a complete explanation must take into account the special wealth effects

372
Robert A. Mundell
with the most overvalued currency, was the first to fall; the franc,
with the least overvalued currency relative to gold, was the last to be
devalued.
A transition period from, 1931 to 1936, thought of as chaos by
the framers of the Bretton Woods Agreements a decade later, saw the
vain efforts of first the United States and then France to hold onto the
gold standard. Had the US gone off the gold standard at the time
Britain did or soon after, much of the misery of the depression would
have been avoided. By prolonging the inevitable the harm was done
without, in the end, saving the gold standard. The US went onto
flexible exchange rates in 1933 and then devalued the dollar to 1/35 of
an ounce of gold in 1934. This sealed the fate of the franc; France
struggled vainly to hold on to gold at the expense of severe deflation.
(When the French, on October 1, 1936, did devalue, it was by too little
and only resulted in further disequilibrium until, on June 30, 1937,
France went off the gold standard entirely). By the end of 1936 all
currencies had devalued against gold, established controls or had
flexible exchange rates. Too late, gold was given a correct valuation.
The Tripartite Agreement of 1936, involving the US, Britain and
France, represented a start toward the re-creation of an international
monetary system. It anticipated the IMF agreement in its provisions
regarding consultation and notification about exchange rate changes.
It was finally recognized officially that exchanges rates were an
international matter and a necessary subject for consultation. But by
1936 the three countries had become unequal. Since 1934 the US,
now with the strongest currency, had the upper hand; the next era
properly begins not in 1936 but in 1934 (25).
of the stock market crash, the retreat to economic nationalism, the increased debt
burden caused by deflation, the collapse of American lending abroad, the reparations
fiasco, and the banking crisis. There is no doubt that the fall of expenditure and the
money supply were inextricably involved; they are almost a definition of recession. But
the gold shortage theory provides an explanation of why those changes in expenditure
and money occurred.
(25) Perhaps it is not out of place here to mention the comments on the inter-war
period made by Per Jacobsson when he was Managing-Director of the International
Monetary Fund in 1958. In a speech presented at the BasIe Centre for Economic and
Financial Research, June II, 1958, Jacobsson discussed the errors made in the 1920s in
re-aligning exchange rates, and the instability of the fluctuating exchange rates that
followed the breakdown, emphasizing the overshooting of flexible rates and the
consequent destabilizing effect on prices. He then cites four "other lessons" which

The Global Adjustment System
1.8 The Gold-Dollar Standard: 1934-1971
373
The period from 1934 to 1971 was characterized by a monetary
system in which only the dollar, for most of the period, was conver-
tible into gold. The monetary character of the new era was set by the
dollar price of gold. All the other currencies were either pegged to the
dollar, managed by exchange controls, or flexible. For much of the
period the dollar meant money. But the era had three distinct phases.
The first phase, from 1934 to 1950, was the period of the dollar
shortage when the dollar is better than gold (26). In the second phase,
from 1949 to 1959, the dollar is "only" as good as gold. In the third
phase, from 1960 to 1971 the dollar is decidedly not as good as gold.
Corresponding to these three periods are, respectively, very low,
rising and high interest rates.
The devaluation of 1934 at least partially corrected the problem
of the undervaluation of gold and eliminated the excess demand for it.
The dollar value of gold reserves increased by 60% creating excess
reserves in the US monetary system; the Federal Reserve gold require-
ment backing liabilities was 40%. The demand for gold had been cut
suddenly when the US Treasury forcibly exchanged currency for the
US gold coinage, and the government enacted a prohibition on
Americans holding or trading in gold. The dollar was now better than
should be kept in mind: 1) the dangers of unwise lending between 1925 and 1930,
especially short-term lending for long-term purposes by the United States; 2) the US
imposition of tariffs when she was a major creditor; 3) undue accumulation of gold by
France, amounting to world production of several years; this arose largely because of
the undervaluation of the franc in 1926; and 4) the failure of the system to mobilize
financial resources quickly in the event of a crack in the banking structure such as that
which developed with the failure of the Osterreichische Creditanstalt in May 1931.
What was then needed was a lender of last resort of the kind the IMF became in the
post-war period. See: International Monetary Problems: Selected Speeches of Per
Jaccobsson, 1957·1963, Washington, International Monetary Fund , 1964, pp. 49·66 .
Jacobsson does not seem to have taken into account in this lecture the general
undervaluation of gold which would have undermined the system eventually even
without these immediate factors; he could hardly have done so, given his position at the
Fund, without inviting attention to the same mistake perpetrated in the post-World War
II period.
(26) The term "dollar shortage" was due to Charles Kindleberger. John Chipman,
in a paper presented to the Eastern Economic Association Meetings in Baltimore in
March 1989, has traced the literature in Britain on the dollar shortage back to 1938.
The dollar shortage (1936·1949) was due to the overvaluation of gold with repect to the
dollar, at a time when private gold holding was prohibited in the United States.

374
Robert A. Mundell
gold and the Treasury, the residual buyer, had to take up the excess
supply in the world market. There were even rumors that the US
might change its policy, giving rise to a "gold scare". Dollars emerged
as a world currency.
War preparations in Europe reinforced the excess supply of gold
against dollars. The Thornton effect was brought into play with gold
exports stemming from deficit spending in Europe to pay for rearma-
ment. Capital flight from central Europe reinforced the Thornton
effect and brought on a "Golden Avalanche"(27). By 1938 the US had
captured three quarters of the world's stock of monetary gold; it was
back to an even stronger position internationally than it had been in
following World War I. Gold was no longer stable, as far as the US
was concerned, in the sense that she could stabilize her currency to
gold and expect to have a stable economy. It was now the stability of
the dollar that gave gold its stability, not (as say in 1879) the stability
of gold that gave the dollar its stability. Jupiter had become bigger
than the Sun. For more than two decades, from 1936 to 1958, US
monetary policy was not dominated in any important way by the
condition of the US balance of payments.
The monetary gold influx to the US was the key to recovery from
the great depression. However, the Federal Reserve blocked the
recovery in one of its greatest blunders. There had been substantial
monetary expansion since devaluation in 1934 which the Federal
Reserve mistook for inflation. It is true that the price index had
increased, taking 1929 as 100, from 80 in 1935 to 84 two years later.
But the fact that the consumer price index was still far below that of
1929, the fact that President Roosevelt's goal had been reflation, the
fact that unemployment was still over 14% of the labor force, and the
fact that in 1936 real GNP had only just reached the 1929 level, should
have convinced the Federal Reserve that expansion was the best
policy even if it involved a moderate reflation. Instead the Federal
Reserve sterilized the gold inflow and flung the economy into the deep
recession of 1937-1938. Unemployment increased from 7.7 million to
10.4 million or 19% of the labor force in 1938.
(27) See F.O. GRAHAM and C.R. WHffiLESEY: The Golden Avalanche, Princeton'
1939; the authors advocate flexible exchange rates.

The Global Adjustment System
375
The recovery of employment from the 1937-1938 recession took
until 1940, after which wartime demand finally brought the devas-
tating 1929-1939 depression to an end. As with the last war the US
stayed on gold throughout; but in contrast to World War I, the war
was fought with cheap money and unbelievably low interest rates. The
great,
almost
painless,
American war effort was
accomplished
through the utilization of excess capacity that had existed because of
the great depression.
Long before the war ended, plans were being prepared for the
post-war international economy. There were four pillars on which the
stability of the post-war economy was thought to depend: 1) the
international monetary system; 2) long-term capital for reconstruction
and development; 3) tariffs and trade; and 4) international aspects of
the unemployment problem. The Bretton Woods Conference dealt
with the first two problems, and resulted in the creation of the
International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Recon-
struction and Development, the so-called Bretton Woods twins. The
problem of tariffs and trade was handled on a ad hoc basis after the
war through the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, an agree-
ment that upgraded itself into an institution, GAIT. The fourth issue
dealing with international aspects of unemployment and other trade
practices was embodied in the Havana Charter, which fell afoul of the
US Congress after the opening of the Cold War and the belief that, in a
world of restrictions, the US (and perhaps Switzerland) would be the
only country to abide by its regulations.
The IMF was a set of regulations, some gold and a bag of
currencies (28). The original task posed to his Treasury department by
President Roosevelt had been to establish the conditions for a world
currency, but second thoughts soon intervened. In view of US prepon-
derance and the role of the dollar, the idea of a world currency
distinct from gold and the dollar was scrapped. It was the White Plan,
rather than the Keynes Plan, that was adopted. Instead of a world
bank producing its own currency backed by gold and member
country currencies, the Fund became a regulatory body, the manager
(28) See BRIAN TEW: International Monetary Cooperation, 1945·1952, New York,
Longmans, Green & Co.. 1952.

376
Robert A. Mundell
of a currency cartel, and a short-term lending agency. Gold was
reinstated as the numeraire of the system, while the US gold dollar
became the unit of quotation.
The articles of Agreement of the Fund were, as a matter of
principle, symmetrical among countries with respect to the rules and
regulations. Each country was required to state the par value of its
currency in gold, or the 1944 gold dollar, worth 1/35 of an ounce.
Each country was also required, according to the original articles, to
maintain the exchange values of all other currencies of member
countries on its own territory within 1% of its par value. The exchange
margins were an attempt to simulate (and enlarge) the gold points of
the gold standard. Countries were allowed to change their stated par
values with the consent of the Fund, and it was understood that the
overwhelming burden of the doubt would be given to the country in
the event of a "fundamental disequilibrium". · The British, remem-
bering 1931, had stipulated that they would devalue rather than face
unemployment, and it was therefore generally considered that high
unemployment and a deficit in the balance of payments constituted a
fundamental disequilibrium, qualifying for devaluation. The system
set up was not a fixed exchange rate system but an adjustable peg
system (29).
It is necessary now to make a distinction between the provisions
for the exchange system in the IMF articles of Agreement and the
actual exchange system as it turned out. It is perhaps a credit to the
architects of the Fund that the modus operandi of the dollar standard
could be squeezed into the Articles, with by-laws rather than an
amendment. When the Fund opened for business in 1946 two con-
siderations had to be dealt with to bring the regulations into line with
the real world. First, the key currency system (30) in which other
(29) James Meade first characterized the Bretton Woods System as an "adjustable
peg system". In reality, however, the short run stability was self-reinforcing and quickly
turned into a long run stability.
(30) See J.H. WlWAMS: Post-War Monetary Plans, New York, Knopf, 1947, and
C.P.
KINDLEBERGER: International Economics, Homewood,
Illinois,
Irwin,
1958,
Chapter 24, and especially Kindleberger's retrospective on the key currency idea in
"How Ideas Spread Among Economists: Examples from International Economics", in
The Spread Among Economists: Examples from International Economics", in The
Spread of Economic Ideas, eds. David Collander and A.W. Coats, Cambridge, Cam-
bridge University Press. 1989, Ch. 5, especially pp. 51-2.

The Global Adjustment System
377
countries pegged their currencies to the dollar, had to be accommo-
dated; and second, the US practice of pegging gold rather than
interventing in the foreign exchange market. The articles of Agree-
ment said nothing about a key-currency system, the first problem, but
they did fortunately say something about the second problem of a
currency that is pegged to gold.
At the time the Fund opened its doors for business in 1946 few
officials, bankers or economists had a clear understanding of what the
actual exchange system was. Since 1934 the dollar had become the
supercurrency. With gold pegged at $35 an ounce no other country
had any incentive to peg to gold; since most other currencies were
inconvertible even into the dollar there was little consideration of gold
convertibility of the other currencies. The dollar system grew out of
the practices of the real world which meant, in fact, that the Fund
regulations had to be accommodated to the system, not the other way
around. The gold practices of the US could be accommodated easily
within the Articles. There was a special provision in Article IV (Article
IV-4-b) that enabled a country that was buying and selling gold freely
at a fixed price to avoid its obligation of intervening in the exchange
market. In 1949 the US Secretary of the Treasury wrote a letter to the
Managing Director of the Fund asserting that the US was buying and
selling gold freely (31). That took care of the unique US practice of
intervening in the gold market and not in the foreign exchange
markets.
There was still the first problem mentioned, that of sidestepping
the Fund regulation that required each country to keep its currency
within 1% margins around parity against every other currency. The
approach to this problem took advantage of the solution to the
second. It was decided that if a country was stabilizing its currency
against a convertible currency, it was deemed to be satisfying its
obligations under the exchange rate provisions of the Fund. Instead of
maintaining margins around the par values of every other currency
within its border, a country could instead peg its currency to a
convertible currency.and be spared the need for intervention in other
(31) The word "freely" is to be taken cum grana salis because us citizens had been
prohibited. since 1934, from using gold for any monetary purposes.

378
Robert A. Mundell
currency markets. The dollar was the only convertible currency so
countries could peg their currencies to the dollar and thus be deemed
to be satisfying the articles of Agreement regarding exchange rate
practices.
The special accommodition to the dollar arose from the fact that
in 1945 the US was the superpower; it accounted for 80% of the
world's industrial production, had three quarters of the world's gold
stock, had won the war and had, besides, the atom bomb. Its power at
this stage was unparalleled. Of course with the rapid recovery of
Europe, the US share of world output fell quickly, but even so the US
produced 40% of World Product a decade after the war. The dollar
became the world's unit of account, key currency, unit of contract,
store of value, medium of exchange, intervention currency, invoice
currency, unit of deferred payments and reserve currency.
The first phase of the dollar, when it was better than gold, ended
in 1950. Four factors contributed to the turning point when it became
"only" as good as gold. The first factor was the US inflation during
and after the war that had halved the purchasing power of the dollar
and gold; the second factor was the great devaluation of sterling and
associated currencies in 1949; the third factor was the US recession of
1949-1950; and the fourth factor was the Korean War which brought
on another burst of inflation. The weakening of the dollar was
confirmed by the Federal Reserve's need to abandon its pegging of
interest rates at the wartime 2% level. The Treasury, faced already
with the deficit financing needs of the Korean War, rejected the
central bank's arguments and Truman demoted the Chairman of the
Federal Reserve Board. The much-publicized "accord" only provided
for consultation between the Federal Reserve and the Treasury;
independence was not achieved until the Eisenhower administration
took office in 1953 (32).
(32) The Chairman of the Federal Reserve was Marriner Eccles, who was ap-
pointed by Roosevelt to replace Eugene Black in 1935. Eccles' warm relations with
Roosevelt were not duplicated by his successor; Eccles had a running dispute with
Treasury Secretary Snyder who insisted that the Reserve continue the arrangement of
pegging bond prices that had been made during the war. Truman fired Eccles and
appointed Thomas McCabe in his place but offered the latter the position of Deputy
Chairman which Eccles accepted. But even with McCabe as Chairman, the conflict
between the Federal Reserve and the Treasury continued, leading to a meeting with

The Global Adjustment System
379
The US gold losses started during the Korean War, and after that
there were calls for an increase in the dollar price of gold. Neverthe-
less the dollar, backed by two thirds of the world's gold stock,
appeared for a time to be as good as gold. In 1954 the London gold
market opened, creating a new drain on US gold through the private
market. When Britain sold gold to the market for dollars the Bank of
England converted the dollar proceeds into gold from the US Treasury
(33).
Two factors, not widely realized at the time, emasculated the
adjustment mechanism. The first factor was the Federal Reserve
practice of sterilizing gold flows. Under a gold standard gold losses
would automatically reduce the reserve base of the banking system
and tighten monetary conditions, working in the direction to correct
the balance of payments deficit.
That did not happen because
whenever the US sold gold (withdrawing money from circulation) the
Federal Reserve would buy bonds (increasing the amount of money in
circulation), nullifying the monetary effects of the gold loses.
The other factor arose from the practices of foreign countries, as
Jacques Rueff pointed out. In the 1950s the European countries ran
balance of payments surpluses, finally replenishing their reserves. If
the dollars accumulated were held, they would be taken off the
market, tightening US bank reserves. But the European central banks
reinvested their surpluses in liquid earning assets in the US, such as
Truman, on January 31, 1951, about which he writes in his memoirs: «I was given
assurance at this meeting that the Federal Reserve Board would support the Treasury's
plan for the financing of the action in Korea...». Throughout February the consultations
between the Federal Reserve and the Treasury continued, with William McChesney
Martin sitting in for Secretary Snyder (who was ill) at these meetings. When the famous
Accord was announced on February 4, 1951, it was not clear what the agreement was,
except that it made an arrangement for consultation between the Federal Reserve as to
policy. On March 31, 1951 McCabe resigned (possibly in protest, possibly because he
did not think the Reserve would eventually win); Martin, a Treasury man, was
nominated and confirmed to replace him.
It is a mistake to think of the Accord as an outbreak of independence; that came
only "in 1953 when the Eisenhower administration granted it without a struggle." For
the detailed account of the personality clashes, and also Eccles' view that banking
interests in California (Bank of America) were responsible for his demotion, see The
Federal Reserve System, A Study, prepared for the use of the Joint Committee,
conducted by Hon. Wright Patman, January 3, 1977, Washington, US Printing Office,
1976, pp. 128-36.
(33) A gold market in the US was of course prohibited.

380
Robert A. Mundell
Treasury bills, which replenished the dollars. Both actions ruptured
the adjustment mechanism (34).
The US started to worry about its gold position in the late 1950s.
The 25% gold cover of Federal Reserve liabilities would be exhausted
if gold losses continued at the pace of 1958. If gold reserves fell below
the 25% gold cover, the Federal Reserve would be required by law to
raise interest rates whatever the needs of the domestic economy. After
two decades of ignoring the balance of payments, a moment of truth
had arrived.
Following the establishment of external convertibility of the
European currencies in 1958, European countries started to convert
dollars into gold in a substantial way. From 1950 to 1959 the US had
lost about 100 million ounces of gold. In 1959 the US had 557 million,
still over half the world's gold stock. But it was clear that the US could
not continue to lose (sell) gold at the current rate of loss. The balance
of payments of the US had been theoretically in continuous deficit as
the rest of the world accumulated dollars and gold in the 1950s.
Robert Triffin presented, in 1959, his famous paradox, that if the US
corrected its balance-of-payments deficit the world would not have
enough reserves for growth and there would be a liquidity shortage;
on the other hand if the US did not correct its deficit, dollar liabilities
would soon exceed gold reserves, the US dollar would become
inconvertible, and the international monetary system would break
down.
The second phase of the gold-exchange standard formally ended
in October 1960 when, in the heat of the Nixon-Kennedy election
campaign, Britain and the United States got their wires crossed. There
was speculation about the gold policy of the new administration and
Kennedy's position on gold was not then known. The British stopped
feeding the London gold market, fearful that the new administration
(34) If the Federal Reserve increased bank reserves whenever the foreign central
banks hoarded dollars, the policy of hoarding dollars would not have any point. To save
the $35 gold price the Federal Reserve would have had to follow a pure gold standard
policy in the 1950s. This would have been deflationary, attempting to roll back the
wartime and post-war inflation. I am not. therefore. suggesting that the US should have
followed a much tighter monetary policy. It would have been better to declare
inconvertibility in 1958 or 1961.

The Global Adjustment System
381
might not be willing to convert the gold into dollar. The price of gold
at once shot up to 40 an ounce in the (now) free market. It was only
after Senator Kennedy had pledged to keep the $35 price of gold and
to continue convertibility that the bubble burst and the British
resumed gold sales in the London market. The significance of the
episode was in verifying that the dollar was no longer as good as gold.
In the next three years the US lost 98 million ounces of gold,
leaving 459 million ounces in 1962; in the next six years it lost another
146 million, leaving only 311 million in 1968; and by 1972 the gold
stock was down to 276 million ounces. Most of the gold went to the
Continent. In 1955 five countries, Germany, France, Italy, the Nether-
lands and Belgium had collectively 113.7 million ounces; by 1966 they
had 434.3 million, of which France held 149.7 million and Germany
122.6 million.
The European central banks had every right to convert dollars
into gold according to the letter of the US commitment to gold (its
1949 letter). The US nevertheless had grounds for objection, much
like the objections made in England three decades earlier when
France, in May 1927, converted sterling into gold. Just as France was
not (yet) on the gold standard in 1927 so the European countries were
not on the gold standard in 1958; and never indicated their intention
of going on it. General De Gaulle had called for a return to gold but no
country dared to risk (or found it profitable to risk at the current price
of gold) convertibility. The Kennedy-Johnson commitment to gold at
the "sacred" price of $35 an ounce, made in the heat of the 1960
election campaign, was a commitment it would have been wiser not
to honor (35).
(35) As already noted, the French attempt to convert sterling into gold in May 1927
led to the Washington agreement in August 1927, under which no central bank would
draw gold without the consent of the host country. That solution would have been
worth reviving in the early 1960s. But had the US withdrawn its 1949 letter, the US
would have been required to intervene in the currency market of every other country,
which would be impractical. The exchange rate system would then have broken down,
just as in 1971, but before the US had lost most of its gold. The US would have been in a
much stronger position to reform the international monetary system in 1961 than it was
in 1971.
I was not, however, in the 1960's among those who argued for an increase in the
price of gold; I thought that a solution could be worked out with a new world currency.
In some testimonary to the Joint Economic Committee in 1966 I argued that the
dynamic working of the gold exchange standard depended upon two dynamic forces:

382
Robert A. Mundell
Meanwhile the Group of Deputies of the Group of ten, assigned
by the IMF to find a solution to the problem of international monetary
reform, settled on the creation of Special Drawing Rights within the
International Monetary Fund. They were called SDR's to distinguish
them from ordinary drawing rights at the Fund. Under the charter of
the Fund each country had contributed a quarter of its quota in gold
or dollars, and the rest in local currency. These deposits gave them
US monetary policy adjusted to maintain convertibility of the dollar, and foreign
(European) gold/dollar reserve ratios committed to stability of the world price level. I
argued that to preserve the gold exchange standrd at the existing price of gold, the
adjustment rules would have to be reversed, with the US taking responsibility for the
world price level and the Europeans taking responsibility to maintain dollar conver-
tibility. The system however would break down if America and Europe had different
views of the optimum inflation. For a theoretical formulation of this model see my essay
"The Crisis Problem" in International Economics, New York,
MacMillan,
1968,
Chapter 20.
In the middle 1960s I argued that the international monetary system would work
better if countries held their reserves in the same currency or commodity to which their
own currency was pegged since that was the currency required for intervention
purposes. In a comment on a presentation by Sir Roy Harrod, apropos this point, I
suggested that countries (like Britain) that pegged their currencies to the dollar should
hold their reserves in dollars, not gold , and if instead the British government wanted to
keep its reserves in gold it should peg sterling to gold. Similarly a country like Australia,
that (then) pegged its currency to sterling should hold its reserves in sterling. The same
argument applied to the countries on the Continent, which had accumulated large
stocks of gold. The discussion continued as follows .
Mundell: «... I have
suggested that countries should hold
their
reserves
completely in the currency to which they peg . I would like to have Sir Roy's argument
as to why he thinks, as he does, the British should hold their reserves in gold when they
peg the pound sterling to the dollar, not to gold».
Harrod: «It is convenient for all operations where it's a question, say, of supporting
sterling, to be in dollars. But the UK is under legal obligation, under the Articles of
Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, to keep the pound within the pre-
scribed limits, as against the Deutsche Mark, or any of the other currencies that are
members of the IMF. It is a question of technique. There is no difference of principle».
Comment from the Floor : «There is a different article applying to the US dollar.
The United States is not obligated to peg its currency to any currency».
Harrod: «Yes. But that is for a particular reason. . . The legal obligation of the
British to maintain the pound, within the prescribed limits, as against say , the Deutsche
mark is exactly the same as its obligation to maintain the value of the pound as against
the dollar. But it would be a nuisance for the Bank of England to be operating in a
number of different exchange markets. It would be more cumbersome. So the
operations go via the dollar, but the legal obligation is the same for the currencies of all
countries who fulfill Article VIII of the International Monetary Fund» .
Kenen: «.. . The price of the pound is filed with the Fund in terms of gold, not in
terms of dollars. The way it is done, by agreement, is to operate in dollars. But I see no
logical inconsistency in holding some part of one's assets in the form of gold rather than
dollars. It doesn 't seem to me a matter of great principle or moment».

The Global Adjustment System
383
"drawing rights" a member could utilize if it got into balance of
payments difficulties. When a country "drew," it deposited an amount
of its own currency for the equivalent amount of foreign currencies it
was "drawing." Thus the Fund holding of a member's currency was in
equilibrium when it was equal to 75% of its quota; but a member was
given the overwhelming benefit of the doubt to draw the first or gold
"tranche" (36) which represented the one quarter of the quota the
Mundell: «It seems to me a matter of great importance because the European
countries -
the continental countries -
have been converting their dollar assets into
gold.) .) . (But) they don't use gold for exchange operations. They buy and sell dollars .
And in order to be able to keep to their exchange rate obligations, they have to convert
their gold first into dollars, before they can supply dollars when their currencies are
weak. I think you could have a system in which countries in the dollar area (the
countries that continue to peg to the dollar) hold their reserves in dollars , and in which
the European countries which now hold nearly all theur reserves in gold) peg their
currencies to gold. Together with the United States, European countries should move
onto the Article IV-4-b clause of the Fund which frees them from the need to buy and
sell foreign currencies. Then you would have a two-pillar system, Europe with about
$16 or $17 billion in gold (about 460 million ounces) and the United States with $14
billion of gold (400 million ounces), and both groups, perhaps with or without the
United Kingdom. would then be engaged in stabilizing the price of gold».
That system was not acceptable at the time since every European country wanted
to buy gold and none to sell it at its undervalued $35 price. The gold pool, which had
been created in the early 1960s to ration out the scarce new supplies of gold from South
Africa among the eight members, was disbanded in the spring of 1968; France backed
out of it as soon as there was no net excess supply on the market and price stabilization
would have met sharing gold losses.
The political trauma created by the Viet-Nam war on both sides of the Atlantic
made it difficult for Europe and America to agree on a satisfactory alternative to the
dollar-gold standard; the unpopularity of South Africa and the Soviet Union made the
natural solution, an increase in the gold price, politically unpopular. The IMF Articles
made a provision for gold scarcity: it was a universal reduction in par values, equivalent
to a world-wide increase in the price of gold.
In my 1968 Testimony (Joint Economic Committee Report on the Hearings of
September 1968) I argued for the creation of an international currency backed by gold
and convertible currencies, the object of which would have created a fully liquid
instrument called "inters" that would have a gold reserve ratio equal to the ratio of gold
to total assets of the "International Monetary Pool" that would create it. I still believe
that the
solution lies along these lines, supplemented perhaps by commodity assets
from those countries with inconvertible currencies.
(36) In Fund language, a tranche is a quantity of money equal to one quarter of a
country's quota. The Fund initially held (theoretically) a quarter of a country's quota in
gold and three quarters in national currency. A drawing within the "gold tranche"
meant borrowing that would leave the Fund's holdings of a country's currency between
75% and 100% of quota. The first "credit tranche" was a drawing leaving Fund's
holdings of currency between 100 and 125% of quota. The super gold tranche referred
to the case where the Fund held less than 75% of a country's quota in currency.

384
Robert A. Mundell
country had originally deposited in gold. The currency to be drawn
was the currency needed for exchange transactions and that, of
course, was usually dollars.
The drawing rights of the members of the IMF were completely
backed by gold or currencies (37). Special Drawing Rights were
distinguished from these ordinary drawing rights in that they were not
backed by anything except the commitment of countries to accept
them in payment for obligations amounting to three times their own
allocation. Because the SDR's would always be equivalent to 1 ounce
of gold, they were thought of as a substitute for gold, "paper gold."
The gold stock could be "stretched" by the addition of SDR's which, it
was argued, would be willingly held because of the gold guarantee.
The SDR's were agreed upon by the GI0 Deputies in late August
1967 and presented for discussion at the IMF annual meetings in Rio
di Janeiro in September 1967 (38). The (First) Amendment to the
(37) The Articles of Agreement required that each member maintain the gold value
of the currency in the Fund. If a member devalued its currency, it would have to
contribute a proportionate amount of its own currency into that already existing in the
Fund. However, many of the currencies held by the Fund were inconvertible and
therefore unusable by other members, reducing the Fund's liquidity by a corresponding
amount. No country would have any reason for drawing an inconvertible currency. The
currency drawn would weaken on the exchange market and it would be unmarketable
if inconvertible. The currency that countries needed for exchange transactions was, of
course, mainly the dollar because it was the dollar to which other currencies were
pegged. After the dollar became "weak" it was inconvenient for the US to have
drawings in dollars. The Fund then became illiquid to the extent not only of the
inconvertible currencies but of the dollars as well. To avoid this problem the strong
currencies (e.g, marks, francs) were drawn, quickly reducing the Fund's stocks. To
meet this problem, and to allow for the possibility of a US drawing, a new facility was
arranged. Atthe Vienna meeting of the IMF in 1961 an agreement was made, called the
General Arrangements to Borrrow, providing credit to the Fund in the event the Fund
needed to repenish its liquidity; the US quota was $2 billion, Germany's was DM 4
billion, and France 's was FF 2.7 million. For the agreement see «The International
Monetary Fund: 1945·1965, vol. III, Documents, Washington, IMF, 1969, pp. 247·52.
The details of the agreement would not have been necessary had all the currencies
in the Fund been convertible. The original idea of the Fund was revolving credit with a
rotation of the deficit countries. It was not envisaged that one set of currencies would
be permanently inconvertible. The activities of the Fund were hampered throughout by
inadequate resources and the inconvertibility of a substantial part.
(38) That meeting witnessed a clash between the US and French authorities over
the use of dollars to help finance the war in Viet-Nam, an idea that was rejected in a
forceful speech in praise of gold by the French Minister Debreu of Finance. More
important however was the euphoria created by the hope that the SDR's were the
embryo of a world currency.
Also at that meeting Dr. Otmar Emminger, the Chaiorman of the Deputies of the

The Global Adjustment System
385
articles of Agreement was ratified in 1968 and the first allocations
were started in 1970, equal to something like $3.5 billion or 100
million ounces of paper gold. Three years of the scheduled allocations
would have resulted in almost 300 million ounces of paper gold,
stretching the world's stock of gold by almost one third.
It is doubtful whether, in the long run, the SDR solution would
have worked. As the ratio of SDR's in total reserves increased, the
probability that their gold-weight guarantee would be honored, would
have declined; their acceptability would then have decreased and
further allocations would be denied. A long run solution required
either a new world currency or an increase in the price of gold.
Unfortunately, the SDR) did not even work in the short run. The
SDR's came too little and too late. The allocations might have been
sufficient to stabilize the system in 1960, or possibly even in 1965. But
in 1970, when the first allocations began, the path toward breakdown
had already gone too far. The devalution of sterling in November 1967
brought on a gold crisis in the winter of 1968. Before 1967 there had
already been some excess supply of new gold production coming from
the private market. But in the fall of 1967 and the winter of 1968
private market demand for gold overtook new supplies. To maintain
the market price, the gold pool (which France had already left in
1967) would have had to feed the market. The crisis climaxed in
March 1968 when the Gold Communique of March 1968 resulted in
the so-called (39) two-tier system which let the private market price of
gold float up, while the official prise was held steady.
Meanwhile the US economy had moved into inflation with the
consumer price index rising by more than 4% in 1968. In the summer
of that year there was a sudden change in the policy mix. In the
summer of 1968 a ten per cent income tax "surcharge" was imposed;
and in the following year monetary policy was tightened; both
measures contributed to
the
recession of
1969-1971.
With the
economy in recession interest rates fell, capital fled to Europe and the
Group of Ten, and Deputy-President of the Bundesbank, asked me unofficially to
prepare for him and the other Deputies a plan to save the pound sterling from
devaluation. But sterling fell, in November 1967, two months before my report was
due.
(39) It was called the "two-tier system" at the suggestion of Guido Carli, Governor
of the Bank of Italy. It was more an act of desperation rather than a "system".

386
Robert A. Mundell
dollar became weak. From 1969 to 1971 dollar holdings rose from
$2.7 billion to $11.6 billion in Germany, and from $2.6 billion to $12.7
billion in Japan. The crisis of the mark in the spring of 1971 turned
into the crisis of the dollar in the following summer. On August 15,
1971 the US closed the gold window.
1.9 Inflation Without Gold: 1972-1981
No sooner was the exchange rate system dismantled than the
monetary authorities took steps to revive it. Rather than peg their
currencies to an inconvertible dollar, the European countries at first
let their currencies fluctuate. The dollar dropped against currencies in
Europe, even the lire, which rose from 1/620 of a dollar to 1/585 of a
dollar in late August (40). Steps had already been taken in 1969 and
1970 to create a European currency (41) but they had hardly emerged
beyond the drawing board stage. The inconvertibility of the dollar
gave an impetus to these plans. A joint float was discussed but, for
want of an acceptable pivot currency, never materialized. At the
Smithsonian meeting in December 1971, the dollar was formally
devalued against gold from 1/35 to 1/38 of an ounce, and some of the
stronger European currencies were appreciated. President Nixon
praised the conclusions as "the most important monetary agreement
in the history of the world". Its major novelty was in fixing exchange
rates without a gold-convertible currency.
With the divorce of the monetary system from gold, monetary
discipline broke down. In February 1973 the US again devalued the
(40) On Sunday April IS, 1971 I was in Panama, but I flew to Rome en route to
Siena the next day to arrange the 1st Santa Colomba Conference (on September 4th),
and on Tuesday , I visited Governor Carli at the Banca d'Itaiia. I suggested to him that
the lire was not strong enough in the long run to appreciate against the dollar. "I realize
that," he said, "but we have to let it rise for the sake of European solidarity!" The dollar
did fall to 585 lire for a short time, but it soon depreciated far beyond its original IMF
par value of 625.
(41) My own foray into proposals for a European currency was made in a paper
delivered at the American Management Association's meetings in New York in
December 1969, "The Case for a European Currency", where I outlined a plan for the
"Europa". A revised version "A Plan for a European Currency", was presented at the
Conference on Optimum Currency Areas in March 1970 in Madrid, reprinted in the
conference volume, The Economics of Common Currencies edited by HARRRY JOHNSON
and ALEXANDER SWOBODA.

The Global Adjustment System
387
dollar but without restraining monetary policies;
the balance of
payments got worse. Faced with the prospect of an increasing over-
hang of dollars, Europe again considered a joint float. With, however,
no agreement on a pivot currency (e.g. pound or mark) and little
prospect of an effective joint float without one, that possibility came to
naught. In June 1973 the idea of international monetary reform was
abandoned for the time being and flexible exchange rates were
introduced, leaving each country to solve the inflation problem on its
own.
The first oil shock came in late 1973 and created a huge shift of
wealth from the industrial countries to oil exporting countries. Bal-
ance-of-payments deficits of vulnerable countries mounted and deficit
countries borrowed huge amounts from the Eurodollar market. The
increase in liquidity in the Eurodollar market was fed by expansive
monetary policy in the US as the recession of 1974-1975 unfolded.
With the inflationary recovery from that recession the dollar dropped
precipitously against foreign currencies, leading to a vain attempt,
organized at the end of October 1978, to solve the problem by
borrowing $30 billion worth of foreign currencies. Because the infl-
ationary monetary policy was not corrected, the loan was wasted. The
European countries dumped dollars and they depreciated even more.
Then the second oil shock came in 1979, boosting oil prices to $34 a
barrel.
The flexible exchange rate period, from
1971 to
1980, was
characterized by lax monetary discipline which spilled over to the
fiscal side. With monetary discipline abandoned fiscal discipline was
undermined. Government, no longer faced with the threat of a run on
their exchange reserves, allowed their budgets to go into deficit,
leading to more monetary expansion just to prevent interest rates on
government debt from rising. But this policy was self defeating
because it put an inflation premium on interest rates. Interest rates
that had been below 5% in the 1960s rose to over 8%. But the price
level was rising much faster so that real interest rates were negative. It
was at this point that much of the third world, attracted by cheap
money and inveigled by liquid bankers anxious to make loans,
borrowed amounts far beyond their capacity to repay at positive real
interest rates.

388
Robert A. Mundell
Meanwhile the weak dollar in the late 1970s recreated interest in
European monetary integration. France and Germany found mutual
interests in establishing a stable Europen monetary system which
would bind more losely the interests of French farmers and German
industrialists (32). Germany provided a more stable currency for the
other countries than the dollar had been and it gave the more
inflationry countries, such as Italy, an external discipline that had
been lacking under the flexible exchange rate regime.
After the second oil price increase, when the dollar was at its
lowest level ever against the mark and Swiss franc, the rate of
inflation mounted to over 15%. The price of gold, which had been
$179 an ounce in the summer of 1979 rose to an all-time high of $850
in January 1980.
1.10 The Strong Dollar: 1981-1985
A new phase in the history of the flexible exchange rate system
started after Reagan became president in November 1980. The Feder-
al Reserve, under Chairman Volcker, reversed previous policies and
tightened. Interest rates in 1981 were the highest in US history. As
inflation declined real interest rates rose and the economy moved into
a
short,
but
particularly
deep,
recession,
with
unemployment
reaching 11%. The fall in tax revenues, combined with increased
defense spending, greatly increased the huge budget deficit. The
recession hit bottom toward the end of 1982, but the tax reductions
that had been enacted in 1981 took effect in 1983-1984, leading to the
sharpest recovery on record. The dollar had already recovered some
of its lost ground in 1981, but now it soared. In 1980 it had averaged
1.39 against the ECU; in 1981, 1.12; in 1982, 0.98; in 1983, 0.89; in
1984,0.79; in 1985, 0.76. Foreign capital had fled the dollar in the late
1970s. But now, in the 1980s, attracted both by the rising dollar and
the tax cuts, capital returned. The net capital inflow more than
financed the excess of expenditure over income that created the trade
balance deficit.
(42) See MARCEUD DE CECCO (op. cit.) for a discussion of the exchange of benefits
that binds the European Community in general, and France and Germany in particular.

The Global Adjustment System
389
The US had been a creditor country ever since World War I. But
high trade deficits from the 1970s on had reduced the US creditor
position. The trade deficit, in successive years starting with 1977, had
been $31.1 billion; $34 billion; $27.5 billion; $25.5 billion; $27.9
billion; and $36.5 billion in 1982. But in the next few years the trade
deficit was $67.1 billion in 1983, $112.5 billion in 1984; $122.2 billion
in 1985; $144 .3 billion in 1986; $160.3 billion in 1987; and $126.3
billion in 1988. These trade deficits, amounting to $732.7 billion in six
years tipped the world's largest net creditor into the position of being
the world's largest debtor. The US net indebtedness has been increas-
ing at a rate of about 3% of GNP each year. Interest payments abroad
on the debt will require ever-increasing future trade surpluses.
The rising trade deficit was at first ignored because of the soaring
dollar. But two factors operated in the winter of 1984-1985 to
overturn the strong dollar: One was the growth slowdown, the other
was an increase in the US rate of monetary expansion, both of which
contributed to an excess supply of money and a falling dollar. The rate
of monetary expansion had been 7% in 1984, 9.2% in 1985 and 13.4%
in 1986. The dollar, which was at 250 yen and OM 3.4 at the end of
February, fell to 240 yen and OM 2.5 at the time of the Plaza Accord
designed to let the dollar depreciate in September 1985.
1.11 The Coordinated Dollar: After 1985
The Plaza Accord marked a turning point in international mon-
etary history. No longer was it believed that flexible exchange rates
would automatically arrive at a desirable equilibrium. The Plaza
Accord represented a deliberate decision to alter the value of the
dollar against major currencies. The ostensible reason for the "Baker
dollar" was to pre-empt protectionist legislation in Congress, and it
served that purpose. While wage rates changed only moderately,
exchange rates changed a great deal, drastically lowering US real
wages expressed in terms of foreign currencies. The US became much
more competitive. Exports responded finally by 1988 almost recaptur-
ing the role it had lost to Germany in 1986 as the world's top exporter.
The dollar however went far lower than initially expected; it reached a
low point near 121 yen and OM 1.59. The great strength of the yen

390
Robert A. Mundell
and European currencies is attributable more to the fall in the price of
oil in the winter of 1985-6 than to actual changes in monetary policies.
The next phase of the coordinated dollar started with the Louvre
Accords. The first Louvre meeting took place in February 1987, a year
and a half after the Plaza meeting. At that time it was determined that
the dollar had depreciated enough and that the goal of coordinated
dollar policies should be stabilization of exchange rates "around
current levels." Nevertheless the dollar tended lower, raising the
problem, for discussion at the Venice G7 Summit, of where the
responsibility for stabilization policies lies. The use of an index
number had already been suggested. It would work as follows: If, say,
an index of dollar prices of a basket of commodities was rising too
fast, that would indicate that the weak currency should tighten; but if
that basket were falling, that would mean that the strong currencies
should loosen. Debate then centered around the composition of
commodities in the basket. At the IMF meetings in Washington,
Secretary Baker suggested that the basket should include gold . But
with or without gold in the basket, a promising start had been made in
forming a new international monetary system based on the coordi-
nated dollar.
In October, however, the path to reform was blocked by the
stock market crash. Starting on Monday, October 13, 1987, a week
before the big crash, bad news about the trade balance figures sent the
market down. During a week of bad economic news, trouble in the
Persian Gulf, rumors that the Secretary of Commerce wanted a lower
dollar, and finally, at the close of Friday's session, an apparent conflict
between Germany and the US over monetary policies, led to a steep
fall in the Tokyo market on Sunday, and the great crash in New York
on October 19. The Dow Jones Average, had been as low as 750 in
August 1982 but had climated to a high of 2722 on August 25, 1987.
That was to be its high until August 11, 1989. In the meantime the
Dow Jones Average had fallen to 2500 by October; and then the crash
came. It fell to an intra-day low of 1620 on Tuesday, October 20. Of
course the market rebounded to hover between 1900 and 2100 soon
after the crash, but the uncertainty and demoralization it created cast
a pall over the market for over a year. Nevertheless by the summer of
1989 the market was heading for full recovery and new records.

The Global Adjustment System
391
The crash of 1987 crowded out thinking about reform of the
international monetary system and the progress made toward the
judgement index. The dollar had weakened below the Louvre levels
and uncertainty prevailed, with some economists and the Commerce
Department calling for an even lower dollar. But the second Louvre
Accord held in December 1987 confirmed the consensus to maintain
the dollar at current (lower) levels.
The weak dollar ended in 1988 after the election of President
Bush. The dollar now rose strongly against both the yen and the OM.
It would be desirable now to resume discussions about the appro-
priate index to determine where the burden of adjustment of mon-
etary policies lie. In the longer run it would be desirable to prepare
plans for a stable exchange rate system in the future, an international
currency and a world central bank.
2. - The international adjustment mechanism
The study of the adjustment of the balance of payments under the
gold standard or fixed exchange rates has persisted as a source of
contention in economic theory. It is generally agreed that balance-of-
payments surpluses and deficits would be self-correcting under a pure
gold standard, but there is no general agreement on the nature of the
adjustment mechanism. A country would lose gold if it had an excess
supply of money, which would have its necessary counterpart, in an
excess of expenditure over income of goods and securities. The gold
losses, however, would set in motion forces leading to their elimin-
ation. Eventually the excess supply of money would be eliminated and
the gold flow cease. Corresponding adjustments would occur in the
rest of the world so that the burden of adjustment between the
countries would be shared.
2.1 The Transfer Problem
The precise nature of the mechanism by which balances of
payments are equilibrated has been a subject of continued contention.
What came to be called the classical position was inferred from

392
Robert A. Mundell
Hume's pioneering essay, Of the Balance of Trade, in which he seems
to suggest that the adjustment mechanism works through changes in
relative prices between the surplus country and the rest of the world.
This essay, frequently quoted, became the model for the classical
analysis of the adjustment process followed by Mill, Taussig and
Keynes, a view that some economists maintain to this day. But the
rediscovery of demand shifts in the 1920s introduced the "modem"
view that refuted the "classical" contention that changes in relative
prices are required to restore equilibrium (43).
Ohlin's analysis of the transfer problem in the 1920s reintroduced
expenditure effects into the analysis of the transfer problem. It was
immediately apparent that these expenditure effects applied equally to
the adjustment process. The proposition, that the trade balance is
equal to the difference between income and expenditure, known to
Gervaise and Thornton among others, was rediscovered and elabor-
ated in the late 1940s and early 1950s (44). Combined with the idea
that any trade deficit or surplus must be financed and that the
financing itself has expenditure effects that affect the trade balance, it
became clear that price changes were an incidental rather than
essential component of the adjustment mechanism. The possibility of
(43) I have discussed the doctrinal origins of the adjustment mechanism in a
paper, complementary to this one, prepared for presentation at the 1st Mondragone
International Economic Seminar, "International Economic Interdependence and Pat-
terns of Trade Balances," Villa Mondragone, Frascati, Italy, June 19-21, 1989, and
printed with the Conference Proceedings in Rivista di Politica Economia, September
1989. The two papers overlap in several instances.
(44) See SYDNEY S. ALEXANDER: "The Effects of a Devaluation on a Trade Balance",
IMF Staff Papers, April 1952. Alexander argued that the relative price approach was
inadequate and that the income approach was more relevant. Fritz Machlup criticized
Alexander's article on grounds that both relative price and income approaches were
necessary to determine the effects of a devaluation. In the sense that devaluation is itself
the change in relative prices of two or more currencies, relative prices do change; but it
has never been proved that relative commodity prices change following a devaluation.
It is nevertheless true that in the short run, relative labor costs change with devaluation.
The relationship between income, expenditure and the trade balance was by no
means unknown in the 18th, 17th and even 16th century, but it was erased from the
economics of Mill, Taussig and Keynes, until it was revived by Meade, Metzler,
Machlup and Alexander. See Meade's articles on the transfer problem in Economica
(1949) and in His Balance of Payments (1951) , and especially its Mathematical
Appendix. Metzler used the relationship in a Keynesian context in his "The Transfer
Problem Reconsidered", reprinted in the AEA Reading in The Theory of International
Trade (Blakiston, 1949), and his 1951 article, A Multiple-Region Theory of Income
Transfers.

The Global Adjustment System
393
relative price changes was never rejected by the modern school but
the excess of saving over investment or a reduction in the budget
deficit (increase in a budget surplus) could be altered without changes
in relative prices.
The proposition attributed incorrectly (45) to the classical school,
that relative price changes are needed to correct a balance-of-pay-
ments deficit, is easily refuted. Suppose that one country produces
only traded goods and that the prices of these goods are governed by
world prices. Now suppose this small country must make a unilateral
transfer abroad. If it were true that the adjustment mechanism
required changes in relative prices, this poor country could never
make a transfer, or if it did, it could make it only by spending its
reserves. What the so-called classical mechanism neglected were the
demand shifts that would take place as a result of the changes in
purchasing power of the countries involved. These expenditure effects
in the example given would automatically improve the balance of
trade of the paying country, and worsen the balance of trade of the
receiving. This proves that relative price changes are not an essential
mechanism in the balance-of-payments adjustment process (46). In
this case there might be supply shifts in the rest of the world if the
expenditure shifts altered the pattern of world demand (47).
(45) I discuss this point from a different direction in Part II below, and in my
Mondragone paper referred to above. See also the discussion in THOMAS M. HUMPHREY
and ROBERT E. KELEHER: The Monetary Approach to the Balance of Payments,
Exchange Rates and World Inflation, New York, Praeger, 1982. Viner himself recog-
nizes that Ricardo, Wheatley, Bastable and Nicholson as well as Wicksell took account
of direct expenditure effects. See J. VINER, op. cit. p. 304.
(46) After Viner's conversion to the demand shift approach he made important
contributions to it. From his initial position that relative price changes were necessary
he argued (what no one ever denied) that they were possible. Viner was, however, the
first to establish that the terms of trade would not and could not change if one country
were small relative to the rest of the world. He was also the first to emphasize that the
effects of a transfer on the balance of payments (and therefore the flow of gold) under
fixed exchanged rates, or on the exchange rate in the case of flexible exchange rates,
depended critically on income velocities. No author, however, has recognized the
supply-side possibility that the paying country might produce more and the receiving
country less, which would be the normal assumption if leisure is not an inferior good.
See my paper on the Transfer Problem in the book Latin Debt and Adjustment, ed.
Brock and Gonzales-Vega, 1988.
(47) Viner (op. cit. p. 293-318) presents an excellent survey of the transfer theory
literature after Mill, worth summarizing here. Mill's argument that a unilateral transfer
requires a fall in the terms of trade of the paying country, creating a secondary burden,

394
Robert A. Mundell
2.2. Domestic Goods and the Terms of Trade
When domestic (non-traded) goods are taken into account adjust-
was attacked by C.F. Bastable, "On Some Applications of the Theory of International
Trade," Quarterly Journal of Economics, n. 4, 1889, on the grounds that demand shifts
would induce the equilibriating changes in the trade balances; subsequently J.S.
Nicholson in his Principles of Political Economy, 1897, made the same point, acknow-
ledging Bastable's revision of Mill's theory. Taussig, apparently unaware of the
preceding contributions,
in his "International Trade Under Depreciated Paper" ,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, n. 31, 1917, repeated Mill's mistake, arguing that the
transferring country's prices must fall relative to those of the transferee. Taussig's
argument was criticized by Knut WickseU, "International Freight and Prices", Quarter-
ly Journal of Economics, n. 32, 1918, on the grounds that he ignored demand shifts
which made changes in the terms of trade unnecessary. Viner, in his study of Canada's
Balance of International Indebtedness, 1924, pp. 204-6, reviewed the Taussig-WickseU
controversy, recognized the possibility of demand shifts (attributing the ideas to
Wicksell), but made the error of thinking that demand shifts would not be sufficient to
effect the transfer if any of the funds were spent on domestic goods, an error Viner
acnowledged eleven years later in his Studies (p. 396). Ohlin, taking the WickseUian
position, had already written an articlen on "The Reparations Problem," Index, April
1928, so when Keynes published his article in the Economic Journal, 1929, pessimistic
about the possibilities of transfer of Germany's reparations, the Keynes-Ohlin exchange,
reprinted in the AEA Readings (loc. citc.} occurred.
Another question, which resulted in some confusion, was the effect of the transfer
on the distribution of the gold stock (or the balance of payments) and (if exchange rates
are flexible) the exchange rate. Haberler argued (Theory of International Trade, 1936,
pp. 75-76) that if reparations result in shifts of demand that raise the relative price level
of the paying country gold would flow to the paying country. Viner disputed this view
on the grounds that the country that spent more would require more money. In this
analysis Viner (Studies pp. 365-4) makes an important contribution to the monetary
approach to the balance of payments applied to unilateral transfers. Gold will flow from
the paying country to the receiving country if the transfer creates an excess demand for
money in the latter and an excess supply of money in the former, a result which
depends on whether income or expenditure velocity of money is assumed to be
constant. (See supra, f. 46) Generally neglected in the controversy was the fact that the
existence of the transfer itself created additional transactions and therefore a global
increase in the excess demand for gold, creating deflationary pressure in the world as a
whole.
Viner's theory, that gold would flow to the receiving country, was criticized by
D.H. Robertson in his review article of Viner's book in 1937, to which Viner wrote a
rejoinder. The movement of gold depends on how the transfer affects the relative
demand for money in the two countries. Viner assumes that the demand for money
depends on expenditure (what he calls "final purchases") but Robertson argued that it
depends on production or income. A more sophisticated analysis would split the
components of the demand foir money into those held by business, households and
governments. Then it could be shown that under the assumptions of the analysis, where
national income remains constant in the two countries, that business demands for
money in the two countries would not change, whereas household demands would
increase in the receiving countries and decrease in the paying country, confirming, in
this case, Viner's conclusion. Gold would therefore flow to the receiving countries
under the gold standard; and under flexible exchange rates with constant money
supplies in each country, the currency of the paying country would depreciate.

The Global Adjustment System
395
ment to disequilibrium may require a change in relative prices (48). A
consistent model in which a transfer worsens the terms of trade of the
transferring country has been produced by John Chipman in his paper
for the Joan Robinson Memorial. If both countries produce only
exportable goods and domestic goods, then a transfer which increases
the demand for domestic goods in the receiving country, and decrea-
ses the demand for domestic goods in the paying country, will result
in resource shifts out of export goods in the receiving country, and
into export goods in the paying country, resulting in
change in the
terms of trade even in the case of constant costs, and Professor
Chipman believes it vindicates Mill's theory of the secondary burden
from the transfer.
Chipman's example, however, is only a special case that shows
Mill's result is a possibility, not a necessity as Mill thought. Even
under Chipman's assumption, the terms of trade can change in the
opposite direction. If the expenditure shifts result, at constant prices,
in an increased demand for the goods of the paying country, it is
possible that the increased supply in the paying country will be
insufficient to offset the increased demand and the terms of trade of
the paying country will improve; there is, however, a presumption in
the Mill-Chipman direction because with neutral tastes (income ef-
fects on imported goods cancelling) the terms of trade of the paying
country would worsen because of the supply effects. But the possi-
bility of a shift in the terms of trade in that direction has never been
doubted.
When the Mill-Chipman model is generalized to the case of
incomplete specialization, both countries producing both traded
goods as well as domestic goods, the conclusions do not stand up. This
(48) The case of domestic goods was known to all economists who accepted the
"law of one price" in its application to transportable commodities, including David
Hurne, and as Viner notes, Ricardo. Mountifort Longtfield in particular stressed the
harm from absentee landlords to the Ireland, in terms of the loss of employment arising
out of the reduction in the landlords' consumption in Ireland. See WILL MASON: "Some
Neglected Contributions to the Theory of International Transfers", Journal of Political
Economy, December 1955, pp . 529-35 . Taussig (loc. cit.) laid great emphasis on
domestic commodities as did Keynes in the Treatise. The model with domestic goods
forms an important part of the analysis in ROlAND WILSON'S Capital Imports and the
Terms of Trade, 1931. See Viner's Studies, pp. 323-6 for a discussion of the literature
up to 1937.

396
Robert A. Mundell
is because the shift of resources in the paying country may go into the
importing-competing goods industry; and/or the shift of resources in
the receiving country may be from the import-competing goods
industry, both supply effects working against the Mill-Chipman con-
clusion. If only one of the countries, a large country, produces all
goods at constant costs, the transfer obviously cannot alter the terms
of trade. Chipman's interesting special case only illustrates a special
set of conditions under which Mill's conclusion would hold up, one of
many possibilities.
2.3. The Relative Price of Domestic Goods
and International Goods
If there is incomplete specialization in the two countries, the
change in relative prices of domestic and international goods will
depend on the conditions of production. The initial effect of the
increase in demand for domestic goods in the payee, and decrease in
the payer, will be a rise in prices of domestic goods in the former and
a decline in prices of domestic goods in the latter. A shift of resources
will then take place in both countries-to the domestic-goods industries
in the payee and into the international-goods industries in the payer.
Production of domestic goods will increase in the payee and produc-
tion of domestic goods will decrease in the payer. In the new
equilibrium, after supply adjustments have taken place, the change in
the relative prices of domestic and international goods will depend on
three possible supply configurations: a) increasing opportunity costs;
b) constant opportunity costs; and c) decreasing opportunity costs.
In the case of a) the prices of domestic goods relative to interna-
tional goods will, for the duration of the transfer, be higher in the
payee and lower in the payer. In the case of b) the relative prices of
domestic and international goods would be unchanged. And in the
case of c) the relative prices of domestic goods will fall in the payee
and rise in the payer. Thus we arrive at the conclusion that the initial
effect where domestic goods prices rise in the payee and fall in the
payer may be sustained or altered in the final equilibrium depending
upon supply conditions.
More can be said, however, if we specify the production func-

The Global Adjustment System
397
tions that determine the conditions of supply. Suppose there are two
factors of production, labor and capital, two countries, A and B and
three goods, x, y and z. The goods x and y are assumed to be exported
by A and B respectively and the good z is the domestic good produced
and consumed in both countries. We assume constant returns to
scale, the same technology in the two countries, but different factor
endowments.
Under these conditions factor prices will be equalized provided
that factor endowments are not so different that specialization occurs.
Now if country A makes a transfer to country b there will be an
increase in demand for x, yand z in B and a decrease in demand for
the same goods in A, assuming the absence of inferior goods. Let us
assume that tastes in both countries, at the margin, are the same in
order to isolate supply effects. Then it can be shown, perhaps
surprisingly, that the relative prices of the three goods will be
unchanged. Even though country B increases, and country A decrea-
ses its output of the domestic good z. they can be produced at
constant opportunity costs because the mix of export and import
goods can be altered in each country. Factor prices were equalized
before and are equalized after the transfer and are, moreover, un-
changed, because of our assumption that income effects cancel,
placing no alterations on the global demands for resources.
Now let us relax our assumption that the transfer creates no net
change in demand. Provided that there is no specialization before or
after the transfer, so that each country produces, besides domestic
goods, both export and import-competing goods, the effect of the
transfer on the terms of trade and the relative prices of domestic and
international goods can be deduced by determining the change in
relative factor prices, by summing the net change in demand for the
productive factors. Supply of goods implies corresponding demand for
the factors to produce them. Wages will rise or fall relative to rents of
capital according to whether there is an excess demand or supply of
the factor labor at constant commodity and factor prices. The terms of
trade of the country exporting the labor-intensive good will rise or fall
according to whether labor requirements are increased or decreased
as a result of the redistribution of demand arising from the transfer. In
which direction the terms of trade will change depends on the

398
Robert A. Mundell
interplay of the ratios of factor intensities and the propensities to
consume; there is no presumption in one direction or another.
2.4 Banking Systems
The growth of commercial banking created alternative means of
payment that, in theory, would have the effect of accelerating the
process of adjustment. If the ratio of gold behind the money supply
(including bank deposits) were a constant, then every ounce of gold
leaving or arriving would decrease or increase the money supply by a
factor equal to the reciprocal of the reserve ratio. The speed of
adjustment would thereby be correspondingly increased.
The introduction of central banking also affected the speed of
adjustment. In the specie standards of the 17th centuries no country
had a central bank (49), but by the late 19th century most countries
had at least a semi-public institution that performed central banking
functions (50); the US was a major exception. Most central bank
notes, as already noted, were convertible into gold. Central banks'
reserve ratios would vary between countries but were unlikely to be as
high as one. A loss of a penny of gold might force a reduction of two
pennies in bank notes and 10 or 20 pennies in the money supply,
depending on the reserve ratio.
(49) With the possible exceptions of the Bank of St. George of Genoa (founded in
1407); the Banco di Rialto (1587); the Bank of Amsterdam (1609); Bank of Hamburg
(1619); Banco del Giro or Bank of Venice (1619). The Bank of Sweden, founded in
1656, may have been the first (in 1658) to issue bearer notes. European banking,
however, was born in Italy and banking institutions in some of the independent Italian
states performed some central banking functions.
(50) While the Bank of Sweden may have issued the first bank-notes payable to the
bearer on sight in 1658 it did not become the Riks bank until 1688. The Bank of
England was founded in 1694. The Bank of France, founded in 1800 as a private
company, virtually became a state bank on April 14, 1803, when it was given a
monopoly of note issue in Paris, a right extended to all of France during the revolution
of 1848 when gold payments were suspended and its notes became legal tender. The
Imperial Bank of Germany was founded in 1875 when the Bank of Prussia was merged
in the Imperial Bank. The Bank of Naples, said to be the oldest bank of issue in Italy,
was created in 1796 as a result of a fusion of seven pawn banks, founded in the 16th
century as a protest against usury (See European Currency and Finance, p. 351). At the
time of the unification of Italy six banks had the right of note issue; after the
reorganization of the banking system in 1893, only the new Bank of Italy, the Bank of
Naples and the Bank of Sicily had the right of note issue; by 1914 over two thirds of the
note outstanding were issued by the Bank of Italy .

The Global Adjustment System
399
Increasingly in the later nineteenth century the central banks
acted to slow the adjustment mechanism, indicating that reserve
ratios were below optimum. When gold left, the central bank would
often blunt its effect on monetary reserves by making loans, often
increasing banknotes. The central bank exercised discretion over its
banking policy reacting differently to a loss of gold in the inland
market and a gold loss from abroad. The monetary authorities in a
country could alter the speed of adjustment even under an automatic
system by requiring the banks to hold a larger reserve ratio. A larger
reserve ratio would shift some of the burden of adjustment onto the
countries who, squeezed for reserves, had to adjust quickly. The
optimum reserve banking ratio for a country would be determined by
the advantages and disadvantages of alternative speeds of adjustment.
A high reserve ratio gave a country greater financial power.
The declining ratio of gold to GNP was one of the factors that
encouraged increasing centralization of gold in central banks, and
created difficulties for adjustment at a time when monetary contrac-
tion came to mean depression.
The gold standard could probably not have worked smoothly
without a high degree of capital mobility, which enabled a country to
optimize the speed of adjustment and achieve a better pattern of
intertemporal expenditures.
2.5 The Alleged Mercantilist Fallacy
The mercantilists argued in favor of policies that, so they thought,
would generate a balance-of-trade surplus and thus provide for a
regular increase in the quantity of money. They reasoned that a
country with no gold or silver mines would have to import its money
from abroad, which could only be achieved by a balance-of-payments
surplus, which, apart from capital movements, required an excess of
exports over imports.
It is probably not true, as the classical economists later claimed,
that the mercantilists confused wealth with gold, although their
language sometimes gave that impression (51). On the contrary the
(51) Clement Armstrong, in 1530, writes: «The holl welthe of the reame is for all
our riche commodities to gete OWl of all other reamys therefore redy money; and after

400
Robert A. Mundell
economists in the infancy of economic theory, from Mun, Petty,
North, and Locke in the 17th century through Gervaise, Cantillon,
Hume and Steuart, had fairly sophisticated ideas of wealth. It is hard
to find any serious economic writer during the century and a half
before Adam Smith who believed that wealth consisted only of gold.
Indeed the catalogues of wealth in England and elsewhere, from the
Domesday Book to the work of Gregory King, all took account of
physical capital in wealth, and frequently wanted to use that as the
basis of tax-paying capacity. Although they did not confuse wealth
with gold or silver. they did believe that an increase in wealth required
an increase in the quantity of money to finance an expansion of trade
and, in a world where money consisted mainly of gold and silver, that
required an export surplus. The views of many of the mercantilists
were not much different from the views of many economists today.
It is true that there were mercantilists who advocated artificial
policies to increase the quantity of money. This was especially true
during the great depression of the 1620s, associated with the Thirty-
Years' War in Germany. There were arguments for tariffs, import
restrictions and devaluation as means to increase the quantity of
money and to promote activity. Toward the end of the 17th century
there were arguments for devaluation in connection with the Great
the money is brought in to the holl reame, so shall all peple in the reame be made riche
therewith». In uA Treatise Concerning the Staple and the Commodities of this Realme»,
quoted in Palgrave's Dictiona ry, vol. I, p. 86. In this and later centuries mercantilist
policy was devoted to the pursuit of national power. Unlike the classical economists',
the mercantilist arguments were not based on a static economy. Growth and prosperity
both required an increase in the money supply and saw a growth of the money supply
as an indication of prosperity, not the thing itself. To the classical objection that an
increase in the money supply would cause inflation and worsen the balance of
payments, a good mercantilist could have answered: «Not if the influx of money is a
reflection of saving and people want to hold the additional money•. To that the classical
economist would answer: «Gold and silver are barren! It is wasteful to tie up wealth in
the form of money». But our intelligent mercantilist would reply : «No. It represents a
claim on foreign commodities, like a war chest, that will help make our troops
victorious in time of war and our people well-fed in times of famine». And when the
classical economist responds, rather lamely: «The only true source of wealth is
productive capital» the good mercantilist would say: «If money is not itself a form of
productive capital it raises the profits from productive capital by being available to take
advantage of opportunities. We know that we cannot clothe ourselves in silver and eat
our gold, but it is an instrument by means of which our prosperity will be measured.
Gold, it is true , is only a means to other things, but the sensible nation, jealous of its
power and alert to its opportunities, will not fail to keep a national reserve of gold. and
encourage its citizens to hold gold too which our state can then draw upon if need be•.

The Global Adjustment System
401
Recoinage, by Loundes and Newton on the one side, advocating
devaluation, and Locke on the other side rejecting it (52). But the
object of expanding the quantity of money through an export surplus
was Rot incorrect, nor inconsistent with the classical system, in a
growing world economy.
The mercantilists were not in error in wanting an increase in the
quantity of money; this was necessary in a growing economy. Those
advocates of a trade surplus were not greatly different from those
advocates of an improved balance of trade today. The classical
economists would have said that each country will get its natural level
of specie. If they had considered, they would probably have said that a
growing economy will naturally attract a rising quantity of specie. But
mercantilist thinking came into being most exuberantly in the first
part of the 17th century, when rapid monetary expansion associated
with silver production was subsiding and depression had set in. The
depression of the early 1620s, the heyday of mercantilism, was not
unlike in many respects the depression of the 1930s, which brought
about a revival of mercantilism with Keynes. The world monetary
shortage, combined with the war in Germany, put pressure on every
country to resist deflation, and the only way to do so in a single
country was to prevent balance-of-payments deficits. Protectionist
remedies may have been distorting in the long run, but in the short
run they might have mitigated the unemployment.
The classical model rejected the mercantilist notion that tariffs or
other trade restrictions would improve the balance of trade or pay-
ments. They argued that any temporary gold inflow that resulted
would produce counterproductive inflationary effects offsetting the
initial gain. A sophisticated classical economist would have acknow-
ledged that a tariff would raise the domestic price level and thus lower
real wages, but he would have insisted that this was merely tem-
porary; in the long run real wages are determined by subsistence, and
the fall in real wages would have reduced the population until
equilibrium was restored. This measure of course works out only in
the long, long run, whereas the mercantilists were interested in short
(52) Newton changed his mind later and when the question came up again in 1717
he objected to altering the price of silver on the grounds that silver was the "standard ."

402
Robert A. Mundell
run remedies for short run problems. A more alert classical economist
would have said that the tariff increases the price level, but this is a
once-for-all effect that will bring about only a once-for-all increase in
specie. The balance of payments advantage will therefore be very
short-lived. As Hume took pains to argue, the benefit to industry of an
increase in the price level lies only in the transition from one price
level to another. After the new price level has been reached the
economy is no better off than before, and would be saddled with the
misallocative effect of the tariff.
The classical school also rejected the notion that exchange rate
changes would alter the balance of payments, for the same reason.
Devaluation, according to the early classical school, meant a decrease
in the gold content of the currency (an increase in the currency price
of gold), an increase in the number of units into which a given weight
of gold or silver was divided. The price level would rise in proportion
to the devaluation. Whether a pound of silver was divided into ten,
fifty or a hundred parts would not change the price level in terms of a
given weight of metal. If the name of a currency, say a shilling, now
represented a smaller quantity of silver, its value would go down
proportionately, and the price of commodities in that unit would rise
proportionately.
The situation is not fundamentally different for an inconvertible
paper currency. If the number of units of paper were increased the
price level would rise in proportion, as under a metallic currency,
provided that no further issues were expected. In the case of paper
currencies, the classical school would say that depreciation of a
currency can only arise from monetary expansion and the consequent
depreciation of the nominal exchange rate would not alter the real
exchange rate (53). The classical objection to paper currencies,
however, is that the temptation to increase paper currency to finance
government expenditures is so great that the public would expect
further emissions of currency and lose confidence in it, fleeing the
currency for goods; the velocity of circulation would increase and
aggravate the inflationary movement.
(53) «.. .the depreciation of the currency does not affect the foreign trade of a
country: this is carried on precisely as if the currency maintained its value... See JOHN
STUART M ILL, Principles of Political Economy, London, Ashley Edition, 1909, p. 635.

The Global Adjustment System
403
The classical model stressed the equilibrium mechanism in a
static framework but it can be adapted to a growing world economy.
We shall consider this in some detail later, but the basic ideas are
simple enough. If, under the gold standard, growth takes place
unevenly between countries, there will be an increasing demand for
money, financed by savings, that will automatically leave room for an
export surplus and an increase in the quantity of money. If every
country were growing, each country would strive for an export
surplus to finance the concomitant increase in the supply of money.
The question then arises: can each country achieve an excess of
exports over imports at the same time? The answer is that it can if
global monetary reserves are increasing. The excess of exports over
imports in the world as a whole is equal to the increase in monetary
gold reserves (54). If the demand for gold-money is a given proportion
of income, then the required balance-of-payments surplus as a propor-
tion of national income would be the growth rate of income multiplied
by the ratio of gold to the money supply (the reserve ratio) and divided
by the income velocity of money (55).
2.6. More on the Classical Doctrine
The price-specie-flow mechanism of international adjustment
attributed to the classical economists implied adjustment based on
"inflation" in the surplus countries and "deflation" in the deficit
countries. This model, however, was at variance with the real world
of the gold standard. Instead of some countries inflating while others
(54) World exports equal world imports if there are no asymmetries in the
recording of items; net gold exports must equal net commodity (non-gold) imports. But
if (as is the practice) gold exports from gold-producing countries are counted "above the
line" as ordinary commodity exports, while monetary gold changes in other countries
are listed "below the line", an asymmetry is introduced that gives rise to the statement
in the text. It is easier to divide gold into two commodities: commercial gold and
monetary gold. Net monetary gold imports equal net commodity exports including
commercial gold. See PAOL HOST-MADSEN: "Asymmetries Between Balance of Payments
Surpluses and Deficits", International Monetary Fund Staff Paper, n. 9, 1962, pp.
182-99.
(55) Let G = aM, where G represents gold, M the money supply. and A the
gold/money reserve ratio, assumed to be constant. Let income velocity be V = PYI M
where PYdenotes money income. Then the balance of payments ratio to money income
is (dGI dt)) I PY = ani V, where n is the rate of growth of money income .

404
Robert A. Mundell
were deflating most countries experienced inflation and deflation
together. The gold standard was a currency area in which the member
countries experienced the same monetary phenomena.
Recent
studies,
however,
suggest that the price-specie-flow
mechanism did not reflect the mainstream thinking of the classical
economists.
The Cunliffe Committee Report in 1918 contained an explicit and
influential description of the adjustment process that prevailed under
the pre-1914 gold standard according to perceptions of it in the early
decades of the twentieth century. Following a discussion of the
adjustment of the discount rate and capital movements in the face of
seasonal disturbances, the report discusses the core of the adjustment
process for durable disturbances (56): «If the adverse condition of the
exchanges was due not merely to seasonal fluctuations, but to circum-
stances tending to create a permanently adverse trade balance, it is
obvious that the procedure above described would not have been
sufficient. It would have resulted in the creation of a volume of
short-dated indebtedness to foreign countries which would have been
in the end disastrous to our credit and the position of London as the
financial centre of the world. But the raising of the Bank's discount
rate and the steps taken to make it effective in the market necessarily
led to a general rise of interest rates and a redistriction of credit. New
enterprises were therefore postponed and the demand for construc-
tional materials and other capital goods was lessened. The consequent
slackening of employment also diminished the demand for consum-
able goods, while holders of stocks of commodities carried largely
with borrowed money, being confronted with an increase of interest
charges, if not with actual difficulty in renewing loans, and with the
prospect of falling prices, tended to press their goods on a weak
market. The result was a decline in general prices in the home market
which, by checking imports and stimulating exports, corrected the
adverse trade balance which was the primary cause of the difficulty».
This statement was astonishing in that it treated the trade balance
as a datum, perhaps for the first time, and not as a variable. What in
(56) «The Committee on Currency and Foreign Exchanges After the War», First
Interim Report, London, 1918.

The Global Adjustment System
405
heaven's name is a "permanently adverse" trade balance? Trade
balance deficits can exist only so long as they are financed, and when
the financing stops so does the deficit. If Britain had a lower income
because of sales of British investments during the war, there would no
longer be a source of finance for the excess of expenditure over
income that the trade balance implies. Britain's problem was her
reduced income, not her trade balance.
The Cunliffe Report neglects the demand-shift expenditure effects
arising out of altered sources of finance. Atrade balance deficit cannot
exist independently of the method by which it is financed. A trade
balance cannot be adverse without an excess of domestic expenditure
over income and this cannot be maintained without inward income
transfers, international borrowing, or the sale of domestic reserves.
The Cunliffe Report draws on a mistake in the Mill-Taussig
analysis later pursued by Keynes in his transfer controversy with
Ohlin and Rueff in the Economic Journal in 1929. The locus classicus
of the error is a passage in John Stuart Mill's Principles of Political
Economy. After discussing the process of equilibrium of exchange
rates in the absence of transfers, correctly based on changes in relative
prices, Mill proceeds to: « •••••• point out in what manner and degree
the preceding conclusions are affected by the existence of interna-
tional payments not originating in commerce, and for which no
equivalent in either money or commodities is expected or received;
such as a tribute, or remittances of rent to absentee landlords, or of
interest to foreign creditors, or a government expenditure abroad,
such as England incurs in the management of some of her colonial
dependencies.
To begin with the case of barter. The supposed annual remittan-
ces being made in commodities, and being exports for which there is
to be no return, it is no longer requisite that the imports and exports
should pay for one another: on the contrary, there must be an annual
excess of exports over imports, equal to the value of the remittance.
If, before the country became liable to the annual payment, foreign
commerce was in its natural state of equilibrium, it will now be
necessary for the purpose of effecting the remittance, that foreign
countries should be induced to take a greater quantity of exports than
before: which can only be done by offering those exports on cheaper

406
Robert A. Mundell
terms, or, in other words, by paying dearer for foreign commodities.
The international values will so adjust themselves that either by
greater exports, or smaller imports, or both, the requisite excess on
the side of exports will be brought about; and this excess will become
a permanent state. The result is that a country which makes regular
payments to foreign countries, besides losing what it pays, loses also
something more, by the less advantageous terms on which it is forced
to .exchange its productions for foreign commodities.
The same results follow on the supposition of money. Commerce
being supposed to be in a state of equilibrium when the obligatory
remittances begin, the first remittance is necessarily made in money.
This lowers prices in the remitting country, and raises them in the
receiving. The natural effect is that more commodities are exported
than before, and fewer imported, and that, on the score of commerce
alone, a balance of money will be constantly due from the receiving to
the paying country. When the debt thus annually due to the tributary
country becomes equal to the annual tribute or other regular payment
due from it, no further transmission of money takes place; the
equilibriwn of exports and imports will no longer exist, but that of
payments will; the exchange will be at par, the two debts will be set
off against one another, and the tribute or remittance will be virtually
paid in goods. The result to the interest of the two countries will be as
already pointed out: the paying country will give a higher price for all
that it buys from the receiving country, while the latter, besides
receiving the tribute, obtains the exportable produce of the tributary
country at a lower price».
Mill's doctrine that a unilateral transfer required a deterioration
in the terms of trade was distinctly unclassical, having its earlier roots
in Thornton and Malthus, and, by one interpretation, Hume.
It is remarkable that the later classical economists, Mill, Marshall,
Taussig and Keynes (in his classical phase) neglected the direct effects
of expenditure changes on the trade balance, whereas some of the
earlier economists understood it. Taussig was guilty of perpetuating
the error and influencing a whole generation of economists. His
argument proceeds as follows, after an: « •••..• increase in remittan-
ces from London to New York
specie will flow from London to
New York. Then will follow that train of consequences familiar to the

The Global Adjustment System
407
reader of Ricardo and Mill. Prices will fall in Great Britain and will rise
in the United States. With the fall of English prices the export of
commodities from England will be stimulated, and more of them will
go to the United States. With the rise of American prices exports from
he United States will be discouraged, and imports correspondingly
stimulated».
He then goes on to say that the improvement of the British
balance of trade will equal the new remittances.
Taussig erred in attributing to Ricardo «that chain of conse-
quences familiar to the reader of Ricardo and Mill». Taussig's pupil,
Viner, recognized that Ricardo does not fit in that group. But if we
leave out Ricardo, we are left only with Mill of the real classical
economists.
More important, however, is that Taussig, like others with the
same views, ignores Walras' Law; his is a single-entry bookkeeping
view of the economy (unless one attributes to him an implicit
assumption that all income effects are zero). Nowhere is there an
account of the factors that financed the remittances in the first place
nor of the expenditure effects the shifts in purchasing power produce.
Every gold inflow has a counterpart inside the economy in the
form of a corresponding excess supply. A balance-of-trade surplus
combined with a gold inflow does not constitute disequilibrium if the
demand for money is growing because of, say, growth in the
economy. It was the omission of the counterpart to the transfers that
led to a tortuous theory of adjustment under fixed exchange rates. It
was a theoretical error that led Keynes and others to believe that
adjustment required changes in price levels and would therefore be
achieved better by changes in exchange rates.
Viner is not unaware of the uncomfortable position of this school:
«From Hume on, there was general agreement that some or all types
of disturbances in international balances would result in changes in
the terms of trade, and that these changes would contribute to a
restoration of equilibrium. As has been shown, Hume held that a
relative change in the quantity of money in one country as compared
to other countries would result in a rise in the prices of its products
relative to the prices of foreign products, until, as a result of the
influence of this relative change in prices on the course of trade and

408
Robert A. Mundell
the flow of specie, the "level of money" had again been equalized
internationally. This was almost universally accepted doctrine during
the next century. Thornton and Malthus claimed, with Wheatley and
Ricardo dissenting, that a similar change in relative prices would
occur and would operate to restore equilibrium in the balance of
payments when it had been disturbed by a crop failure or the
remittance of a subsidy, and this also came to receive the erroneous
designation of the "Ricardian theory"».
Mill's view, which Viner also attributes to Hume, was not
representative of the classical economists. First, there is room for an
interpretation of Hume that suggests he was not guilty of the error
made by Mill. Hume believed in the law of one price, notwithstanding
his famous "miracles" -
really controlled experiments -
whereby
four-fifths of the money of Great Britain are annihilated or multiplied
overnight.
Second, several important writers before Mill, including John
Leslie Foster John Wheatley, David Ricrdo, Mountifort Longfield,
Thomas Joplin, Robert Torrens and Peter (Lord) King (57) took into
account direct shifts of demand without changes in relative prices.
Viner himself has noted besides several of the above, Cairnes, Bastable
and Nicholson. What was called in Viner's day the "modem view"
which incorporated demand shifts, seems to have been held by most
of the classical economists with the exception of John Stuart Mill.
Third, Viner's claim that the "classical view" was still the "pre-
dominant" view was just in the process of crumbling when Viner was
writing, as a result of the developments by Ohlin, Wilson, Pigou,
(57) See JOHN LEsUE FOSTER: An Essay on the Principle of Commercial Exchanges
and More Particularly of Exchange Between Great Britain and Ireland, London,
Hatchard, 1804, p. 24; JOHN WHEATELY: An Essay on the Theory of Money, vol. I, 1807,
esp. p. 238; DAVID RICARDO: High Price of Bullion, appendix; MOUNTIFORT loNGFIELD:
Three Lectures on Commerce and One on Absenteeism, Dublin , Milliken, 1835, pp.
76-9; Loan KING, Thoughts on the Effects of the Bank Restrictions (2nd edition),
London, Cadell & Davies, 1804; THOMAS JOPUN, Currency Reform: Improvement and
Depreciation, 1844, pp. 14-15; Colonel ROBERT TORRENS: The Budget, London, Smith,
Elder, 1844, p. 144. Will Mason discusses also in the same connection the contributions
of William Joseph Stourton (1776-1846), Thomas Chalmers (1780-1847); Mason's
survey builds on Viner , lac. cit., pp . 293-311, but reaches a different conclusion with
respect to the classical view: «Consideration of the neglected contributions to interna-
tional transfer theory thus reveals that nineteenth century thought was more modem
than modern critics have realized". (loc. cit., p. 535).

The Global Adjustment System
409
Robertson and Viner himself. Subsequent literature includes the work
of Haberler, Meade, Samuelson, Johnson, myself and others (58).
Fourth, empirical studies have tended to refute the notion that
under a fixed rate system like the gold standard prices in countries
moved in opposite direction. On the contrary, the economies that
adhered to the gold standard tended to experience inflation and
deflation simultaneously according to the state of the international
business cycle or the trends in world gold production. The studies
carried out by students of Taussig, including Viner, indicated that
even when price changes did occur in the direction suggested -
against the transferring country -
the extent of the price changes
were much too small to account for the very rapid adjustment of the
trade balance to capital imports or unilateral transfers.
(58) Professor Samuelson reviewed the issues and developed a criterion based on
the slopes of the Engels ' curves (ratios of marginal propensities to consume and import)
that was valid (for determining changes in the terms of trade) even when domestic
goods are taken into account; it is valid for the case of fixed production. See P. A.
SAMUELSON: "The Transfer Problem and Transport Costs: I. The Terms of Trade When
Impediments are Absent", Economic Journal, n. 57, June 1952, pp. 278-304; "The
Terms of Trade and Transport Costs: II. Analysis of the Effects of Trade Impediments",
Economic Journal, n. 59, June 1954, pp . 264-90. In "The Transfer Problem: A Note on
Criteria for Changes in the Terms of Trade", Econom ica, May 1955, pp. 113-21; HARRY
JOHNSON generalized and simplified somewhat Samuelson's treatment of transport
costs; and in "The Transfer Problem and Exchange Stability," Journal of Political
Economy, n. 64, June 1956, pp. 212-25 he attempted (unsuccessfully in my opinion) to
equate the "transfer problem", defined to exclude the budgetary problem, to the
problem of exchange stability. In my "Transport Costs in International Trade Theory,"
Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science, n. 23, August 1957, pp. 331-48 I
introduced the geometry of transport costs into the literature of international trade
theory (by modifying the offer curves) and applied that technique to the transfer
problem; in "International Trade and Factor Mobility," American Econom ic Review, n.
47, June 1957, pp . 321-35, I analyzed the relation between factor mobility and
commodity mobility in a factor proportions model and showed how capital movements
affect the relation between income and expenditure (and the trade balance and the
current account) through the transfer of the marginal product of the capital imported
abroad in the form of interest payments; in The Pure Theory of International Trade,
(loc. cit.), I analyzed the transfer problem as one of a series of disturbances to
equilibrium to derive the Meade criterion and to demonstrate the effects of a transfer on
real income, taking into account any secondary burden (or benefit!), showing that the
transferring country's income must always worsen if the exchange market were stable,
an implication that Samuelson had already deduced from his discussion of the Leontief
model in the Taussig Festschrift. Subsequent to my analysis, part of which I generalized
to the multiple-country multiple-commodity case , Jagdish Bhagwati and Graciela
Chichilinsky have argued that the paying country might gain by a transfer if a third
country were made sufficiently worse off by it. a possibilitv consistent with stability.

410
Robert A. Mundell
2.7 The Ohlin-Mead Criterion
The literature reached a high point, for the case of the two-coun-
try two-commodity non-monetary model, with the contributions of
J.E. Meade (59). His formula for the criterion for changes in the terms
of trade generalizes the preceding literature:
where: P is the terms of trade of country B; Tab is a transfer from A to
B; rna and mi, are the marginal import propensities in A and B; n« and
nb are the elasticities of demand for imports in A and B as a function
of the terms of trade; I is the initial level of imports and exports,
assumed to be in balance.
Meade's criterion for the first time expicitly generalized the
two-country, two-commodity model to take into account both de-
mand and supply. The Ohlin-type expenditure effects are involved in
the numerator, and show that the transfer creates an excess supply,
equilibrium or an excess demand for the goods of the transferor
depending on whether the sum of the marginal propensities to import
is less than, equal to or greater than unity. But because supply effects
have not been considered this does not yet determine the change in
the terms of trade. The elasticities of demand for imports incorporate
both supply and demand effects (60). The elasticities of demand for
imports are weighted averages of the elasticities of demand and
supply (within A or B) of the imported commodity. Thus in the case of
constant costs where one country is completely specialized there will
be no change in the terms of trade even if the expenditure shifts would
otherwise suggest one.
(59) See JAMES E. MEADE: The Balance of Payments, London, 1952 and especially
its Mathematical Supplement. See also Meade's discussion of the transfer problem in A
Geometry of International Trade, London, 1951.
(60) Meade's elasticities are derived from his "trade-indifference curves" which
incorporate movements along consumption indifference and production transformation
curves. For example, the elasticity of demand for imports in any country can be
expressed as a weighted sum of elasticities of demand and supply for the product, the
weights being the quantity consumed and the quantity produced respectively. For a
further discussion see my "The Pure Theory of International Trade", American
Economic Review, n.
47,
March
1960, pp. 67-110,
reprinted in
International
Economics (loc. cit.).

The Global Adjustment System
411
The
importance of the Ohlin-Meade contributions were to
demonstrate that relative price changes were not an inherent part of
the adjustment process, as Mill, Marshall,
Taussig and
Keynes
believed. The work of these four economists has been characterized as
the classical approach to the transfer problem. But a more detailed
examination of the doctrines of the earlier economists, including,
Gervaise, Cantillon, Hume, Ricardo, Wheatly, Foster, Longfield, Bas-
table and Nicholson shows that the true classical position was much
closer to the Ohlin-Meade view than to the view of the Mill-Taussig
school.
3. - What the Classical Adjustment Mechanism Really Was
The basic features of the mechanism of adjustment of the small
open economy, as conceived by the mainstream eighteenth and early
nineteent century economists, was based on three propositions: 1) the
money supply increases when there is a balance-of-payments surplus
and decreases when there is a balance-of-payments deficit; 2) money
expenditure increases or decreases when the money supply increases
or decreases; and 3) increases or decreases in expenditure respectively
worsen and improve the balance of payments. These economists
believed in the quantity theory of money applied to the world
economy, a closed economy, but did not apply it to an open economy
with a convertible currency; they believed that the existing quantity of
money would be distributed around the world in proportion to its
demand, which, they assumed, was based on income and population.
The main issue that came to divide economists in the next century or
so was the question of whether changes in relative prices were a sine
qua non of the adjustment mechanism or merely incidental factors.
3.1 The Monetary Approach
To understand the basic issues it will be convenient to develop a
classical model in which we shall abstract from all unemployment
affects. The analysis starts with the Quantity Theory of Money applied
to the world economy. Let M denote the world money supply and P

412
Robert A. Mundell
the price level expressed in a given currency, say a particular gold
coin. Now the demand for money in a particular country,
i, is
assumed to be a proportional function of national output in i, Yi, and
the price level in i, Pi. Thus:
(1)
4= KiPiYi
i= 1, 2,
n
represents the demand for money in one of the n countries. We have
the law of one price, however, that states that all prices levels are the
same so that:
(2)
(3)
PI=P2=
= PI1= P.
Then we can write the world demand for money as follows:
which must in equilibrium be equal to the stock of money. The supply
of money in the world as a whole is determined exogenously (by
conditions of gold and silver production):
(4)
M=M(t).
Now we equate (3) and (4) to get the conditions for monetary
equilibrium:
(5)
M(t)=I.KiYiP
and solve for the world price level in equilibrium:
(6)
Once the world price level is determined the equilibrium quantity of
money in a particular country can be found by solving the equation:
(7)

The Global Adjustment System
413
The
Petty-North-Locke-Gervaise-Cantillon-Hume-Smith
theory
that is usually referred to as "Ricardo's theorem on the distribution of
the precious metals" is implicit in equation (7), in combination with
the equations for the world demand and supply of money. Money is
distributed around the world in proportion to demand, which depends
on income and population. In the above we have used national
income PYj instead of per capita income and population.
The propositions are illustrated in Graph 1. The price level is
plotted on the abscissa and the money supply on the ordinate. The
given stock of money in the world as a whole is fixed (at the moment)
at Mo. The demand for money in country 1 is indicated by the line LL
that of two countries by L 1 + ~, and so on, with L = l:.Lj the demand
GRAPH 1
THE INTERNATIONAL DISTRIBUTION OF MONEY
M
M = r.M! ~--------------..-".--------
M
o
Po
P

414
Robert A. Mundell
for money in the world as a whole. The intersection of the money line
MaMo with the Lline determines the equilibrium price level indicated
by Po. The equilibrium stock of money in country 1 is PaR, in country
2 is RS, in country 3 is ST, and so on.
It is clear from the diagram that a sudden increase in the stock of
money occasioned by gold discoveries or new mining techniques
would shift the MoMo schedule upward, raise world prices and
increase the demand for money in each country, resulting in a new
distribution of the stock of gold (or silver) around the world in
proportion to the increased demands.
Many economists from the 16th to the 18th century had a good
understanding of this much of the mechanism and used it to explain
the effects of the influx of silver into Europe following the discovery of
the first of the three great silver mountains in what was then Peru. It
is probable that such early economists as Thomas Mun, Dudley North
and certainly, and most explicitly, John Locke had completed this lap
of the journey to a complete account of the adjustment mechanism.
It should be said, however, that the above equations do not
present an explicit account of the dynamic process of adjustment to
equilibrium. Many of the early economists were content with the final
solution, the reduced form, of the analysis, without explicit analysis of
the process of adjustment to the equilibrium itself. The complete
description of the mechanism was reserved to Gervaise, Cantillon and
Hume in the eighteenth century. It is to the dynamics of the mechan-
ism that we now turn.
3.2 Burne's Theory
In Graph 2 money income and expenditure are plotted on the
abscissa and money on the ordinate. The money equilibrium line is
LM which assumes that the demand for money is a linear function of
money income. Given the world price level and domestic output there
is only one level of money income at which prices will be constant;
this is at the income Yo' The two lines YoYo and LM intersect at the
point Q which is the equilibrium. Our interest is in how the system
arrives at Q when it is not in equilibrium.

M
The Global Adjustment System
HUME'S EXPERIMENT
415
GRAPH 2
LM
Yo
E,PO
Consider a disturbance such as that postulated by Hume: «Sup-
pose four-fifths of all the money in Great Britain to be annihilated in
one night, and the nation reduced to the same condition, with regard
to specie, as in the reigns of the Harrys and Edwards, what would be
the consequence? Must not the price of all labour and commodities
sink in proportion, and everything be sold as cheap as they were in
those ages? What nation could then dispute with us :in any foreign
market, or pretend to navigate or to sell manufactures at the same
price, which to us would afford sufficient profit? In how little time,
therefore, must this bring back the money which we have lost, and

416
Robert A. Mundell
raise us to the level of all the neighbouring nations? Where, after we
have arrived, we immediately lose the advantage of the cheapness of
labour and commodities; and the farther flowing in of money is
stopped by our fullness and repletion».
Hume's experiment seems to suggest that the price level would
initially fall in proportion to the money supply; but that this would
immediately improve the balance of payments and eventually restore
the equilibrium quantity of money. In Graph 2 it would seem that a
fall in the money supply to one-fifth of the equilibrium money supply
would, assuming a given output, lower money income to the level
indicated by the point G, after which it would shoot up along LM to
the point Q as indicated by the arrow.
The difficulty with this interpretation of Hume is that he explicitly
argued that just as prices in different provinces of the same country
must be equal, except for transport costs, so prices of transportable
commodities in different countries cannot diverge much from one
another. Hume is consistent throughout his writings in adhering to
the law of one price applied not just to commodities and money but
also to labor. How then can be seem to suggest that the price level
would drop in proportion when four-fifths of the quantity of money in
the kingdom had been annihilated?
At least part of the solution to the puzzle has been advanced by
Thomas Humphrey and Robert Keleher in their analysis of the
propositions and doctrinal origins of the monetary approach to the
balance of payments. They note (61) that Hume received a letter from
his friend, the economist James Oswald, who had read an early
manuscript of Hume's essay. The letter was dated 10 October 1749,
over two years prior to publication. While Oswald conceded in the
letter the applicability of the quantity theory of money for a closed
economy, he did not think that Hume was justified in applying this
proposition mechanically in the case of an internationally trading
society: «The increased quantity of money would not necessarily
increase the price of all labour and commodities; because the in-
creased quantity,
not being confined to
the home labour and
commodities, might, and certainly would, be sent to purchase both
(61) See HUMPHREY and KELEHER: (op. cit.), pp. 131-7.

The Global Adjustment System
417
from foreign countries, which importation, unless obstructed by
arbitrary and absurd laws, would keep down the price of commodities
to the level of foreign countries».
Hume replied to Oswald one month later, willingly conceded the
point and agreed to change the draft before publication.
Humphrey and Keleher argue that Hume intends his miraculous
changes in the-money supply to be pedagogical supposition in order to
prove that significant price reductions cannot take place (62). For in
the very next paragraph following these monetary miracles Hume
writes: «Now it is evident, that the same causes, which would correct
these exorbitant inequalities, were they to happen miraculously, must
prevent their happening in the common course of nature, and must
forever, in all neighbouring nations, preserve money nearly propor-
tional to the art and industry of each nation. All water, wherever it
communicates, remains always at a level. Ask naturalists the reason;
they tell you that, were it to be raised in anyone place, the superior
gravity of that part not being balanced, must depress it, till it meet a
counterpoise; and that the same cause, which redresses the inequality
when it happens, must for ever prevent it, without some violent
external operation».
The Humphrey-Keleher interpretation of Hume is convincing. It
means that Hume was not the originator of the "price-specie-flow"
mechanism. But it leaves open the question of how adjustment,
following Hume's hypothetical experiment, does in fact take place. In
one place Humphrey and Keleher seem to suggest that the miracle
could not take place; in another that adjustment takes place through
the real balance effect on expenditure. Hume leaves us in the dark
about the exact mechanism and resorts to allegorical reasoning
which, while apt, does not help to elucidate the differential equations
that describe the process of adjustment.
3.3 Two Concepts of Relative Prices
There are two distinct concepts of relative price changes that
need to be carefully separated. One idea of the combined mechanism
(62) See HUMPHREY and KELEHER, ibidem , p. 135.

418
Robert A. Mundell
is based on two dynamic processes: 1) a fall in the money supply
lowers all prices slightly below the prices abroad; and 2) this produces
arbitrage that results in an export surplus and an increase in the
money supply. The differential equations reflecting these processes
can be written as follows:
(8)
(9)
dP/dt= A(M- kPO)
dM/dt= B(Po - P)
where Po is the world, and P the domestic price level); A is a constant
speed of adjustment and B is the balance of trade function. This
dynamic process is plotted in Graph 3. The direction of change in the
variables from typical points, A, B, C, and D in the four quadrants are
indicated by the arrows. On these postulates, it is readily shown that
the path to equilibrium, from Hume's disequilibrium, H, is stable. But
the approach to equilibrium may be cyclical (63). The more rapidly
arbitrage takes advantages of price differentials the more quickly the
balance of payments responds to changes in relative price levels, and
the more likely the price level and money supply will overshoot
equilibrium and oscillate around it in convergent cycles.
(63) The approach to equilibrium can be found by solving a linearized version of
the system to get its characteristic equation
m2) +) AKOm) +) AB) =0
where B shows the (assumed positive) effect of a reduction in the price level on the
balance of payments. Convergence to equilibrium requires that the real parts of m in
the solutions are negative; this is assured, for a quadratic. by the positive coefficients of
m in the characteristic equation. The roots will be complex. and the path to equilibrium
cyclical, if and only if the discriminant of the solutions is negative. i.e.• only if
A) (KO)2) <) 4B ,
which will be the case if the trade balance responds quickly to price differentials, if the
fraction of income held in the form of money is low, and if prices move sluggishly in
response to an excess supply of money.
Why worry about overshooting and cyclicity? Disequilibrium positions are subop-
timal and prolongation of disequilibrium is not efficient. More important, perhaps. that
when one or more additional variables are taken into account, the extra variable has the
effect of shocks that can tip the cyclically stable system into an unstable one.

The Global Adjustment System
419.
It is important to notice that the adjustment of prices here do not
imply changes in the terms of trade or any other changes in relative
prices of different goods; the price differentials refer to the same
commodities at home and abroad, creating the opportunity for arbi-
trage profits. The adjustment mechanism described above works
through short-term discrepancies from the law of one price.
The second concept of price adjustment involves changes in the
relative price of one country's export goods in terms of the other, i.e.,
changes in the terms of trade. This is entirely consistent with an
instantaneous version of the law of one price. It is this second version
price-adjustment that was taken up by Mill, Marshall, Taussig and
Keynes.
Which process did Hume have in mind?
GRAPH 3
ALTERNATIVE DYNAMIC POSTULATES
M
cr
LM
D
~
E.PO

420
Robert A. Mundell
Viner attributes to Hume a terms of trade concept which plays a
determining role in the adjustment process (64). Humphrey and
Keleher, however, believe Hume understands the mechanism by
which money inflows lead to an increase in expenditure via the real
balance effect, quoting Hume's remark that (65): «It is impossible to
heap up money, more than any fluid, beyond its proper level».
However, Hume's failure to make the mechanism explicit (e.g.,
in contrast to Gervaise) suggests that he was not completely clear
himself about what the mechanism was. It is difficult to escape the
view that he wandered between two stools, wanting prices to stay the
same all over the world, but nevertheless wanting price differences-
of some unspecified kind -
to assist in the adjustment mechanism; his
intuition seems to have grasped the point, but not his logic.
It is nevertheless useful to put modem words into Hume's mouth
in order to clarify the mechanism that operates when the law of one
price prevails and when the terms of trade do not change. The law of
one price holds the price level at PoO; The question now is, how
should Hume have discussed adjustment without allowing changes in
the terms of trade or contravening the law of one price?
First we start with the basic equation for national income:
(10)
Y=E+B,
and then define income as follows:
(11)
Y=PO
where 0 is output. Now we consider a general expenditure function:
E=E(Y, M)
(64) See VINER: loc. cit., p. 292 and pp. 319-20. Viner states that «This was almost
universally accepted doctrine during the next century». The facts were otherwise.
(65) See HUMPHREY and KELEHER: loc. cit., p. 136.

The Global Adjustment System
421
It will convenient to use an explicit form of this function (66) of
the type
(13)
E= Y+a(M-kY)
in order to express the idea that in this simple economy expenditure is
higher or lower than income depending on whether there is an excess
supply of demand for money. The balance of payments equation is
(14)
B=dM/dt
These equations suffice to determine both the equilibrium and the
approach to it. The LM line in Graph 4 equates both the demand for
money with the supply of money, and expenditure with income.
Above LM there is an excess supply of money, an excess of expen-
diture over income and a balance-of-payments deficit, so the money
supply is contracting. Similarly below LM there is a surplus in the
balance of payments and the money supply is expanding. After
Hume's miraculous annihilation of the money supply, we move from
the point H to the point G. But what has adjusted here is not the price
level; that is constant. It is expenditure that has adjusted to the
reduction of wealth and liquidity. Perfect arbitrage will keep price
levels the same in the two countries, but the balance of payments will
(66) An expenditure function of this fonn was used in an important article by S.J.
PRAIs: "Some Mathematical Notes on the Quantity Theory of Money in an Open
Economy", International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, vol. I, 8, n. 2, May 1961. It
reduces to:
E a (l -
ak) Y + aM
a special case of a consumption function with a real balance effect. More compatible
with Keynesian multiplier theory is the following:
E ... A +·cY+ a(M - kY) a
- A + (c -
a.K) Y + aM
which, however, differs in fonn only by the intercept for autonomous spending. A
choice between the hypotheses could be made by determining whether the intercept is
significantly different from zero .

422
Robert A. Mundell
improve because expenditure quantities fall below income. The rate of
increase in the money supply will be proportionate to the gap between
expenditure and income. The path of adjustment will be LM on along
GO in the direction of the arrow. The path of adjustment will
therefore obey the equation
(15)
M
o
dMldt= a(kY- M)
HUME'S DYNAMICS
w
GRAPH 4
LM
E,PO
3.4 Modification for Credit
The above equations system is only preliminary to an analysis of
Hume's theory. Hume was the first to discover that an increase in
credit money, under a convertible currency system, would not cause
inflation. Instead, it would drive out specie, leaving the total money
supply, including both credit money and gold. unchanged. It is easy to

The Global Adjustment System
423
see that Hume's proposition is an application of Gresham's Law, with
bad money, credit, driving out good money, gold. Smith accepted
Hume's analysis and supplemented it by showing that the same
proposition holds for the case of paper money. Several years later
Thornton argued that the resulting export of gold would cause
inflation in the rest of the world and, by the law of one price, raise
prices at home.
The above equations do not make a distinction between credit or
paper money and gold and thus need to be modified to take into
account the Hume-Smith-Thornton refinements to the basic model.
Assume therefore that there are two kinds of money: gold and paper
currency, the latter being negotiable only in the home market. Then
the total money supply is equal to:
(16)
M=R+D
where R represents reserves (gold) and D the domestic currency
(whether in the form of banknotes or legal tender). Now the balance
of payments equation is:
(17)
dR/dt=B
which replaces equation (14) above. In Graph 5 the total money
supply is WQ. Let us suppose it is initially entirely in gold. Then an
increase in bank credit or paper money that was a substitute for gold
in domestic transactions equal to QV would cause an accumulated
balance-of-payments deficit of like amount. The only requirement
would be that confidence in the convertibility of the paper money or
bank credit into gold be maintained.
This would set limits on the extent of the substitution possible
without endangering confidence.
Thornton argued correctly that this substitution of credit for gold
in the domestic money supply would cause inflation abroad (67). The
(67) HENRY THORNTON (1760-1815) wrote An Enquiry into the Nature and Effects
of the Paper Credit of Great Britain in 1802, Fairfield, Augustus M. Kelley, 1978.
Thornton adopted a distinctly short-run model of the monetary process that took
account of the effects of the interest rate on expenditure and international capital
movements. He understood the inter-regional banking mechanism and applied it to the
theory of international adjustment under convertible currencies.

424
Robert A. Mundell
GRAPH 5
REPLACEMENT OF SPECIES WITH CREDIT OR PAPER MONEY
M
-----------
w
E.!'O
extent of its importance would depend on the relative size of the
domestic country and the rest of the world. Obviously if a country
represented only, say, 1% of the world economy (more exactly if it
held 1% of the world's gold stock), even a 50% substitution of paper
money for gold would cause at most a 0.5% inflation in the world as a
whole and therefore also at home. The ratio of the increase in the
credit to the inflation it caused would be 100 to 1. But if the domestic
country were, say, 50% of the world economy the same proportionate
paper money expansion would result in a price increase of 25% in the
world and at home. The Thornton factor cannot be ignored.
Thornton's amendment to Hume's analysis has wide applicability
in international monetary history. When one country economizes on
gold it creates inflation abroad; when it hoards gold it causes defla-
tion. The great appreciation of gold (deflation) from 1873 to 1986 was

The Global Adjustment System
425
induced partly, as we have seen, by the entry into the gold standard of
France, Germany, the Scandinavian countries and the US. A more
striking episode occurred after 1914 when the European countries
abandoned gold after the outbreak of World War I and the United
States suffered from imported inflation. Again, when the rest of the
world went back to the gold standard after 1924, the increased
demand for gold, and especially the gold hoarding of France, set the
stage for the great deflation and depression. When Europe in the
1950s and early 1960s converted dollar balances into gold, it ensured
the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system. When in the late 1970s
Europe dumped dollars in an attempt at "diversification", the dollar
depreciated excessively, and the reversal of that movement in the
early 1980s created an overvalued dollar. Then again, after the dollar
peaked in February 1985, and fell, speculative shifts out of the dollar
caused its over-depreciation only to be somewhat reversed. Thorn-
ton's refinement of Hume's idea, we can see, has many offspring.
Consider Graph 6 which reproduces the essentials of the world
diagram in Graph 1. The gold price level is plotted on the abscissa and
the stock of gold on the ordinate. Let us suppose that a country
replaces half of its gold with paper money. Then the slope of the L 1
schedule, defining country I's demand for gold, is cut in half, to
intersect the line AQ at S. The fall in the demand for gold in country I
of course lowers the world demand for gold by an equivalent amount,
RS = QT. The world price level rises from OA to OB, a proportionate
increase of AB/OA. The higher world price level raises the world
demand for gold until again supply is equal to demand. It is easily seen
that the increase in the world price level depends on the share of
country I in the world's gold supply and the degree to which gold is
substituted. In the diagram the increase in the world price level is
AB/OA = QR!NQwhich is approximately equal to QT/AQ = RS/AQ
=
(AS/AQ) (AS/AR) = ZW, where Z = (AR!AQ) is the initial share of
gold in country I in the world as a whole, and W is the proportionate
displacement of gold in country I.
The home country's equilibrium gold stock will now be slightly
higher than it was before taking into account inflation in the world as
a whole. Half the gold initially leaves the country, at constant world
prices, as a result of an increase in credit or paper money equal to 50%

426
Robert A. Mundell
GRAPH 6
EFFEcrs ON WORLD PRICE LEVEL OF CREDIT EXPANSION
o
A
B
p
of the money stock, but the actual increase in world prices will raise
the demand for gold and thus lead to a reduction in spending to
finance an increase (or a lesser loss) in the country's gold stock. The
increase in gold VB will be greater than SA, and VB will be more than
half of SA.
3.5 Growth Analysis in the Classical Equilibrium
The classical economists did not develop a theory of growth, and
.they did not therefore have a theory of the relationship between
growth and the balance of payments. Indeed, in Viner's Studies, the

The Global Adjustment System
427
word growth hardly appears! (68). Nevertheless it is apparent what
that growth analysis would have been had, say, Ricardo tackled it, on
the assumption of fixed exchange rates and convertible currencies.
Arguing from the theorem of the equilibrium distribution of specie,
which depends on population and income, it is natural to suppose that
when population and incomes in various countries change the equi-
libium distribution changes. Thus if, in a static world, one country
starts to grow it will attract gold and induce deflation (or less inflation)
in the world as a whole. The "surplus" country of course will be the
growing country, but both will share equally in the deflationary
conditions in the world as a whole.
In order to introduce growth considerations explicitly into our
analysis it is necessary to introduce stocks of capital and money and
rates of interest and growth. In the right-hand part of Graph 7 the
capital stock per capita is plotted on the abscissa and the rate of
interest on the ordinate. The K-schedule delineates the declining
marginal product of capital as the capital stock per capita increases.
The international interest rate, assumed to be constant, is equal to
GG, so that the equilibrium capital stock in the country is GD. The
S-schedule describes the supply of capital; it rises with the rate of
interest (69). At the international interest rate the supply of domestic
(68) There is no entry for growth in the subject index of Viner's Studies. The
closest reference to growth is in the footnote on p. 312: «This definition, of course,
would fit only a static world in which the world stock of monetary gold was subject
neither to accretion from mines nor to depletion by wear and tear or industrial use, or
else a world in which each country produces the gold it needs for industrial consump-
tion or to replace monetary wear and tear» .
The following section expands on some of the analysis presented in my article
"Bart er Theory and the Monetary Mechanism of Adjustment" presented at the World
Bank Conference on Capital Movements and Economic Development in 1965, and
published in Capital Movements and Economic Development (ed. J. H. Adler), London,
MacMillan, 1967; a revised version was published in my International Economics, New
York, MacMillan, 1968, Ch. 8; see also "Growth and the Balance of Payments,"
distributed at the 1966 Chicago Conference on International Monetary Problems and
published as Chapter 9 of International Economics. See also related work in my
Monetary Theory: Interest, Inflation and Growth in the World Economy, London,
Goodyear, 1971.
The common charge that the classical theory of comparative advantage was static
has its counterpart in the classical theory of the balance of payments adjustment
mechanism.
(69) This assumes that there is some substitutability between private (household)
and commercial capital, and that the greater the return to commercial capital the more
incentive there is to shift capital from private to commercial use.

428
Robert A. Mundell
EQUIUBRIUM OF STOCKS
r
N
GRAPH 7
M
A
H
o
B
c
K
K
capital is GE. The difference between the equilibrium capital stock
and the domestic supply of capital is made up by foreign capital,
which represents the net indebtedness of the country.
Monetary equilibrium is depicted in the left part of Graph 7. The
liquidity-preference schedule and the money-equilibrium curve is the
line LM, which is assumed to be a function of the rate of interest. It is
assumed here that the ratio of reserve money (gold or foreign
exchange reserves) to the total money stock is indicated by the
R-curve, a constant fraction of the LM schedule. The equilibrium level
of reserves, IG, backs the equilibrium money supply, FG, with a
reserve ratio of IG/ FG. Total wealth is HC if only outside money is
counted in wealth, but is AC if the banking liabilities are neglected in
the calculation of financial assets.
Gross Domestic Physical Product is the area ONDC. The area
OAFG is gross financial product. The area BEDC is the interest that
must be paid out of Gross Domestic Product to foreign owners of the
capital stock, so Gross National Physical Product is the smaller area
ONDEB. The gains (in the sense of net rent) from the use of foreign
capital is the triangular area, QED. The area OGEB represents the

The Global Adjustment System
429
return to domestic capitalist; BEDC the return to foreign capitalists;
NGD the return to other domestic factors; OAFG is the reward to
liquidity; and NFG is the return to other factors associated with the
provision of the financial services. Indeed the area FND could be
considered as the total reward to factors of production other than
capital.
Total spending must be equal to Gross National Product. not the
Gross Domestic Product, in order to ensure a zero current account
balance of payments and a trade surplus equal to the area BEDC. The
following equations represent the conditions of equilibrium of the
static system:
(18)
Y=E+B
the national accounts equation;
(19)
E= Y- rZ+ a (M- kY)
where Z represent net debt to foreigners;
(20)
B- rZ=dRldt
the balance of payments equation (assuming no new capital move-
ments), with R represents gold , silver or foreign exchange reserves;
(21)
M=R+D
the balance sheet (70) of the monetary system;
(70) Of course R and D must both be measured in domestic currency. If R is
denominated in foreign currency it would have to be multiplied by the price of foreign
exchange. When, in that case, this equation is differentiated there will be a term
allowing for "capital gains" or "profits" of "seigniorage" from depreciation. Thus let R!'
be the value of foreign exchange in foreign currency and e its price in terms of domestic
currency (the exchange rate). Then differentiation of M = eR!' + D yields dMldt = e
dR!'I dt + R!' del dt + dDI dt. The first term on the right represents "devaluation
profits" which can be used for special purposes. Thus after the US devalued the dollar in
1934 the devaluation profits were set aside in an "exchange equalization fund" and
later, in 1945, used to finance the US payment of its gold tranche in the IMF quota.
Devaluation "profits" are frequently used for "off-budget" expenditure in countries with
flexible exchange rates and no constitutions.

430
(22)
Robert A. Mundell
R=bM
where b is the ratio of reserves to monetary liabilities;
(23)
dRldt=O.
3.6 The Effects of Economic Growth
Consider now the implications of balanced economic growth. In
Graph 8, Gross Domestic Product is again the area OCDN, and Gross
National Product is Gross Domestic Product less interest payments,
BCDE, on the foreign debt. In order to introduce growth it is assumed
that population and the labor force are growing at a certain rate, GL.
and that a certain fraction of income is saved in order to generate an
increase in growth of domestic capital at the same rate GL, and also to
finance an increase in foreign exchange reserves.
The former requires saving of GLSE and the latter GLMJ. The
debt will also be growing at the rate ES and inward capital movements
will be the area STDE. This represents balanced growth in the sense
GRAPH 8
BALANCED GROVfnH
r N
M
A
H
o
K

The Global Adjustment System
431
that the ratio of foreign to domestic capital is preserved by capital
imports at the same rate as the home-owned capital stock is growing.
Economic growth will also increase the demand for money and
the demand for reserves. To satisfy this demand without changing the
reserve ratio requires domestic money creation equal to MIFR and a
balance-of-payments surplus equal to LMIG. The trade balance will be
in surplus to the extent of interest payments, BEDC, and the imports
of international reserves, GIML, less capital inflows of ESTD. The
balance of payments categories will be
(24)
dRidt = LGIM
which specifies the change in reserves;
(25)
dKldt=ESTD
which specifies the inflow of capital; and
(26)
rZ=BCDE
which specifies the outward interest payments (Z denotes net indebt-
edness). The balance-of-trade surplus is:
(26)
B =rZ -
dKJdt + dRidt =
= BCDE -
ESTD + LG1M = BCTS + LG1M.
3.7 Saving and the Balance of Trade
As noted above the country is increasing its foreign debt in the
same proportion as its home-owned capital stock. Suppose, however,
that the country wants to stop increasing its debt. The therapy is to
increase its saving. Consider then the effects of an increase in saving
equal to the former capital imports. In this case the entire capital
stock continues to grow at the rate GL but capital inflows cease, the
foreign debt does not increase, and the share of foreign-owned capital
declines over time. This increase in saving results in a corresponding

432
Robert A. Mundell
increase in the excess of exports over imports. The new trade balance
is now equal to:
(27)
B= rZ+ dR/dt= BCDE+ LGJM
3.8 Monetary Policy and the Balance of Payments
How does monetary policy affect the balance of trade and
payments under the assumption that capital is perfectly mobile? The
conventional reasoning is that with perfect capital mobility and fixed
exchange rates monetary expansion, in the form, say, of open market
operations, results in an outflow of reserves but has no effect on he
balance of trade (71). The present analysis shows this conclusion to be
untrue. For let us consider a domestic credit expansion sufficient to
satisfy the demand for money without importing reserves. The total
increase in domestic money is therefore GLRF and this fully satiates
the demand for money, requiring no extra saving to finance the
increase in reserves equal to LGJM. The trade balance is reduced by
an equal amount and will now result in a trade balance surplus equal
only to the outward interest payments BCDE, which becomes a
declining proportion of GNP. The explanation of the reduction in the
trade balance is the decrease in national saving induced by the central
bank lending.
4. - General Equilibrium Analysis
The great merit of the classical model is that it shows the patterns
that are consistent with equilibrium and therefore provides guidelines
against the common mistake of confusing equilibrium with disequilib-
rium. But in order to make it useful it is necessary to take into account
(71) There will be (perhaps slight) budgetary implications if there is a difference, as
there normally is, between the interest rate that the central bank receives on foreign
exchange reserves and government debt. If the additional central bank receipts are
turned over to the government it will have a budget surplus (or a reduced deficit) which
will change current financing needs or induce a reduction in taxes. part of which may
be capitalized. increasing wealth , reducing saving and worsening the balance of trade.
Against this, however, must be set the effect on residents of the reduced level of
national reserves, a public good.

The Global Adjustment System
433
more of the complexities of the real world. This requires general
equilibrium analysis of the world economy.
It is possible to discuss the balance of trade or the balance of
payments in a general equilibrium context that takes into account
international capital movements. Because of the interaction of Walras'
Law (72) and Cournot's Law (73) in international general equilibrium
analysis, and also because of intertemporal "budget equations", it is
possible to show that the balance of payments or the balance of trade
can each be defined in no less than sixten different ways (74).
4.1 The Sixteen Approaches
From that axiom of economics known as Walras ' Law the
balance of payments of a country (or any entity) is zero; all expen-
ditures must be paid for. Inside a closed economy Walras' Law means
that all excess demands are zero. In an open economy the excess
demands must be balanced by a corresponding excess supply in the
(72) OSCAR LANGE, in his Price Flexibility and Full Employment (Cowles Commis-
sion, 1944) introduced the term Walras ' Law to denote the concept that was known to
all the classical economists but which Walras made such effective use of in his
mathematical analysis. Walras'Law, that the sum of all excess demands is identically
equal to zero, follows from the concept of demand and supply, as used by economists,
that neither can exist without an equivalent quid pro quo. If there are n goods only n-l
excess demand equations are necessary to establish the equilibrium prices. Its close
cousin, the homogeneity postulate, conveniently ensures that there are only n-l relative
prices. The original work of Walras is of course LEON WALRAS: Elements d'Econom ie
Politique Pure ou Theorie de la Richesse Sociale, Lausanne, 1874. For an excellent
recent discussion of Walras' contributions to economic theory, that goes considerably
beyond its modest title, see DONALD A. WALKER: "A Primer on Walrasian Theories of
Economic Behavior," HES Bulletin, n. 11·1, Spring 1989.
(73) Cournot was the first to make extensive mathematical use of the proposition
that the sum of all balances is zero. See A. COURNOT: Researches in the Mathematical
Principles of the Theory of Wealth , translated by T. Bacon, New York, MacMillan,
1897. I introduced the term in "The Pure Theory of International Trade," lococit., p.
44; see also, pp. 45, 52, 55, 144, 305.
(74) The following analysis generalizes the international flow-of-funds table in my
article, "Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy Under Fixed and Flexible Exchange
Rates," Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science, n. 29, November 1963
pp. 475-85, reprinted in the CAVES and JOHNSON volume of Readings in the Theory of
Internaional Trade, and in my International Economics, loco cit., Ch.18. I first
presented the "Sixteen Approaches to the Balance of Payments" at the Inter-American
Conference on Financial Markets in Carabelleda, Venezuela in 1979, and I have
discussed the same question with an elaboration of the global reserve-creating mechan-
ism in the Mondragone Seminar Paper referred to above.

434
Robert A. Mundell
rest of the world. These excess demands in an open economy
correspond to the categories of the balance of payments accounts.
Thus the excess supply of goods and services is equal to balance-of-
trade surplus; the excess supply of securities is equal to capital
imports; and the excess supply of money is equal to the balance-of-
payments deficit.
Four concepts of the balance of payments follow from these
relationships. If our interest is in the balance of trade, we define four
concepts of the balance of trade, bearing in mind that a similar
procedure would yield results appertaining to the balance of payments
itself, the capital account or, after allowing for transfers, the current
account. First we have the definition of the balance of trade itself as
the difference between exports and imports. Second, we have the
equality of the balance of trade as the difference between national
output and domestic expenditure. Third, we have the equality of the
balance of trade to the net capital exports and the increase in net
foreign exchange reserves. Fourth, we have the equality of the
balance of trade and the combined excess demands for securities and
foreign exchange reserves.
It is now necessary to take into account Cournot's Law which
involves the rest of the world. Coumot's Law refers to the fact that
the global excess demands of each category of the balance of pay-
ments is zero. The sum of all exports equals the sum of all imports, so
the trade surplus of one country is equal to the trade deficit of the rest
of the world (75). Every excess supply in one category in one country
implies a corresponding excess demand in the rest of the world. There
are, therefore, four concepts of the balance of trade in the rest of the
world corresponding to the four concepts already discussed. Thus
Walras's Law and Cournot's Law together imply eight concepts of the
balance of trade for the country (any country) under analysis.
Suppose there are three categories of the balance of payments
isolated for special analysis: goods, securities and money. Let Y -
E
be the excess supply of goods and services in a country; A -
Z the
excess supply of securities; and G -
H the excess supply of money. Y
can be identified with national output or
GNP,
E with domestic
(75) This holds, as we have seen, only if there is no asymmetric treatment of the
specie exports of gold. These asymmetries are ignored in the present formulation.

The Global Adjustment System
435
expenditure or "absorption", A and Z with the supply of and demand
for securities respectively; and M with new money creation and H
with the hoarding demand for money. Then the equations specifying
that world supply and demand for goods, securities and money are
equal and can be written as follows:
(28)
(29)
(30)
Y+ Y"'=E+E*
A+A*=Z+Z*
G+G*=H+11*
Our interest however is in the categories of the balance of
payments, specifically the trade balance B, capital exports, K, and the
balance of payments surplus P. By rearranging terms we get:
(31)
Y-E
=
B
=
-B* =
E*-},,*
Goods
+
+
+
+
(32)
A-Z
= -K
=
K*
=
Z*-A*
Securities
+
+
+
+
(33)
G-H
=
-P* =
P*
=
H*-G*
Money
0
0
0
0
By Walras' Law the excess demands (in value terms) sum to zero
so that the vertical equations also sum to zero.
The eight approaches to the balance of trade (or payments) follow
immediately. First we have the definition of the balance of trade itself
as the difference between exports X and imports M for each country:
(Elasticity approach)
(Absorption approach)
(Financing approach)
(Savings approach)
Home country
B=X-M
B=Y-E
B=K+P
B=Z-A+H-G
Rest of the world
B*=X*-M*
B*=Y"'-E*
B*=r+p'
B*= Z*- A*+11*- G*

436
Robert A. Mundell
The equations on the left and right sides are connected by
Cournot's Law, B+ B*=O.
The additional approaches derive from intertemporal analysis
that takes into account the accumulation of flows into stocks. The
accumulated balance of trade of any country is confined between
upper and lower bounds determined by debt-carrying capacity and
pressmesonliqwdity.Th~
(34)
where R; is the upper bound on the net international position and R1
is its lower bound. What holds for B holds for all the equivalences of
B, giving another seven approaches to the balance of payments. The
role of stocks cannot be ignored in equations determining the interna-
tional accounts. We worry about balance-of trade and balance-of-pay-
ments problems because we worry about stocks. The same "Ricardo-
equivalence" analysis applies in the international monetary field in
real terms, as that wich applies to government budgets.
4.2 The Composition of the Balance of Payments Accounts
In Graph 9 the abscissa represents output and the ordinate the
rate of interest. E is the curve of domestic expenditure (absorption)
expressed as a function of the domestic rate of interest. All other
variables are held constant. The E curve has a negative slope because
at lower interest rates domestic expenditure is higher. The Y curve, on
the other hand, expresses the national supply of output at varying
interest rates; it has a positive slope because as the interest rate rises
producers shift production from the future to the present. In a closed
economy equilibrium would settle at the point Q defining both the
equilibrium rate of interest and the level of national income and
domestic expenditure. The level of the ordinate at the point of
intersection of E and Y would correspond to the point of intersection
of the saving and investment curves.
To introduce the rest of the world most simply let us assume that
prices, including interest rates, are constant and there is perfect
mobility of capital, goods and money. We also assume there is no

r
The Global Adjustment System
COMPOsmON OF THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS
437
GRAPH 9
R
\
\
E+H
o
y
domestic money production (no gold mines or central bank) so that all
increases in money have to be imported. Let OR be the interest rate
abroad, and as drawn OR is lower than the domestic autarkic rate of
interest, so that expenditure will exceed income by the amount ST at
that rate of interest, which also measures the balance of trade deficit.
To determine the other categories of the balance of payments
from the diagram it is necessary to define the demand for and the
supply of securities. The supply of securities equals the sum of
investment and net business hoarding; and the demand for securities
is the difference between saving and net consumer hoarding. The A
curve is the supply of securities and the Z schedule is the demand for
securities; they are equivalent, respectively, to the demand for and
supply of loanable funds. The excess supply of securities, and the
capital inflow, is UV, which finances both the trade deficit, ST = NM,

438
Robert A. Mundell
and the accumulation of money due to growth on the part of
consumers, UN, and producers, Ml-Z
It will simplify the exposition of the following analysis, when we
take into account the government sector, to aggregate the hoarding
propensities of consumers and producers into a national hoarding
schedule. At every rate of interest there will be a given demand for
additional money on the part of households and firms that will
ordinarily be related to the rates of growth of income of the two
sectors. This national hoarding schedule is the sum of the horizontal
distances of the S curve from the Z curve, and the A curve from the I
curve at alternative rates of interest. This hoarding schedule (not
drawn) is added to the E curve to get the E + H curve, which
intersects the interest rate axis RT at the point L. The distance TL
represents national hoarding and the balance-of-payments surplus of
the growing country. Net borrowing, and the increase in accumulated
net indebtedness required to finance both the trade deficit and the
imports of money from abroad, is equal to SL = uv.
The configuration in Graph 9 links three approaches to the
balance of trade deficit: first, it is the difference between expenditure
and income, and investment and saving: RT -
RS =
ST =
NM.
Second, it is the difference between net capital imports (net exports of
securities) SL and imports of money (balance-of-payments surplus)
TL, so that SL -
TL = ST. Third, it is equal to the difference between
the excess supply of securities, RV -
RU = UV (= SL), and the excess
of hoarding over domestic money production (here assumed to be
zero), UN + MV (= TL).
4.3 Central Banks Create Deficits
The above analysis applies to a small open, growing economy that
imports all additions to its money supply. In this section we make
allowance for the domestic production of money by a central bank.
The central bank is assumed to hold international reserves and
domestic assets (e.g. securities), and to conduct open market opera-
tions to increase the money supply. This time we shall include
business hoarding in total saving so that all investment is identical to
the supply of securities.

The Global Adjustment System
439
In Graph 10 the E and Y schedules and the foreign interest rate
OR are as in Graph 9. The Scurve is the saving schedule; the
Z-schedule describes that component of saving that is manifested in
the demand for securities; the horizontal difference between the
Z-and S-curves represents hoarding. The A-curve is now identical to
investment schedule, I. Thus the investment-saving gap is NM which
corresponds to the balance of trade, also equal to ST. But now the
balance.of payments is affected by the activities of the central bank;
the latter cannot alter the rate of interest or the money supply, but it
will determine the balance of payments.
If the central bank created no money there would be an excess
demand for money equal to UN, a corresponding balance-of-payments
GRAPH 10
EFFECTS OF CENTRAL BANK INTERVENTION
r
income Y

440
Robert A. Mundell
surplus and a capital inflow equal to UM, needed to finance both the
money accumulation and the trade deficit. But now suppose that the
central bank conducts open market operations at the rate of UF,
buying securities and issuing new money. The demand for securities is
increased by UF so that the new total demand for securities is the (Z
+ Zg)-schedule which intersects the interest rate line RT at the point
F. Both the excess supply of money and the excess demand for
securities are NF, which represents the balance-of-payments deficit,
which must be paid for out of the reserves of the central bank. At the
new equilibrium the balance of trade is unchanged, compared to the
situation before the introduction of central bank policy, at NM. But
the capital inflow has been reduced by UF to FM and the balance of
payments has been reduced from a surplus of UN to a deficit of NF
(76) .
The equilibrium can be determined more quickly by making the
appropriate adjustments to the Yand E schedules. To the E schedule
in Graph 10 must be added the excess demand for money, in this case
negative, to get the (E + H -
G)-schedule, which intersects RT at L.
It then follows that the trade deficit is paid for by capital imports of SL
and a reduction of foreign exchange reserves of LT.
The position in the diagram is not a final equilibrium because the
central bank is running down its holdings of foreign exchange. It
would eventually have to reduce its rate of monetary expansion to UN
which would exactly achieve equilibrium in the balance of payments
with the capital inflow exactly financing the trade deficit. Even this is
not a complete equilibrium because of the increase in indebtedness
implied by the capital imports.
(76) This ignores the wealth effects of the open market operations. As I showed in
"The Public Debt, Corporate Income Taxes and the Rate of Interest," Journal of
Political Economy , n. 68, December 1960, pp. 622-6, reprinted in my Monetary
Theory: Interest, Inflation and Growth in the World Economy, London, Goodyear,
1971, pp. 5-13, income streams, including tax deductions, can be capitalized to produce
wealth effects. In the present case the open market purchases reduce the outstanding
stock of securities in the hands of the public , lowering disposable income and wealth,
offset, however, by the reduction in the tax liabilities to finance the interest payments
on the government debt. As noted earlier, however, the loss of foreign exchange
reserves should have some psychic effect on spending becayse of an implicit loss of
national wealth , to be experienced through adjustment policies in the future.

The Global Adjustment System
441
4.4 Budget Deficits
The analysis in Graph 11 shows how the government sector can
be taken into account. The expenditure curve now includes govern-
ment spending. The trade balance is equal to the difference between
both income and expenditure, and the sums of investment and
government spending, and saving and taxes. In the configuration
shown, at the given rate of interest, there is an excess of investment
over saving equal to HK, so that the budget deficit is the differences
between LM and HK (= ST). From the diagram it can be seen that an
increase in government spending that is financed by bonds shifts the
expenditure schedule, and also the (I + G)-schedule, to the right to
positions like E
and (I + G)' increasing the trade deficit by TB
(= MN), from ST (= LM) to SB (= LN), and the amount of capital
imports by an equivalent amount. Increases in the budget deficit when
there is perfect capital mobility cause an equivalent increase in the
trade deficit financed by the rest of the world.
GRAPH 11
EFFECT OF CHANGE IN THE GOVERNMENT SECTOR
r
,
(1+ G)
E
,,
E*
income Y

442
Robert A. Mundell
If the increase in government expenditure is financed out of
money creation instead of bonds there will be no change in the import
of capital from abroad and the increased trade deficit will be financed
entirely out of foreign exchange reserves, abstracting from wealth
effects associated with the monetary policy.
4.5 Interest Payments and the Current Account Balance
Up until now we have not taken explicit accounts of stocks or the
level of indebtedness, and we have not distinguished in the diagrams
between Gross National Product and Gross Domestic Product, or
between the current account balance and the trade balance. In Graph
12, the curve E is the expenditure schedule and Y is the is the supply
curve of output. But now we assume the existence of an international
debt equal to D so that rD must be paid as annual interest on it. GNP
is then Y -
rD, and at the rate of interest OR outward interest
GRAPH 12
INTEREST PAYMENTS AND THE CURRENT ACCOUNT
r
E
E+H-G
R~------lI---.~-...~-
o
N
income Y

The Global Adjustment System
443
payments of WS are made. The level of net indebtedness is equal to
the ratio WS/OR, i.e., the ratio of interest payments WS and the rate
of interest SN (= OR). The trade balance deficit is ST and the current
account deficit is WT. The balance of payments is determined by the
intersection of the (E + H -
G)-schedule with the interest rate line at
the point l'; the case in the diagram is where H -
Gis negative so that
there is a balance-of-payments deficit equal to VT. To summarize, the
four major categories of the balance of payments accounts referred to
the diagram are as follows:
balance of trade
interest transfers
capital inflow
balance
of payments deficits
= -ST
=
- WS (Item: current account
= +WV
+VT.
Wn
The categories of course sum to zero.
4.6 Adjustment to the Deficit
The configuration in Graph 12 cannot be conceived to be more
than a temporary equilibrium. The current account measures the rate
at which net indebtedness is increasing or foreign exchange reserves
are falling. Now let us suppose that the central bank slows the rate at
which open market operations are attempting (but not succeeding) to
increase the money supply in excess of desired hoarding, so that the
balance of payments deficit is eliminated. Thus in Graph 13 we
abstract from problems created by the central bank creating either
more or less new monetary reserves than are needed for growth so
that there is balance of payments equilibrium. The current account
deficit WT is equal to the rate of borrowing and therefore measures
the amount by which the country's indebtedness is being increased.
As before the debt is the capitalized value of outward interest pay-
ments, WS/SN, so that the proportionate rate of increase of the
country's indebtedness is:
(35)
(lID)dD/dt = (SN/WS). WT =
= SN.(WS + ST)/WS = SN.(1 + ST/WS)

444
Robert A. Mundell
per unit of time. Because SN is the rate of interest, it is clear that as
long as the trade deficit, ST, is positive the rate of growth of the debt is
greater than the rate of interest.
GRAPH 13
GROWTH OF DEBT AND INTEREST
r
RI------...;+---...--.--~
o
N
The increase in indebtedness means that interest payments are
increasing so that over time the (GNP = Y -
rD)-schedule is shifting
to the left. After some interval let us say this schedule intersect the
interest rate line at the point H, implying outward interest payments
of HS, an increase of HW. Now it would be foolish to suppose that the
output and expenditure curves Y, and E, as well as the rate of interest
required on the debt, are unaffected by the current account deficit,
growing indebtedness and increasing interest burden of the debt. But
let us imagine for a moment the country were so myopic that the E
and Y curves were unaltered. Then the current account deficit would

The Global Adjustment System
445
worsen from WT to HT, financed by an increase in capital imports of
HW, so that the new level, of capital imports is HT.
4.7 Adjustment to the Debt
We have now implicity assumed that the additional interest rate
payments arising from the increasing debt are financed entirely by
new borrowing. This implicit assumption is embedded in the static
nature of the E and Y curves, which up until now have not been
adjusted to take account of changes in debt, wealth, or interest
payments. But it is immediately apparent that a country cannot ignore
increasing debt. The GNP curve would otherwise be shifting con-
stantly to the left until interest payments equalled GOP and GNP
would be zero! Long before that eventuality occurred, the country's
creditors would have ceased to lend and adjustment would be forced
upon the country. The mere anticipation of bankruptcy would be
sufficient to compel the necessary adjustment (77).
Both the expenditure and output schedules can be expected to
adjust to changes in the debt. In discussing this adjustment we shall
abstract from ordinary growth going on as a result of saving and
investment in order to emphasize the negative aspects of increasing
debt. Expenditure depends on GNP and spending falls with GNP. The
ratio between the increase in outward interest payments and the
decline in expenditure -
the marginal propensity to reduce debt
(MPRD) -
may be less than, equal to or greater than unity, depend-
ing on the total level of debt in relation to wealth. Because rising debt,
eet. par., implies lower net wealth and lower future consumption, the
conditions of intertemporal equilibrium suggest that the MPRP rises
as the debt/wealth ratio rises. The configuration in Graph 14 takes
into account shifts of expenditure as interest payments rise due to
increasing debt. Thus ST represents both the trade deficit and the
current account deficit at an initial point when there is no debt. At
some interval later as the debt mounts and outward interest payments
to service the debt have reached WS, the expenditure curve shifts to
(77) A rising probability of default would be met by an increasing interest rate up
to a point where new funds dried up. Countries with no recourse to new loans must
reduce or close their current account deficits, either by increased output. curtailed
spending or both.

446
Robert A. Mundell
ADJUSTMENT OF EXPENDITURE
r
R ~-------_~"_•
.....iiI~
o
y
GRAPH 14
y
the left to a point like T. This narrows the gap between expenditure
and output, and reduces the rate at which debt is increasing.
The adjustment of the output schedule to rising debt depends on
the changes in the stock of the factors of production, let us say labor
and capital. How will labor supply be affected by increased indebted-
ness? Insofar as the disposable income of labor is reduced by the cost
of servicing the debt labor will "consume" less leisure and work
harder to reduce the drain on future consumption, assuming leisure is
not an inferior good. The Y schedule therefore shifts to the right (78).
Similar effects will occur on the side of capital supply. There may
be no direct relation between capital imports and investment.
Borrowing from abroad for investment purposes may crowd out
savings at home. It is more likely, however, that the capital stock will
(78) This conclusion would certainly hold up in a one-generation working populo
ation. If this assumption is relaxed, however, there will be a tendency for the younger
generation to work harder and save more, whereas the older generation may discount
future tax liabilities at a very high interest rate.

The Global Adjustment System
447
grow somewhat faster than otherwise if there is ready access to
foreign savings. The increase in output represented in Graph 15 shifts
the initial supply schedule, Y, and the corresponding GNP schedule,
to the right to Y, narrowing the gap between expenditure and output
and reducing (or reversing) the rate of increase of indebtedness. The
trade balance deficit, initially SH, is reduced to UB; and the current
account deficit, initially WH, is reduced to TH.
Both supply and demand ordinarily adjust simultaneously. It can
be seen that the combined action of the adjustment of expenditure
and income work to correct and reverse the trade balance. Thus in
Graph 16 the initial expenditure and output curves yield a trade deficit
of SH. But the decline in output with rising debts and service
payments, shift expenditure to E. Simultaneously the increases in
output shift the expenditure curve to Y . Together the combined effect
is to change the trade deficit of SH into a lower trade deficit of TV.
GRAPH 15
ADJUSTMENT OF SUPPLY
r
GNP
R ....
.,...+....~...--....,;....-
o
E
y

448
r
Robert A. Mundell
SIMULTANEOUS ADJUSTMENT
,yt,
"
I
I
E
GRAPH 16
y
Until there is a trade surplus larger than the amount required to
finance the interest payments, new borrowing and increasing debt and
interest payments will generate more rapid adjustment until the debt
service is fullycovered by the trade balance surplus and net borrowing
eases. Zero net borrowing would imply an equilibrium level of
indebtedness. Whether the process of adjustment will continue so that
the debt is increasingly being reduced, depends on the MPRD, which
will be governed by whether the marginal efficiency of additional
spending is higher or lower than the interest rate.
4.8 Changes of the Interest Rate for Debtors
The assumption thus far is that the interest rate at which the
country can borrow is constant. This assumption might be plausible at
low levels of debt owed by a country with no record or prospect of

The Global Adjustment System
449
default. It is no longer plausible after debt exceeds the debt-carrying
capacity of the country.
Even in a default-free situation a large country cannot borrow
unlimited amounts at a given rate of interest. Substantial capital
outflows strain the lending capacity of the rest of the world. Foreign
lending requires an excess of saving over investment, which is limited
at any moment of time. The more lending proceeds the greater is the
urgency of domestic needs, whether for consumption, government
spending or investment, and so the marginal efficiency of capital rises.
The same factors that impose limits on the rate of borrowing of a
country from the demand side impose limits on the rate of lending
from the supply side . Only for a small country can the supply
constraints in the lender have only trivial effects.
Graph 17 takes account of rising lending costs. A T-curve (not
drawn) represents the net lending available to the country at domestic
interest rates; it intersects the interest rate axis at the point" W such
that at the interest rate OW the rest of the world would be willing
neither to borrow or lend. At interest rates below 0 W the rest of the
world wants to borrow; and at interest rates above OW the rest of the
world wants to lend. The T-curve is added horizontally to the output
schedule at corresponding rates of interest, and it intersects the Y
schedule at the interest rate 0 W. The (Y + K*)-curve is a gross supply
curve in the sense that it measures the supply of goods available to the
economy, including that financed by borrowing from abroad. The
gross supply curve intersects the expenditure curve at the point H
determining the equilibrium level of borrowing (and foreign lending),
the trade deficit and the interest rate.
It is easily seen that an increase in the foreign incentive to lend
(which implies an increase in the excess of foreign saving over foreign
investment) shifts the (Y + K*)-schedule to the right, resulting in a
lower rate of interest and a larger deficit in the balance of trade.
In an earlier section we have discussed the adjustment to the debt
burden by the debtor country. Now we must consider the adjustment
from the standpoint of the creditor country. The larger is the debt the
greater is the risk of partial or complete default, open or overt, to the
lender.
Two kinds of risk need to be separated: currency risk and default

450
Robert A. Mundell
ALLOWANCE FOR RISING INTEREST RATES
r
R~----------""'~~~
w
o
GRAPH 17
y
risk. If the debt is denominated in domestic currency the possibility of
devaluation and inflation is present. Devaluation (like inflation) is a
partial, implicit default. The greater the risk of partial default through
depreciation, the higher will be the interest-rate premium required.
Because of devaluation risk (assuming the debt is in the borrower's
currency) the domestic interest rate will be higher than the foreign
interest rate and the trade deficit will be smaller. It would be a
mistake, however, to ignore the fact that if domestic residents also
expect inflation and devaluation the E and Y curves will have shifted
upward in proportion to the devaluation risk. Borrowing and the
trade deficit will tend to be smaller, the same or larger before the
introduction of the expectation of devaluation depending on whether
foreign expectation of devaluation are greater, equal to or less than
domestic expectations of devaluation.
Given an existing level of indebtdness the higher domestic interest

The Global Adjustment System
451
required in rolling over the debt imposes an additional cost to the
country in the form of servicing the debt. The increased risk of
devaluation as debt in local currency mounts can play an important
role in the adjustment process, especially if the foreign perception of
the devaluation risk is greater than the real risk. The cost of servicing
the debt rises in real terms if the depreciation does not in fact take
place. The trade surplus must be larger to finance both larger debt and
higher interest payments (79).
Even if there is no currency risk -
and devaluation risk is easily
dealt with by denominating the debt in foreign currency -
there will
be an increasing risk premium due to the possibility of default. The
risk premium must rise in relation to the ratio of the debt to
debt-carrying capacity, usually GNP, export capacity or wealth. Un-
like currency risk, which can in principle be neutral in real terms
between foreign and domestic participants, default risk inevitably
lowers the available lending and the trade deficit it will finance. In this
sense rising default risk accelerates the adjustment toward equilib-
rium, painful though it may be.
5.• Concluding remarks
5.1 - The price-specie-flow mechanism attributed to the classical
economists is a misreading of economic doctrine. It is doubtful that
Hume based his adjustment mechanism on changes in relative prices.
Viner
had
complained,
for
example,
that
the
attribution
of
the"classical theory" to Ricardo was an error, since Ricardo explicitly
rejected it (80). Before Mill there were no major classical economists
(79) In the spring of 1989 the Italian economy presented an example of this
dilemma. Interest rates are several percentage points higher than German interest rates,
despite the position of the lire in the Ecu. The explanation for the interest difference in a
zone of "fixed exchange rates" lies in the possibility of a "realignment of currencies,"
which means devluation of the lire (and possibly the franc). If Italy were certain the lire
would be devalued, say next year, the high nominal interest rates would be low in real
terms. If on the other hand it were certain that the lire would not be devalued, the high
nominal interest rates imply equality high real interest rates, and Italy would be paying
a exorbitant rent for new capital. The policy is rational only if the authorities are
counting on a future devaluation.
(80) loe. cit., p. 320.

452
Robert A. Mundell
who conceived of adjustment occurring through changes in relative
prices, not counting Thornton and Malthus, who were working with
short run monetary models and were not in the mainstream of what
was considered classical doctrine.
5.2 - The classical economists, following Hume, believed in the
law of one price. They accepted the quantity theory of money for the
world economy (or an insolated island) or for a country with an
inconvertible paper currency. In the case of a country with a conver-
tible currency, however, they argued that an increase in bank credit
or paper money would merely drive out specie and not alter the
quantity of money. In the sense that the demand for money is still
equal to the supply, the quantity theory of money still holds, but the
convertibility requirement prevents the quantity of money from
changing.
5.3 - Thornton made an important extension to the Hume-Smith
argument above, to the effect that the country displacing specie with
paper money would increase world prices because of its gold exports.
Thornton (81) had the opportunity to witness the fall in the value of
gold (inflation) following the French revolution partly caused by the
issue of assignats (82) in France which drove out specie.
(81) Thornton
(1762-1815)
was
a
distinguished
parliamentarian
and
phil-
anthropist, one of the founders and sometime chairman of the Sierra Leone Company
involved in trade with West Africa, an opponent with his friend Wilberforce of slavery,
and was a representative of business among an elite body of men that included William
Pitt. Thornton favored a graduated income tax and paid his own taxes according to his
idea and not his legal obligation. For an analysis of his contributions to the monetary
approach to the balance of payments see HUMPHREY and KELEHER, op. cit., e.g., pp,
61·3, 143-53, 290.
(82) The assignats, the paper money issued by the French republic soon after the
revolution. were so-named because they were secured not upon specie but upon the
confiscated lands of the church and the aristocracy. The first issue carried interest but
not subsequent issues.
The French had a previous and disastrous experience with inflationary bank notes,
as a result of the company formed by John Law
(l6~1·1729), which had acquired
control of virtually all French colonial trade. the French currency and the French debt;
Law introduced important reforms in France and in January 1720 became controller- :
general ofthe finances. But on May 21, 1720 the government made the fatal mistake of
issuing a decree, halving the value of banknotes, precipitating the crisis that goes down
in history as the Mississippi bubble.
This example was held up in the French assembly as a warning against paper

The Global Adjustment System
453
5.4 - The Thornton effect has been a major factor in subsequent
monetary history. When, in the 1870's, Germany, France and the
United States abandoned the silver standard, inflation occurred in the
other silver standard countries, including, at that time, Austria-Hun-
gary, Russia, the Far East and much of Latin America. The adoption
of the gold standard by those three countries (and many others)
created an increased demand for gold that caused deflation in other
gold standard countries (especially Britain). An even more dramatic
example of the Thornton effect was the credit inflation in Europe after
the outbreak of World War I, which sent tens of millions of ounces of
gold to the US.
5.5 - The Thornton effect repeated itself in reverse in the middle
1920s when despite the undervaluation of gold caused by the wartime
inflation in the US, most of Europe restored the gold standard, putting
deflationary pressure on the world economy that the use of foreign
exchange in lieu of gold only postponed. The 1930-1934 deflation
followed from the fatal decision to restore the international gold
standard at a price of gold that overvalued it even in terms of dollars
by more than 35%.
5.6 - The Thornton effect reasserted itself again in the late 1950s
and early 1960s when the recovery of Europe brought about a
renewed desire to increase gold reserves. During this period more
than a third of the world's gold stock shifted from the United States to
Europe as a result of Federal Reserve sterilization policies. To main-
tain its 25% gold ratio the United States would have had to follow a
tighter monetary policy resulting in a slower rate of world inflation.
Rejecting this approach the US maintained its credit expansion during
money issues, but it was successfully refuted: "Paper money." it was argued before the
assembly , «paper money under a despotism is dangerous, it favors corruption; but in a
nation constitutionally governed, which takes care of its own notes, which determines
their number and use, that danger no longer exists». However, even the French
revolutionaries could repeal neither the laws of economics nor the hunger of the fiscal
authorities; as a result of continued issues, the assignat fell from par to less than 1/100
of a franc. The land guarantee was no protection partly because the price was not set,
and partly because many believed the aristocrats and the church would come back
some day to reclaim it.

454
Robert A. Mundell
the late 1960s, leading to the balance-of-payments deficit that ulti-
mately resulted in the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system in
1971.
5.7 - The classical economists rejected the notion that exchange
rate changes altered the balance of trade. They argued that devalu-
ation would increase the money supply and the price level, without
altering the terms of trade. A fall in the foreign-currency value of a
country's currency, can only be achieved by an increase in the money
supply at home, and/or a decrease in the money supply abroad. The
effect of devaluation must therefore take into account not only the
change in relative currency prices but also the effects of the changes
in the relative money supplies, that brought devaluation about, on
domestic expenditure in surplus and deficit countries.
5.8 - Most of the classical economists took account of the
counterpart of the financing of a unilateral transfer from one country
to another. Thus they allowed for the extra saving required to finance
the transfer in the paying country, and the extra spending resulting
from the disbursement of the transfer in the receiving country. Mill
was an exception in his, belief that the terms of trade of the paying
country must decline, and that the latter must bear a secondary
burden over and above the primary burden of the transfer itself. Mill's
error was in neglecting the demand shifts, a costly oversight that
misled his followers. However, Bastable had already refuted Mill's
theory in the 1880s and this contribution had been discussed by
Nicholson. Thus it was surprising that Taussig would hark back to
Mill's erroneous argument and implicate Ricardo, despite Ricardo's
explicit rejection of the idea (83). Even after Wicksell had refuted
Taussig's treatment, on the same ground that Bastable attacked Mill's,
students of Taussig, including Viner, repeated Taussig's error. The
changes in purchasing power will bring about shifts in demand -
decreases in the payer and increases in the payee -
that could change
world demand either in favor of or against the paying country.
(83) It is doubly surprising because BASTABLE'S article (op. cit.) appeared in the
Quarterly Journal of Economics, and because of Nicholson's book which could hardly
have escaped Taussig's notice.

The Global Adjustment System
455
5.9 - With non-traded goods, however, there is a presumption
that aggregate demand for the goods of the paying country will
decline and for the receiving country will increase. In the paying
countries resources will shift from the domestic goods industries to
the traded goods industries; whereas in the receiving country re-
sources will shift from the traded goods sector to the domestic goods
sector. Whether the terms of trade between the two countries will
change in favor of or against the receiving country will depend on the
resource contents of the shifts in demand. In the case where factor-
price-equalization conditions prevail before and after the transfer, the
increase in the resource-mix of the receiving country's increased
expenditure will exactly equal the decrease in the resource mix of the
paying country's reduction in expenditure and factor returns (except-
ing the tax-cum-subsidy of the transfer itself) will be the same as
before and there will be no change in relative prices if marginal
demand patterns cancel despite the existence of domestic goods (84).
5.10 - Contrary to the impression left by Taussig and even Viner
the classical economists did not subscribe to the Mill-Taussig-Keynes
"theorem" that the terms of trade of the transferring country would
decline and that there would be a "secondary burden" on the paying
country. On the contrary, the mainstream of classical thinking before
John Stuart Mill took into account the Ohlin-type demand shifts that
made changes in the terms of trade unnecessary or unpredictable as
to its direction.
5.11 - The view that unilateral transfers inevitably involved a
secondary burden was due to Mill and followed by Marshall, Taussig,
Viner and Keynes. Because of their wide influence in the early
twentieth century it became erroneously established as the "classical
doctrine." The legacy of the Mill-Taussig-Keynes error lives on today
(84) In the case of specialization in export goods and home goods (which violates
factor price equalization conditions) the shift of resources to the domestic goods sector
in the receiving country, and the shift to the treated goods sector in the paying country.
will increase the scarcity of the receiving country's goods and thus (if not offset by
biassed demand changes) change the terms of trade in the Mill·Taussig direction. See
above for discussion of the Chipman case.

456
Robert A. Mundell
in the single-entry book-keeping approach to exchange rate devalu-
ation, which ignores the financial counterparts of changes in the trade
balance.
5.12 - Financial transfers, including foreign aid, capital move-
ments and interest payments on international indebtedness are driving
forces that can be the cause of a country's trade balance. The outward
capital movements from the East Asian countries and Germany
generated trade balance surpluses in those countries. Similarly US
voluntary borrowing finances the excesses of expenditure over income
that imposes on the US its trade deficit. The trade balances are driven
by capital flows and transfers, not exchange rates (85).
5.13 - The sine qua non of the trade imbalances in the 1980s is
the high savings level in Germany and Japan, and low savings level in
the United States. The US overspending can be partly attributed to its
extra defense burden and its failure to balance the budget. But an
important (related to the preceding point) role is played by the
exceptional attractiveness of US monetary and financial assets in the
1980s (86). The high and continuing demand for dollar assets due to
(85) Changes in exchange rates can certainly change relative prices in the short
run if any prices are fixed. The great fluctuations of nominal exchange rates since
floating was adopted in 1973 have led to huge swings in the real exchange rates, largely
because wage rates in the largest countries move comparatively slowly, and follow
depreciations only with a substantial lag.
Taking 1985 as the base equal to 100 the US's unit labor costs fell, by the end of
1988, to 63.5 whereas Germany's and Japan's had risen to 120 and 141.1 respectively.
This represents a reduction in relative US labor costs of 56.5% against Germany's and
77.6 against Japan's. See IMF: International Financial Statistics, June 1989, p. 70 (first
table). The situaion is not much altered if the other measures of "competitiveness" or
"Real Effective Exchange Rates" are used.
The reverse movement had taken place in the early 1980's. Taking 1980 as the base
of 100, costs rose to 139.3 in the United States, fell to 90.9 in Germany and rose only to
104.3 in Japan, a swing of relative wage rates of 500/0 against Gemany and 35% against
Japan. See International Financial Statistics, Yearbook, 1987, p. 108. A smaller
reverse movement had taken place in the late 1970s.
To some extent the fluctuations in real exchange rates can be explained by the
great oil shocks in 1973-1974, 1979 and 1985-1986. But a more important factor has
been the changes in monetary policy in the United States; it went from ease in the late
1970s to tightness in the early 1980s to ease in 1984-1985 to excessive tightness the
months preceding the Stock market crash, followed by ease after the crash.
(86) No better example can be found than the 30-year bonds issued in the United
States in 1981-1982 at more than 14% interest.

The Global Adjustment System
457
its role as an international currency give US assets exceptional
liquidity and their very attractiveness invites the financial transfers to
the US that finance the trade deficit.
5.14 - Correct analysis of the balance of payments requires a
general equilibrium approach that fully takes into account Walras'
Law, Cournot's Law and endogenous capital movements into the
balance of payments. One of the weaknesses of international trade
theory, as it developed in the classical English tradition, was its failure
to incorporate endogenous capital flows. The balance of payments (or
balance of trade) has fifteen counterparts each of which must be
reconciled in viable economic models.
5.15 - The balance of trade and payments problems of the world
today cannot be understood outside the context of the world demand
and supply of reserves and national or international assets that qualify
as reserves. In a growing world economy the global demand for
reserves and other financial assets automatically imposes a balance-of-
payments deficit on the reserve-supplying centers. The increase in
indebtedness of the reserve center will eventually exhaust its credit
and result in inflation, devaluation or outright default.
5.16 - Purchasing-power-parity relationships should be studied
in terms of pairs of individual commodities, not indexes of price levels
which have different weights. The degree of conformity to the law of
one price is a measure of the efficiency of arbitrage in the world
economy and an index of the degree to which the gains from
exchange have been exploited.
5.17 - Under fixed exchange rate systems, such as the gold
standard and the Bretton Woods systems, prices and interest rates,
once established in equilibrium, conform closely to changes in pur-
chasing-power-parity. But under flexible exchange rates both interest
differentials and purchasing power parities diverge from forward
parity and actual exchange rates. This is especially true during the
periods of rapid change of exchange rates. This aspect of false pricing

458
Robert A. Mundell
is a defect of flexible exchange rate systems that is not shared by
stable, fixed exchange rate systems.
5.18 - Ricardo's penchant for long run analysis led him to a
consideration of different points of equilibrium as in comparative
statics analysis, whereas others, expecially Thornton and Malthus
(87), took into account the transitions between periods of equilibrium.
The classical economists, especially Ricardo, were prone to consider
increases and decreases in gold reserves as a symptom of disequili-
brium, requiring inflation and deflation of expenditure or (in a few
cases) changes in relative prices. This would be true in a static
economy but it makes no allowance for growth. When a country, on a
specie standard, is growing it must import additional money from
abroad and thus have a balance-of-payments surplus, if it has no gold
or silver mines of its own.
Under conditions of balanced world
growth, all countries need to increase reserves and therefore have a
balance-of-payments surplus, which is possible only if global monetary
reserves are increasing; the alternative is deflation.
(87) Although Hume was not considered a classical economist by his contem-
poraries he should be included in this connection with Malthus and Thornton because
of his considerations, anticipating the multiplier theory, of the transitional effects of
changes in the money supply. For this heresy he was taken to task by John Stuart Mill:
-Hume... thought that all commodities would not rise in price simultaneously, and that
some persons therefore would obtain a real gain, by getting more money for what they
had to sell, while the things which they wished to buy might not yet have risen. And
those who would reap this gain would always be (he seems to think) the first comers. It
seems more obvious, however, that for every person who thus gains more than usual,
there is necessarily some other person who gains less. The loser, if things took place as
Hume suppose, would be the seller of the commodities which are slowest to rise; who ,
by the supposition, parts with his goods at the old prices, to purchasers who have
already benefited by the new. This seller has obtained for his commodity only the
accustomed quantity of money, while there are already some things of which that
money will no longer purchase as much as before. If, therefore, he knows what is going
on, he will raise his price, and then the buyer will not have the gain, which is supposed
to stimulate his industry. But if, on the contrary, the seller does not know the state of
the case, and only discovers it when he finds, in laying his money out, that it does not go
so far, he then obtains less than the ordinary remuneration for his labour and capital;
and if the other dealer's industry is encouraged, it should seem that his must, from the
opposite cause , be impaired» . See JOHN STUART MILL:
The Principles of Political
Economy, London, Ashley, 1909, p. 551. Mill has in mind a zero-sum game, whereas
Hume speculates that temporarily the economy would be bigger.

The Global Adjustment System
459
5.19 - The classical tendency to abstract from economic growth
has its modem counterpart in the error of regarding an excess of
imports -
a trade deficit -
as an indication of disequilibriwn. The
classical economists recognized that unilateral transfers required, and
in a sense implied, corresponding trade "imbalances" in order to
maintain balance-of-payments equilibriwn. The US trade deficit has
resulted from voluntary borrowing in the US and voluntary lending in
the rest of the world, which can only be effected in real terms by a
trade deficit. Devaluation of the dollar, as some American economists
propose, to 100 yen and 1.5 marks would not eliminate the deficit if
those capital movements persisted. On the contrary, it is possible that
an artificial suppression of the dollar would undervalue US capital
assets more than at present, raise the marginal efficiency of capital,
and provoke an increased inward capital flow and corresponding
deficit (88).
5.20 - It is not possible to analyze correctly the effects of "de-
valuation" or "depreciation" without first specifying the means by
which the exchange rate is changed. It is essential to specify also the
initial conditions. If the initial position is one of equilibriwn under
fixed exchange rates, devaluation must mean an increase in the price
at which the Central Bank is pegging foreign exchange. This raises the
prices of internationally-traded goods and lowers the real value of
money balances, increasing saving via the wealth-saving effect and
generating the excess of income over expenditure that is implicit in a
trade surplus (89). The trade surplus with unchanged capital move-
ments implies a surplus in the balance of payments, an increase in the
money supply and eventually a proportionate increase in all prices in
proportion to the devaluation. From a position of equilibriwn an
(88) Devaluation would not have this effect in a classical world for the same reason
that monetary expansion has no effect on the real interest rate; while capital assets
become cheaper in foreign currency, the goods they produce likewise become cheaper,
leaving unchanged the retwn to capital. But in a world where wage rates do not change
(by as much as the devaluation) there is a shift along the factor price frontier in favor of
capital. raising the real rate of retwn both in domestic currency and in foreign
currency.
(89) This assumes no change in capital movements and no expenditure effects
arising from revaluation of international indebtedness.

460
Robert A. Mundell
equi-proportionate increase in the money supply, the price of foreign
exchange, wage rates and the price of labor will leave real values
unchanged (90).
5.21 - The balance of trade is determined by the relation be-
tween income and expenditure and the means by which it is financed.
The exchange rate is not likely to be the best instrument to alter the
balance of trade. The primary role of the exchange rate is to link
national prices expressed in a national currency to those in another.
Changes in exchange rates alter the price levels in national currency.
In a small open country devaluation, from a position of initial
equilibrium, is inflationary; more usually the devaluation is a conse-
quence of past inflation. If in a large not-so-open economy like the US,
devaluation of the dollar is brought about by actions in the surplus
countries, it will have deflationary effects on the world. But if it
brought about by inflation in the deficit country it will be inflationary
at home, as in the case of the small open economy. It is better for the
surplus countries to ease monetary policies, and for deficit countries
to contract; the opposite happened after the Plaza Agreement.
5.22 - Exchange rate changes will affect competitiveness if wage
rates adjust more slowly than prices. The competitiveness effects flow
from the changes in the distribution of income. Appreciation raises
real wages, lowers profits and reduces competitiveness; and depreci-
ation lowers real wages, raises profits and increases competitiveness.
Exchange rates in the industrial countries since 1973 have moved
much more rapidly than wage rates, having a major effect on
competitiveness at the sacrifice of net wealth in the devaluing country.
The major argument for flexible exchange rates in the early literature
was that real wages could be made flexible by exchange rate vari-
(90) For a geometric analysis of the effects of devaluation under these assumptions
see my 1965 paper, "Barter Theory and the Monetary Mechanism of Adjustment," (loc.
cit.), reprinted as Chapter 8 in my International Economics (loc. cit.), especially p. 122.
Even if there is no change in net capital movements a wealth effect from devaluation
would arise if the existing net indebtedness is fixed in the currency of the devaluing
country. While the debts of the LOC's are denominated in dollars or other major
currencies, leaving no advantage to them of devaluation on this account, depreciation
and inflation of the dollar will reduce US net indebtedness and also the real value of the
debts of the LOC's.

The Global Adjustment System
461
ations even if money wage rates were rigid (91). This is certainly true
in the short run, but it is at the expense of a stable monetary system in
the long run. Money wage rates eventually catch up to prices and real
wage rates recover (and perhaps overshoot), reducing competi-
tiveness and requiring another devaluation "fix" that will maintain
competitiveness for shorter and shorter intervals.
5.23 - The monetary system in the age of bimetallism and gold,
from say 1803 to 1914, had the merit of preventing serious inflation or
deflation in the countries adhering to one or the other or both metals,
except for periods of transition when groups of countries were going
onto or off one standard or the other. The drifts in the price level that
did take place were extremely modest, expressed as an average
inflation rate per year, by contrast with our own inflationary experi-
ence.
5.24 - The instability of the gold standard during 1914-1918, at
least for the United States and Japan, was due to the abandonment of
gold by the European belligerents. The restoration of the post-war
gold standard was effected at a time when there was a shortage of
gold. The reformed gold standard based on an undervalued gold price
resulted in deflation, the profile of the deflation being determined by
the timing of foreign exchange conversions into gold in the late 1920s
and early 1930s. The aftermath of the deflation was a world-wide
increase in the price of gold. The correct policy was forced onto the
authorities who had resisted it for over a decade. Had the world-wide
increase in the price of gold that did take place occurred sooner, say
in 1928 or 1930, the great depression might have been avoided.
(91) In "The Monetary Dynamics of Internatinal Adjustment under Fixed and
Flexible Exchange Rates." Quarterly Journal of Economics. n. 74, May 1960. pp.
227-57. I wrote: «The argument is based on money illusion: The community is unwilling
to accept variations in real income through changes in money prices. but it will accept
the same changes in real income through adjustments in the rate of exchange». Other
motives for exchange rate changes are as follows: 1) to change the international
distribution of debt; 2) to alter the value of domestic debts (including the public debt);
3) to change the price level; 4) to alter the distribution of income and wealth; 5) to
acquire seigniorage for off-budget expenditures; 6) to compensate for the removal of
distortions; and 7) to prevent distortions in a country doomed to inflationary finance of
budget deficits.

462
Robert A. Mundell
5.25 - The mistake made after World War I was repeated after
World War II. During and after World War II inflation had again
undervalued gold, leaving enough gold reserves for US use, but not
enough to rebuild European stocks. In the first stages of the post-war
recovery period countries were content to accumulate dollars, which
were considered to be as good as gold. But as recovery progressed,
and the European nations established external convertibility, dollars
were increasingly converted into gold at the US Treasury, draining the
US stock, and "forcing" the US to abolish (92) its domestic reserve
requirements. The Federal Reserve System was then no longer con-
strained by its gold reserve requirements and, pressured by the
financing requirements of the budget due to the Viet-Nam War,
followed a more inflationary policy than would otherwise have been
desirable, much to the discomfort of Europe, which thought the US
should finance the Viet-Nam War out of taxation. The system there-
fore broke down. Had the price of gold been raised, or even better,
had the Deputies of the Group of Ten agreed upon world central bank
or an international currency in the 1960s, the international monetary
system might have been preserved. But Europe was afraid that the US
might use it to finance US deficits, and the US was afraid that a world
currency would replace and therefore weaken the dollar.
5.26 . The system of flexible exchange rates introduced in June
1973 was intended to "nationalize" the inflation problem, letting each
country solve inflation in its own way. This was based on the
monetarist view that each country's inflation rate under flexible
exchange rates, was independent of the others. There is certainly
some truth in that view fortunately for economic theory. But the
overly simplistic model on which it was based ignored the role of
international capital movements, the massive amounts of floating
(92) From 1934 to 1945 the US gold reserve requirement for Federal Reserve
liabilities (including currency and deposits) was 400h; in 1945 it was lowered to 25%. In
1965 the backing behind deposits was abolished, and in 1968 the backing behind
Federal Reserve notes (all currency, except for Treasury silver certificates) was abol-
ished. I remember Congressman Henry Reuss, then Chairman of the Subcommittee on
International Monetary Reform of the Joint Economic Committee, at a lunch in 1965
expressing his astonishment that the Congress had let the bill pass with hardly a protest!

The Global Adjustment System
463
capital that shift across borders, and the interdependence of expecta-
tions in different countries due to instant communications (93).
Capital movements represent the dominating force in foreign ex-
change markets, not the trade transactions stressed by David Ricardo
and Milton Friedman. These capital movements have always overshot
(94) equilibrium, driving the dollar down too far in the late 1970s, up
too far in the early 1980s, and down too far again in the late 1980s,
only to find itself, at the time of writing, shooting up too far again.
5.27 - Group of Seven initiatives, starting at the first Louvre
meeting, to stabilize exchange rates among major countries constitute
a valuable first step in returning to a stable international monetary
order. Every country would gain if big movements in exchange rates
among the major countries could be avoided (95).
(93) The daily figure for foreign exchange transactions everywhere has been most
recently estimated at $422 billion by Haris Makkas of Citibank. One way to measure the
problem is to compare the current situation with an ideal state where there is a
common world currency and no national currencies. With a world currency there
would be no "foreign exchange" transactions. However there would still be cross-bor-
der capital transactions. What would be the global value of cross-border transactions
under an ideal state of a single world currency? I am not aware of any such estimate.
The annual value of foreign exchange transactions, using Makkas' daily estimate of
$422 billion amounts to $126,600 billion for a 300-day year, about five times the dollar
value of Global Product. What is the welfare cost of the unnecessary component of
these transactions? If each transaction -
that would take place even under ideal
conditions of a world currency -
represented a dead-weight resources cost of 0.1%
(111000), the cost of our multiple currency system would be $126.6 billion per year
multiplied by the fraction by which transactions would be reduced. Assuming this
(somewhat arbitrarily) to be
112, the cost of the present exchange system, by
comparison with a world currency, would be $63.3 billion per year. Of course the
redistributional effects of an elimination of the foreign exchange system would have to
be taken into account, especially the loss of profits to the banks, the loss of jobs to
traders, whose income would be transferred to the rest of the public, minus the lost
taxes on their salaries.
(94) In "The Monetary Dynamics of International Adjustment Under Fixed and
Flexible Exchange Rates:' (loc. cit.) I developed several dynamic models some of which
exhibited the perpetual oscillations that lead to repetitive overshooting. See pp. 164-6 of
International Economics.
(95) As already mentioned, the real value of the debts of the LOC's would be
reduced by US inflation and depreciation of the dollar insofar as their debts are
denominated in dollars. If the existing debts were long term, the LOC's would thus
benefit by inflationary policies in the US. However, insofar as these debts are short term
there would be little gain as short term interest rates would rise; and if inflation again
became serious in the United States, the political reaction against it might provoke
another tight money crisis like that of 1981-2, leaving the LOC's worse off than before.

464
Robert A. Mundell
5.28 - One of the important developments in the 1990s will be
the movement toward European monetary union and the possible
development of a Europe-wide currency. This is likely to provoke the
usual division between those who want to use the exchange rate
mechanism, or the common currency itself, as a vehicle for coordi-
nation of policies; and those who want to coordinate policies, in-
cluding budgets, interest rates and inflation rates, first. The division
will play itself out in Europe, with Germany backing the approach of
coordination first and then monetary union; and France and Italy the
path of monetary integration as an instrument of coordination. Since
the Economic Community needs to define well in advance its next
target for integration, the European Bank and Currency will be likely
targets for integration before the year 2000, and perhaps long before.
5.29 - If Europe embarks on a path to monetary union the
United States and Japan (and Canada) will have to take steps to ensure
that the rest of the world does not lack an effective and stable
monetary system. It is unlikely that Europe can provide much leader-
ship in this direction because its monetary energies will be taken up
within Europe. Leadership on the international monetary sphere
therefore will have to come from the United States and Japan and the
other countries in the International Monetary Fund.
5.30 - In the long run it would be desirable to associate the
Soviet Union and China as major partners in a new International
Monetary System.

Index
Aaron, Henry 88, lOSn
adjustment system. global
classical adjustment mechanism
403-32,451-9
general equilibrium analysis 432-51
gold standard and its aftermath
351-91
international adjustment mechanism
391-411
Africa 3,172,228,230
Alexander, S. 127, 141-2, 145-6, 148,
154n,392n
Allais, M. 38n
Argentina 99
Armstrong, Oement 399-4OOn
Asia 1-3,91,456
Attwood, Mathias 360n
Attwood, Thomas 359
Australia 99, 141, 172n, 230, 360, 382n
Austria 97, 185, 37o-1n
Austria-Hungary 351n, 365
Baker, James 2-3, 69,73,263-4,305,
389-90
balance of payments 125-6
adjustment of 391-432
composition of accounts 436-8
deficits 438-51, 457
elasticity approach to 126-41
growth and 426-32
sixteen approaches to 433-6
see also trade balance
balance of trade see balance of pay
ments
Barro, R. 265n, 284, 292n
Barsky, R. 303, 321n
Bastable, C. 140, 154n, 393-4n, 454n
Bayne, N. 259n, 262n, 294n
Belgium 84,97, 209
Bergsten, C. 151, 154n
Blackhurst, R. 135n, 154n
Bloomfield, A. 316, 321n, 325, 349n
Boughton, J. 282,292n
Boulding, K. 142n,154n
Brandt, Willy 202
Branson, W. 51, 55n,273n, 292n
BrazU99
Bretton Woods System 3, 62, 64, 94-6,
135n, 137,200,203,207-8,210,217,
245-7,259,294, 298-302, 306-7,
309,314-15,318,324,327-9,332-3,
327,375-6,425
Britain 41,59-63,72,74,80,98,137,141,
172-9,185,208,211,214,216,337,
352,405-8,415-16
and gold 356-72, 380-2n,4OO
and monetary union 84,97,219,
221-2,312
bullionist controversy 357-8
fiscal policy 329-30
inflation 354
interest rates 299-301
Brittan, S. 318, 321n
Bryan, William Jennings 353
Bryant, R. 271n, 274, 292n
budget deficit 135,146-53,441-2
USA 1,31,68-9,85,92-4, 103-4,
147-53,213,260,278,459
Bush, George 76,200, 391
Canada 2, 72, 111-13, 172n, 230, 342-3,
371n,464
Cantillon, Richard 356n, 400, 411, 414
capital mobility 45, 47, 432, 436-8,
440-2
capital movements 40-2, 126-7, 129,
138-41, 146n, 340, 430-1, 433,
456,463
Carter, Jimmy 66-7, 305
Cassel, G. 141, 154n, 352 .
Chile 99-100
China 62, 101,208,210,353,363,464
Chipman, J. 129-30, 132,134n, 137-41,
154n, 373n, 395-6
46S

466
Index
Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) 15,
203-7,228-9
common currency 187, 192-3, 318,
323-4, 344-8
competition 186-8,190,215,334-6
Cooper, R.302,321n, 325,339, 344,
349n
Corden, W. 147, 154n, 292n
Cournot's Law 433-6,457
cnedit 29-32,422-6, 432, 452
Cunliffe Report (1918)404-5
currency, depreciation of 125-8, 134-5,
137-8, 141-2, 150
fiscal approach 146--8
portfolio-balance approach 145-6
under conditions of Keynesian
unemployment 142-5
current-account imbalances 39-40,
442-3
dealing with 43-7
desirability of 40-3
obstacle to international monetary
reform 53-4
de Cecco, M. 362, 388n
de Gaulle, General 381
debt 87, 90, 172-9,440-51
LDCs 16-18, 87, 98-100, 213, 463n
third world 16-18, 247-54
deflation 334, 403-4, 424-7, 453, 458
and gold 358-60, 362-5, 366-72
Delors, Jacques 186
Delors Report 3, 15, 84, 97, 218
Denmark 185
DM 59, 97, 101, 199, 203, 218, 337-8,
343-4
see also exchange rates
dollar 31, 47-8, 50-1, 53, 79, 82, 84,
90-1,94-7,127-8,334,337-8,459
and the EC 84-5,199-200,203-4,
217-18
and the policy mix 57-76, 206
coordinated dollar after 1985 389-91
eurodollar 63-4, 112, 387
gold-dollar standard: 1934-1971
373-86
in post war period 304-12
inflation without gold: 1972-1981
386-8
strong 102-4, 335-6, 338-9
see also exchange rates
Dornbusch, R. 131n, 133n, 138n, 145,
154n, 292n, 338n
Eccles, M. 378-9n
economic science 25-37
Einzing, P. 370n
Eisenhower, D. 379n
Emminger, Otmar 83, 384-5n
employment 189-90, 277, 334
fiscal stimulus and 157-61
the two-currency customer-
market model 161-81
Ethiopia 353
Eurodollar Market 63-4, 112, 387
Europe 160-1, 173-9,343
and gold 353, 366, 374, 379-87, 425
see also European Community;
specific countries
European Coal and Steel Community
185
European Commission 188, 197n, 203,
215-16,220-1,234-6
European Community (EC) 82-5, 97,
185, 225-6,347, 388n
and the dollar 84-5,199-200,203-4,
217-18
basic institutional framework 216-23
competition 186-8, 190, 215
farmers 192, 203-4, 215, 228-9
integrated market (1992) 185-96
protectiionism 185-6,.189, 203, '125-7,
229-31
tax harmonisation 193-5, 221
see also Fortress Europe
European Council 216,218
European Court ofJustice 188, 197n,
215,220
European Currency Unit (ECD) 83-6,
. 193, 451n
European Free Trade Association
(EFfA) 185,230-1,233,235
European Monetary Cooperation Fund
(FECOM) 63,85,331

Index
467
European Monetary System (EMS) H,
13-15,59,63,83-6, sr, 199,222,
259,266-7,298,312,318,343
origin of20Q-4, 215, 217, 329
predecessors 207-12
success of 205-7
EMU 464
European Parliament 84, 218
European Strategic Program for
Research and Development in
Information Technology (ESPRIT)
234-6
exchange rates 12-13, 62, 87-8, 142,
172-9,194-5,278-9,287-91,
312-17,345
and interest rate volatility
29s-312
fixed 32, 39-40, 46-53, 60, 95, 192
flexibility 3, 45, 47, 60, 64, 324, 333-9,
387-9,460-3
and elasticity approach 126-41
floating 31, 46, 52,59,63,87,95-6,
258-9, 282, 295-7, 324, 326-7,
329-39
proposals for reform 339-48
real 44-5, 54, 128, 171
stability 83-4
volatility 339-43
see also Bretton Woods; dollar
exports 129-36, 139-40, 14H, 146,
395-7,403-4,410,434-6
Feldstein, M. 97n, 105n, 150-1, 154n,
258, 260n, 278, 292n,305,321n
Finland 185
fiscal policy 44-54,74-5,108,146-8,
278,281-2,329-30,342,348
USA 74-5, 104,200,274-5,329
fiscal stimulus and employment 157-{jl
the two-country-market model
161--81
Fischer, S. 265n, 284, 292n
Fisher, 1.303, 321n
Fitoussi, J.P. 15%1, 174-5, 181
Ford, Gerald 65
foreign balance 125, 127,134-5, 141-3, 146
see also trade balance
foreign exchange 131-4,139-40,331-2,
337-9,434,440-2,463
Fortress Europe 13, 16, 192, 225-{j, 236--8
agriculture 228-9
anti dumping mechanism 231
discrimination among firms 231-2
government procurement 233-4
least favoured nation principle 230-1
protectionism 'l26-7, 'l29-31
sensitive manufactured goods 229-30
subsidies 234-{j
technical standards 232-3
trade diversion 227--8
see also European Community
Foster, J.L. 408, 411
France 59-62, 72,74,84-5,95, sr, 137,
186,193,200,203-4,209-12,216,
219, 228, 237, 351n, 388, 464
and gold 353,357-{j3,367, 369-72,
381, 384n,425,452
inflation 205-7, 267
interest rates 299
Frankel,J. 257n,258n,260n,274-5, 280-1,
292-3n,304-5, 321n, 339, 349n
Franz, Otmar 84
Friedman, B.283,293n
Friedman, Milton 59, 265n, 333,349n,
463
Froot, K. 305, 321n, 339,349n
Funabashi, Y.261, 262n, 293n
GATT 190,192,213,223,226,244,
246-7,375
Genberg, H. 4On, 44, 46n, 48, 52, 55n
Germany 351n, 353-4, 363-4, 367,
369-70,400,425
Giavazzi, F. 264, 266-7, 293n
Giersch, H. 186,192, 197n, 220
Giovannini, M. 264, 293n, 298n, 321n
Giscard d'Estaing, V. 85, 202-3, 266
global imbalances 87-94
gold 47, 58-60, 74,211,279-80,287-91,
324-{j,331-2, 343, 398-400,403n,
407, 412-14, 422-{j,434n, 453
standard 60-3, 116n, 208-10,
298-304, 336n, 351-3, 403-4,
409,425,461-2

468
Index
gold,cont,
another inflationary swing
1850-73 360-2
deflationary swing 1820-49 358-60
gold-dollar standard 1934-71
373-6
inflation without gold 1972-81
386-8
inflationary long swing 1789-1819
357-8
long run stability of gold 354-7
post war palliatives and the
great deflation 366-72
South African gold and inflation
1897-1920~
swing to gold and deflation
1873-96362-6
Golden Avalanche, The (Graham and
Whittlesey) 374
Goldstein, M. 263, 282n, 293n
Gorbachev, Mikhail 81
Gordon, D. 284,292n
Gordon, R. 281n, 293n
Graham, F. 141, 154n
Great Depression 89,158, 265n
Greece 16, 185, 218, 226-8
Gresham's Law 422-3
Group of Five (GS) 246, 257-8, 262
Group of Seven (G7) 96-7, 103,199,
246, 257-8, 26Q-4, 267n, 271n,
277-8, 283,390, 463
growth and the balance of payments
426-32
Haberler, G. 88, 105n, 125-6, 133n,
137n,155n,394n,409
Hansen, A. 133n, 155n
Harberger, A. 142, 155n
Hardouvelis, G. 274-5, 28On,293n
Harris, J. 356-7
Harrod, Sir Roy 382-3n
Havana Charier 375
Hayek, FA 186, 197n
Henderson, D. 226n, 239n
Hicks,J.R. 91, 105n, 157, 168-9
Hindley, B. 231, 239
Hirschman, A. O. 126, 132-3n, 155n
Holland 72, 200
Holtham, G. 266n, 293n
Homg Kong 3, 91, 365n
Hoon, Hian 180
Horiuchi, A. 306n, 321n
Hughes Hallett, A. 266n, 293n
Humboldt, Baron von 360
Hume, David 392n, 395n, 400
adjustment mechanism 406-11,
414-26,451-2
Humphrey, T. 416-17, 420
Hungary98n
hysteresis 190
Iceland 185
imports 132-6, 139-40, 142-4, 185-6,
192,397,403-4,409-10,434-6
inconvertible paper currencies 351, 402
India 208, 210, 351-3, 357n
Indonesia 72
inflation 64, 84, 92, 109-10, 145-8, 189,
270-2, 332-4, 387, 403-4, 409,
423-7,453
and international policy coordination
264-6
gold and 357-8, 360-2, 365-6, 386-8
in developing countries 98-9
see also specific countries
interest rates 31, 45-7,108,144,158-80,
279, 282, 389, 427-8, 432n,436-40
and current account balance 442-51
and exchange rates 298-312
see also specific countries
International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development 375
International Monetary Fund (lMF)
17,61,62,71,82,95,98-9, 133n,
244-7,252-4, 262n, 271n, 276, 295,
372-3n
and international monetary reform
382-5
creation of 244-7, 375-8
international monetary system
207-12,375,464
history of 323-39
origin of 351-3

Index
469
reform of 18-22, 39-40, 79-82, 382-7
common currency 318, 323-4,
344-8
current account imbalances 40-7,
53-4
exchange rates 47-54
Kenen proposal 343
key currency monetary coordin-
ation343-4
target zones: The Williamson-
Miller proposal 341-3
transactions tax 339-41
International Nominal GNP Targeting
(INTI 257-60, 280-91
international policy coordination
257-60
obstacles to 260-80
Ireland 185
Italy 52, 59, 72, 74, 84, 200, 209, 211-12,
267, 351n,398n, 451n,464
inflation 205-7, 388
Jamaica 60
Japan 70, 72, 74, BO, 91, 97--8,103-4,
206,213,215-16,227--8,230-1,
234,267,272,295-7,312,314-16,
318,323,337,343,347,365-6,386,
464
fiscal policy 329-30
inflation 309-10
interest rates 101-2, 300-1, 306-11
monetary policy 343-4
surplus 1, 81, 87--8,456
[astrom, R. 354
Jay Cooke scandal 363-4
John Paul II, Pope 95-6, 105n
Johnson, Lyndon 381
Jones, R. 347n, 3490
Keleher, R. 416-17, 420
Kemp, Congressman Jack 66-7, 71
Kenen, P. 261n, 271n, 293n, 339, 343,
3490, 382-3n
Kennedy, John F. 57--8,63, 67, 380-1
Keynes, J.M. 91, 128-9, 155n, 344,
3490,359,3690,375,392,401,
405-11,419,421,455-6
Keynesianism 107-9, 117-18, 168, 170,
333-4
unemployment 142-5, 157--8
Kindleberger, C. 1420, 3730, 376n
King, P. 140, 155n
Klein, L. 128, 148-51, 155n
Kondratief index 354-5, 362, 366
Korea 3, 91
Kia~,I.89-90,105n
Krugman, P. 234, 264n 293n, 334-5,
337--8,347n,349o
Kuznets, S. 89-90, 105n
Kydland, F. 284, 293n
Lange, O. 433n
Latin America 2-3, 1720, 353, 358
debt 98-100, 247-51
Latin Monetary Union 208-12, 362-3
Laursen, S. 143, 155n
Lawson, Nigel 218
Lerner, A. 126, 133n, 136, 155n
less developed countries (LDCs) 2, 102
debt 16-18, 87. 98-100, 213,463n
growth 89-90
Upsey, R. 89-90, 105n
Locke, John 356n, 400-1, 414
Louvre Agreement 70, 74, 264n,
390-1,463
Luxembourg 84
Machlup, F. 126, 128, 131, 133-4n,
136, 138-40, 146n,392n
Malthus, Thomas 406, 408, 452, 458
Marshall, Alfred 91, 105n, 133n,
155n, 406, 411,419,455
Marshall-Lerner condition 126, 133,
138n
Masson, P. 263, 282n, 293n
McCabe, T. 378-90
McCallum, B.282-3, 293n
McKibbon, W. 282n, 293n
McKinnon, R. 259, 282n, 293-4n,
296-7, 321n, 339, 343-7,3490
Meade, J. 376n, 392n, 409-11
Meltzer, A. H. 332n, 3490
mercantilism 399-403
Metzler, L.A. 143, 155n, 392n
Mexico 2, 98, 365

470
Index
Mill, J.S. 127, 133n, 155n, 360n, 392-6,
402n, 405-11, 419, 451-2, 454-6,
458n
Miller, M. 259, 278-9, 281-2, 294n, 339,
341-3,35On
Mitchell, B.306n, 312, 321n
Mitterand, F.216,235
monetarism 107-20, 333-4
monetary policy45-7, 52,191,341-6,
416-17
and balance of payments 411-14,
432
and international policycoordination
264-6,281-3
and unemployment 157-8
seealso monetarism; specific countries
money supply 35,46,110,137,142,
270-2,277-9,283,403,411-26,
434,436-44
Mulford, D.261, 262n
Mundell, R. 52, 57, 77n, 107n, 122n, 126,
155n, 170, 181n, 282, 294n, 382-3
Mundell-Fleming model 44-6, 274n
Mussa,M.304, 321n
Nash equilibrium 257-9, 261, 271
NATO 82,215
N~hi,T. 145, 156n
New Zealand 100, 112n, 230
newly industrialised countries (NICs)
91
see also specific countries
Newton, Sir Isaac 356, 401
Nicaragua 99
Nixon, Richard 58, 304-5, 380-1
non-tariff barriers 185-6, 225-6, 233
Norway 185
Nurske, R. 326-7,349n
OftheBalance ofTrade (Hume) 392
Ohlin, B. 91, 392-4n, 405, 408-11, 455
Ohno, K. 303-5, 315,317,321n, 344, 349n
oH64, 248, 330, 347
shocks 17, 189, 216, 387-8
OPEC 64, 116
Oswald, J. 416-17
Oudiz, G. 275, 294n
Pagano, M. 266-7, 293n
paper money 423-6, 452-3
Pareto, V. 34, 37
Phelps, F. 158-64,174-5, 181n
Phillips Curve 72-3,109-10
Pigou, A.C.408-9
Plaza Accord 3, 257-8, 264n, 389-90,
460
Pohl, Karl Otto 83
Polak, J.J. 138, 141-2, 146-7, 156n
Poland98n
Portugal 16, 185,193,214,218,222,
226-8
Prais, S.J. 421n
Prescott, E. 284,293n
price-specie-flow mechanism 403-4,
417,451-2
prices 35, 46,83-4,333-4,401-2,406-9
change in relative prices 140-1,
144-5,148,411-26
cOmpetitiveness (USA) 148-53
of domestic goods 396-8
wholesale 302-3
Principles ofPolitical Economy (Mill) 405
producer price index (PPI) 295-6,
314-15,317
protectionism 42-3, 53, 102, 281, 401
in EC 185-6, 189, 203,'115-7, 229-31
Purchasing Power Parity (PPP)
295-7,312-17,343-6,457
Putnam, R. 259n, 262n, 294n
R&D231,234-6
Razin, A. 143n, 156n
Reagan, Ronald 66-72, 81, 235, 388
recession 219-20
US 58, 65-6, 88-9, 93-4, 101, 277
Regan, Donald 69, 206
Ricardo, D. 91-2, 169,201-2,359, 395n,
406-11,413-14,427,436,451,
454-8,463
Robertson, D.H. 91, l05n
Robinson, J. 126, 128-9, 131, 138-40,
142-4,156n,322n,395
Rockett, K. 26On,293n
Rogoff, K. 265n, 266, 267n, 284,294n
Romania 98n

Index
471
Roosevelt, Franlclin D. 62, 374n, 378n
Rotemberg, J. 273n, 292n
Rueff, J. 379-80,405
Russia 365
Sachs,J. 41n,55n, 259, 275, 282n, 293-4
Samuelson, P. 139n, 156n, 409
Schmidt, H. 85, 202-3, 266
SDRs 47, 58, 60, 74, 329, 331, 382-5
Shiller, R. 337,349n
silver 60, 208-11, 351, 353, 360, 363-4,
412-14
standard 356-8, 361, 453
Singapore 91
Single European Act 188
single market 13-14, 185-96, 236-7
Smith, Adam 16, 244, 246, 356n, 400,
423,452
Snyder, J. 357n
Sohmen, E. 136n, 156n
South Africa 211, 353, 365-6
sovereignty 346
Soviet Union 3, 72, 213, 230, 464
Spain 16, 185, 214, 218, 222, 226-8, 237
Summers, H. 150, 156n
Svensson,L.143n,156n
Sweden 100, 141, 185, 398n
Switzerland 52, 74, 103, 185, 200, 209,
375,388
Swoboda, A. 4On, 44,45n, 46n, 48,52, 55n
Taiwan 3, 91
Takeshita, N. 98
tariffs 136n, 229-30, 375, 401-2
Taussig, F.W. 128-9n, 141, 156n,
392-4n,405-11, 419, 454-6
Thatcher, Margaret 186, 218, 220
Third World 90,192
debt 16-18, 247-54
see also LDCs
Thornton, Henry 406, 408, 423-6, 458
Effect 374,452-4
Tobin, J. 334, 339-41, 349n
Tovias, A. 226n, 239n
trade balance 12-13, 125-8,336
absorption approach 141-8
elasticity approach 128-41
US 148-53
see also balance of payments
transaction tax 339-41
Treaty of Rome 216
Triffin, R. 326,327,350n, 380
Truman, Harry S.378-9n
Turkey 230, 235
unemployment 12, 35, 109,127,148,
159,167-8,172,179,411
EC 191,215-16, 221-3
Keynesian 142-5
monetary approach to 157-8
USA 67-8, 72-4
United States of America 2, 12, 18-19,
52,58-63,80,97-9,108-9,114,119,
127-8, 138n, 141, 172-9, 199-200,
208,228,230-1,245-7,272-3,
295-7,314-16,318,323,332,343,
347,464
and gold 353,362-73
gold-dollar standard 373-86, 425
budget deficit 1, 31, 68-9, 85, 92-4,
103-4,147-53,213,260,278,459
current account deficit 40-3, 53, 80-1,
87-8,90-4,148-53,214,456
fiscal policy 74-5, 104, 200,274-5, 329
inflation 14,57-8,63-8,73-4,88,91,
112,201,205-6,267,309-11,453
interest rates 50-1, 57-8,88-9,101-2,
112,205,299-303,306-12,388
monetarist policy 67-9, 104,316,
343-4,387
recession 58, 65-6, 88-9, 93-4,101,
277
stock prices 337-8
supply side economics 65-7
tax 58, 67-75
trade deficit 1,92-4, 98, 102-3,305-6
unemployment 67-8, 72-4
velocity 111-12, 268-9
see also dollar
Uruguay Round 16, 190,192,226-7,
234,236-8
Van Home, J.e. 310, 322n
Vaubel, R. 193,197n

472
Index
Viner,J.141,I56o.325,35On,356o.358-9n,
393-50.4r1lJ},420,426-7,451,454-6
Volker, Paul 57, 68, 205-6, 216, 266-7n,
388
voluntary export restraints (VERs)
227,229-31
wages 189-98,333-4, 397
nominal 142, 160
reall~120144-~15~,167-~
172-80,192,401-2
Walras Law 407, 433-6, 457
Wanniski, J. 66, 77n
Weber, Max 353
Weede, E. 196, 197n
Werner Report 216-17
West Germany 59-61, 70, 72, 74, 80,
84-5,97-8,104,141,186-8,192,
194,212-14,219-21,228,267,
272-3,295-7,314-16,318,337,386,
388-90, 456, 464
fiscal policy 329-30
inflation 309-10
interest rates 101-2, 199-200,205,
300-1, 308, 311-12, 451n
monetary policy 343-4
surplus 1, 81, 87-8, 199, 207
Wheatley, J. 408, 411
Williams, J. 376n
Williamson, J. 218,2240.259,278-9n.
281-~ 294n.3120.322n339,341-3,
350n
Wilson, R. 141, 156n
Winter, Sidney G. 161-4, 181n
World Bank 62, 99
Young, John Parke 368-70
Yugoslavia 98n

