

DEFENSE, SECURITY AND STRATEGIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GLOBALIZATION AND  
INTERNATIONAL SECURITY 
 
AN OVERVIEW 
 
No part of this digital document may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or
by any means. The publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this digital document, but makes no
expressed or implied warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No
liability is assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of information
contained herein. This digital document is sold with the clear understanding that the publisher is not engaged in
rendering legal, medical or any other professional services. 

DEFENSE, SECURITY AND STRATEGIES 
 
 
Additional books in this series can be found on Nova‘s website  
under the Series tab. 
 
 
Additional e-books in this series can be found on Nova‘s website  
under the e-book tab. 
 
 

DEFENSE, SECURITY AND STRATEGIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GLOBALIZATION AND  
INTERNATIONAL SECURITY 
 
AN OVERVIEW 
 
 
 
 
 
TERESA RODRIGUES 
RAFAEL GARCÍA PÉREZ 
AND 
SUSANA DE SOUSA FERREIRA 
EDITORS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New York 
 

Copyright © 2015 by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or 
transmitted in any form or by any means: electronic, electrostatic, magnetic, tape, mechanical 
photocopying, recording or otherwise without the written permission of the Publisher. 
 
For permission to use material from this book please contact us: 
nova.main@novapublishers.com 
 
 
NOTICE TO THE READER 
The Publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this book, but makes no expressed or 
implied warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No 
liability is assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of 
information contained in this book. The Publisher shall not be liable for any special, 
consequential, or exemplary damages resulting, in whole or in part, from the readers’ use of, or 
reliance upon, this material. Any parts of this book based on government reports are so indicated 
and copyright is claimed for those parts to the extent applicable to compilations of such works. 
 
Independent verification should be sought for any data, advice or recommendations contained in 
this book. In addition, no responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage 
to persons or property arising from any methods, products, instructions, ideas or otherwise 
contained in this publication. 
 
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information with regard to the 
subject matter covered herein. It is sold with the clear understanding that the Publisher is not 
engaged in rendering legal or any other professional services. If legal or any other expert 
assistance is required, the services of a competent person should be sought. FROM A 
DECLARATION OF PARTICIPANTS JOINTLY ADOPTED BY A COMMITTEE OF THE 
AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION AND A COMMITTEE OF PUBLISHERS. 
 
Additional color graphics may be available in the e-book version of this book. 
 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 
Globalization and international security : an overview / editors: Teresa Rodrigues, Rafael Garcia 
Perez and Susana de Sousa Ferreira. 
       pages cm 
  Includes bibliographical references and index. 
 1.  Globalization. 2.  Security, International.  I. Rodrigues, Teresa F., editor of compilation. II. 
García Pérez, Rafael, editor of compilation. III. Ferreira, Susana de Sousa, editor of compilation.  
  JZ1318.G5824 2014 
  355'.033--dc23 
                                                            2014035792 
 
 
Published by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. † New York 
 
ISBN: 978-1-63463-081-8 (eBook)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
Acknowledgments 
vii 
Notes on Contributors 
ix 
List of Abbreviations 
xiii 
Introduction 
 
xvii 
Teresa Ferreira Rodrigues, Rafael García Pérez  
and Susana de Sousa Ferreira 
Part I: Risks and Opportunities 
1 
Chapter 1 
Globalization, Crisis and Security – What Will be the Map  
of Global Rivalries in the Horizon 2030? 
3 
José Félix Ribeiro 
Chapter 2 
Global Governance Failure 
15 
Rafael García Pérez 
Part II: Human Perspectives 
31 
Chapter 3 
Population Dynamics: Demography Matters 
33 
Teresa Ferreira Rodrigues 
Chapter 4 
International Migrations, Security and Identity 
51 
Miguel Requena 
Chapter 5 
Reconceptualizing the Human Rights Heritage:  
Challenges and Prospects on the Responsibility  
to Protect 
77 
Ana Isabel Xavier 
Part III: Exogenous Issues 
93 
Chapter 6 
Climate Risks: Theory, Data and the Global Governance  
of Climate Change 
95 
Lara Lázaro Touza and Michel Zoghby 
 
 
 

Contents 
vi
Chapter 7 
Fight for Natural Resources: The Geography of Wars 
127 
Américo Zuzarte Reis 
Chapter 8 
Energy Security: Concepts, Shifting Energy Landscape  
and Main Players in the 21st Century 
147 
Catarina Mendes Leal 
Part IV: New Security Threats 
167 
Chapter 9 
Cyber Threats, Strategic Impact and Legal Framework  
of Conflicts in Cyberspace 
169 
Paulo Fernando Viegas Nunes 
Chapter 10 
Transnational Terrorism and Diffused Risks in a Globalized World 
183 
Susana de Sousa Ferreira 
Chapter 11 
Globalization and the Threats of Weapons of Mass  
Destruction Proliferation 
197 
Francisco Galamas and Francisco Proença Garcia 
Chapter 12 
Globalization and Challenges for Intelligence Analysis 
211 
Helena Rêgo 
Index 
 
223 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
 
This book grew out of a project originally designed by two members of the Coordination 
Team, whose teaching responsibilities led to the necessity of writing their own view of the 
globalization process related with security issues. 
But the text now published is most of all the result of the enthusiasm of a group of people 
who deserve to be mentioned in this circumstance. We owe our special thanks to the authors 
of the twelve chapters that make up this study. Our final words are for them. We would like to 
acknowledge their availability and the enthusiasm with which they all embraced our 
challenge. The final result is a book with quality and high scientific standards that the 
coordinators are proud to present.  
Additional thanks to NOVA Publishers, for having accepted to publish this book without 
restrictions. We hope with it to somehow contribute to enrich this editorial line. 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS 
 
Américo Zuzarte Reis is Invited Assistant at the Instituto de Geografia e Ordenamento 
do Território, at the University of Lisbon (Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal) and Researcher 
at the Centre for Geographical Studies, University of Lisbon. He also works on environmental 
and Geography Consultancy. Previously, he worked as Security Major (retired) and Professor 
at Portuguese Air Force Academy (1991-2004). Main research interest: geopolitics of natural 
resources and conflicts, quantitative analysis of resource conflicts, environmental security, 
climate change and security. 
E-mail: areis@campus.ul.pt 
 
Ana Isabel Xavier is an Assistant Professor in the NOVA University of Lisbon 
(Portugal) and a Post-Doctoral research fellow in the Research Unit in Political Science and 
International Relations (NICPRI) and IPRI (International Relations Portuguese Institute). She 
is a member of the European Commission‘s Team Europe developing, from several years, 
training activities on European Studies, Human Rights, Non-Formal Education and 
Citizenship. Her main research interests include European Union, Security and Defense, 
Human Security, Human Rights and Globalization. Her publications include several book 
chapters and articles on these topics. Ana Isabel Xavier is frequently invited by civilian and 
military institutions for conferences and lectures. She is a member of the Portuguese Political 
Science Association (APCP), Portuguese Security Studies Network (PT-SSN). The Academic 
association for contemporary European Studies (UACES) and International Studies 
Association (ISA).  
E-mail: aix@fcsh.unl.pt 
 
Catarina Mendes Leal is the Head of the International Relations Department of the 
Economy and Food Safety Standards Authority and invited lecturer in the Master of Political 
Science and International Relations at the Faculty of Social Sciences and Humanities (NOVA 
University of Lisbon) and guest lecturer at ISCTE. Author of several publications, she usually 
participates in research projects that focus on areas such as energy security, North Africa, 
South Atlantic, Economic Diplomacy, Islam, Foresight/ Scenarios. Her latest publications are 
The Maghreb and Islam - Energy Risk of Portugal; Internationalization of the Portuguese 
Economy in Brazil - An Experience of Economic Diplomacy?; The U.S. Foreign Policy - 
Main Milestones and Doctrines. She won the National Defense 2010 Prize with a study on 
‗Energy Relations between Portugal and Nigeria - Risks and Opportunities‘. 
E-mail: catarina.mleal@gmail.com 

Teresa Rodrigues, Rafael Garcia Perez and Susana de Sousa Ferreira 
x
Francisco Galamas is an Associate Researcher at the National Defense Institute (IDN, 
Portugal), where he researches and lectures on issues linked to the proliferation of Weapons 
of Mass Destruction (WMD). He holds a B.A. in International Relations and, since 2009, a 
M.A. in International Security. Between 2007 and 2010, he has the Executive-Director of 
Forum Intelligence, a strategic studies think-tank of the Portuguese Catholic University. 
Previously he has also worked in different governmental departments on issues linked to the 
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Mr. Galamas also supported countries in Africa 
and Eastern Europe in matters related to nonproliferation. Since 2007, he has published 
several articles and book chapters about International Security – with an emphasis on 
nonproliferation topics – in national and international journals. 
E-mail: galamas@netcabo.pt 
 
Francisco Proença Garcia is a LTC in the Portuguese Army. Graduated from Military 
Academy in 1991 and holds a PhD in Contemporary History. Had his Aggregation (same as 
the German Habilitation) at the Portuguese Catholic University in 2008 and took the Staff 
Course at the Portuguese Joint War College in 2006. He has served as Vice-president of the 
Council of the Portuguese Military Academy and its Army Research Centre. He is also 
Deputy-Secretary General from the International Academy of Portuguese Culture. He is a 
Guest Professor of War and Strategic Studies in the Catholic University of Lisbon and of Law 
and Defense in the Lisbon New University. In his Military career he has been assigned to 
several countries (Angola, Mozambique, Guinea-Bissau and East-Timor) in peace keeping 
and security sector reform missions. He has served as a Military Counsellor to the Portuguese 
Delegation to NATO HQ in Brussels, he also serves as the Portuguese representative in the 
European Defense Agency in Brussels, and also served as a Counsellor to the General Chief 
of the Army Staff. At present is the director of the Post-Graduated Studies Department in the 
Military Academy and the Head of the Master in Military Science - Security and Defense in 
the Portuguese Joint War College. 
E-mail: fmgppg@hotmail.com 
 
Helena Rêgo is Invited Teacher, PhD in International Relations (Institute of Social and 
Political Sciences, ISCSP). Director of the Portuguese Intelligence Academy under the 
Portuguese Republic Intelligence System (SIRP) and director of several operational 
departments of the Portuguese Intelligence Service (SIS) (1995-2013).  Her PhD focus on 
intelligence analysis and security issues. She holds a Master Degree in International Relations 
(ISCSP) with focus on Russian issues, and a Law Degree from the University of Lisbon (UL). 
She was Invited Assistant Professor at UL Law School (1985-1987), and at ISCSP (1992-
2009). She is a speaker at several conferences in Portugal and abroad, organized by different. 
She was the President of the Terrorism Working Group (TWG) of the European Council 
during the Portuguese Presidency of the EU, in 2007. She was jointly responsible for the 
security of several great events. She was a representative at the Anti-Terrorism Coordination 
Unit (UCAT) (2003-2004). She gives training in all SIS and SIRP (intelligence) courses, 
since 1988. She teaches and coordinates the PG course on Structured Analytic Techniques at 
ISEGI- NOVA University (Portugal). 
E-mail: dcrh@pcm-c.com 
 

Notes on Contributors 
xi
José Felix Ribeiro is an economist. Has been Principal Advisor to the Department of 
Foresight and Planning and International Affairs of the Ministry of Environment and Spatial 
Planning, where coordinated the International Information Office until 2009. Was responsible 
for the area of Foresight in the Courses of Public Administration Management in INA - 
National Institute of Administration. Regular contributor at the IDN - Institute of National 
Defense and the IPRI - Portuguese Institute of International Relations. Holds a PhD in 
International Relations from the NOVA University of Lisbon (Portugal). Has several 
publications in the subjects of International Economy and Geopolitics and Forecasting. 
E-mail: jm.felixribeiro@gmail.com 
 
Lara Lázaro Touza holds a PhD from the London School of Economics, an MSc in 
Environmental Assessment and Evaluation from the London School of Economics and 
a Graduation on Economics from the Autónoma University of de Madrid (Spain). Dr. Lázaro 
Touza has been the Director of the Master in Environmental Management at IE University 
where she has been a lecturer in Environmental Policy and Decision-Making. She is also a 
lecturer in Economic Theory at a University College in Madrid (Colégio Universitário 
Cardenal Cisneros). As a consultant, Dr. Lázaro Touza has been employed by Repsol, a 
leading energy company in Spain, in a project envisioned to develop a decision-support 
system to help optimize the company‘s energy technology portfolio in the future. 
E-mail: laralazaro@cu.cisneros.es 
 
Michel Zoghby has a multidisciplinary background, focusing on megatrends and 
emerging issues including the Greater Middle East/political Islam, environmental treaties, 
clean/disruptive technologies and energy issues. He also has experience in international 
business, real estate and U.S. political campaigning. Michel earned a B.S. in Finance (minor 
in economics) from the University of Florida, a MSc in Environmental Policy from the 
London School of Economics and a Master in International Affairs from Columbia 
University‘s School of International and Public Affairs. Michel has lived or worked in over 
half a dozen countries, from Yemen to Taiwan.  
E-mail: mszoghby@gmail.com 
 
Miguel Requena (Ph.D. by Universidad Complutense de Madrid) is Full Professor of 
Sociology in the Department of Social Structure and Director of Instituto Universitario 
General Gutiérrez Mellado de Investigación sobre la Paz, la Seguridad y la Defensa 
(Universidad Nacional de Educación a Distancia, Madrid, Spain). He has been a member of 
the Technical Staff of Centro de Investigaciones Sociológicas (1984–1987), researcher at the 
Fundación Investigaciones Económicas y Sociales Aplicadas (1989–1992), Senior Associate 
Member in St. Antony College, Oxford University (1994–95), Professor at Hamilton College 
(1992–2001) and Visiting Professor at Princeton University (2004). His research interests are 
demography, social structure and social change. 
E-mail: mrequena@poli.uned.es 
 
Paulo Viegas Nunes is an invited Professor at the Military Academy where he teaches 
Information Warfare and a Cyberspace Crisis Management Exercises Seminar. He is also and 
invited lecturer at the National Defense Institute and in several Universities. He graduated at 
the Portuguese Military Academy in 1990. He obtained a Master Degree in Electronics and 

Teresa Rodrigues, Rafael Garcia Perez and Susana de Sousa Ferreira 
xii 
Computer Science at Technical Superior Institute in 1997. He completed his PhD in 
Information Sciences at Complutence University of Madrid in 2010. During his career he 
participated in several Cyber related working groups and has been engaged at Cyber Security 
and Cyber Defense Capability Development Projects at NATO, EU and National levels. He is 
the author of more than 50 articles and four books. 
E-mail: nunes.pfv@mail.exercito.pt 
 
Rafael García Pérez is a professor of international relations at the Faculty of Political 
Science of the University of Santiago de Compostela (Spain). He also lectures at the Instituto 
Universitario Gutiérrez Mellado, Madrid (UNED - Ministry of Defense, Spain) and holds a 
Jean Monnet Action ‗Foreign Policy of the European Union‘. He is a senior researcher for 
national and international programs focused on European security, foreign policy and global 
governance. He is the author of more of 60 articles and five books. 
E-mail: rafael.garcia@usc.es 
 
Susana de Sousa Ferreira has a PhD scholarship from the Portuguese Foundation of 
Science and Technology (FCT) and is a researcher at the Portuguese Institute of International 
Relations (IPRI), the Research Center for the Study of Population, Economy and Society 
(CEPESE) and the Research Center of Security and Defense (CISDI). She is currently a 
Visiting Fellow at the Instituto Universitario General Gutiérrez Mellado (IUGM) in Madrid 
(Spain). Master in Political Science and International Relations by the NOVA University of 
Lisbon (Portugal), she is currently attending a PhD course in International Relations, in the 
field of Security Studies and Strategy. Has published several articles in the subjects of 
migrations, security, Mediterranean, demography and prospective. 
E-mail: sferreira@igm.uned.es 
 
Teresa Ferreira Rodrigues is an associate professor of International Relations at the 
Department of Political Studies and a visiting professor at the Instituto Superior de Estatística 
e Gestão de Informação, both at NOVA University of Lisbon (Portugal). She teaches Security 
Studies, Demography, Human Ecology and Globalization Studies. She holds a PhD in 
Contemporary History (1993) and Aggregation in Political Science and International 
Relations (2002), both at NOVA University. She holds the title of National Defense Adviser 
(2009). She is head of the PhD program in International Relations and of the Master‘s 
program in Political Science and International Relations at the NOVA University. She is also 
Head of the postgraduate programs in a) Strategic Studies and Security (3rd edition), a 
partnership between NOVA and the Portuguese Ministry of National Defense; b) 
Globalization, Diplomacy and Security, a partnership between NOVA and the Ministries of 
Foreign Affairs and National Defense and c) Information Management and Security, a 
partnership between NOVA, the Portuguese Republic intelligence System and the Ministry of 
National Defense. Author of more than 150 articles and seven books, she is a senior 
researcher for national and international projects focused on migration, mortality, health, 
forecast analysis and planning, security studies. 
E-mail: trodrigues@fcsh.unl.pt 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
 
 
AAU 
 
Assigned Amount Unit 
ADNOC 
 
Abu Dabhi National Oil Company 
APT 
 
Advanced Persistent Threats 
AR  
 
Assessment Report 
ARPA 
 
Advanced Research Projects Agency 
ASB 
 
Air Sea Battle 
ASEAN 
 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
AU  
 
African Union 
BAU 
 
Business As Usual 
BP  
 
British Petroleum 
BRICS 
 
Brasil, Russia, India, China and South Africa 
BTWC 
 
Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention 
CCD COE  
NATO Cooperative Cyber Defense Centre of Excellence 
CDM 
 
Clean Development Mechanism 
CER 
 
Certified Emission Reduction 
CESEDEN 
Centro Superior de Estudios de la Defensa Nacional - Centre for 
Advanced Studies of the National Defense 
CNOOC 
 
China National Offshore Oil Corporation 
CNPC 
 
China National Petroleum Corporation 
COP 
 
Conferences of the Parties 
CRS 
 
Creditor Reporting System 
CTCN 
 
Climate Technology Centre and Network 
CWC 
 
Chemical Weapons Convention 
DAC 
 
Development Assistance Committee 
DRC 
 
Democratic Republic of Congo 
EIA  
 
Energy Information Administration 
ENI  
 
Ente Nazionale Idrocarburi 
ESRI 
 
Environmental Systems Research Institute 
EST 
 
Environmentally Sound Technologies 
EST 
 
Emerging Strategic Technologies 
EU  
 
European Union 
FDI  
 
Foreign Direct Investment 
FRG 
 
Federal Republic of Germany 

Teresa Rodrigues, Rafael Garcia Perez and Susana de Sousa Ferreira 
xiv
G8  
 
Group of Eight 
GCR2P 
 
Global Centre for the Responsibility to Protect 
GDP 
 
Gross Domestic Product 
GDR 
 
German Democratic Republic 
GEF 
 
Global Environmental Facility 
GHG 
 
Greenhouse Gas 
GICNT 
 
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism 
GIS  
 
Geographic Information System 
GSE 
 
Government-Sponsored Enterprise 
HEU 
 
Highly Enriched Uranium 
HIV/AIDS 
Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection / Acquired 
Immunodeficiency Syndrome 
HR 
  
Human Rights 
IAEA 
  
International Atomic Energy Agency 
ICAO 
  
International Civil Aviation Organization 
ICISS 
 
International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty 
IDN 
 
Instituto de Defesa Nacional – National Defense Institute 
IEA  
 
International Environmental Agreement 
IMF 
 
International Monetary Fund 
IMO 
 
International Maritime Organization 
INA 
 
Industrija nafte 
INOC 
 
Iraq National Oil Company 
IOC 
 
International Oil Company 
IPCC 
 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
IPE  
 
International Petroleum Exchange 
IPR  
 
Intellectual Property Rights 
IRA 
 
Irish Republican Army 
IRA 
 
Irish Republican Army 
KMG 
 
Krav Maga Global 
KP  
 
Kyoto Protocol 
KPC 
 
Kuwait Petroleum Corporation 
LDCF 
 
Least Developed Countries Fund 
LNG 
 
Liquified Natural Gas 
LULUCF 
 
Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry 
MENA 
 
Middle East and North Africa 
MOL 
 
Magyar Olaj 
MOP 
 
Meetings of the Parties 
NAFTA 
 
North America Free Trade Agreement 
NATO 
 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
NGO 
 
Non-governmental Organisation 
NIC 
 
National Intelligence Council 
NIOC 
 
National Irarian Oil Company 
NOC 
 
National Oil Company 
NOC 
 
National Oil Corporation 
NPT 
 
Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty 
NSA 
 
National Security Agency 

List of Abbreviations 
xv
NSG 
 
Nuclear Supplier Group 
OECD 
 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
ONGC 
 
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation  
OPEC 
 
Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries 
PCN 
 
Pipe Coaters Nigeria 
PDO 
 
Petroleum Development Oman 
PDVSA 
 
Petróleos de Venezuela 
PFLP 
 
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine 
PISA 
 
Program for International Student Assessment 
PRIO 
 
Peace Research Institute of Oslo 
PSI  
 
Proliferation Security Initiative 
QP  
 
Qatar Petroleum 
R2P 
 
Responsibility to Protect 
RDD 
 
Radiological Disperse Device 
RtoP 
 
Responsibility to Protect 
SBL 
 
Seabed Logging 
SCCF 
 
Special Climate Change Fund 
SEZ 
 
Special Economic Zone 
SIDS 
 
Small Island Developing States 
SINOPEC  
China Petrochemical Corporation 
SLOC 
 
International Sea Lines of Communication 
SRES 
 
Special Report on Emissions Scenarios 
TEC 
 
Technology Executive Committee 
TNA 
 
Technology Needs Assessment 
TRIPS 
 
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 
UAE 
 
United Arab Emirates 
UAV 
 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle 
UCDP 
 
Uppsala Conflict Data Program 
UK  
 
United Kingdom 
UN  
 
United Nations 
UNEP 
 
United Nations Environment Programme 
UNFCCC 
 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
UNMISS 
 
United Nations Peacekeeping Mission in South Sudan 
UNOCI 
 
United Nations Operation in Côte d‘Ivoire 
US  
 
United States 
USA 
 
United States of America  
USA 
 
United States of America 
USD 
 
United States Dollar 
USGS 
 
United States Geological Survey 
USSR 
 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
WEO 
 
World Energy Outlook 
WG  
 
Working Group 
WHO 
 
World Health Organization 
WIPO 
 
World Intellectual Property Organization 
WMD 
 
Weapons of Mass Destruction  
WTO 
 
World Trade Organization 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
Teresa Ferreira Rodrigues* 
NOVA. New University of Lisbon, Portugal 
Rafael García Pérez† 
Santiago de Compostela‘s University, Spain) 
Susana de Sousa Ferreira‡ 
IPRI - Portuguese Institute of International Relations, Portugal 
 
 
The number of publications that describe the phenomenon of globalization, its history, its 
process of evolution and its various actors, is quite extensive. The same is true when we deal 
with security and defense issues. Either when we assume them in a more classical realistic 
perspective or even when we select new subjects, considering the largest scope allowed by 
the concept of human security. Relevant studies have already been published on transnational 
threats, terrorism, climate change factors, or the secutization of certain matters, as migrations. 
At the same time we know that the number of publications that try to articulate the 
phenomenon of globalization with security issues is more reduced. But still they also exist 
and are quite recent. 
However the coordinators of this volume decided to assume the risk of editing a 
publication linking globalization and security. What justifies another book on a recurring 
theme? The belief that the present book will contribute with new ways of approaching some 
topics. In fact in Globalization and International Security. An overview we seek to assure an 
updated and comprehensive perspective at two different levels: to tackle some unavoidable 
themes such as climate changes, governance issues, economic challenges, and terrorism 
threats), but also to approach less known subjects, such as population dynamics, natural 
resources and intelligence. To achieve this goal we had the privilege to rely on the expertise 
of about a dozen researchers, coming from different backgrounds and nationalities. Their 
analytical perspectives to address current issues reflect that diversity, without compromising 
the cohesion of the book.  
                                                           
* trodrigues@fcsh.unl.pt. 
† rafael.garcia@usc.es. 
‡ sferreira@igm.uned.es. 

Teresa Rodrigues, Rafael Garcia Perez and Susana de Sousa Ferreira 
xviii 
Globalization is one of the main features that characterize the international relations of 
our time. Scholars agree that we live in an era of economic, social, cultural and political 
change and some of those changes are correlated with the globalization process. Associated 
with globalization there is a set of phenomena that changed the international system. The 
complex nature of these phenomena and their interaction dynamics changed the paradigms of 
research that were predominant until the end of the cold war in the field of International 
Relations as a discipline. In this changing and undefined scenario, security has become the 
axis of the study of international relations by allowing to integrate the analysis of phenomena 
that were traditionally studied separately. 
The link between globalization and security remains narrow. The wide range of old and 
new threats to security, from climate change to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, 
organized crime or terrorism have led to the awareness that greater collaboration between the 
various stakeholders is necessary. In this way, security is ‗globalizing‘, in a double sense: on 
the one hand, as the problems identified with the maintenance of security (both of States and 
citizens) acquired a global dimension and, on the other hand, as measures that are considered 
necessary to deal with them also tend to be global. Both at the global and regional context, the 
emergence of new relevant international actors and the variety of old and new challenges 
point out, thus, to the creation of a non-polar world rather than a multipolar system. 
Given their interests and global responsibilities, major powers face the same strategic 
insecurity sources, hidden, potential and real. So they have a common interest and a huge 
need to cooperate in order to coordinate the different national policies against these threats. 
The recognition that unilateral responses (and even small ad hoc coalitions) to transnational 
insecurity problems are inefficient, reinforces this common interest. Thus, the joint action in 
which the great powers optimize, rather than maximizing, the power of the State through the 
distribution of responsibilities, is the rational answer. 
What is the world order of the 21st century? Despite the political dynamic that followed 
the financial and economic crisis of 2008, which increased the importance of the emerging 
powers, the post-cold war world, marked by the emergence of globalization, is the main 
frame of International Relations. As a result, a series of phenomena transformed the 
international scenario, forcing analysts to look at the new nature of the system 
[1,4,5,7,8,10,11].  
The question that many have made is which concepts allow, today, the understanding of 
the system‘s structure and how to develop a research program capable of assuming the 
different phenomena of globalization? Thus, academics, politicians and those in general who 
deal with international politics, are trying to find a reformulation of the foundations of 
International Relations theories, capable of conceptualizing the problems of the post-cold war 
and the diverse trends arising from the globalization process. 
Power and research for peace have lost its centrality as key concepts of the internal 
debate in the discipline. Thus, the quest for a new concept that allows us to address the 
phenomena that were not anticipated, nor treated by previous concepts [3]. That is why the 
International Relations theories are increasingly focusing the concept of security as a guide 
for the interpretation of the dynamics of the system. 
Some analysts saw the collapse of the cold war as the way to a new international order, in 
which security matters require different approaches and analytic perspectives.  Security has 
become an articulator axis of the debates in International Relations, dominating scientific 

Introduction 
xix
research programs and assessing problems that were not resolved or successfully assumed 
since the debate between realists and idealists [12]. 
Therefore, a security framework allows us to interpret various problems and to structure 
the discussion of phenomena that are usually studied separately and on its own, such as: arms 
proliferation and industry, international trade and investment planning, options of foreign 
policy, system and sovereignty dynamics, which may be connected within a broader 
framework. Security is available to analysts as an organizational idea for International 
Relations and is as effective as power when it comes to unify the debate. However, even 
analysts recognize that the centrality of security in the discipline of International Relations is 
not exempted of conceptual and semantic problems. On the contrary, the term security is 
ambiguous in its content and its form, and it is not easy to identify its own application level, 
or the spectrum of references that it refers to [2]. 
Therefore, this approach to security aims to debug the concept in order to get a more 
elaborate treatment as a central category when dealing with globalization [6]. 
Research on the concept of security is based on an initial assumption; current 
international relations can be understood through a security framework. Security has become 
an explanatory category of the international system characterized by the phenomena of 
globalization. Different security concepts arise different interpretations of the international 
system. 
 
 
THE PROJECT: OBJECTIVES, METHODOLOGY AND CONTENT 
 
This book is the contribution of a large number of authors. Thus, the analytical 
perspectives adopted to address the issues reflect the diversity of origins and academic 
backgrounds. In order to reduce the risk of exhibiting a dispersed work, the editors believe it 
to be necessary to provide a general (very general) vision which can frame all the issues that 
are addressed in this book. 
Our intent is not to unify the analytical perspective, nor condition the complete freedom 
that each author had to write his chapter. The ideas presented here are not original. Many of 
you know them and some of you share them.  
Our basis is a chronological perception of globalization according to which what we 
normally conceive as ‗globalization‘ would begin at the end of the cold war and reach the 
present day. In this time frame there are two phases divided by the international economic 
crisis that began in 2008. 
The first of these stages (1991-2007) is determined at the political level by the rise of the 
US and the creation of a unipolar system (at least the attempt to form one). Those years are 
characterized by the extension of a particular model of capitalism, with an American matrix, 
which broadly favored the interests of advanced economies, reaffirming its international 
influence. 
The second phase, that begins with the outbreak of the financial crisis in 2008, the stage 
seems to change radically. A unipolar world gives place to a multipolar configuration. The 
behavior of the world‘s major economies is also reversed. The rise of emerging economies 
contrasts with the stagnation or recession in the old core countries. 

Teresa Rodrigues, Rafael Garcia Perez and Susana de Sousa Ferreira 
xx
Many of the ideas that have been discussed in the past two decades in the international 
arena were formulated during the first phase (prior to 2008) and were consistent with the 
political and ideological context of the situation: one of Western dominance and universal 
globalization under Western parameters. As far as we are concerned, a debate of deep 
ideological content took place, hinged on the notion of ‗global governance‘. Some of its main 
ideas involved a reduced role of the State (the ‗withdrawal of the state‘) and a ‗rethinking‘ of 
the principle of national sovereignty (in most respects). 
Different structures of international cooperation, more or less institutionalized, for the 
collective management of global risks were created based on those conceptions. Those 
constitute the core of the analysis in this work. 
Until now it has been common to attribute the slow progress of global governance to the 
resistance brought by those agents ‗opposing‘ globalization (national and spurious self-
interests). This has created a sort of discourse with two opposing positions: the course of 
history drives the need for global governance institutions that are restrained by hindrances of 
the past that resist the future. The dialectic modernity/post-modernity could summarize this 
approach. 
The consequences of the international economic crisis in shaping the balance of power in 
the current international system contradicting approaches earlier to 2007: from a unipolar to a 
multipolar trend; from a ‗post-modern state‘ to a ‗state sovereignty‘; from unrestricted 
integration in the global economy to the independent management of economy itself 
(competitive devaluation of currency, trade protectionism); from trade integration at the 
global level (WTO) to the fragmentation of the economic space in regional areas (the failure 
of the Doha Round, regional free trade agreements). 
In short, the transition from a unipolar to a multipolar trend seems to be reflected in the 
increasing fragmentation of the economic space and, if confirmed, will also eventually affect 
the strategic and security space. 
These changes are also affecting the ‗discourse‘ that explains the process of globalization 
and the appropriate strategies to successfully deal with it. If until 2008 a sort of ‗Western 
model‘ was accepted, it is now a lot more questionable, and we may even talk of an outright 
censorship. The rise of emerging powers associated with the construction of a new ‗narrative‘ 
adapted to the values embodied by these countries. A scenario where it is increasingly 
difficult to adopt the tenets of globalizing governance. 
This book is composed by twelve different chapters. Each one of them tries to present the 
state of the art and major structural lines on their own specific subject. Those chapters are 
divided in four sets. Each of these parts corresponds to one of the objectives we have assumed 
as main components for our study. Namely: (1) to characterize some of the major challenges 
of globalization, such as the framework of the economic and political international system; 
(2) to evaluate some issues concerning human imbalances in our globalized world and some 
of their specific consequences in security terms; (3) to identify environmental concerns 
coming from the lack of essential natural resources, whose access is leading to conflicts in 
most regions; and, (4) to assess different examples of new security threats resulting from the 
globalization process, such as cybersecurity, terrorism, WMD and intelligence leaks. 
Part One offers the framework for the main challenges of globalization. The two first 
chapters follow the structural transformations which took place in the last decades in 
economic and political terms. The first, written by Félix Ribeiro, economist, supports a long-
term analysis about international economy and the way globalization introduces insecurity 

Introduction 
xxi
risks in the international system. This chapter focuses on the relationship between 
Globalization and Security, in a long-term horizon. It is characterized by the ongoing 
transformation of the geo-economics pattern of complementarity between the USA and Asia 
Pacific and the geopolitical and strategic rivalries between emerging powers and between 
them and the USA, in the afterwards of the international financial crisis of 2008 and the 
partial withdrawal of the US from the ‗Greater Middle East‘. 
Actually, one of the main problems arises from the fact that the governance of global 
risks is not sufficiently advanced and it is difficult to expect significant advances in the future. 
This negative diagnosis made by Rafael García Pérez is due to the identification of two 
negative dynamics that occur in today‘s international society and that go against the agenda of 
global governance: the changes that are occurring in the international system, in transition to 
a post-Western and post-hegemonic system; and the increasing ‗regionalization‘ of the 
globalization process that tends to manifest itself in an uneven performance (both 
economically and demographically) of the different regions of the planet in the process of 
global transformation. There is no uniform global society that perceives the threat posed by 
global risks in the same way and therefore is willing to react simultaneously and in a 
coordinated manner. To the extent that the behavior of the different regions diverges and thus 
traditional hierarchies established in the international system change, the implementation of 
proposals, with a Western profile, is increasingly more difficult. Those are rejected by the 
new emerging actors who support their own national agendas. 
Some of these problems are addressed in a broader perspective in the second part, which 
we named as ‗Human Perspectives‘. In what regards population dynamics, the most relevant 
conclusion is that demography matters. The globalization process brought a larger complexity 
to the link concerning population and security. Thus, in the actual framework both the 
demographic conditions and the security environment are becoming increasingly complex. 
Demographic imbalances, poverty and economic inequality reinforces threats and risks, 
worsens economic and financial instability, uncontrolled migratory flows, organized crime, 
traffic of human beings, and terrorism. The social, economic, political and environmental 
context matters and demographic changes alone are unlikely to inflame political violence, but 
can trigger conflict and insecurity, as pointed out by Teresa Rodrigues. 
In the last decades three, as the very idea of security has expanded beyond the traditional 
concern about territorial integrity and defense against military aggressions, the relationship 
between international migrations and security has become a hot topic in the academic 
literature, the media industry and the public in general. After emphasizing the growing 
importance of international migrations in a globalized world, Miguel Requeña focuses on one 
of the several dimensions of the so-called migration-security nexus: the possible threat to 
collective or national identity that international migrants can represent for host countries. In 
fact, international migrations are moving significant amounts of people from their countries 
of origin to receiving societies where the differences in religion, political beliefs, social 
values, and lifestyles between natives and immigrants appear to be very salient. This is 
particularly so in developed countries, where these differences are often seen as putting in 
jeopardy their societal security, cultural cohesion and collective identity. Although Muslim 
immigrants are not the only case of potential conflict with the cultural majority in ethnically 
heterogeneous societies, special attention has been devoted to them in European countries. 
Not only on account of their potential role as vectors of global terrorism, but also because of 

Teresa Rodrigues, Rafael Garcia Perez and Susana de Sousa Ferreira 
xxii 
the size of these displaced Islamic communities and the obstacles found in their path to social 
and cultural integration in host societies. 
In order to face the new global security challenges the author of Chapter 5, Ana Isabel 
Xavier, provides an overview of Human Rights‘ four generations and explores the required 
balance between intervention and protection in order to safeguard fundamental and basic 
living conditions. Moreover, the author highlights Canada‘s and the United Nations‘  
pioneering role and focuses on the current challenges and prospects within the debate on 
Responsibility to Protect. Governance responsibility in future years will have to solve some 
empirical dilemmas such as ‗Tell me something new Vs. the need for a new narrative‘; 
‗Legitimating to intervene Vs. License to kill‘; ‗Narrow Vs. broad scope‘; ‗Double standards 
Vs. International Community awareness‘. We will see how this emerging label urges clear 
guidelines if it wants to give a step further in the traditional right/duty to intervene patterns.  
The third part is composed by three chapters called ‗Exogenous Issues‘. The purpose is to 
debate the main security threats due to climate change and consequent fight for natural 
resources, such as water, food or energy. Lázaro Touza and Zoghby assume a weak 
constructivist perspective of risks in highlighting the potential impacts of climate change, the 
vulnerabilities to its effects, the mitigation and adaptation options available for effective 
climate action as well as financial and technology transfer issues. They believe that the 
International Environmental Agreements have not played a central role in the process of 
managing climate change, leading to the consensus that temperature increases above 2ºC 
compared to pre-industrial levels will lead to dangerous climate change. The pending 
challenges to reduce climate risks are many and they need to be addressed earnestly in the 
very near future to avoid the worst consequences of unabated climate change. 
In Chapter 7, Zuzarte Reis sustains that research on the relationships between 
environmental factors and violence or environmental related conflicts constitute a much 
debated research field nowadays. Over the past two decades much attention has been paid to 
the role of natural resources in post-cold war conflicts, particularly in Africa. While it is 
debated to what extent and under which conditions abundant resources in Africa increase the 
risk of conflict, it is clear that resource governance should form an intrinsic part of 
peacemaking and development building on the continent. Both the geographies of civil war 
and conflicts, coincide and reinforce theories that associate the wealth of natural resources 
and conflict.  
The chapter on Energy Security in a Globalized World, focuses its attention on energy 
security issues (namely those arising from oil and natural gas) in a globalized world. Catarina 
Leal divided it in three parts, with a large commented bibliography. It begins by analyzing the 
main energy risks, some concepts about energy resources, the strategic-institutional aspect of 
oil and natural gas, emphasizing the reorganization of oil and natural gas companies and its 
consequences in geopolitics. It follows with a presentation on the outlook of the present 
energy landscape (either conventional or unconventional): reserves, producers, consumers, 
flow trades and future trends. It then focuses on the present structural changes and future 
main geopolitical challenges on energy. And in its final remarks, it stresses, on the one hand, 
the current major energy game changers that will shape the energy world in the near future of 
this century; and, on the other hand, it underlines the implementation of some solutions.  
Finally, on the fourth part of the book we approach some of the new security threats, 
taking as examples cybersecurity, terrorism, the proliferation of Weapons of Mass 
Destruction and Intelligence. 

Introduction 
xxiii 
The first one, written by Viegas Nunes, emphasizes the rapid pace of technological 
development, recorded over the last three decades that largely concurred to popularize the use 
of internet worldwide. Cyberspace, only accessible through the internet, has become a true 
mediator of social relations and driver of economic development in most developed countries.  
If, on the one hand, this new virtual space came to promote and simplify the relationship 
between citizens, government and businesses, on the other hand it has also acquired a central 
role in providing essential and critical services to the functioning of societies in the Age of 
Information. 
Cyberspace as a global common good has no physical borders and clearly defined spaces 
of sovereignty; making it difficult to differentiate between what is public or private, civil or 
military, domestic or international. The increase in cyber conflict in general and the 
increasing militarization of cyberspace in particular, boosts the use of force and the 
occurrence of armed conflicts in cyberspace.  
In Chapter 11, Susana Ferreira underlines the growing interconnection between 
globalization and terrorism as one of the main paradigms of the twenty-first century. 
Terrorism is not a new phenomenon, but the terrorist attacks in New York and Washington in 
2001 gave it a new boost and international concern. Transnational terrorism has become a 
main idiosyncrasy of modern times and poses compelling challenges to international security. 
The author takes a closer look to the relationship between globalization and transnational 
terrorism, by analyzing the link between transnational terrorism and globalization, exploring 
key trends in transnational terrorism, and assessing the interconnection between new 
transnational threats and terrorism. 
Proença Garcia and Galamas focus on the tremendous transformations to the international 
economy brought by globalization, which created benefits in several areas of economy, 
politics and science, but also significant security challenges. As most publications address the 
strategic issues emanated from the proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD), 
few are those which explain the proliferation phenomenon from an operational perspective. 
This chapter demonstrates that the same mechanisms used every day by individuals and 
WMD trafficking networks, have also been used to support the phenomenon of proliferation 
of WMD over the past few years. Furthermore, the chapter also looks at the threats posed by 
proliferation to regional stability as well as the risks emanated from non-State actors 
attempting to acquire such weapons.  
The last chapter deals with intelligence analyses. Helena Rêgo points out that in an 
increasingly globalized and unpredictable world, which is under an accelerated pace of 
transformation, and characterized by technological advancement, the intelligence analyst 
faces particularly demanding challenges in order to achieve its goals. The intelligence of 
states must be understood as a higher stage, which allows states to organize themselves, in 
order to survive and provide security and justice for their citizens. The science of complexity 
and its theory helps us to find new methods and challenge our perceptions, while analyzing 
such events and the world as a whole. While schematization helps us to investigate the 
predictable future, we must also prepare for chaos. Education plays a critical role in the 
preparation for the future, which implies a holistic organization of knowledge. Consilience, or 
the convergence between sciences and humanities, will help us to create an integral vision of 
the world and to prepare the discovery of the needed answers to the whole set of challenges 
facing humanity. A collective mobilization will be needed so that states will survive and 
accomplish their mission.  

Teresa Rodrigues, Rafael Garcia Perez and Susana de Sousa Ferreira 
xxiv 
The following pages will assess risks and opportunities coming both from security and 
globalization. Let‘s see how. 
 
 
Teresa Ferreira Rodrigues 
Rafael García Pérez  
Susana de Sousa Ferreira 
Lisbon and Madrid, July 31, 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Allan, P. & Goldmann, K. (1992). The End of The Cold War. Evaluating Theories of 
International Relations. Londres: Martinus. 
[2] Barbé, E. & Perni, O. (2001). Más allá de la seguridad Nacional. In: Cueto de, C. & 
Jordán, J. (eds.) Introducción a los estudios de seguridad y defensa. Granada: Comares. 
[3] Buzan, B. (1991). People, States & Fear, an Agenda for International Security Studies 
in the Post-Cold War Era. London: Harvester Wheatsheaf. 
[4] Clark, I. (1999). Globalization and International Relations Theory. Oxford University 
Press. 
[5] Gaddis, J. L. (1992-1993). International Relations Theory and the End of the Cold War. 
International Security, 17(3). 
[6] Haftendorn, H. (1991). The Security Puzzle: Theory-Building and Discipline-Building 
in International Security. International Studies Quarterly, 35(2), 3-17. 
[7] Lebow, R. N. & Risse-Kappen, T. (eds.) (1995). International Relations Theory and the 
End of the Cold War. Columbia University Press. 
[8] Lynn-Jones, S. M. (ed.) (1991). The Cold War and After. Prospects for Peace. The Mit 
Press. 
[9] McSweeney, B. (1991) Security, Identity and Interests. A sociology of International 
Relations. Cambridge University Press. 
[10] Miller, S. E. (2001). International Security at Twenty-five, From One World to Another. 
International Security, 26(1), 5-39. 
[11] Pearson, F. & Martin Rochester, J. (2003). Relaciones Internacionales, situación global 
en el siglo XXI. Bogotá: McGrawHill. 
[12] Walt, S. M. (1991). The Renaissance of Security Studies. International Studies 
Quarterly, 35(2), 211-239. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART I: RISKS AND OPPORTUNITIES 
 
 


In: Globalization and International Security: An Overview 
ISBN: 978-1-63463-075-7 
Editors: T. Rodrigues, R. García Pérez et al.  
 
© 2015 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 1 
 
 
 
GLOBALIZATION, CRISIS AND SECURITY –  
WHAT WILL BE THE MAP OF GLOBAL RIVALRIES  
IN THE HORIZON 2030? 
 
 
José Félix Ribeiro 
IPRI - Portuguese Institute of International Relations, Portugal 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The approach that guides this chapter is that the relationship between Globalization 
and Security, in a long term horizon, will be intermediated by the ongoing transformation 
of the competition pattern and geopolitical and strategic rivalries between emerging 
powers and between them and the USA, in the afterwards of the international financial 
crisis of 2008 and the partial withdrawal of the US from the ―Greater Middle East‖ (vd. 
Iraq and Afghanistan). 
 
 
ECONOMIC GLOBALIZATION AND GEOPOLITICAL FRAGMENTATION 
– A BRIEF RETROSPECT – 1980-2010 
 
Globalization, the USA, and Asia Pacific 
 
We date the beginning of the contemporary phase of globalization in 1979/80 after the 
almost simultaneous decision by the US, UK and Japan to opt for the freedom of capital 
movements in a monetary context of a dollar standard and with a close relationship between 
dollar and oil prices that had been established in the middle 70s. This dating coincides with a 
geo-economic breakthrough: the beginning of China‘s integration in the world economy and 
its spectacular growth based on exports and investment in the export sector. 
The consolidation of the globalization process – analyzed in an economic perspective – 
led to an exponential increase in financial transactions and the growth of international trade 
                                                           
 jm.felixribeiro@gmail.com. 

José Félix Ribeiro 
4
and investment, based on the relationship established in the 80s, between the US and Asia-
Pacific. 
This relationship was characterized by a flow of US imports from Asia Pacific (from 
Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, Hong Kong, Thailand, Malaysia and, later on, the 
People Republic of China) and a flow of savings from Asia Pacific to the US economy 
applied on several kinds of assets – treasury bonds, GSE bonds, company shares and bonds). 
With the USA assuming in a global scale the function of ―Consumer of First Instance‖. 
 
 
Source: Author‘s elaboration. 
Figure 1.1. The Investment and Trade Flows between Asia Pacific, the United States and the 
Commodity Producers. 
This recycling of Asian savings partly applied to the purchase of US treasury bonds by 
the central banks of Asia Pacific (from Japan to China, Taiwan and South Korea) - and by 
private investors from these countries - has allowed the US to maintain a huge military 
apparatus, without burdening US citizens with higher and higher levels of taxation. Transfers 
of savings from Asia – and also from the Oil monarchies of the Persian Gulf – to the US 
partially financed the US‘ Defense expenditures, as if it were a tribute paid to the US for the 
double strategic service they provide to the States of Asia Pacific: 
 
 
Maintaining a climate of peace between powers and states in Asia with strong 
potential for rivalry –Japan, China, Taiwan and South Korea – thanks to its dominant 
military presence in the Pacific and the Indian Oceans, dispensing these states from 
higher Defense spending; 

Globalization, Crisis and Security 
5
 
Securing the access of all Asian states to the energy resources of the Persian 
Gulf/Middle East, due to its hegemony in the region, which has prevented the 
assertion of a local dominant regional power and assured the control of extensive 
maritime communication lines that separate Asia Pacific from the Gulf/Middle East. 
 
Globalization thus has given the US external financing conditions for the biggest 
investment in Defense in peacetime (performed by the Reagan administration) that, along 
with the counter-oil shock in 1985 greatly contributed to the defeat of the USSR in the Cold 
War and for its subsequent implosion. Thus changing completely the bipolar system that 
structured international relations from the end of World War II. [1, 2] 
 
 
The End of the Cold War and the Forces of Geopolitical Fragmentation 
 
The end of the Cold War determined the end of a bipolar structure in global strategic and 
geopolitical relations that, having heightened the tensions in several regional complexes as a 
result of superpower competition has simultaneously kept these tensions under control, thanks 
to the intervention of each and both superpowers. The nuclear deterrence between the two 
superpowers, allowed the centralization of the management of deterrence in terms of regional 
conflicts. 
If Globalization has been an evolutionary process towards the global triumph of the 
market economy the Geopolitical Fragmentation was a different kind of process – it resulted 
from a Systemic Rupture – the implosion of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War. 
This systemic rupture did not lead immediately to a new stable structure, but has given 
place to several epochal changes in the international environment: 
 
 
The loss of strategic importance for Europe, parallel to the disintegration of the 
USSR and the German reunification process that brought together the two territories 
where during the ―Cold War‖ were concentrated the most advanced forces of the two 
superpowers – GDR and FRG; 
 
An intense process of fragmentation and recomposition of States in Europe‘s Balkan 
periphery and in the Caucasus; 
 
The growing strategic importance of an ―Arc of Crisis‖ which includes Central Asia, 
the Middle East, the Persian Gulf, South Asia and Asia-Pacific (with Koreas, Kuril, 
the Taiwan Strait and South China Sea); 
 
The complex and possibly tumultuous emergency of new Great Powers (China, India 
and Iran) that want to assert themselves as key players in the ―regional security 
complexes‖ in which they operate and which are located along this ―Arc of Crisis‖; 
 
The decline of Russia‘s external power, divided between the two contrasting options- 
privileged understandings with key US allies during the Cold war – Germany, Japan, 
South Korea and Turkey OR try to benefit from the rise of new Great Powers to 
reduce US‘ maneuvering capacity along the ―Arc of Crisis‖; 
 
The affirmation of the US as the only power capable of projecting power throughout 
this ―Arc of Crisis‖ and with the technological and financial resources to reduce the 

José Félix Ribeiro 
6
vulnerability of its territory to weapons of mass destruction. Giving rise to the false 
idea of a New Structure – the Unipolar World. 
 
During the 1990s, Globalization – with the promises of growth and development that it 
gave to emerging economies - has functioned as an economic stabilizer in a fragmented 
international system. Complemented by a set of US diplomatic and military interventions that 
kept under control the process of geopolitical fragmentation in the ―Arc of Crisis‖. 
When trying to summarize the factors that allowed the US to occupy a central position at 
geo-economic, geo-political and strategic levels, and through this centrality to ensure 
continuity to Globalization and containment of conflicts resulting from the Geopolitical 
Fragmentation in the ―Arc of Crisis‖, we can point to the following: 
 
 
The USA preserved the technological superiority in the military field that allowed 
them to maintain control over the ―strategic fluids‖ – oceans, airspace and outer 
space and to revolutionize the ―art of war‖ in land; 
 
The USA remained the only military power that was able to secure a strategic 
superiority in the Pacific and Indian Oceans and in the Persian Gulf, organizing the 
maritime security framework for the Asia Pacific and its secure access to a crucial 
energy supply base; 
 
The USA could count with its allies as economic competitors and sources of energy 
supply – from Japan to Saudi Arabia who depended on them for their own security 
and defense - although sometimes they had difficulty in managing the ambitions of 
autonomy of some of these allies. 
 
The U.S. organized from the 1980s, a circulation of goods, services and capital in the 
Pacific that allowed them to finance a large part of the costs in Defense based on 
external financing coming from Asia Pacific and the Persian Gulf and including 
China in this circulation - by co-optation. 
 
The USA continued to issue the dominant international currency, the US Dollar – 
and had unparalleled capital markets – liquids, deep and varied – resulting from its 
own ―model of capitalism‖. [4] 
 
 
THE EMERGING CHINA 
 
The new millennium is experiencing a qualitative change in the international system and, 
eventually, in the position occupied by the USA on it. This change is closely associated with 
the emergence of China. 
 
 
Unlike Japan and Germany, which in the post-World War II competed economically 
with the US but depended on North American protection against the USSR, China 
now has a pattern of very strong economic interdependence with the US but is 
involved in a process to obtain a much greater strategic autonomy, based on the 
development of a military industrial complex. With which China intends to manage 
the strengths and weaknesses of its geo-strategic characteristics in order to acquire a 
much greater ability to dissuade the US to oppose the goals that the Chinese regime 

Globalization, Crisis and Security 
7
considers crucial – e.g., the reunification of Taiwan – and to affirm a clear 
superiority in face of its long-term rival Asian power – India. 
 
Unlike the USSR, China could create the conditions for economic growth based on 
its integration in the world economy, which allowed them to start investing 
massively in Defense capabilities and in a huge and modern military industrial 
complex without being concerned with its own economic viability. 
 
Looking in detail to the strategic and geo-economic distinctive featurees of China – 
which show the extent to which China is a completely different entity from the USSR – we 
can identify the following: 
 
 
China, although having a large land mass, does not to have to fear any ground 
invasion from its neighbors with greater military potential, i.e.: Russia – whose core 
territory is separated from China by a vast space, sparsely populated and with 
difficult accessibility in Eastern Siberia and the Far East – and India, separated from 
China by the highest mountain ranges on the planet. Nevertheless, China is in serious 
risk of internal fragmentation involving territories such as Xingiang and Tibet – 
which have great value for military reasons – related to its nuclear arsenal and 
deterrence posture – and economic potential – energy and water resources; 
 
China is obviously vulnerable to nuclear attacks to its territory from three powers – 
the US, Russia and India – but does not have to fear land invasions by its continental 
neighbors, nor by the US. which gives a favourable strategic position not having to 
think how to use nuclear weapons to solve conventional wars in defense of its 
territorial integrity, but only to dissuade potential adversaries from attacking with 
nuclear weapons1; 
 
China, in defending its territorial integrity – if threatened in the peripheral regions of 
Islamic or Buddhist influence (Xingiang and Tibet) - can be forced to intervene 
militarily in the continental mass around it to control outbreaks of radicalism in 
Afghanistan or Central Asia; or may intervene to prevent a disintegration or 
territorial breakdown of its main ally in the region – Pakistan; or to condition the 
options of India forcing it to concentrate its military potential in its continental 
border rather than developing its maritime potential; 
 
China has a set of coastal provinces exceptionally well placed to access the Pacific 
Ocean, which constitute a valuable asset in geo-economic terms but which bring with 
it strategic challenges since its emergence as a global power occurs when the Pacific 
maritime space is organized around the naval and air presence of the US with its 
maritime allies – South Korea and Japan – and protect a territory that the regime in 
Beijing considers as a non-negotiable part of China – Taiwan; 
 
China, despite having such a large land mas, is not however a ―continental 
economy‖, self-sufficient in primary goods such as food, minerals and energy 
resources as were the US or the USSR in identical periods of their industrialization. 
China relies increasingly more on imports of these goods whose sources of supply in 
some cases lie in its Asian proximity (e.g., in Australia, Indonesia or Malaysia), 
while in many other cases are separated from China by extensive sea lines of 
                                                           
1 Or as the recent White Paper refers ―conventional long-range attacks with great destructive power‖. 

José Félix Ribeiro 
8
communication patrolled by the US (as the global dominant naval power) and are 
punctuated by choke points that China does not control [3]; 
 
China – in Russia‘s current period of relative decline of power – regards Central Asia 
as an area in which it can obtain a growing influence enabling it to access and control 
energy, mineral and agriculture resources without depending on far distant regions 
only accessible by sea; but to secure its position in this area it must ensure that 
Afghanistan does not become a base of Islamic radicalism or a corridor to link India 
and Central Asian resources (Figure 1.2). 
 
Trying to have a long term perspective of the geopolitical aims of the Communist Party 
of China we have to formulate the following hypothesis: it will try hard to reposition China as 
the ―Middle Kingdom‖, a Power surrounded by militarily weaker states agreeing to integrate 
their transport infrastructure and energy resources in complete consonance with the needs of 
the Chinese economy and the geo-economic imperatives of the unity of China and which will 
be willing to finance the Chinese State, in return for guaranteed access to its huge internal 
market. [5] 
If this is the long term aim of China‘s regime, this implies: 
 
 
To remove the US leadership in Asia, which means hitting the core of the North 
American geopolitical power; 
 
To prevent India from constituting an autonomous pole of attraction in Asia, possibly 
in alignment with the US; 
 
To become the essential power to guarantee peace and stability in the Persian Gulf, 
after leaving the US exhaust alone its ―strategic energies‖ in this region. 
 
 
FROM TODAY TO THE HORIZON 2030 
 
Globalization and Financial Crisis – This Time It Was Different – In a 
Geopolitical Perspective 
 
The consolidation of globalization has been accompanied by successive financial and 
currency crisis, from Japan (1989), Mexico (1994), East Asia (1997) (1) (or Russia (1998) 
followed by the US dotcom crash. But these crisis were managed to contain their impact, 
thanks to the intervention of the monetary authorities of the USA providing liquidity to the 
world economy, the opening of the US market to increase exports of the countries in 
difficulty and, in some of these crisis, with the IMF intervention. 
However, in 2008, the bankruptcy of one of the major investment banks in the US 
triggered a global financial crisis, which ended a decade of explosive growth of credit and 
unleashed what many authors have designated as the ―Great Contraction‖. 
In Europe this financial crisis has been followed by a severe crisis in the Eurozone, 
among the States which, in previous decades, had benefited the most from the cohesion policy 
of the European Union – Greece, Portugal, Ireland and Spain – and threatened to infect 
economies such as Italy, Belgium or even France. 

Globalization, Crisis and Security 
9
The financial crisis of 2008, which mainly hit the US and Europe – due to the tight 
integration of the economies in the North Atlantic – has proved difficult to overcome. If 
expansionary monetary and fiscal stimulus prevented this crisis from becoming a Great 
Depression, the combination of these policies has not allowed to go back to a sustainable 
growth but did increase public debt to levels known only in wartime. 
This crisis, occurring at the exact moment that the large boomer generation of the West 
entered the traditional retirement age, has posed particular challenges: 
 
 
to the institutional investors that manage private pensions or saving accounts of that 
generation which, confronted with historically low interests rates, were forced to 
seek opportunities around the world that generate higher returns; 
 
to the Public Finances of States that have co-responsibility for social security and 
health services, which are faced with the need to reduce other government spending 
in order to cope with the demographic shock. 
 
Aware of this fact, the markets are forcing fiscal consolidation – particularly in Europe 
where the social responsibilities of States are far superior to those found in the US – 
generating serious resistance in Western societies. 
 
 
The USA in a Strategic Pause 
 
The decade 2000/09 was marked in the US by the coincidence of two financial crisis (the 
dotcom and the subprime crisis) which, although did not metamorphose into prolonged 
recessions, have contributed to bigger budget deficits; and two wars, in Iraq and Afghanistan, 
which also contributed to high budget deficits. 
The US, both in Iraq and in Afghanistan, were not able to achieve what seemed to be 
their ―war aims‖, in each case: the transformation of Iraq in a democratic State allied with the 
US and leading to a new management model for their oil sector in the Middle East, and the 
consolidation of a new regime in Afghanistan that, in addition to expelling Al-Qaeda, will 
side-line the Taliban and strengthen the influence of Washington in Pakistan. 
In October 2010 the New National Security Strategy of the USA was announced, which 
defined a new doctrine that relates economics and diplomacy with military power, pointing to 
the need for a compromise between the diplomatic engagement, economic growth and 
military power to preserve the role of America in the World. Renew the economy, spur 
growth and put the fiscal situation of the United States in order are major concerns and a 
national priority recognized in the National Security Strategy. 
 
 
USA – A New Military Strategy 
 
Presented in early 2012, the new US Military Strategy pointed to smaller armed forces, 
but more nimble, enabling them to defeat a ―major conflict‖ and at the same time contain an 
aggressor in a second conflict (instead of the previous strategy that pointed to the ability to 
fight and win two ―major conflicts‖ simultaneously). At the same time, budget cuts of nearly 

José Félix Ribeiro 
10
490 billion dollars over the next decade were announced. The number of soldiers will be 
substantially reduced, but the investment in cyber capabilities will be increased. 
The ability to mobilize and deploy forces very quickly is central to this New Strategy in 
parallel with the wider use of unmanned means, Special Forces and cyber defense. Improved 
systems for intelligence, combined with closer diplomatic ties with allies in Europe were also 
essential in this new strategy, which will rely on new generations of long-range air assets and 
new types of weapons capable of projecting power to longer distances. These new 
capabilities, integrated in the new concept of Air Sea Battle (ASB) are all the more necessary, 
as powers like China or Iran develop weapons and tactics of asymmetric warfare that could 
threaten US aircraft carriers in international waters near their coastal zones. 
The activity of US Armed Forces will focus on existing and emerging threats in the 
Middle East and Asia Pacific. Thus, US‘ defense policy will give emphasis to security in the 
Middle East and Persian Gulf region, in collaboration with its ally, Israel, and, where 
appropriate, with those states belonging to the Gulf Cooperation Council in order to prevent 
the development by Iran of the ability to produce nuclear weapons and to meet its 
destabilizing policies in the region. 
In turn, the shift of focus to Asia Pacific is related with growing US concern with respect 
to the strategic objectives of China, when it started the installation of weapons systems that 
the US military authorities perceive as aiming to prevent naval and air assets from US to 
project power in the Far East. Nevertheless, the Pentagon did not see the current military 
build-up of China as a direct threat to the US and recognized the existence of common threats 
to both countries, such as the possibility of a military conflict between the two Koreas, 
nuclear proliferation and the rise of fundamentalist Islam in which prevention both powers 
would be interested. 
The New Military Strategy of the United States determines also an evolution of the 
country‘s military posture in Europe, which, without jeopardizing its commitment to NATO, 
involved the reduction of forces, as has already been decided on troops stationed in Germany, 
and assumption of responsibility for their own European allies. 
 
 
Turbulence in the Middle East and North Africa 
 
The vast space which includes North Africa, the Middle East and the Persian Gulf, has 
been a focus of permanent tension and conflict, given the coexistence of natural resources and 
global shipping routes of concern to great powers, alongside a ―mosaic‖ of clashes between 
religions, ethnicities, peoples and States. We can refer in particular, tensions between Sunni 
and Shiite Muslims, between Arabs and Persians, and the relationships of strong tension of 
many of these States with Israel, around the question of the creation of a Palestine State. 
This region is now polarized by the tensions resulting from the emergence of Iran as a 
regional power with hegemonic ambitions. Iran has developed an important military industrial 
complex, which includes a nuclear program with potential military use, and the development 
of missile and space vectors. 
Iran has also built a regional network of alliances based, first, on its alliance with Syria; 
secondly, on the control of political and irregular military forces on the borders of Israel, as 
the Lebanese Hezbollah and Islamic Jihad – and radical Palestinian groups; and, thirdly, on 

Globalization, Crisis and Security 
11
Iraq following the overthrow of Saddam Hussein regime by the US and the ascension of 
Shiite parties.  
And made the confrontation with Israel a cornerstone of its regional policy in geopolitical 
competition with Sunni Arab States. 
But it must be noted that the US could be interested in establishing closer relations with 
Iran, in parallel with the strengthening of its partnership with India if it wants to enhance its 
role in the Indian Ocean – the most important of the Oceans from the strategic point of view 
on the Horizon 2030. 
Since 2011 we witnessed another profound political change in North Africa and the 
Middle East. After decades of a relatively stable authoritarian political order, this macro-
region was crossed by strong popular movements - what was called the ―Arab Spring‖. 
They provoked the fall of autocratic regimes in Tunisia, Libya and Egypt, and a 
prolonged civil strife in Syria, as well as peaceful political reforms in Morocco and Jordan. 
This initial movement of masses opened the doors of power to political parties aligned with 
the Muslim Brotherhood, in some of these countries (Tunisia, Egypt and Morocco). 
But soon it became clear that some States in the Gulf region – such as Saudi Arabia 
opposed to this increase of influence (that was sponsored by another State of the Gulf 
Cooperation Council – Qatar).  
We can say that the Arab Spring uprisings did divide the Sunni Arab field at the time that 
Iran strengthened its geopolitical influence. 
 
 
THE CHANGING MAP OF GEOPOLITICAL COMPETITION  
AND RIVALRIES 
 
Figure 1.4 tries to represent how we consider the three ―major competitions‖ that will 
mark the first half of the twentieth century and will set the security issues globally. 
 
 
A competition involving the USA and China in strategic, geopolitical and geo-
economic terms, first in the Pacific Ocean, but also in the Indian Ocean and even in 
the Persian Gulf. In the context of a competition for naval power, the militarization 
of outer space; and cyber warfare. 
 
A competition involving China and India around Tibet, Pakistan, Afghanistan and 
Central Asia and, increasingly, in the Indian Ocean through which pass the sea lines 
of communication between China and the Persian Gulf and South Atlantic regions, 
which are of interest for both powers. 
 
The competition inside the Islamic World and of it with Israel. Competition centered 
in the Mediterranean, the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf but with a dynamic in which 
the strategic control of the Indian Ocean is crucial.  
 
Three other powers - Russia, Turkey and, surprisingly Germany - are going to try to 
reinforce their global influence giving priority to the Black Sea, Caucasus and Central Asia, 
the place where they are going "to meet China" in its drive to have continental alternative to 
huge reserves of energy and minerals (Figure 1.2) 

José Félix Ribeiro 
12
 
Source: Author‘s elaboration. 
Figure 1.2. The map of rivalries and geopolitical and geo-economic competitions – Horizon 2030. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Eichengreen, B. (2004). Capital Flows and Crises. The MIT Press. namely  
[2] 
Felix Ribeiro, J. (1998). Economia Mundial - O Papel Central do Sistema do Pacifico. 
Informação Internacional. Lisboa: Ed. DPP. 
[3] 
Félix Ribeiro, J., Azevedo, F., Trindade, R. (2008). ―Energy and China´s gGeo 
economic Dilemmas‖ In: Tomé, L., East Asia Today, with preface by Sutter, Robert. 
Lisboa: EDIUAL. 
[4] 
Felix Ribeiro, J. (2012). Os EUA, a Globalização e o Mundo do Pacifico 1979 -2009. 
Tese de doutoramento na Faculdade de Ciências Sociais e Humanas da Universidade 
Nova de Lisboa.  
[5] 
Felix Ribeiro, J. (2013). O Reposicionamento da China: Geoeconomia, Geopolítica e 
Estratégia. 
Relações 
Internacionais. 
IPRI 
Instituto 
Português 
de 
Relações 
Internacionais. 
 
 
ADDITIONAL READING MATERIALS 
 
[6] 
Felix Ribeiro, J. (2001). O Enquadramento Internacional 2002/2012 - Sugerindo 
Configurações Contrastadas. Informação Internacional 2001 - Volume II. Lisboa: Ed. 
DPP. 
[7] 
Jack, Y. (2013). Oil Stain on America. Military & Foreign Affairs Journal Veterans 
Today. 16.08.2013. Retrieved from www.vetereanstoday.com. 

Globalization, Crisis and Security 
13
[8] 
Koo C., R. (2009). The World in Balance Sheet Recession: causes, cure and politics. 
Real-World Economics Review No.58. 
[9] 
Reinhart, C. M. & Rogoff, K. S. (2009). This Time is Different. Princeton University 
Press. 
 
 


In: Globalization and International Security: An Overview 
ISBN: 978-1-63463-075-7 
Editors: T. Rodrigues, R. García Pérez et al.  
 
© 2015 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2 
 
 
 
GLOBAL GOVERNANCE FAILURE 
 
 
Rafael García Pérez 
Santiago de Compostela‘sUniversity, Santiago 
de Compostela, La Coruña, Spain 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The thesis defended in this chapter is that the governance of global risks is not 
sufficiently advanced and it is difficult to expect significant advances in the future. This 
negative diagnosis is due to the identification of two negative dynamics that occur in 
today‘s international society and go against the agenda of global governance: the changes 
that are occurring in the international system, in transition to a post-Western and post- 
hegemonic system; and the increasing ―regionalization‖ of the globalization process that 
tends to manifest itself in an uneven performance (both economically and 
demographically) of the different regions of the planet in the process of global 
transformation. Globalization is not meeting the defined perspectives from the West in 
the mid-90s of the last century. There is no uniform global society that perceives the 
threat posed by global risks in the same way and therefore is willing to react 
simultaneously and in a coordinated manner. To the extent that the behavior of the 
different regions diverges and thus traditional hierarchies established in the international 
system change, the implementation of proposals, with a Western profile, is increasingly 
more difficult. Those are rejected by the new emerging actors who support their own 
national agendas. 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Global governance has not achieved the expected results when it was announced as a 
political project after the Cold War. In less than twenty years, the relationships of power in 
the international system have swiftly changed and are here to stay in the foreseeable future. 
These changes have created an atmosphere of uncertainty, a lack of predictability which has 
                                                           
 Correspondingauthor: Rafael García Pérez. Santiago de Compostela‘s University (Spain). E-mail: rafael.garcia@ 
usc.es. 

Rafael García Pérez 
16
weakened cooperation between governments and obstructed an agreed management of global 
public goods. We have been submerged in a process of transition towards a post-West and a 
post-hegemonic world in which the ideas favored in previous contexts have no reason to be 
fulfilled in spite of their rationality. 
The international financial crisis which started in 2008 affects every region on the planet 
in a different way. This uneven behavior produces divergent expectations in every continent, 
favoring the crumbling of the global economy and weakening political integration. In recent 
years, we have seen how each regional conglomerate has tried to erect new barriers in an 
attempt to reach domestic agreements rather than a global collective management. 
This break-up, simultaneous and parallel to globalization, buries itself in long term 
tendencies which strengthen it and stand out in global risk management. The changes taking 
place do not reflect the premises global governance was based on.States have not seen their 
influence reduced and the West‘s liberal solidarity order has faced a strong, growing 
resistance, especially from the emerging countries. Multipolarity is not making way for 
multilateralism. 
In the present chapter we will firstly describe the political project which underlies the 
idea of global governance in its three critical elements; diagnosis, perception and response. 
We follow on assessing why the international society‘s perception of reality is not uniform, 
depending on demographic and geo-economic variables which have not been sufficiently 
taken into account. We then discuss why the emergence of a multipolar world is not 
automatically associated with multilateralism as an executive instrument and, finally, if global 
risks, although perceived and recognized as such, can determine a cooperative response from 
the international participants. 
 
 
DIAGNOSIS OF THE SITUATION: A WESTERN EXPLANATION FOR 
GLOBALIZATION, GLOBAL RISKS AND GLOBAL GOVERNANCE 
 
Global governance is a Western political proposal which emerged from the interpretation 
of the globalization process centered on the weakening of the State [50]: on the inability of 
the modern (Westphalian) State to face the new challenges globalization presents and the 
need to adapt to it. 
Anthony Giddens [14] identified two features which singled out globalization as opposed 
to other historical phenomena: the radical transformation of time and space - the acceleration 
of time and expanding space. Until a few years ago, all the political systems focused on the 
immediate present and were structured on a geographical space defined by State borders. This 
double time and space limitation began to break up during the 1970s and progressively ―the 
future‖ and its consequences have slowly become a part of the present-day political debate. 
Structuring economic, social and political action, taking into account not only the present but 
also the future has become one of the greatest challenges that globalization has presented to 
mankind [27]. 
The preservation of common wealth (environment, economic development sustainability, 
international peace) or the management of global problems (climate change, proliferation and  
 
 

Global Governance Failure 
17
nuclear threat) is only possible by using strategies which consider this new time (between the 
present and the future) and space (between States and the planet as a whole) as a dimension 
which characterizes globalization. 
Planetary time and space (market globalization and risk) cannot be administered from the 
time-space coordinates represented by States (territorial sovereign powers centered on the 
management of the present). For this reason global governance is necessary to attain State 
political systems which have been defined by a global democracy [30]. 
Global governance aims to answer those new challenges by overcoming the judicial 
formal notion of government restricted to a territory over which it has authority. This may be 
achieved by a collective management procedure for these global conflicts using a system of 
collectively agreed practices and rules that do not come from a formally constituted authority 
[11]. 
The concept of global risk is more complex than it appears to be. Ulrich Beck [6] 
established the difference between danger and risk, pointing out that risk is the result of 
human action and decisions: technology produces unwanted and unknown effects which are 
unforeseeable and, frequently, irreversible. At present, these risks are mainly environmental 
and suggest a new concept, namely ―the threat of self-destruction of all life on Earth‖ [6]. 
The situation we are living in at the moment is not so much of ―risk‖, which implies a 
statistically calculated assessment of its possibilities of being carried out, but ―uncertainty‖: a 
multiplication of diffuse risks without a definite probability. Peter L. Bernstein [7] analyzed 
the evolution of the risk concept based on the laws of probability in order to set out statistical 
rules to support decision-making. He ended up establishing a distinction between risk and 
uncertainty, the former being a measurable, assessable value and the latter not so. 
Now, risk (where the assessable result may have both positive and negative 
consequences) has turned into uncertainty which is why we can assume that any future result 
will have negative consequences and is beyond our ability to control and beyond rational 
calculation. 
The so-called global risks (global warming, nuclear proliferation, new viral diseases, the 
loss of biodiversity and others) constitute the unforeseen and undesirable effects of human 
technological action, threatening to inflict irreversible harm on all living things. Its 
indeterminate manifestation in time and space, the uncertainty of its causes and effects and its 
planetary direction reduce humanity to a state of vulnerability. 
This gives rise to an indefinite, generic sense of insecurity, a loss of control over our own 
lives [4]. The same fears of the globalization era are indefinite, according to Zygmunt 
Bauman [4]. It is about unclear and extended fears expanding from a ―liquid fear‖ generated 
by a feeling of insecurity and a perception of a loss of control - a fear produced by real danger 
but lacking a clear, recognizable cause. 
The ―liquid fear‖ of global risks is not necessarily converted into an individual or 
collective reaction to confront them.The indefinite nature of the threats produces a distortion 
in the perception of danger which is generally translated into a passive attitude.Some authors 
have highlighted the role emotions play to explain behaviour not always, nor necessarily, 
rational [10]. Moreover, for the rational information which we introduce into our cognitive 
system to have an effective impact on our behavior it should be accompanied by emotions 
which allow us to ―react emotionally‖. For Elena Pulcini the main difficulty when facing 
global risks lies is the imbalance between ―knowing‖ and ―feeling‖ the risk [43]. 

Rafael García Pérez 
18
Generally this imbalance is explained by applying the concepts of denial (Verleugnung) 
and self-deceit (Selbstbetrug), coined by psychiatry to describe individuals‘ reactions to 
moments of vulnerability. Sigmund Freud described nine ways of avoiding reality which he 
called ―defense mechanisms‖. 
Among these unconscious protective tactics negation, projection, distortion, 
externalization, rationalization, sublimation, religion and even humor stand out. The most 
well-known of all is repression. Self-deceit is a peculiar survival strategy. Traumatic 
experiences are overcome or an uncomfortable truth is neutralized by a fallacy [45]. With the 
help of this unconscious self-protecting mechanism people sacrifice the correct perception of 
reality in exchange for maintaining spiritual peace. Nonetheless, the result is not always 
beneficial: denying a real danger can make us not protect ourselves. 
Stanley Cohen has used the concept of denial to identify several traits which characterize 
contemporary society: 
 
people, organizations, governments or whole societies are presented with information that 
is too disturbing, threatening or anomalous to be fully absorbed or openly acknowledged. 
The information is therefore somehow repressed, disavowed, pushed aside or 
reinterpreted. Or else the information ‗registers‘ well enough, but its implications - 
cognitive, emotional or moral - are evaded, neutralized or rationalized away [9]. 
 
Along with this Freudian self-protection mechanism, there is a specific variable which 
consists of lying to ourselves in order to believe something which does not correspond to our 
rational knowledge but to our desires. Self-deceit allows individuals to act not in accordance 
to what rational judgment indicates. For Elena Pulcini, both denial, and self-deceit determine 
present day‘s society‘s lack of perception of the nuclear threat (denial) or the environmental 
risk (self-deceit), which explains our inability to react. By weakening the fear, the future 
nature of harm allows individuals to minimize the risk by denying its possible consequences. 
The consequent reasoning the author arrives at is that ―we need to learn to fear again‖ [43]. 
The aforementioned arguments may be summed up as follows: the West understands that 
the globalization process (present) identifies future global risks. Humanity should react to 
these risks using political participation and decision-making which do not exist at present 
(States). This should be reformed, mainly by reinterpreting the sovereignty which allows 
States to be submitted to external normative restrictions (global governance). 
If this simultaneous, concerted reaction has not surfaced it is because rationally we do not 
perceive reality, we deny it and deceive ourselves. This is why we need to learn to fear again 
to be able to collectively react while there is still time. 
This succinct summary obviously simplifies the arguments but it does not pretend to offer 
a circumvented interpretation. By looking at them in a systematic approach we can identify 
the three main elements it sustains and that condition all the logical construct of the line of 
argument: diagnosis, perception and response. 
We are not going to argue about the diagnosis. We admit it is correct. Let us not question 
the fact that global risks are not ―systematic risks‖ but rather inherent contradictions of 
capitalism itself which might be controlled with a greater and better political regulation, but 
which cannot be avoided whilst the very bases of the capitalist system remain unchanged 
[22]. 

Global Governance Failure 
19
We are going to direct our arguments towards the other two dimensions of the proposal 
about governance of global risks (perception and response) aiming to highlight the 
suppositions they are settled on and how those suppositions have conditioned the appliance of 
suggested response. 
 
 
DIVERGENT PERCEPTIONS OF REALITY: 
DEMOGRAPHIC AND GEO-ECONOMIC REASONS 
 
The governance of global risks sets out from an essential condition: globalization has 
created a worldwide society, which similarly and simultaneously perceives threats identified 
as global risks and that, as a result, is willing to respond, regardless of the sacrifices. This 
condition has not been fulfilled, at least not until now, because globalization has not created a 
uniform worldwide society before, on the contrary [4,36,44]. Therefore, political 
communities are still very self-centered, thinking about themselves and the perception of 
threat they face. Their behavior is influenced not only by social and economic circumstances 
but also cultural and political ones, different in each case, and thereof not always coinciding 
with the rest of humanity. 
Present societies do not regard the future in the same way and although they identify the 
risks they harbor they do not face them in the past. This divergence of attitude is not only 
determined by self-defense mechanisms such as self-deceit or denial of reality but also by 
different influential social variables which contribute to creating a collective state of mind: 
dominant optimism or pessimism in certain societies. 
The collective emotional state of a society may contribute to facing the future with fear or 
confidence, with fatalism or determination and, as a result, the sacrifices they are prepared to 
assume collectively will vary considerably and, only rarely will they coincide in time. Each 
community‘s political agenda does not coincided simultaneously worldwide. 
We will consider two variables which have a decisive influence on the notable optimism 
or pessimism in current societies: the demographic regime and its economic behavior.These 
variables will explain how different attitudes regarding the future exist. 
The planet‘s demographic conditions are changing rapidly. For the first time in history 
some developed countries (Japan and several countries in the West) have inverted their 
population pyramids: they have more inhabitants older than 60 and younger than 20. The 
average number of children women have has dropped increasingly faster in Europe, the Far 
East (especially Japan and China) and to a lesser extent in the United States (US). 
At the same time the population continues to increase in Africa, the Middle and South 
East. These regions‘ share of the world‘s population will increase in the next fifty years. 
Probably, Europe, Russia, Japan and China‘s share will drop in the same period (significantly 
in some cases) while in the American continents it will remain stable. At opposite ends of this 
evolution is Europe (less than 8% of the world‘s population in 2050) and Africa (more than 
23%). 
The result is an accelerated ageing in some societies which, in certain cases, already 
present a negative growth rate (United Nations, 2012). On the one hand, the percentage of 
under 15s is of 41% in Africa, 19% in North America and 28% in Latin America, 25% in 
Asia, 31% in the Middle East, 16% in Europe, and 15% in Russia. On the other hand, those 

Rafael García Pérez 
20
over 65 make up to 3% in Africa,13% in North America, 7% in Latin America and Asia, 5% 
in the Middle East and 16% in Europe (13% in Russia). These changes will unavoidably have 
a profound impact on economic growth or geopolitical balances [17]. They will also influence 
the way we face the future. 
Societies with an ageing population and prolonged longevity are more inclined to show 
fear, in line with the cycle of life of emotions associated with ageing (Pochintesta, 2010). 
The opposite reaction is associated with youth. Optimism, confidence and hope for the 
future are characteristic feelings of young people. They may be well aware of the risks they 
are exposed to but their attitude is different from older people. These traits are also noticeable 
in collective society behaviors. The optimism or pessimism with which future challenges are 
faced is influenced by the average age of the population.This optimism, which moves 
individuals more instinctively than rationally to take on risks, was pointed out by Keynes to 
characterize decisions on economic investment which were made during moments of 
euphoria motivated by ―animal spirits‖: an instinctive impulse which does not consider the 
possibility of future losses, ―as a healthy man puts aside the expectation of death‖ [32]. 
As well as the demographic variable, the economic factor also influences societies‘ 
attitudes when facing these problems. Societies enjoying fast economic growth do not regard 
the future in the same way as societies submerged in economic recession and crisis. 
At the end of the twentieth century, economists‘ general diagnosis was that global 
economy was moving towards a greater integration within a liberal normative framework 
[49]. A feeling of euphoria dominated which assured that the world was on the way to 
unifying the binomial made up of free markets and liberal democracies. However, the 
economic and financial crisis which burst in 2008 highlighted an increasing divergence in the 
behavior of the world economy which has developed at two rates: while the poorest and 
traditionally richest economies languished, the burgeoning economies have resisted, 
maintaining their financial, commercial and economic prosperity. The growing commercial 
imbalances have led to an unprecedented situation in which the emerging countries have 
managed to accumulate an enormous quantity of currencies (this amount tripled during the 
first decade of the 21st century) and they have become net creditors of the richest countries. 
The group of emerging economies has managed to equal the share of the richest countries‘ 
GDP. 
The 2008 crisis has uncovered a long term tendency in the global economy: the growing 
convergence of the per capita worldwide income, especially from 2000 onwards [48]. At the 
same time, there has been an increase in social inequality. Although poverty has diminished 
rapidly in recent decades thanks to the growth in highly populated developing countries, the 
disparity between the share of income and wealth has not ceased to grow. Up until the 20th 
century this inequality was explained mainly by the existing differences between countries. 
Nowadays, however, there is a greater disparity within countries themselves. Seemingly, this 
tendency will last throughout the coming decades [1]. 
Globalization is definitely not resulting in an equal or ―flat‖ world [13]. The increasing 
demographic and economic disparities are leading to diverging social reactions against global 
risks. Ageing societies submerged in the crisis, with poorer and threatened middle classes 
show their pessimism for the future by fearing it. 
On the contrary, young societies, at the height of their economic rise, with hundreds of 
millions of people leaving poverty behind face the same challenges with absolute confidence. 

Global Governance Failure 
21
The West‘s appeal for fear (―we need to learn to fear again‖) is thwarted by these economic, 
demographic and social differences. 
Several studies confirm this opinion. The Pew Research Global Attitudes Survey of 2007, 
inquired more than 45.000 people in 46 countries, found that more people in more places 
have grown more satisfied with their lives. The results suggest that people are generally 
happier in countries that have experienced stronger economic growth over the last five years, 
compared with the previous five years. 
In these economically expanding countries, citizens are likely to be particularly satisfied 
with their incomes and more likely to say they are making progress in their lives, conditions 
that lead to higher levels of overall satisfaction with life. In Africa, the world‘s poorest 
region, people are markedly less satisfied with their lives and incomes than people in other 
regions [41]. 
These trends were confirmed in a recent survey conducted by the firm Ipsos-Mori, about 
the future of youth in their countries. They found that people in so-called Western countries, 
like the US, France and Spain were more likely to say that the future was bleak, when 
compared to developing countries. On the vision of the future, in France only 7% believe that 
the world in which their children live will be better than theirs; in the US it reached 19% and 
16% in Spain. In contrast, in China 81% believes that the future will be better than the 
present, 49% in India and 45% in Brazil [28]. 
Ever-increasing fear is shared by all societies. Nonetheless, social perception of fear 
varies greatly according to the social group in question. In developing countries, the sectors 
with little purchasing power fear the present, the sorrows of daily life, the insecurity derived 
from poverty and exclusion. In countries with high per capita income and an extensive middle 
class, for whom worries about survival and citizen insecurity have diminished thanks to social 
and economic development, their fears for the future are not linked to daily life. It is not about 
poorer societies not knowing or being aware of global risks. They worry about more 
immediate daily problems. This is why future risks take second place. The diversity of social 
conditions where fear is an individual and social experience means that generating an agreed 
global response becomes extremely difficult [40]. 
It is highly likely that the consequences of the present economic crisis are affecting the 
perception of global risks.Insofar as the crisis has impoverished the middle classes in the rich 
countries, their fears have been redirected to the immediate needs of the present: fear of 
losing a job, elimination of social class, etc. Crises have always fed population‘s fears and the 
traditionally rich countries (Europe in particular) are now gripped by fear. This was 
recognized by Van Rompuy, President of the European Council as: ―[t]he biggest enemy of 
Europe today is fear‖ [54]. 
In the present economic situation, the appeal for a need to educate the population in fear 
of global risks has not been taken up by Western society. The populace already has enough 
worries; it concentrates more on the daily experience of a precarious present rather than the 
problems of an indeterminate future. Under these circumstances, how distant are President 
Roosevelt‘s words in his first inaugural speech in 1933: ―[t]he only thing we have to fear is 
fear itself‖. The crisis seems to have destroyed Western society‘s faith in itself. 
 
 

Rafael García Pérez 
22
MULTIPOLARITY WITHOUT MULTILATERALISM 
 
Two new facts have broken into the international scenario in the last decade disrupting 
the predicted evolution of geopolitical power: the rise of the developing nations and the 2008 
crisis. The unipolar vision of the post-Cold War world has turned into a vision of permanent 
instability at an alarming rate which now characterizes present international relations. 
As stated by Christophe Jaffrelot: disorder is the new order [29]. A political consensus 
does not exist to define an international order which goes along with the United States 
military supremacy and the economic changes in a growing interdependent, multipolar world. 
It is widely acknowledged that the 2008 crisis has furthered the shift of financial and 
economic power from the West to the developing countries. The crisis is also considered to 
have changed the West‘s intellectual interpretation of globalization: it has gone from being 
considered a post-modern phenomenon to a ―geopolitical‖ one [16,31], which favors a 
distribution of wealth that, for the first time in centuries, benefits non-Western countries [33]. 
The crisis has accelerated the transition of power in the international system and as such 
was immediately recognized by politicians and analysts. In autumn 2008 Javier Solana stated: 
―the crisis is accelerating the power shift from the West to the East. This is true both in terms 
of material resources and ideological ‗pull‘‖ [46]. 
John Gray also highlighted the geopolitical aspect of the crisis: 
 
Our gaze might be on the markets melting down, but the upheaval we are 
experiencing is more than a financial crisis, however large. Here is a historic geopolitical 
shift, in which the balance of power in the world is being altered irrevocably. The era of 
American global leadership, reaching back to the Second World War, is over [20]. 
 
In the US, the National Intelligence Council (2008) foresaw the appearance of an 
uncertain, multipolar international system, defined by the growing influence of upcoming 
players which, by defending their own interests would try to promote new rules of the game. 
This report becomes more significant if we take into account the previous report of 2004 
which confirmed an everlasting US dominance due to lack of counterweights. 
The rise of non-Western powers has influenced the structure of world order since the end 
of the Cold War. During the early decades a ―common front‖ process was laid down [2] 
which tried to foment a collective management of global problems adopting liberal 
generalized values and creating supranational institutions to restrict State‘s sovereign 
autonomy. The rise of new influential players has curbed the process posing a normative 
controversy for international order by opposing two different models: the ―liberal common 
front‖ and the ―post-modernism‖ of the US and the European Union as opposed to a 
Westphalian pluralism of the rising powers. They demand the defense of national sovereignty 
and non-interference in home affairs as basic principles of the international order. This 
normative controversy obstructs a collective response which assumes governance as an 
executive instrument of global risks. 
The tension arising from these two opposing proposals (post-modern vs.Westphalian) is 
apparent in several areas although the most relevant is in the United Nations‘ debates on the 
―responsibility to protect‖ and its enforcement, authorizing a humanitarian intervention in 
Darfur, Libya or Syria. 

Global Governance Failure 
23
In this new context, the West‘s, particularly the European Union‘s, normative proposals 
and their behavioral practices (global governance) are coming up against increasing rejection 
from non-Western authors who consider them ―Euro-national‖ [56], if not downright neo-
colonial [12]. 
The diplomatic behavior of the rising nations is becoming more self-asserted and is 
justified by their own interpretive and theoretical assumptions based on the opposition and 
moral flouting of the West [37]. 
Their interpretation of reality goes beyond the West‘s understanding of the world [47] 
and leads them to justify, with unruly pride, their own method of economic and political 
development equal to the Western model [56]. The key to explaining both the rise of these 
States and the fall of the West, punished by the crisis and its democratic and market 
fundamentalism may be found in their independent and alternative behavior to Western 
influence. 
The rejection of anything Western by Southern rising powers does not necessarily have to 
lead to a direct confrontation between alternative models for the international order. It may be 
possible to come to a mutual understanding [35]. If this agreement was to materialize, the 
agreed terms would hardly reflect the post-modern assumptions proposed by global 
governance. The inability of the European Union to convince other States in the United 
Nations seems unstoppable.During the nineties, the European countries received an average 
70% support for their proposals from the members of the General Assembly. This share was 
reduced to 50% in 2008. On the other hand, in the same period, support for China went from 
50% to 74%.The economic crisis seems to confirm this tendency.In 2011, 60% of the votes 
went to China, 58% to Russia, 40% to the European Union and 38% to the United States 
[18,19]. China (along with Russia and other developing countries) has managed to 
consolidate a sovereign pole which obstructs the creation of the normative framework favored 
by Western powers. 
The difficulties creating a global governance within the post-modern international order 
not only arise from the resistance and opposition of the emerging and growing number of 
Southern powers, but also from Western powers themselves. 
For different reasons, neither the United States nor the European Union seem to have the 
same faith in their proposals as they had a decade ago. In the European case, this may be due 
to failures in their home affairs.In the US, Barack Obama‘s foreign policy seems to be finding 
a place in the new international system. 
Europe has been a perfect example of how not to manage the economic crisis as it did not 
apply the principles and values it was supposed to support. The crisis that has threatened the 
existence of the euro on three occasions has its political roots in the selfishness of Member 
States‘ national policies. The crisis, allegedly attributed to fiscal irresponsibility or to a 
handful of corrupt countries, has brought to light a huge lack of collective compromise to 
foment shared sovereignty and form a true fiscal union [3]. The multiple meetings between 
national leaders which have been taking place in recent years have emphasized the ongoing 
divergence between the political objectives of each government preventing the setting up of a 
common strategy to fight the crisis. 
It will be extremely difficult for the European Union to gain support for its post-modern 
proposals because it falls back on national selfishness to protect its own interests at the 
expense of its neighbors‘ – a pure exercise in Westphalian sovereignty. This has been the 

Rafael García Pérez 
24
main difficulty since the onset and cannot go unnoticed by the rest of the international players 
and undermines the international position of the EU as a credible model. 
Some authors, however, defend the options the Union maintains to put its project of 
efficient multilateralism into practice. This project is based on rules which allow it to have a 
greater influence and repercussion in a multipolar context. But to achieve this, the EU would 
need to apply a ―great strategy‖ [25], the possibility of which seems to be fading away. In the 
end, although Europe may be able to get back on track and surmount the crisis by remodeling 
its union, the wounds inflicted during these last years will not be forgotten so quickly. 
The punishment imposed on the citizens, such as the ones the Portuguese or Greeks are 
experiencing, will encumber the future viability of a shared European project threatened by 
hegemonic relations which have reappeared in continental policies. 
While awaiting the balance which will bring the crisis to an end, the EU is considered to 
be just a week partner of the US, unable to convert their collective power into results. The 
new creditors, increasingly independent, are exercising a progressive influence over the 
indebted European democracies. The Union seems to be doomed to a slow isolation from the 
worldwide strategic scenario, reducing its opportunities to promote the ―solidarity‖ 
international order it worked towards. 
Barack Obama‘s government has taken a significant turn regarding the international 
strategy of its predecessor. The Obama administration abandoned the Bush doctrine of a 
hegemonic unilateral project and transformation of the international order. According to the 
new approach, the great powers are facing the same strategic sources of insecurity. This 
means they have a common interest and a real need for cooperation in order to coordinate the 
different national responses to these threats.Joint action optimizes State power by distributing 
responsibilities. Thus, operative responses are no longer a Western monopoly. Instead of 
trying to stop new powers from rising as new poles of independent power, the US should 
consider itself a partner bringing about a greater cooperation among the largest number 
possible of players (National Security Strategy, 2010) – a chance of primus inter pares able to 
lead worldwide alliances. 
Along this line, the US would bring about a new international order even between the 
great powers which would not coincide precisely with global governance. This would be 
based on new alliances with India and China, to a lesser extent. Decision-making would take 
place in new international fora, more flexible and informal than the traditional international 
organizations, e.g., the G-20 which brings old and new powers together. The role of these 
associations is that of a management committee which makes decisions and promotes 
worldwide policies, enforced by regional, traditional institutions (the UN or IMF). 
However, these plans have not been achieved. In the collective control of the financial 
crisis, the results of the G-20 have been very limited. No general agreement was reached to 
overcome the systematic failures detected, not even on the basic levels, such as the 
coordination of national policies or the balance in currency rates. At the same time, the US 
government seems to be more concerned with its internal political battles. Its hesitations 
regarding Syria and other serious international conflicts indicate it is no longer interested in 
being a leader of international affairs. Its unwillingness to promote foreign affairs is a 
reflection of its own public opinion which demands its government to look after its own 
economic growth, and not to assist external conflicts. 
A considerable increase in the national energy production has notably reduced 
dependence on imported petroleum. Thanks to new technologies that allow the exploitation of 

Global Governance Failure 
25
shale oil, the US is expected not only to be self-sufficient in terms of energy but also to 
become an exporter. The consequent reduction in fuel prices will allow the US to bring back 
high energy consuming industries which were relocated in previous decades thus increasing 
employment and economic growth and reducing its ecologic footprint. This will result in a 
more inward-looking country with less international presence but acquiring a larger share of 
world trade. Being a worldwide leader in a new international order will be less important. 
There is no wish to become isolated. US foreign policy will remain active but will change, 
with more selective priorities making future global risks more intense. 
 
 
DO GLOBAL RISKS INFLUENCE A COOPERATIVE 
RESPONSE FROM THE INTERNATIONAL PLAYERS? 
 
Global risks‘ governance is a Western proposal, made after the end of the Cold War. It is 
based on the understanding of the nature and destiny of globalization as a historic process and 
on some assumptions about the awareness and ability of international society to react 
collectively. These assumptions are yet to be confirmed. While the West maintained 
leadership in the post-modern liberal international order, the political and institutional 
developments of its proposals were heard to a greater or lesser extent, having little impact. 
The emergence of new Southern powers and the consequences of the 2008 crisis have put an 
end to its implementation, with growing opposition from the non-Western world. 
We are not facing a plural international scenario where States have relegated influence. 
Nor a multipolar system where international cooperation arises from structured dialogue. 
Richard Haass considers that the transformation of the international system has led to an era 
of non-polarity in which power is diffuse [23]. Ian Bremmer shares the same opinion when 
saying that we are heading towards a vacuum where no single State is able to galvanize global 
initiatives – a world without poles: the G-Zero [8]. 
A hegemonic power or a coalition of players with similar interests and goals is necessary 
to confront global risks, to promote a global governance plan and to make sure the 
agreements are carried out. Is there such a convergence of interests? Do both old and new 
players have a shared interest in overcoming global risks by working together? Are we 
perhaps moving towards the interdependent, interpolar world foreseen by Giovanni Grevi 
[21]? 
There is hope. John Ikenberry [26] considers that the Western proposal based on 
multilateral, bilateral institutions and regional alliances has the necessary requisites to accept 
commitments, including the rising powers. These are based on norms and integrated 
institutions which favor non-discrimination and open markets.With this idea in mind, all the 
relevant players would share an interest in maintaining a working international economic 
system. China, India or even Russia itself benefit from the existing status quo inasmuch as 
they are trying to come up to date by integrating the whole world in order to have access to 
the markets, technology and foreign investment. So the crisis that began in 2008 has 
highlighted the mutual economic interests and the interdependence between the great powers. 
Although both new and old stakeholders can identify common strategic challenges, they 
are still unable to achieve sustainable responses together, as shown by the meagre results of 
the multilateral fora. Hence the alternative advocated by Moisés Naím in favor of 

Rafael García Pérez 
26
―minilateralism‖. This means gathering the fewest number of countries necessary to obtain 
the greatest impact on a global risk, whose solution is beyond the individual action of a State 
[38,39]. Bringing together a larger number of participants probably hinders the real possibility 
of reaching agreements. 
Whether it is down to too many participants or to the fundamental ideological differences 
of each, all the relevant players, including Western countries, only defend multilateral 
governance when it affects their immediate interests, especially when considering their home 
affairs. They all favor regional to global organisms as well as addressing national interests 
rather than global ones, in the long-term. 
Different ideas and expectations may explain the difficulties encountered when trying to 
improve international cooperation. The fragile bonds of mutual confidence are continually 
broken because there are various opinions on global risks and disparities in the international 
agenda.Different ideas between Western and Southern countries, between rich and poor, 
about the new normative principles are increasingly more apparent. 
New norms about ―responsibility to protect‖, ―democratic governance‖, ―responsible 
sovereignty‖ or ―ecological responsibility‖ lack universal support. Agreement over how, 
when and where they should be applied persists. The different views regarding the West‘s 
recent humanitarian intervention perfectly exemplify the real limits which the necessary 
normative convergence to establish global governance is up against. When there are more 
pressing national interests, international norms and agendas take second place. Global 
institutions are weakened by the absence of this basic impulse. 
At the same time, the rising of Southern powers has reduced existing differences between 
the most powerful players thus helping the global convergence process. However, social and 
economic indicators in these countries show they are still developing. This creates tension 
between their role as defensive powers in the status quo and the need to sort out their own 
internal challenges to achieve maximum development. The divergent expectations about the 
distribution of power in the future determine the real possibilities of cooperation. 
The new powers have gained sufficient influence and independence to stop the post-
modern liberal program being carried out in several areas - they defend the sovereign 
authority of the States without assuming the responsibility to face collective problems. The 
definition of international order is currently blocked and without a leader to direct it. 
Moreover, this behaviour of the ruling elite of the emerging powers counts on wide support 
from their nations, even though in many places they are not democratically governed. The 
economic boom experienced in recent decades and the consequent increase of the middle 
class (23% of the total population of China, with a 1% annual growth) has given the 
population expectations of prosperity so the people accept the political restrictions in the hope 
of collective wealth. Under these social and economic circumstances, with young, growing 
populations, the views on global risks not only diverge from Western opinion but from the 
responses they are willing to adopt. All the emerging powers are experiencing a feeling of 
national pride that given their shared colonial past drives them away from Western proposals 
and strengthens their independence and their uniqueness. It may not be possible to prolong 
this tacit social pact but while the economic cycle continues to expand, the new powers‘ 
sovereignty will expand with it.Perhaps the near future will be dominated by globalization 
made up of geopolitical blocks, regional groups of players where each State looks after its 
own interests, but not global issues. A globalization, starring multiple regionalisms [35], 
governed by strong States but without a global leader, will be unable to conduct international 

Global Governance Failure 
27
cooperation and even less to make global governance work.It is also possible to explain the 
inability to give common answers to global risks because of the very nature of these threats 
which pose increasing doubts about the allocation of duties and responsibilities [24]. The 
enormous potential consequences of unexpected events with multiple secondary effects may 
create a vacuum of power, where it is not clear (and nobody wants to clarify) where legitimate 
authority lies. 
 
For many of the global risks discussed in this report, the ownership of these risks 
remains fragmented and unclear, and it is often difficult to identify actors willing and 
able to take ownership. This, coupled with the complexity of interdependencies, is 
perhaps why so many of these issues remain endemic and systemic in nature, although 
their existence and potential impact is known [15]. 
 
Are we perhaps facing a situation where the ability to manage (collectively or not) world 
affairs is inadequate when dealing with the magnitude and complexity of the risks before us? 
Are the dynamics unleashed by the globalization process beyond humanity‘s intellectual 
capacity to analyze and comprehend? Global risks have created a negative co-dependence 
among all the international players which identifies common risks. However, this knowledge 
alone does not bring about positive agreements which, in turn, produce efficient, legitimate 
and fair responses. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Anand, S. and Segal, P. (2008). What Do We Know about Global Income 
Inequality?Journal of EconomicLiterature, 46(1), 57-94. 
[2] 
Barbé, E. (2012). La Unión Europea en el contexto internacional, a la hora de las 
potencias emergentes. In: E. Barbé(Dir.), Cambio mundial y gobernanza global. La 
interacción entre la Unión Europea y las instituciones internacionales (pp. 46-67). 
Madrid: Tecnos. 
[3] 
Bastasin, C. (2012). Saving Europe: How National Politics Nearly Destroyed the 
Euro.Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press. 
[4] 
Bauman, Z. (1999). Globalization.The Human Consequences. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
[5] 
Bauman, Z. (2006), Liquid Fear. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
[6] 
Beck, U. (1992). Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity. New Delhi: Sage. 
[7] 
Bernstein, P.L. (1996). Against the Gods.The Remarkable Story of Risk. New York: 
John Wiley. 
[8] 
Bremmer, I. (2012). Every Nation for Itself: Winners and Losers in a G-Zero World. 
New York: Portfolio. 
[9] 
Cohen, S. (2001). States of Denial: Knowing about Atrocities and Suffering. 
Cambridge: Polity Press. 
[10] Damasio, A.R. (1994). Descartes' error: Emotion and reason in the human brain. New 
York: Putnam. 
[11] Finkelstein, L. S. (1995). What Is Global Governance?Global Governance 1, 367-372. 
[12] Fioramonti, L. (2012). Is the EU a ―Better‖ Global Player? An Analysis of Emerging 
Powers‘s Perceptions. In: T.Renardand, S.Biscop (Eds.), The European Union and 

Rafael García Pérez 
28
Emerging Powers in the 21st Century. How Europe can shape a new global order(pp. 
147-164).Farnham: Ashgate. 
[13] Friedman, T. (2005).The World Is Flat: A Brief History of the Twenty-First Century. 
New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 
[14] Giddens, A. (1994). Beyond Left and Right - the Future of Radical Politics. Cambridge: 
Polity Press. 
[15] Global Risks (2010).A Global Risk Network Report. Geneva: World Economic Forum. 
Retrieved from www.weforum.org/pdf/globalrisk/globalrisks2010.pdf. 
[16] Gnesotto, N. (2008). L‘Europe politique a-t-elle un avenir? In: M.Rocardand 
N.Gnesotto(Eds.), Notre Europe (293-308). Paris: Robert Laffont. 
[17] Goldstone, J. A. (2012). A Theory ofPolitical Demography. In: J. A. Goldstone, E.P. 
Kaufmann and M.D. Toft (Eds.), Political Demography. How Population Changes Are 
Reshaping International Security and National Politics (pp. 10-28). Boulder (Col.): 
Paradigm. 
[18] Gowan, R. andBrantner, F. (2008).A Global Force for Human Rights?An Audit of 
European Power at UN.European Council on Foreign Relations. 
[19] Gowan, R. andBrantner, F. (2011).The EU and Human Rights at the UN: 2011 Review. 
European Council on Foreign Relations. 
[20] Gray, J. (2008, September 28). A shattering moment in America's fall from power. The 
Guardian. Retrieved from http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/sep/28/ 
usforeignpolicy.useconomicgrowth. 
[21] Grevi, G. (2009). The Interpolar World: A New Scenario. Paris: European Union 
Institute for Security Studies. 
[22] Harvey, D. (2010). The enigma of capital and the crises of capitalism. London: Profile. 
[23] Haass, R. N. (2008). The Age of Nonpolarity: What Will Follow us 
Dominance?Foreign Affairs, 87(3), 44-56. 
[24] Herd, G. P. andDunay, P. (2010). International Security, Great Powers and World 
Order. In: G.P. Herd (Ed.) (2010), Great Powers and Strategic Stability in the 21st 
Century: Competing Visions of World Order (pp. 3-20). London: Routledge/GCSP. 
[25] Howorth, J. (2010). The EU as a Global Actor: Grand Strategy for a Global Grand 
Bargain?Journal of Common Market Studies, 48(3), 455-474. 
[26] Ikenberry, G. J. (2008). The Rise of China and the Future of the West. Can the Liberal 
System Survive? Foreign Affairs, 87(1), 23-37. 
[27] Innenarity, D. (2009). El futuro y sus enemigos. Barcelona: Paidós. 
[28] Ipsos-MORI (2014). People in western countries pessimistic about future for young 
people. 
Ipsos 
MORI 
Global 
Trends 
Survey.Retrieved 
from 
www.ipsos-
mori.com/researchpublications/researcharchive/3369/People-in-western-countries-
pessimistic-about-future-for-young-people.aspx#gallery[M]/2/ 
[29] Jaffrelot, C. (ed.) (2009). Emerging States: The Wellspring of a New World Order. New 
York: Columbia University Press. 
[30] Jáuregui, G. (2000). La democracia planetaria. Oviedo: Nobel. 
[31] Kaplan, R. D. (2009). The Revenge of Geography, Foreign Policy, 88(3), 96-105. 
[32] Keynes, J. M. (1936). The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money, 
Orlando (FL): Harvest/Harcout. 
[33] Kings, S. D. (2010). Losing Control.The Emerging Threats to Western 
Prosperity.Hampshire: Yale University Press, New Haven and London. 

Global Governance Failure 
29
[34] Kissinger, H. A. (2009, January 12). The Chance for a New World Order.The New York 
Times, 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.nytimes.com/2009/01/12/opinion/12iht-
edkissinger.1.19281915.html?pagewanted=alland_r=0. 
[35] Mahbubani, K. (2013). The Great Convergence.Asia, the West and the Logic of One 
World. New York: Public Affairs. 
[36] McGrew, A. G. (1992). A Global Society?In: Hall, S., Held, D. and McGrew, A.G. 
(Eds.), Modernity and its Futures. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
[37] Mishra, P. (2012). From the Ruins of Empire: The Revolt against the West and the 
Remaking of Asia. London: Allen Lane. 
[38] Naím, M. (2009). Minilateralism. Foreign Policy, 173, 136-137. 
[39] Naím, M. (2013).The End of Power. New York: Basic Books. 
[40] Olvera Serrano, M. and Sabido Ramos, O. (2007). Un marco de análisis sociológico de 
los miedos modernos. Sociológica (México), 22(64), 119-149. 
[41] Stokes, B. (2007). Happiness Is Increasing in Many Countries - But Why? Pew 
Research Global Attitudes Project. Retrieved from www.pewglobal.org/ 2007/07/24 
/happiness-is-increasing-in-many-countries-but-why/ 
[42] Pochintesta, P. (2010).Las emociones en el envejecimiento y el miedo ante la muerte. 
InvestigacionesenPsicología, 15(1), 117-140. 
[43] Pulcini, E. (2013). Care of the World.Fear, Responsibility and Justice in the Global 
Age. New York: Springer. 
[44] Robertson, R. (1992). Globalization.Social Theory and Global Culture.London: SAGE. 
[45] Rojas Marcos, L. (1995, June 20). Autoengaño: sí, gracias. El País. Retrieved from 
http://elpais.com/diario/1995/06/20/opinion/803599209_850215.html. 
[46] Solana, J. (2008, October 13). Speech by the European Union High Representative for 
Common Foreign and Security Policy.Annual Conference of the Institute for Security 
Studies of the European Union. Paris. Retrieved from www.iss. europa.eu/ 
uploads/media/Address_by_EUHR_Javier_Solana.pdf. 
[47] Sousa Santos, B. and Gandarilla Salgado, J. G. (Eds.) (2009). Una Epistemología del 
Sur. La reinvención del conocimiento y la emancipación social. México: Siglo XXI 
Eds., CLACSO. 
[48] Spence, M. (2011).The Next Convergence: The Future of Economic Growth in a 
Multispeed World. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 
[49] Stiglitz, J. (2002). Globalization and its Discontents. New York: Norten. 
[50] Strange, S. (1996). The Retreat of the State: The Diffusion of Power in the World 
Economy. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
[51] United Nations (2012).World Population Prospects: The 2012 Revision. New York: 
Department of Economic and Social Affairs. Retrieved from http://esa.un.org/wpp 
/other-information/faq.htm. 
[52] US National Intelligence Council (2004).Mapping the Global Future: Report of the 
National Intelligence Council‟s 2020 Project. Washington, DC: National Intelligence 
Council. Retrieved from www.foia.cia.gov/2020/2020.pdf. 
[53] US National Intelligence Council (2008), Global Trends 2025: A Transformed World. 
Washington, 
DC: 
National 
Intelligence 
Council. 
Retrieved 
from 
www. 
dni.gov/nic/NIC_2025_project.html. 

Rafael García Pérez 
30
[54] Van Rompuy, H. (2010, September 11). A Curtain went up -EinVorhangging auf. 
Berlin: The President of the European Council (PCE 256/10). Retrieved from 
www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/ec/117623.pdf. 
[55] Weiwei, Z. (2011). The China Wave: Rise of a Civilizational State. Hackensack, New 
Jersey: World Century Publishing Corporation. 
[56] Youngs, R. (2010). Europe‟s decline and fall. The struggle against global irrelevance. 
London: Profile Books. 
[57] White House (2010).The National Security Strategy of the United States of 
America.Retrieved from www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/rss_viewer/national_ 
security_strategy.pdf. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART II: HUMAN PERSPECTIVES 
 
 


In: Globalization and International Security: An Overview 
ISBN: 978-1-63463-075-7 
Editors: T. Rodrigues, R. García Pérez et al.  
 
© 2015 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3 
 
 
 
POPULATION DYNAMICS: DEMOGRAPHY MATTERS 
 
 
Teresa Ferreira Rodrigues 
NOVA University of Lisbon, Portugal 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The following pages focus on the discussion of the possible existing links between 
population and security. Globalization produces opportunities and raises fears for states, 
civil society and new international actors. Given the existing economic and social 
disparities, new and different challenges will rise, assuming a visible geographic 
expression. We wish to grasp the main issues that rise from these changes in today‘s 
human societies, as well as their possible evolution in the coming years. The 
globalization process brought a larger complexity to the link concerning population and 
security, as in the actual framework both the demographic conditions and the security 
environment are becoming increasingly complex. Demographic imbalances, poverty and 
economic inequality reinforced some threats and risks, worsened economic and financial 
instability, uncontrolled migratory flows, organized crime, traffic of human beings, and 
terrorism. Yet the social, economic, political, and environmental context matters. In fact, 
demographic changes alone are unlikely to inflame political violence, even if they can 
trigger conflict and insecurity situations or just their perceptions. 
 
Keywords: Demography, population, security, sustainable development, well-being, 
development 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Demography matters. The globalization process brought a larger complexity to the link 
concerning population and security, as in the actual framework both the demographic 
conditions and the security environment are becoming increasingly complex. Demographic 
imbalances, poverty and economic inequality reinforced some threats and risks, worsened 
                                                           
 Corresponding author: Teresa Ferreira Rodrigues. New University of Lisbon (Portugal). E-mail: trodrigues@fcsh. 
unl.pt. 

Teresa Ferreira Rodrigues 
34
economic and financial instability, uncontrolled migratory flows, organized crime, traffic of 
human beings, and terrorism. The social, economic, political and environmental context 
matters [22]. Population is an underlying variable for conflict. 
Nevertheless, demographic changes alone are unlikely to inflame political violence, but 
they can trigger conflict and insecurity. Population volumes, specific age structures, fertility 
and mortality average levels and migratory dynamics are both a resource, an indicator and a 
multiplier factor of power and security. They impact not only the capability of a given State 
to defend itself from external threats, but they also help it to prevent collapsing and can even 
contribute to guarantee reasonable wellbeing standards to its citizens. Thus, demographic 
characteristics have effects at two different levels which we can split in a simplistic and 
classical way into internal and external security risks. Although in contemporary societies this 
dichotomy had ceased to make an absolute sense, it still helps us in the analysis of the 
contextual factors of the demography-security link.  
The characteristics of a given population at a given moment increase or reduce the 
likelihood of conflict and the levels of social instability and economic growth. They also 
influence the will of assertion of power from a political entity (State or ethnic group), its 
attempts of expansionism, the probability of ethnic conflict, terrorism, radicalism or religious 
fundamentalism, and even of environmental stress episodes. 
Demographic trends influence political stability and security. For analytical purposes we 
can consider three major aspects correlated with the possible demographic impact on a State‘s 
national security [28]. The first one is the external framework, i.e., how to secure state 
borders and assure the capacity to project power in the international system. The second and 
third levels are associated to internal framework, both to regime issues and collective 
structural security. It concerns a) the guarantee of political and social internal stability, b) the 
protection of the system‘s interests; and c) the right to access resources and thereby its 
citizens human security. 
For the coming decades we know how many, where, and which characteristics will the 
world's population have. But still we do not know how the inevitable changes it will face may 
represent an asset or an embarrassment to global security. 
The following pages focus on the discussion of the possible existing links between 
population and security. Globalization produces opportunities and raises fears for states, civil 
society and new international actors. Given the existing economic and social disparities, new 
and different challenges will rise, assuming a visible geographic expression. 
We wish to grasp the main issues that rise from these changes in today‘s human societies, 
as well as their possible evolution in the coming years. We will (a) present the links between 
demographic dynamics and regional asymmetries; (b) discuss the complex links of 
sustainability between population volumes, resources, economic and social development 
levels and security challenges; and (c) debate the crossing lines between demographic 
dynamics and security issues. 
 
 
POPULATION AND SECURITY CHALLENGES. CONTEXTUAL FACTORS 
 
Demographic studies should be regarded as a fundamental area of security studies and as 
an instrument of support for political decision. Information regarding population volumes, 

Population Dynamics: Demography Matters 
35
age and sex characteristics, and geographical distribution contributes to detect and prevent 
possible factors of risk. 
So, population must be seen as a strategic vector in the context of security and defense 
sectors. In past societies the total number of inhabitants of a given State or a region was 
regarded as an element to measure its relative power. The issue was not complex, within a 
framework in which all populations grew moderately, had a similar age structure (many 
children and a few elderly), economic production was based in household units, and mainly 
focused in primary activities. Today the issue can no longer be seen in this simple way. 
In contemporary and future societies the importance of demographic variables varies 
according to the main characteristics of human resources (in terms of gender, age, skills and 
education). Population‘s volume, sexe and age characteristics can be considered as elements 
of soft and hard power, but can also trigger real or perceived insecurity risks. 
In the new paradigms of the international system, the demographic volumes and their 
main dynamics are a crucial factor. Nevertheless, demographic changes occur slowly and 
imperceptibly, which partially hides its importance and interest for some of the actors 
responsible for the maintenance, prevention and mitigation of security threats. The inertia and 
predictability of demographic trends is an advantage for those who look into their dynamics 
for reliable information in terms of decision-making. But this characteristic is also one of the 
reasons why population studies are not always seen as an interesting subject for researchers 
and policy-makers [26]. 
In terms of academic research, the link between demography and security features three 
distinct perspectives [23]. The first one goes back to 1968, with the publication of The 
Population Bomb (Ehrlich, [8]). It considers that insecurity results from a complex and 
unbalanced relationship between population growth, vital resources and economic 
development. During the first stage it was mainly focused on discussing conflicts between 
States. Population volumes were seen as the determining factor for the assertion of power. 
But other factors were progressively added to the dynamic equation of the considered 
populations, such as the average levels of education and health status, employment and well-
being, and quality of life in terms of housing, food and leisure. Those were recognized as 
determinant factors to guarantee satisfactory levels of collective security. 
The second set of theories are symbolized by Weiner and Russell‘s work [34]. They 
assume a more historic and economic point of view and are linked to the International Studies 
Association, the American Political Science Association and the Environmental Change and 
Security Program [18]. Their emphasis is given to the way how environmental conditions, 
demographic trends, diseases, economic globalization and technology must be seen as 
solutions, but also as potential problems for war and peace, sovereignty and development. 
Supporters of this theory underline the security implications resulting from the patterns in 
which the relationship between population, natural resources and development patterns is 
based. They assume an ecological profile and highlights the risks to stability coming from 
competition for essential resources such as water, food, employment. The risk of conflict is 
higher in politically weak states and lower in democracies or dictatorial states. Some of its 
followers advocate the economic and military advantages of numerous populations and 
acknowledge that economic development leads to increased political and social security. 
The third and last tendency is chronologically more recent and underlines the importance 
of geostrategy, geopolitics and prospective forecasting. It perceives population as an 
unconventional threat and considers demographic vitality as a strategic vector of security and 

Teresa Ferreira Rodrigues 
36
defense [28]. The future of conflicts is being shaped by demographic trends in terms of 
fertility, mortality and migration. 
World population growth is mainly concentrated in developing regions and impacts local 
political power, influences regional capacity of economic development and might worsen 
social tensions. Demographic trends can hinder the achievement of human security, and thus 
put in danger the security of a nation. The existence of young population structures increases 
the risk of internal conflict, as there may be no responses from the labor market and 
difficulties to access health care and education. 
But young political states can have their window of opportunity by having many young 
adults. This contributes to increase their importance in the international political system (e.g., 
projection of armed forces, advantageous alliances with ageing countries, consolidation of 
political strength international organizations). 
If we look at the demographic model as a locked system, with its endogenous dynamics 
arising from the fecundity, mortality or migration variables, the study of populations might be 
considered as an end in itself. But we can also look at it as an open and dynamic structure, 
where each variable is both a cause and a consequence of exogenous political, economic and 
cultural conjunctures. The link between demography and security fits in this holistic view of 
the international system. The end of the Cold War brought new threats to populations and 
states security, although some of them might be unreal. The characteristics of a given 
population should be considered as a security predictor at three different levels (Figure 3.1). 
 
 
Source: Author‘s elaboration, based on Sciubba [28]. 
Figure 3.1. The Demographic-Security link. A few examples. 
 
DEMOGRAPHIC ASYMMETRIES, DEMOGRAPHIC CHALLENGES 
 
The world‘s population doubled four times between 1900 and 2000, with a momentum of 
maximum increase in the mid-80. In 2011 we hit 7 billion inhabitants. Although today we 

Population Dynamics: Demography Matters 
37
notice a slight reduction in all population increase growth dynamics, pronounced regional 
differences are still a reality. 
These differences are connected with the prevalent stages of demographic transition 
models they belong to [12]. Populations grow quickly in South Asia, the Middle East and in 
sub-Saharan Africa. 
In what concerns the international system and the geopolitical balances today's 
distribution of human populations presents three aspects of awareness. The first one is related 
to geographic distribution: a) there are major inequalities in that distribution; b) the number of 
inhabitants increases faster in least developed countries, while it decreases or stabilizes in the 
most developed ones (of a total of 250 thousand daily births registered in the world, 90 
percent take place in poorly developed countries); c) only the evolution to new stages of the 
demographic transition model (and fertility levels reduction) will significantly reduce this 
increase.  
The second aspect relies on the concentration of population levels: a) there are political 
units with optimal levels of population, others under or densely populated; b) differences are 
even more obvious at the internal level (e.g., urban/rural areas; costal/interior areas). Asia and 
Europe have higher average values of soil occupation, but only the first one will continue to 
see its density levels increasing. 
Finally, we must highlight the importance of population‘s age structure: a) this was not a 
question in past societies, but becomes more complex today, as some areas are increasingly 
older, while others grow too quickly and have very young age structures; b) migrations do not 
solve the problem, as there is a "sociological limit of tolerance" in what concerns the 
percentage of immigrants in a given society. Those limits are being broken as we speak, 
arising serious social tensions, particularly in the European Union; c) demographic pressure 
worsens the inequalities between rich and poor societies: 70 percent of the world‘s population 
has less than 30 percent of the world‘s total income [31]. 
The economic boot of an undeveloped country with a rapidly growing population most 
frequently implies the adoption of measures which benefit capital holders and a few wealthy 
social groups which can generate popular discontentment and internal tensions. 
Until the end of the 21st century an increase of around three thousand million individuals 
is expected. More than three quarters of these ―new populations‖ will have been born in Asia 
or Africa. The expected future depends on present differences in age structural characteristics 
(percentage of young, adults and aged population) (Figure 3.2). 
However, the projections undertaken by different international organizations reveal a 
progressive slowdown in terms of demographic increase, due to the sharp reduction of 
fertility rates in regions where today they still remain high. Somewhere between the end of 
the 21st century and the beginning of the following one the world‘s population will start 
reducing, after reaching the maximum value of 10 billion [17]. 
In a two-speed world in terms of economic and human growth, the relationship between 
population, resources and development will face a multiplicity of challenges. The most 
developed countries will struggle with the accumulated effects of the double ageing of their 
age structures (less youngsters, more people with at least 60 years old), scarcity and ageing of 
their active population, the need of redefying labor market rules and social support systems, 
and a growing dependence on (not always wanted) migrations. 
At the same time, more than 80 percent of the world's population will be confronted with 
the effects of a still substantial demographic increase rate and most of all with its 

Teresa Ferreira Rodrigues 
38
consequences to access vital resources, conditioned by new global phenomena such as global 
warming, water scarcity, and soil desertification. 
 
 
Source: UNDP [30]. 
Figure 3.2. World‘s population. Trends and distribution (2010-2100). 
The inevitability of demographic asymmetrical growth (Figure 3.3) generates other 
uncertainties, particularly how to ensure the urgent improvement of life quality and well-
being indicators in the least developed countries, against a backdrop of sharp demographic 
increase. And also how to ensure their economic development, considering the weakness of 
their domestic markets. Once again in mankind history it will be urgent to find a suitable 
answer to the following questions [21]: how to ensure a balance between population and 
resources, without endangering the necessary and desirable economic, social and human 
development? How to assure that this process guarantees a closer relationship between levels 
of well-being among populations without compromising the sustainability of vital resources 
and without increasing the pressure on the natural or built environment?  
The management of the trilogy population, resources and development is increasingly 
difficult, as the geography of most vital natural resources does not match the geography of 
population (Figure 3.4). The growing pressure on resources, under the form of consumption 
and particularly of degradation, aggravates stress situations. Pollution levels are rising, as 
well as soil deterioration, shortages of drinking water and hunger episodes, as a result of the 
asymmetric distribution of resources, in the context of climate change. The latter act as 
multipliers of risks and threats and are potential facilitators of social tensions and conflicts.  

 
 
Source: Global Strategic Trends [11]. 
Figure 3.3. Growth population rates and median age (2010-2040). 

 
 
Source: Global Strategic Trends [11]. 
Figure 3.4. Infrastructure and global resources. 

Population Dynamics: Demography Matters 
41
They intensify disparities between groups, ethnicities and political entities, generate processes 
of forced migration, either in the search of these resources or simply to escape from their 
costs. The challenges of global society tend to transform population into a vector that can 
trigger security risks [11]. 
Demographic dynamics figure among the MEGATRENDS assumed by the NIC for 2030 
[11], although they are also seen as background for most of the GAME-CHANGERS. But of 
what are we talking about? 1) of individual empowerment, which will be accelerated by 
poverty reduction, growth of the global middle class, greater educational attainment, 
widespread use of new communications and manufacturing technologies, and health-care 
advances; 2) of power diffusion, as power will shift to networks and coalitions in a multipolar 
world; 3) of demographic patterns, as the demographic arc of instability will narrow; 
economic growth might decline in ―aging‖ countries; 60 percent of the world‘s population 
will live in urbanized areas; migration will increase; and 4) of tackling problems pertaining to 
one commodity will be linked to supply and demand for others, as the demand for food, water 
and energy resources will grow substantially due to demographic growth. 
 
 
THE COMPLEX LINKS OF SUSTAINABILITY 
 
The world of the 21st century inherited from the former one the need to understand and 
regulate the challenges and opportunities produced by globalization, but also the urgency to 
address the risks associated with it [24]. The relationship between population volumes and 
security is more complex nowadays, as we have populations with different characteristics and 
we also have new concepts and new environments of (in)security. 
World society faces an increased interdependence of powers. In this complex reality the 
State performs the difficult role of acting as a moderator between the commitments 
undertaken externally within alliances and international institutions, while guarantying its 
acceptance by civil society and non-governmental agencies [1]. Countries with better socio-
economic indicators and a better degree of political and social structuring can manage the 
neo-liberal offensive, even with different degrees of success. However, in the case of poorly 
consolidated states the process overlays the way to situations of tension and disruption, which 
can worsen internal inequalities. The accumulation of differences between those who are able 
or unable to follow the process creates risks of human security at an international scale, 
associated with exclusion processes, most of which have a clear spatial interpretation. One 
should discuss the achievement of balance between equality and equity, equality and/or 
identity, equality and/or profitability, redistribution or reward, the articulation between a 
global and "world culture" and regional specificities [2]. 
At the beginning of this century the world isn't getting politically more integrated, 
economically more interdependent, culturally more homogeneous or safer [27]. 
The Population-Development nexus returns to the agenda in a global risk society and 
acquires a new perspective of analysis: human security [25]. 
As we live in a two-speed world, nature is no longer used or shaped according to human 
interests in the short run. In fact, the new actors of the international system have to focus in 
the management, resolution or mitigation of problems that arise from the effects of 
technological and economic options from previous generations. We deal with different types 

Teresa Ferreira Rodrigues 
42
of risk (natural, technological, global and mixed) and different risk analysis dimensions, 
including spatial, temporal and social ones. 
Our current society is characterized by the globalization of risk, in terms of intensity, 
generalization, existence or weightlessness of certain risks and the development of new ones. 
It also faces the ambivalence in the decision concerning the risks, as well as the need for 
international cooperation for its regulation and neutralization. We refer to risks without 
borders, both natural and technological, resulting from transnational threats and identity (e.g., 
pollution knows no borders, nuclear waste and genetically modified organisms have a long 
life span) [25]. Man's relationship with the ecosystem is at present characterized by new 
questions and concerns. Today‘s society faces a "readjustment crisis" of unpredictable extent 
in rhythm and intensity, which can even worsen for the coming generations, as the ecological 
footprint grows. How can we joint a world of contrasts? 
Some controversy and major uncertainties frame the attempts made to rank the world‘s 
current and future global risks, according to their impact to human societies. The situation 
becomes even worse, if we consider its variability according to geographic regions. The 
international scientific community has given relevance to the effects of climate change, the 
issue of public health, armed conflicts, financial instability, poor governance and corruption, 
malnutrition and hunger, migration, ensuring access to drinking water and sanitation 
structures, trade barriers [7]. This listing, far from exhausting the emerging concerns, can be 
further simplified if restricted to the problems with larger consensus [14, 15]. 
Let us address some of them (Figure 3.5). 
Climate change and global warming - major changes in ecosystems contribute to the 
decrease of the ice cap, the rise of water levels and coastal flooding, scarcities, desertification 
and famine, as well as a higher probabilistic occurrence of cyclones and other climate 
incidents [6, 16]. Pollution levels have risen, just like soil degradation, scarcity of drinking 
water and food, as a result of the asymmetric distribution of resources. 
Climate change is a risk and threat multiplier and a potential catalyst of tension and 
conflicts associated with food insecurity, and access to clean water and energy. It deepens 
asymmetries between social groups, ethnicities, rich and poor populations. 
Although climate change is never the only cause of conflict, it can increase its 
probability. It also generates forced migrations and struggles to ensure the ownership of these 
resources or to escape the consequences of its shortage. Most of the States affected by conflict 
already face social, economic, and political instability, which means that they will find it 
difficult to address the impacts of climate change. 
Provision of drinking water - over the last fifty years freshwater resources have declined 
swiftly. Today, over a billion people have no access to sufficient quantities of water and two 
more billion do not have access to drinking water. The consumption‘s increase is 
accompanied by the diminishing of its quality, with direct impacts in food security and public 
health. Demographic growth will increase the need for water in the near future, requiring new 
technological investments and most of all a concerted international solidarity. Guarantying 
sufficient water will become a problem of international solidarity, but the forms and ways of 
doing it remain still unclear. 
Technological risks - Nuclear energy is one of the best examples of technological risk, 
and a subject of the international political agenda. The option for nuclear energy can reduce 
the impact of global warming. However, its use is associated with severe accidents caused by 
the release of radioactive gases and also with the possibility of its use for military purposes or 

Population Dynamics: Demography Matters 
43
terrorist acts (Weapons of Mass Destruction - WMDs). Another sensitive area in the field of 
technology lies on genetic research, molecular biology, cloning and genetically modified 
organisms. 
 
 
Source: Author‘s elaboration. 
Figure 3.5. Human population and global risks. 
Public health, infectious and ―avoidable‖ diseases - World‘s population health status has 
improved in the last decades. But despite all progresses situation is still far from satisfactory. 
Some diseases considered controlled in the past decades returned suddenly, new diseases with 
unknown prophylaxis appeared and the number of degenerative and disabling diseases 
increased [13]. The main problem is that in our progressively globalized society a growing 
number of individuals does not have access to health care or does not receive the appropriate 
treatments. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), 90 percent of the treatment 
means are committed to a tenth of world‘s total population. The situation is illogical: Africa 
loses 12 billion dollars per year due to malaria consequences, while a lower investment would 
assure the control of the disease. Moreover, donations in the domain of health cooperation 
faced a backspace in the last few years, due to the unfavorable economic context. 
Management of wealth and opportunities - the percentage of world‘s poor people is 
decreasing, but not the number of poor. Regional inequalities have decreased, but not in 
regions or social groups who failed to keep up with the challenges introduced by 
globalization. Even in societies where the average income levels increased there were 
globalization "collateral" effects, visible in the rise of internal inequalities [35]. 
Impact of demographic ageing - in the coming decades there will remain a coincidence 
between aged societies and societies with better indicators of human development [20]. In 
fact the globalization of the aging phenomenon represents a victory of man over death. The 

Teresa Ferreira Rodrigues 
44
problem is the speed of the process in contexts of scarce sustainability and weak support 
networks. Changes in population‘s age structure in a given territory influence its economic 
capacity, governance characteristics, military strength and also collective behaviors [21]. As 
we know, the different chronologies of population‘s aging creates regional imbalances 
between demographic growth rates and most of all a growing migratory dependency in most 
developed societies. 
Instability bred by international migrations - migratory movements represent one of the 
most obvious testimonies of world narrowing. But migration is a complex phenomenon, 
which does not fit in a strict economic logic. Therefore migratory movements and volumes 
represent one of the biggest challenges for the international community. There is no linear 
relationship between who wants to migrate and those who are wanted by host societies. But 
the dissemination of information on economic opportunities and the access to certain goods 
that define degrees of life quality will inevitably increase over the coming decades the 
volumes of migrants. All forecasts agree on an increase in the number of those who want and 
will leave their countries of origin [26]. 
Unevenness of life in large megacities - According to the United Nations, in 2008 the 
global urban population surpassed half of the world‘s population. Nowadays 52 percent of the 
world‘s population is urban. The number of urban residents will continue to grow at an 
accelerating pace during the first half of the 21st century, with the number of larger cities 
increasing as well. Delhi, Dhaka, Jakarta, and Mexico City will surpass the 30 million 
residents and more than 500 cities will have more than a million residents within a decade. 
Most of the global population growth will continue to be urban and take place in the 
developing world. Simultaneously urban inequality is becoming widespread and poverty 
average rates are increasing [4]. Moreover, life is dangerous in non-European megalopolis 
[7]. 
Ecological balance - The planet does not lack natural resources, and the real question lies 
in its unequal distribution [33]. The implementation of guiding principles of sustainable 
development must be based on effective planning, which: 1) enables population‘s growth in a 
perspective of resource sustainability and reduces the use of harmful products for human 
health in food production processes; 2) ensures food for all in the long term, through the 
adaptation of crops and soil stabilization to local resources, reforestation and the retreat of 
desertification; 3) preserves biodiversity and ecosystems, even in contexts of human pressure; 
4) reduces the consumption of non-renewable energies and develops technologies to promote 
the use of renewable energy sources; 5) increases industrial production based on ecologically 
adapted technologies; 6) controls regional planning; 7) bets on environmental education, new 
forms of citizenship and behaviors (the recycling of renewable materials/unusable or not 
wasting water and food are exemplify the importance of the education of future generations).  
Countries that lack the means to provide for their citizens‘ basic needs face greater risks 
of instability and conflict. The PAI identifies a few links between demographics and security 
to highlight strategies for governments and global institutions to combat poverty, ensure that 
growing nations develop sustainably, and create a more stable world. Some programs that 
promote demographic transition (such as family planning, girls education, maternal and child 
health, HIV/AIDS prevention, care and treatment) should be an integral part of the 
development assistance [22]. 

Population Dynamics: Demography Matters 
45
The future has to be seen in a perspective of sustainability which can only be achieved 
through a global diagnosis. We face a time for reassessment, and of search for new paradigms 
where human populations are the structuring element [25]. 
 
 
DEMOGRAPHY MATTERS. CROSSING LINES 
 
Demographic trends influence political stability and security. We should not neglect the 
importance of demographic studies as an instrument of decision in security and defense 
policies. To further recognize the importance attributed to population volumes, it is 
paramount to obtain and manage information on the different kinds and geographical 
directions that demographic dynamics may assume. 
Demography is progressively in the policy agenda and the diversity and novelty of the 
field requires a close connection between academics and policymakers. 
Demography and policy influence each other. It is important to understand how 
governments perceive their own demographic issues and how these issues are integrated at 
different national and global levels. The question is whether demographic trends are dealt 
with sufficient resources. 
What is therefore the influence that demographic dynamics have in a given political 
entity? Which other settings should be considered when it comes to measure the potential role 
or relevance of a given political reality in today‘s globalized world? 
We can underline four factors or spheres of context: 
 
1 
Natural environment, i.e., location, topography, climate, natural resources; 
2 
Economic system, i.e., the status of the entity on the global economic system, either 
if it assumes a leading role or a role of economic dependency in a regional context; 
3 
Political system, i.e., if either we refer to a democracy or a dictatorship, a stable 
political regime or a vulnerable one; 
4 
Finally, men: a) in terms of volume large populations‘ benefit from an advantage 
situation, as a small country, even though highly developed, has greater difficulties to 
stand in the international system; b) the levels of human concentration and 
urbanization are also relevant, as the likelihood of social exclusion and facilities to 
uphold subversive practices are easier in areas with higher densities; c) the 
population‘s age characteristics in richer and older societies determine geriatric peace 
situations and intensify the real or percepted insecurity. In less developed societies 
the concentration of youngsters can fuel social tensions, as a result of poor living 
conditions, unemployment, and social exclusion. 
 
So, today and in the near future we must consider four essential aspects in the link 
between population and security: 
 
1 
A two-speed world: population growth along with demographic inertia factors lead to 
a rapid population growth, which is higher in less developed regions. But population 
increase is only an advantage a) if complemented by internal stability, and b) if the 
State involved has endogenous capacity to maximize the advantages of this new 

Teresa Ferreira Rodrigues 
46
workforce. On the other hand, the ageing phenomenon of societies with better 
indicators of human development makes them lose military capability and human 
force (hard power). In this case only alliances and technological investment can 
make up for the number disadvantage. 
2 
Globalization of migration: we face more sensitive and rapid human movements as a 
reaction to economic and political stress situations. Human mobility generate 
changes in cultural identity, balances in internal and regional powers and can be a 
source of conflicts and insecurity. All regions become regions of origin or destination 
of migrants. The percentage of foreigners in almost all societies rises, as well as the 
variety of nationalities, profiles and expectations [29]. 
3 
Urbanization and asymmetric internal migration: the privileged directions of 
migration flows can reduce wealth standards in the most attractive societies. It can 
also increase the likelihood of occurrences and the intensity of humanitarian 
disasters. As we saw poverty is becoming an increasingly urban phenomenon. These 
profound demographic and economic changes are go along with geographic changes, 
which are especially important in a time of global climate change. Social inequalities 
are greater in the global cities of the 21st century, where vulnerable populations live. 
The scale and complexity of urban communities requires that politicians promote 
broader development and that security agendas acknowledge the urban context [4]. 
Urban growth clustered in places of social tension and economic exclusion increases 
the risk of violent occurrences. Anonymity is easy in the illegally built 
neighborhoods, safe havens for subversive actions and terrorism. 
4 
Age structure changes: changes in population age structures influence local 
economy, military capacity and governance. Youth predominance can accentuate 
social claims against the existing authority and dominant life conditions. Urban 
young people with some instruction, unemployed and with frustrated expectations 
easily join mercenary forces or adhere to radical groups. Moreover, in societies with 
numerous elders, isolation and vulnerability will increase insecurity, real or 
perceived. Political stakeholders will face the problem of what to do with so many 
youngsters, while others will face the issue of what to do with so few [22]. 
 
The link between demography and security requires a continuous process of adjustment, 
as we face dynamic realities. The future implies the redesign of global society, ensuring the 
sustainable management between more aged societies, complex and distinct migratory flows, 
needs in terms of economic development at local, national and global scales, without 
threatening human rights and guarantees. 
In 2004, the United Nations established a Human Security Unit promoting the protection 
and empowerment of people to achieve ―survival, livelihood and dignity‖ [32]. Human 
security includes four aspects: survival and physical safety; conditions for health and 
economic well-being; legitimate, trustworthy and capable governance; and individual dignity 
[3]. This concept, based on the dignity of the individual, implies a concern for our 
environment and with the geographical universe that surrounds us. Security is mainly the 
product of proactive and preventive attitudes and behaviors. 
Demography matters, but we must avoid the securitization of the demographic issue. 
Population volumes need context. They are insufficient in themselves to foster social 

Population Dynamics: Demography Matters 
47
tensions, political or economic disruptions, and conflicts. Population dynamics can create 
insecurity but they can also give answers. 
As already stated, we believe that population trends should be read as an indicator, a 
resource and a multiplier. The link between demographic dynamics and security is not 
univocal. The same demographic behavior can have different impacts, depending on climate 
conditions, social reality and political context. 
This happens mostly because threats assume diffuse forms in response to changes of 
various kinds, including the environmental ones. They frequently imply population mobility 
and displacement and in a matter of weeks they can change the human composition of a given 
region. 
Future implications of security arising from demographic trends will depend on the 
political capacity (especially of institutions, Governments and a growing set of actors) to deal 
with the inevitable challenges. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Baylis, J., Smith, S. and Owens, P. (2011). The Globalization of World Politics. An 
Introduction to International Relations. Oxford: University Press. 
[2] 
Beck, U. (1998). World Risk Society, Cambridge: Polity Press. 
[3] 
Beebe, S. D. and Kaldor, M. (2010). The Ultimate Weapon Is No Weapon: Human 
Security and the New Rules of War and Peace. New York: Public Affairs. 
[4] 
Ruble, Blair, A. (2012). The Challenges of The 21st-Century City, Wilson Center, Policy 
Brief, December. Retrieved from http://www.wilsoncenter.org/sites/default/files/policy 
_briefthe_challenges_of_the_21st_century_city.pdf. 
[5] 
Ruble, B. A. (2012). The Challenges of the 21st Century City. The Wilson Center  
Policy Brief, December, Washington, DC. http://www.newsecuritybeat.org/2012/12/ 
challenges-21st-century-city/#.UuYsTxCp3IU. 
[6] 
Dauvergne, P. (2007). Handbook of Global Environmental Politics, 2nd ed. Columbia: 
Lawtext Publishing. 
[7] 
Durand, M. F., et al. (2008) Atlas de la Mondialisation. Comprendre l‟Espace mondial 
contemporain. Paris: Sciences-Po. 
[8] 
Ehrlich, P. and Ehrlich, A. H. (1968). The Population Bomb. New York: Ballantine 
Books. 
[9] 
Ehrlich, P. and Ehrlich, A. H. (2009). The Population Bomb Revisited. Electronic 
Journal of Sustainable Development. Retrieved from http://www.docstoc.com/docs/ 
12166078/Population-Bomb-Revisited. 
[10] Environmental Change and Security Program (ECSP) (2008-2009). Environmental 
Change and Security Program Report 13. The Woodrow Wilson International Center 
for Scholars, Washington DC: USAID. http://www.wilsoncenter.org/sites/default/files/ 
ECSPReport13_hi.pdf. 
[11] Global Strategic Trends (2011) Out to 2040, Strategic Trends Programme (4th ed.). 
London: Ministry of Defence, SWINDON. 

Teresa Ferreira Rodrigues 
48
[12] Henriques, F. and Rodrigues, T. (2009). O século XX: a transição. In: Rodrigues, T. 
(coord.), A População Portuguesa. Das longas permanências à conquista da 
modernidade (pp. 417 - 567). Porto: Afrontamento. 
[13] Lee, K. and Collin, J. (2005). Global Change and Health – Understanding public 
Health. Berkshire: McGraw-Hill International. 
[14] Lomborg, B. (2004). Global Crises, Global Solutions. Cambridge: University Press. 
[15] Lomborg, B. (2007) Solutions for the World‟s Biggest Problems. Costs and Benefits, 
Cambridge: University Press. 
[16] Mol, A. P. J. (2003). Globalization and Environmental Reform: The Ecological 
Modernization of the Global Economy. Cambridge: MIT Press. 
[17] Münz, R. (2013). Demography and Migration: An Outlook for the 21st Century. MPI 
Policy Brief 4, September. 
[18] Nafeez, M. A. (2010). Globalizing Insecurity: The Convergence of Interdependent 
Ecological, Energy, and Economic Crises. Yale Journal of International Affairs,  
5(2), 75-90. Retrieved from http://yalejournal.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/09/105208 
ahmed.pdf. 
[19] National Intelligence Council (2013) Global Trends 2030: Alternative World. Retrieved 
from www.dni.gov/nic/globaltrends. 
[20] Nazareth, M. (2009). Crescer e Envelhecer. Constrangimentos e Oportunidades do 
Envelhecimento Demográfico. Lisboa: Presença. 
[21] Pison, G. (2009). Atlas de la Population Mondiale. Faut-il craindre la croissance 
démographique et le vieillissement? Paris: Jacquard. 
[22] Population Action International (2013). Healthy Families, Healthy Planet Why 
Population Matters to Security. Retrieved from http://populationaction.org/topics/ 
security-and-governance/#sthash.iJJ7zoUp.dpuf. 
[23] Rodrigues, T. F. and Xavier, A. I. (2013). Reconcetualizar a Segurança e a Defesa 
Nacional: O Futuro e a Importância do Fator Demográfico. Revista de Ciências 
Militares, 1(1), 59-61. Retrieved from http://www.iesm.pt/Cisdi/revista/Artigos/Revista 
_1_Artigo_2.pdf. 
[24] Rodrigues, T. F. (2010). Espaços e Populações do século XXI. Janus 2010, 56-57. 
Lisboa: UAL-Público. 
[25] Rodrigues, T. F. (2011). Globalização, População e Ambiente. Lisboa: Academia das 
Ciências. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.acad-ciencias.pt/index.php?option=com_ 
contentandview=articleandid=1736. 
[26] Rodrigues, T. F. (2012a). O Futuro (in)Certo das Dinâmicas Demográficas em Portugal. 
In: A. Lopes, N. Teixeira, V. Viana (Coord.), Contributos para Um Conceito 
Estratégico de Defesa Nacional (pp. 205-230). Atena, 28. Lisboa: Imprensa Nacional 
Casa da Moeda. 
[27] Rodrigues, T. F. (2012b). Globalização. Definições, Convergências e Diversidades. In: 
V. Correia (Org.), A Distinção Política “Esquerda-Direita”: a problemática da sua 
validade e actualidade (pp. 129-140). Lisboa: Fonte da Palavra. 
[28] Sciubba, J. (2011). The Future Faces of War. Population and National Security. 
Oxford: Praeger. 
[29] UNDP (2009). Human Development Report 2009 - Overcoming barriers: Human 
mobility and development. Retrieved from http://hdr.undp.org/en/media/HDR_2009_ 
EN_Complete.pdf. 

Population Dynamics: Demography Matters 
49
[30] UNDP (2011). World Population Prospects. The 2010 Revision. Retrieved from 
http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/publications/world-population 
[accessed 
in 
January 2014]. 
[31] UNDP (2013). Human Development Report 2013. The Rise of the South: Human 
Progress in a Diverse World. Retrieved from, in http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/human 
[accessed in February 2014]. 
[32] United Nations Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (2014). Human Security Unit: 
Overview and Objectives. Retrieved from http://www.unocha.org/humansecurity/ 
human-security-unit/human-security-approach. 
[33] Veyret, Y. and Arnould, P. (Dir.) (2008). Atlas des développements durables. Un 
monde inégalitaire, des expériences novatrices, des outils pour l'avenir. Paris: Éditions 
Autrement. 
[34] Weiner, M. and Russell, S. (Eds.) (2001). Demography and National Security. New 
York, Oxford: Berghan Books. 
[35] World Bank Research (2012). Globalization, Growth and Poverty: Building an 
Inclusive World Economy. The World Bank Group. Retrieved from http://econ. 
worldbank.org/prr/subpage.php?sp=2477. 
 
 


In: Globalization and International Security: An Overview 
ISBN: 978-1-63463-075-7 
Editors: T. Rodrigues, R. García Pérez et al.  
 
© 2015 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4 
 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL MIGRATIONS, 
SECURITY AND IDENTITY 
 
 
Miguel Requena 
UNED (National University of Distance Learning, Spain 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Over the three last decades, as the very idea of security has expanded beyond the 
traditional concern about territorial integrity and defense against military aggressions, the 
relationship between international migrations and security has become a hot topic in 
academic literature, the media and for the general public. After emphasizing the growing 
importance of international migrations in a globalized world, this chapter focuses on one 
of the several dimensions of the so-called migration-security nexus: the possible threat to 
collective or national identity that international migrants can represent for host countries. 
In fact, international migrations are moving significant amounts of people from their 
countries of origin to receiving societies where the differences in religion, political 
beliefs, social values, and lifestyles between natives and immigrants appear to be very 
salient. This is particularly so in developed countries, where these differences are often 
seen as putting in jeopardy their societal security, cultural cohesion and collective 
identity. Although Muslim immigrants are not the only case of potential conflict with the 
cultural majority in ethnically heterogeneous societies, special attention has been devoted 
to them in European countries, not only on account of their potential role as vectors of 
global terrorism, but also due to the size of these displaced Islamic communities and the 
obstacles found in their path to social and cultural integration in host societies. 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
There is nothing intrinsically new in the phenomenon of contemporary migrations: 
territorial and geographic mobility has been a persistent trait of human populations from their 
                                                           
 Corresponding author: Miguel Requena. UNED (National University of Distance Learning,Spain). E-mail: 
mrequena@ poli.uned.es. 

Miguel Requena 
52
origins [36]. However, the magnitude, reach, frequency, causes and significance of these 
movements have varied a great deal over time and space. Human history has witnessed both 
short movements of small communities and long movements of large populations that have 
ended up occupying entire continents. In the same geographic areas, periods of scant 
migration have alternated, sometimes suddenly and unexpectedly, with massive exoduses. 
From time immemorial, differences in wealth and the quality of life between countries, 
demographic pressures derived from excessive population density or imbalanced age 
structures, political, ethnic or religious persecution, as well as natural disasters, have induced 
human beings to abandon their birth places to look for better opportunities, escape violence 
and oppression or simply to reunite with family members living in other countries. And 
although not all population movements have had, have or will have the same importance, 
those that involve a certain number of people usually imply changes for the emitting and 
receiving societies, which can sometimes be transcendental. A good illustration of the 
historical significance of migrations can be found in the experience of countries in which 
international emigrants played a decisive role in their formation (e.g., United States, 
Argentina, or Brazil). Or the establishment of ethnic communities and diasporas in receiving 
societies. The reader can easily find many cases of such communities and the political, social, 
economic or cultural roles that they carried out. Just to mention a few examples, we can cite 
the Jews, Albanese, Armenians, Russians, Chinese, Cambodians, Mexicans or Cubans who 
have left the places where they or their ancestors were born. 
Although it is not a new phenomenon1, international migrations have acquired a truly 
global importance today. There are various reasons that explain why large cross-border 
population movements are one of the most distinctive structural characteristics of 
globalization [9]. First, international migrations are no longer limited to or localized in certain 
areas, but rather they have extended all over the planet: an increasing number of countries are 
finding themselves affected by them and the origins of migration flows and their destinations 
are increasingly diverse. In fact, along with the transnational movement of goods, capital and 
ideas, large movements of people from one country to another constitute one of the defining 
traits of globalization. More flexible and comfortable transportation that is also safer and 
cheaper has facilitated –and in all probability will continue to facilitate in the future– 
international movements of people in a context of increasing economic interdependence 
between different societies. Second, the direction of international migration flows is rapidly 
changing, sometimes radically. From a historical point of view, the clearest case of migration 
flows changing direction can be seen in Europe, a continent that traditionally transferred part 
of its population to other parts of the world through conquest, colonization and voluntary 
economic migration, but that after World War II began to attract many international migrants. 
In recent years, more and more European and non-European countries are producing an 
authentic migration transition in which emigration countries become immigration countries. 
Spain, Italy, Mexico, Turkey and Korea have all followed this pattern, while Poland has 
undergone a change in the opposite direction, becoming a country of emigrants. 
And thirdly, the reasons for migrating (economic, labor related, educational, family 
reunification, political, recreational, etc.) have become increasingly diverse on the global 
                                                           
1 It is estimated that during the second half of the 19th Century and until World War I, around 60 million Europeans 
moved mainly to the Americas, Oceania and South Africa. Hatton and Williamson [25, 26] have named this 
period the age of mass migration. 

International Migrations, Security and Identity 
53
level as modern communication technologies provide greater access to information that can 
be exchanged more fluidly and quickly on the comparative living conditions in the emitting 
and receiving societies. 
This also means that migrants and the kinds of migrations in which they participate are 
growing more heterogeneous. The growing feminization of many contemporary migratory 
movements or the permanent migrations of retirees are proof of this. All these factors suggest 
that international migrations can become, if they have not already, one of the most powerful 
forces shaping globalized societies on the planet. 
The intensity of international migrations observed during the second half of the 20th 
century and their predicted acceleration in an increasingly globalized world have made large 
population movements a priority on domestic political agendas and for international relations. 
Obviously, migration policies are not a recent development and migrations have always had 
notable economic and social effects on both receiving and emitting countries. 
But it is growing ever clearer that the political implications of migrations are gaining 
greater notoriety and relevance, becoming an issue of great interest and concern to 
governments and international organizations. The realization of how difficult it is for nation-
states to manage migration flows by themselves within the context of globalization and the 
demand for transnational or genuinely global regulation instruments are clear symptoms of 
the political prominence that migrations have recently acquired. 
One of the most explicit aspects of this growing politicization of international migrations 
is its association with security problems [3, 23]. Although not without criticisms [17], the 
migration-security nexus has been consolidated as a public policy issue and academic subject, 
in which unwanted or unregulated inflows of foreign populations are viewed as a possible 
threat to state security. At first glance, the most obvious implications that migrations have for 
state security are related with the border control that states must carry out to stop the flows 
they do not want to enter their territories. 
But interestingly, the conversion of migrations into a security issue has coincided with an 
extraordinary conceptual transformation of the notion of security itself over the past few 
decades, which is now seen in much broader terms than the traditional concern of protecting 
the integrity of the state‘s territory and defending against military aggression. 
After documenting the growing importance of international migrations in a globalized 
world and reviewing how they can be a threat to security, this chapter focuses on one of the 
several dimensions of the so-called migration-security nexus: the possible threat to collective 
or national identity that international migrants can represent for host countries. 
In fact, international migrations are moving significant amounts of people from their 
countries of origin to receiving societies where the differences in religion, political beliefs, 
social values, and lifestyles between natives and immigrants appear to be very salient. This is 
particularly so in developed countries, where these differences are often seen as putting in 
jeopardy their societal security, cultural cohesion and collective identity. 
Although Muslim immigrants are not the only case of potential conflict with the cultural 
majority in ethnically heterogeneous societies, special attention has been devoted to them in 
European countries, not only on account of their potential role as vectors of global terrorism, 
but also due to the size of these displaced Islamic communities and the obstacles found in 
their path to social and cultural integration in host societies. 
 
 

Miguel Requena 
54
INTERNATIONAL MIGRATIONS IN THE 
CONTEMPORARY WORLD: AN OVERVIEW 
 
There is a broad consensus among specialists that in an increasingly globalized world 
international migrations will become more intense2. This prediction is also a projection into 
the future of the tendencies observed in the recent past. Although it is always difficult to 
obtain precise estimates on the volume of international migrations, it seems clear that over the 
past years it has increased in scale and magnitude. According to the available data (Table 
4.1), in the last fifty years the stock of international migrants in the world (defined as 
individuals who live for at least one year in a country they were not born in) has multiplied by 
nearly a factor of 3, increasing from 77 million individuals in 1960 to 214 million in 2010. 
This growth was slow in the 1960‘s and 70‘s, accelerated in the 80‘s, slowed down in the 90‘s 
and accelerated again during the first decade of the 21st century. Obviously, one of the 
reasons the number of international migrants increased during those fifty years is simply 
because the world population also grew. But if we consider that the world population 
multiplied only 2.3 times, international migrants have grown more in relative terms. This 
means that while in 1960 international migrants represented 2.5% of the world population, in 
2010 they reached 3.1%. Therefore, despite the growing tendency to migrate, the vast 
majority of the inhabitants of the planet have either not migrated or they have done so within 
the borders of their own country3. 
Most international migrants change countries voluntarily, usually for economic reasons. 
But some of them are forced migrants who become refugees: war, political violence and 
repression, as well as ethnic (racial, linguistic, religious) persecutions and major natural 
disasters obligate people to move and seek shelter in safer areas. For example, the recent civil 
war in Syria has produced more than two million refugees since 2011 who have settled, 
sometimes precariously, in neighboring countries. Because the factors leading to these 
movements are often unpredictable, and their success depends on asylum policies in receiving 
countries, it is difficult to anticipate tendencies when talking about refugees. 
 
Table 4.1. Millions of international migrants in the world, several years 
 
Year 
Refugees 
Voluntary migrants 
Total migrants 
World Population 
1960 
1.8 
75.3 
77.1 
3,026.003 
1970 
2.0 
82.5 
84.5 
3,691.173 
1980 
8.4 
93.6 
102.0 
4,449.049 
1990 
18.5 
137.0 
155.5 
5,320.817 
1995 
18.5 
147.5 
166.0 
5,741.822 
2000 
15.6 
162.9 
178.5 
6,127.700 
2005 
13.9 
181.4 
195.2 
6,514.095 
2010 
16.3 
197.6 
213.9 
6,916.183 
Source: UN DESA and Migration Policy Institute [52]. 
                                                           
2 This broad agreement [22] has emerged despite the well-known fact that, in comparison with birth and deaths, 
migrations are the most unpredictable element of the balancing equation of population change. 
3 Globally, internal migrations are more common than international migrations due to the volume of domestic 
movements in countries with large populations, such as China, India, Indonesia or Brazil. 

International Migrations, Security and Identity 
55
An analysis of the recent past reveals that at certain times during the period between 1960 
and 2010, refugees accounted for a considerable part of the total number of international 
migrants (up to 12%). This percentage grew strongly in the 1990‘s, then tapered off and 
stabilized during the first decade of this century. As a consequence, at the beginning of the 
new century refugees have become a smaller part of the total number of international 
migrants. The growth of the 90‘s was strongly influenced by the breakup of the USSR and the 
Balkan conflicts; the later change in this tendency is largely explained as the result of less 
favorable asylum policies in developed countries, in particular European countries [24]. 
 
 
 
Source: United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division [52]. 
Figure 4.1. International migrants. Absolute numbers (millions) and as a percentage of the population. 

Miguel Requena 
56
It is not surprising that international migrants are not distributed equally throughout the 
planet given the enormous disparities in income, wealth, security and welfare between 
different regions of the world. As expected, the development divide is the fundamental aspect. 
Figure 4.1 presents the distribution by continent of international migrants over the past twenty 
years, revealing that the dominant flows of international migrations have been mainly 
directed from developing countries to developed countries. However, it is important to make 
a distinction between absolute and relative data. In absolute terms, in 2010 Europe (70 
million), Asia (61 million) and Northern America (50 million) were the regions most 
populated by international migrants; in comparison, 19 million of those migrants lived in 
Africa, 7.5 million in Latin America and only 6 million in Oceania. 
But an examination of the percentage of migrants relative to the total population of the 
receiving countries tells a different story. A very high number of immigrants live in Asia, and 
this number has increased by approximately ten million over the past two decades, but the 
proportion of the total population of the countries in which they live (1.5%) has hardly 
changed. Conversely, although Oceania has received a limited number of international 
migrants, they represent a high percentage of the total population (15%). The migrant 
populations in North America and Europe have increased both in absolute and relative terms, 
as they are the preferred destination for migrants looking for advanced societies that offer 
better life opportunities than those available in the developing societies they abandon when 
they emigrate. The countries of Oceania, North America and Europe present the highest 
levels of economic, social and human development on the planet; in addition, compared to the 
rest of the world, they have low rates of demographic growth and old populations as a result 
of their low fertility and mortality. It is true that the absolute and relative stocks of 
immigrants vary between these three wealthy regions of the world, but their attraction to 
migrants has been, and will probably continue being, unquestionable. 
On the contrary, the countries of Africa, Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean, with 
high rates of demographic growth and large populations of young people have very small 
percentages of international immigrants, around or below 2%. In fact, many of these African, 
Asian and Latin American countries emit migrants towards the developed world. 
There are countries that have extremely high proportions of immigrants, far exceeding 
the native population —for instance, 70% in Kuwait and United Arab Emirates or 86% in 
Qatar in the Persian Gulf. But these are usually small countries with economies that are 
highly concentrated in a single sector (oil) and of relatively little importance in world 
demography4. 
Therefore, when studying the impact of migrations on receiving countries the focus 
should be on developed countries in particular. Nobody can deny how important emigration is 
for developing emitting countries, as can clearly be seen by the volume of economic 
resources they receive in remittances. 
However, it is in the most developed countries of Europe and North America where the 
proportion of immigrant population is relatively larger and has grown most significantly over 
the past few decades, something that has not occurred in African, Asian or Latin American 
countries. 
                                                           
4 The migrant share is also very large in some microstates (Luxembourg, Liechtenstein) or city-states (Monaco, 
Singapore). These political entities are known by their very relaxed fiscal controls and their supposedly high 
numbers of bogus residents. Not reaching such migratory levels, other countries like Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and 
Israel have also received large contingents of international migrants. 

International Migrations, Security and Identity 
57
 
 
 
Source: UNDESA. Migration Policy Institute [52]. 
Figure 4.2. International migrants as a percentage of the population. Selected developed countries. 
Figure 4.2 shows that in a selected group of European and North American receiving 
countries the clear tendency over the past half century is a growing immigrant population. 
Currently, immigrants constitute at least 10% of the population of Sweden, the United 
Kingdom, the Netherlands, Ireland, Canada and the United States. In those six countries 

Miguel Requena 
58
immigrant flows have grown noticeably over the last fifty years. Other countries in Central 
Europe (Germany, France, Belgium, and Switzerland) and Southern Europe (Spain and Italy) 
have also undergone the same ascendant tendency. In these European countries, more than 
one out of every ten residents are immigrants5. In order to anticipate future tendencies, the 
percentage of the total population of a receiving country represented by immigrants is very 
important. As Collier [14] convincingly argues, the size of the diaspora is ceteris paribus one 
of the factors that accelerates immigration through the mechanism known as the ‗migration 
function‘ or immigration supported by diasporas: the larger the diaspora is, the faster the 
immigration to join the diasporic community. 
Returning to Figure 4.1, the data shows that Europe and North America are the only large 
regions of the planet where there is a large concentration of international migrants that also 
constitute a large percentage of the receiving society. Such countries face a dual challenge 
that has become more urgent over the past fifty years: regulating growing migration flows and 
integrating populations that are becoming more culturally and ethnically diverse. At the same 
time, these countries are major protagonists on the international scene. As a consequence, in 
recent years migrations that cross national borders have been politicized [9]. That is, they 
have become more politically relevant than in the past, becoming a priority on domestic 
political agendas and are the object of intense debate among the public and its political 
representatives. Clear examples of the growing politicization of international migrations 
include the increased concern with immigration after the September 11 attacks in 2001 in the 
United States and the attribution of migration control functions to the Department of 
Homeland Security in 2003; or the appearance and relative growth in some European 
countries of political parties whose programs are explicitly anti-immigration. International 
migrations have also been the subject of bilateral and regional accords between nations and 
have become an important objective in the work of international diplomacy. Additionally, 
over the past few years various initiatives have been developed to try to place international 
migrations in the field of action of emerging institutions of global governance. In one way or 
another, all of these developments have ended up situating international migrations in the 
field of security analysis.  
 
 
HOW INTERNATIONAL MIGRATIONS 
CAN BE A THREAT TO SECURITY 
 
To understand how international migrations can be a security threat it is worthwhile to 
start with a brief review of the idea of security itself and the remarkable expansion of its 
conceptual content over the past few decades. At the same time that analysts, political 
authorities, journalists and the informed public grew aware of how important international 
migrations had become in an increasingly globalized world, the notion of security underwent 
something akin to a mutation, something like a paradigm shift. The result has been that the 
traditional conception of security as a nation defending its territorial integrity from military 
aggression has given way to a much broader, more inclusive and complex understanding in 
                                                           
5 The exception is Italy, which in 2013 had 5.7 million immigrants, representing 9.4% of the population of the 
country. 

International Migrations, Security and Identity 
59
which the center of attention is no longer a country‘s borders and its territory, political order 
or basic infrastructure, but rather society in the broadest sense of the term. 
In a globalized world, viewing security as how a nation can survive external military 
attacks is considered, at the very least, insufficient; new threats to security have been 
perceived and the types of physical and even symbolic entities that warrant protection have 
been broadened. The concepts of human security [44, 49] and societal security [54] respond 
directly to these new demands, although they are not free from criticism [40, 50]. 
The geostrategic context of this transformation of the idea of security is well known. The 
fall of the USSR, the disappearance of the Soviet Bloc and the collapse of the bipolar system 
of the Cold War produced a new framework for international relations in which not only have 
powers that were once irrelevant or had little political, economic or military power appeared 
and consolidated, but also non-state actors with the capacity to destabilize situations that were 
previously in equilibrium and provoke violent conflicts have also proliferated. The novelty of 
this situation compared to the bipolar order is that in these new conditions the possible 
conflicts, risks and threats, as well as the strategic actors, do not necessarily, or do not only, 
fit into the traditional framework of interstate relations. A very telling datum in this respect is 
that the number of armed conflicts —both interstate war and civil or societal warfare— has 
significantly decreased in recent years [38]. Under these premises, experts are concerned 
about the problems that can arise when states collapse or do not display sufficient institutional 
strength to maintain security in their territories or when their weakness becomes contagious to 
neighboring countries. Authors such as Bobbit [5] have pointed to the relevance of threats 
that can arise from attacks by global terrorist networks, the proliferation of weapons of mass 
destruction or humanitarian disasters. In these circumstances, the possibilities of 
asymmetrical conflicts emerging that seriously threaten security are increasingly real6. 
In parallel, and from a purely conceptual point of view, the idea that security is a social 
construction that can have different meanings in different societies —even in different sectors 
of the same society— is beginning to spread among experts. A fundamental aspect of this 
new conceptual focus is that it does not understand security as a category with unanimously 
accepted or objectively determined empirical values, but rather as an issue subject to 
evaluation using heuristic procedures. 
And the same thing occurs when attempting to determine when a risk, whose probability 
is never precisely known, becomes an imminent threat. Here perceptions, impressions and 
sensations count, and they count a great deal [31, 57]. This gives rise to what is known as 
securitization, that is, processes that socially construct security by converting certain entities 
—tangible and intangible— into referent objects of security, by deeming certain factors as 
threats to those objects and by convincing experts, political authorities and the general public 
to acknowledge them (both the objects and the threats) as such. The logic behind this 
conceptual transformation is easy to understand: when the traditional risk of military 
aggression against the integrity of the state diminishes, other entities become part of the group 
of objects considered to be threatened and therefore in need of protection. 
These strategic and conceptual changes have led to a doctrinal redefinition and 
reconceptualization of security in much broader terms than what had been common just two 
or three decades ago. Briefly put, the sources of insecurity that are acknowledged by analysts 
and political authorities today go far beyond the threat of military aggression by a rival state. 
                                                           
6 For a critical stance about these positions from the ‗realist‘ point of view, see for instance Kagan [32]. 

Miguel Requena 
60
Today, security threats are openly acknowledged as transversal, interdependent and 
transnational; because of this, the line between internal and external security has become so 
blurred that it is doubtful that it makes sense to maintain such a distinction; finally, there are 
many more objects under threat that must be defended beyond the territorial integrity of the 
state. A corollary to these arguments is that the traditional approach which equated security to 
defense no longer applies; instead, comprehensive approaches are applied to national security 
strategies in advanced societies. In addition to traditional armed conflicts, today the tendency 
among national security strategies is to see as main threats terrorism, organized crime, 
economic and financial insecurity, energy vulnerability, the proliferation of weapons of mass 
destruction, cyber threats, uncontrolled migration flows, emergencies and disasters and the 
eventual insecurity of infrastructures, supplies and critical services. This is the strategic and 
conceptual backdrop upon which international migrations have become a security issue: 
international migrations are securitized, giving rise to the migration-security nexus; and 
sometimes relevant political and social actors accept these ties [28, 51]. 
How exactly can international migrations become a security threat? What are the main 
aspects upon which the nexus between security and international migration is based? Possibly 
the most obvious connections have to do with the way that international migrants put at risk 
security understood in its most classic and traditional sense, as state or national security. But 
the cases in which migrations imply a threat to human or societal security have also been 
considered. For example, seen from the perspective of human security, it is clear that factors 
such as economic, food, health, environmental, personal or community security are all 
relevant to understanding the experience of many migrants and refugees, both in regards to 
the conditions that motivate or force them to move and to the conditions they endure during 
the move itself or those when they settle or integrate into their countries of destination. 
Under the paradigm of state security, studies on political demography [55, 56, 57, 58] 
have pointed out various situations which produce a fairly direct relationship between 
international migrations and state security7. First of all, immigrants and refugees represent a 
threat to the countries of residence when they are actively opposed to the political regimes of 
their countries of origin and they become a source of conflict between the two countries; 
sometimes this active opposition is not only tolerated, but supported by the receiving country, 
which intensifies the conflict. A good example is the case of Cuban emigrants in the United 
States. There is also the possibility that the effects of these organized activities have an 
impact on the country of origin: the mobilization of the diaspora and the recruitment of 
fighters among the emigrated communities have been indicated as an important factor in 
transnational cycles of political violence exemplified by the cases of exiled Kosovars, Kurds 
and Tamils [1]. Immigrants and refugees can also be a risk to a receiving country if these 
groups direct their subversive acts against it. This possibility has been dramatically illustrated 
by the 9/11 attacks in the United States in 2001, the 3/11 attacks in Madrid in 2004 and the 
explosions in the public transportation system of London on 7/7 in 2005 and, in more general 
terms, by the development of global terrorism. A parallel threat to internal security, although 
                                                           
7 Of course, forced international migration has also been used in the past —very often in a brutal and heartless 
way— as a state resource to strengthen security by eliminating political dissidents, pressing neighboring states 
or colonizing and decolonizing. Alternatively, voluntary or induced migration can also become a tool to 
promote national interests, for example by attracting highly skilled workers or using displaced communities of 
countrymen as diplomatic agents; in this case, migrations can be considered as an instrument of ‗soft power‘ in 
the international arena. 

International Migrations, Security and Identity 
61
not politically motivated, arises when immigrants take advantage of the conditions offered by 
the displaced communities to introduce or establish organized criminal groups there, 
including youth groups; in these cases migration networks promote, or at least facilitate, the 
operation of transnational networks of organized crime. 
Second, the illicit entrance of unauthorized immigrants is another way in which 
international migrations are a direct and immediate challenge to state security. Given that our 
world is basically organized in national states, migrations, and in particular unregulated 
migrations, represent a challenge to border control, a fundamental component of state 
sovereignty. A weak control of national borders, allowing a disorganized influx of significant 
numbers of immigrants, puts in doubt the territorial sovereignty of the state to the degree that 
it weakens its ability to limit access to its labor markets or public assets and, in some cases to 
maintain internal security [2]. Although it is usually flows toward the interior of the state that 
causes security problems, on occasion the difficulties come from uncontrolled outbound 
flows: for instance, the massive exodus of East Germans to the West through Czechoslovakia, 
Hungary and Poland led to the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989. 
In general, highly permeable borders are characteristic of weak or failed states. There are 
numerous examples: post-Gaddafi Libya, for example, in which various militias control parts 
of the territory with no consolidated central authority, has been experimenting a chronic 
problem controlling its borders that are crossed by numerous groups of African migrants and 
refugees on their way to Europe; similarly, the weak control of the border between 
Afghanistan and Pakistan has notably reinforced the ability of diverse groups related to the 
Taliban to act. But even developed countries that have been able to develop solid security 
institutions and agencies are sometimes faced with pressure on their borders from migration 
that they have trouble controlling. 
The phenomenon of migratory pressure on borders appears whenever the number of 
foreigners who wish to settle in or cross a country exceeds the perceived capacity to receive 
or integrate them, a situation that is relatively common in areas of the world with stark 
differences in income that lead to migratory flows; in these cases, the cost of completely 
sealing the borders can be prohibitive or very difficult to assume. The application of more and 
better surveillance instruments and the militarization of border controls are possible 
responses, although they don‘t always produce the foreseen results. Bilateral agreements with 
emitting countries often help to alleviate tension. The border between the United States and 
Mexico is a clear case of migratory pressure that is difficult to control, despite the increase in 
resources dedicated to supervision and surveillance [15]. On the other hand, a recent report of 
the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External 
Borders of the Member States of the European Union estimates more than 107,000 illegal 
entries between border crossing-points in 2013, an increase of 48% from the previous year 
[19]. The highest pressure is put on the Central Mediterranean zone (above all, from Libya to 
Italy), followed by the Eastern Mediterranean and Balkans. Figures corresponding to the first 
four months of 2014 tripled those of 2013, pointing to a persistent problem of border control 
and regulation in Southern European countries brought about by the growing political and 
social instability in Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region8. 
                                                           
8 Defective border controls often offer big opportunities to criminal networks and mafias for people smuggling to 
satisfy the demands of illegal migrants trying to deliberately evade immigration laws. The hateful practice of 
human trafficking is also facilitated by faulty border controls. 

Miguel Requena 
62
A not immediate but even so important connection between international migrations and 
security appears when one adopts the perspective of societal security [54]. 
From this standpoint, it is society —primarily conceived à la Giddens as a framework of 
institutions plus a collective feeling of common identity— that becomes a referent object of 
security and thus a security issue. Although proponents of the idea of societal security have 
not delivered a clear cut operational definition of the concept, embracing this point of view 
usually leads to the perception of two main types of possible risks or threats. Firstly, 
international migrants can be perceived as an excessive social or economic burden for the 
receiving society. In developed societies, international immigrants can be considered a threat 
to the socioeconomic status quo if natives are convinced that the immigrants compete in the 
labor markets, lowering salaries or raising prices in the housing markets. Another source of 
migratory threat emerges when immigrants, due to their large volume or abusive behaviors, 
make disproportionate use of education and public health welfare institutions, or even 
transportation facilities. These threatening perceptions can be even more negative if natives 
assume that immigrants are likely to fall into criminal activities. Although the overall impact 
of immigration on the economic balance of developed host societies —including alleged costs 
to taxpayers— is hard to estimate with accuracy and a matter of bitter debate, it produces 
resentful attitudes among local populations that are exploited by political parties with 
xenophobic platforms. Secondly, international migrations have also been judged as a threat to 
the cultural cohesion and national identity of host societies [2, 55, 58]. This sort of threat 
emerges in cases where international migrations promote the formation of ethnic 
communities, sometimes with powerful transnational links, whose lack of identification with 
or loyalty to the receiving nation and its institutions can be troublesome. This second 
possibility leads us straight to the issue of identity in host developed societies. 
 
 
THE INCREASING ETHNIC HETEROGENEITY OF 
DEVELOPED SOCIETIES: FROM SECURITY TO IDENTITY 
 
Most experts on migrations agree that one of the main challenges that will arise from 
recent global migration tendencies is that it will inevitably cause populations in developed 
societies to grow progressively more heterogeneous in terms of ethnicity over the next 
decades. This is mainly because the flow of international migrants will most likely continue 
to intensify as the world becomes increasingly globalized. First of all, the basic pushing 
factors that have promoted and accelerated international migrations over the past decades 
have not abated. Even if developing countries experience higher growth rates than developed 
countries, as is expected to happen, the differences in income and wealth between them will 
still be maintained for decades; and the salary gap between rich and poor countries will 
continue to feed migration flows that cross the development line, as migrants search for better 
life opportunities in a prosperous and safe setting. Secondly, powerful pulling factors in rich 
societies will continue to attract international migrants. It is known that the costs involved 
with migrating and settling in a receiving country are reduced in direct proportion to the size 
of the immigrant community already present in that country; for various reasons, migrating to 
a country where there is already a large community of countrymen is simply easier and less 
expensive. The evidence available shows that developed countries in Europe, North America 

International Migrations, Security and Identity 
63
and Oceania are the favorite destinations of migrants who abandon developing countries. At 
present, many of the developed countries that receive immigrants have absolute and relative 
foreign populations that have rarely been seen in recent history. If the tendencies observed 
over the past few years are projected into the future, the native populations in these countries 
are destined to live with communities of foreigners that continue to grow in absolute and 
relative terms. 
What we can reasonably anticipate, while keeping in mind the volatility and somewhat 
unpredictable nature of international migrations9, is that the demographic futures of native 
and immigrant populations which coexist in developed countries will have highly divergent 
trajectories. The native populations of rich receiving societies generally have low fertility 
rates, aging demographic structures and very low growth rates; in fact, in some countries 
natural growth has already stopped and only migrations contribute to population increases. 
However, demographic projections reveal a very different scenario for immigrant 
populations, which generally have larger growth rates than native populations. Two 
demographic characteristics will lead to the growth of immigrant communities in developed 
societies: the net contribution of immigration that reaches the receiving country and a higher 
fertility rate than the natives, at least during the initial period of settling. 
As we have seen, by 2010 the immigrant populations in rich countries of North America 
and Europe represented around one tenth of the total population (and more than one fifth in 
the cases of Canada and Switzerland). Almost all Western countries have sub-replacement 
fertility rates and positive net migration and, therefore, the proportion of natives in the total 
population is set to diminish (unless their fertility rate rises or immigration is reduced). 
According to Coleman‘s [13] analysis of the different demographic projections for these 
countries, foreigners will account for between one fifth and one third of the total population 
by 2050. In 2000 between one third and one half of the immigrant population in European 
receiving countries were of Western origin, principally European. 
However, it is expected that the new migration dynamics will greatly alter this tendency 
in the future, with non-Western populations gaining more weight within immigrant 
communities. It is estimated that the non-Hispanic white population in the United States will 
become a numeric minority around the middle of this century, which would be the only case 
in which the dominant ethnic population peacefully loses its condition as the majority since 
the founding of the country, a situation with no recent historical precedents. In some districts 
of large European cities like London or Amsterdam this transition has already occurred [13]. 
Even though it is true that not all immigration results in greater diversity, if these tendencies 
consolidate and continue in the future, the receiving societies of developed countries will 
have to manage unprecedented levels of internal ethnic heterogeneity. 
The growing ethnic variety in receiving societies could lead to important challenges to 
their cultural cohesion and collective identity. Although the ideas of cohesion and identity are 
elusive, cultural cohesion can be understood as the degree to which members of a society 
share a basic set of values, rules, customs and lifestyles; identity refers to the level at which 
people define themselves as members of a society to which they belong. Therefore, whether 
or not receiving societies consider some immigrant communities a threat to their collective 
                                                           
9 Possibly the most surprising recent example of the unpredictability of migrations can be found in Spain, which 
received more than 6 million immigrants in the first few years of this century. In just ten years immigrants 
went from representing around 2% of the total population of the country to 13%. Nobody could foresee the 
magnitude of these migratory flows. 

Miguel Requena 
64
identity depends on to what degree the natives identify with their own culture and how much 
cultural distance they perceive between themselves and the immigrants [57]. 
In any case, and as a general criterion, once immigrant communities have reached a 
certain size, the cultural cohesion of receiving societies will experience tensions derived from 
coexisting with alternative sources of cultural identity, especially if those alternatives are 
defined as ethnically different from the dominant sources of the receiving society. Obviously, 
diversity does not only depend on the relative quantities of natives and immigrants, but also 
on the cultural distance between these communities. Possible identitary tensions will also 
depend on the ethnic origin and cultural background of the immigrant communities. In this 
sense, the case of Muslim immigrants settled in European countries, which we will return to 
later, is paradigmatic. But whenever they are perceived as a threat to the society‘s cultural 
cohesion and identity, those cultural tensions will become the subject of intense debates. In 
fact, they already are in practically every developed society which has accepted a large 
community of immigrants that is culturally different from the dominant ethnic nucleus. In 
many European countries —France, the United Kingdom, Sweden, Denmark, Finland, the 
Netherlands, Belgium, Austria or Greece— the politicization of these debates has led to the 
emergence of xenophobic movements and parties that react to the perceived threat of ethnic 
diversity with programs that are explicitly opposed to immigration. 
Migration-induced ethnic heterogeneity is the primary challenge to the sociocultural 
cohesion of immigrant receiving societies when high levels of diversity are associated with a 
loss of social trust and solidarity; that is, when it inhibits the formation of social capital or 
destroys that which already exists. This is Putnam‘s [45] main argument in his empirically 
detailed study of the impact of ethnic diversity on the United States. Putnam shows that, 
despite the doubtless advantages in terms of creativity, contribution to domestic economic 
growth, demographic balance and the impact of remittances in the countries of origin, 
immigration has increased the social heterogeneity of American society and, as a result, 
lowered the social trust not only among but also within the different ethnic communities, 
which is much more surprising. In the ethnically fragmented settings that are increasingly 
widespread in the United States thanks to residential segregation, people are not only more 
likely to mistrust those who are unlike themselves, but also those who are similar. 
In other words, immigration reduces the aggregate social capital of countries that receive 
it and generally elevates levels of interpersonal distrust; at the same time, the lack of trust 
inhibits cooperation, gives incentive to opportunistic behavior and undermines the social 
foundation of economic prosperity [14]. 
The destruction of social capital is almost directly tied to the weakening of social 
identity. According to Putnam, increased levels of in-group and out-group social distrust 
associated with the ethnic variety produced by immigration causes people to withdraw from 
social life and ‗hunker down‘: social interactions diminish and there is a growing retreat to 
solitary activities in daily life. When this occurs, social relations become more distant and the 
social fabric becomes less dense. At the same time, when social distance grows it becomes 
more difficult to perceive the other as a member of the same group or community and to 
emotionally identify with him. The feelings and emotions that feed social identity weaken if 
we are not able to bridge the structural cracks imposed by socially segregated ethnic 
communities. In a nutshell, the deficit of social capital undermines social identity. And, 
ironically, the effects of immigration on developed receiving societies tend to bring them 

International Migrations, Security and Identity 
65
closer to developing emitting societies, which suffer from a dearth of social capital, a 
generalized lack of interpersonal trust and fragile collective feelings on social identity. 
The connection between immigration and a deficit of social capital and diminished 
cultural cohesion has very clear political implications. If immigration receiving societies are 
destined for ethnic diversity —especially if their current ethnic majorities see themselves 
become minorities— they will have to face the possibility that there will be substantial 
changes to, or even a total redefinition of, their current national identities. As Coleman writes 
[12], ‗the character, identity, and cohesion of countries that formerly regarded themselves as 
nation-states could be profoundly altered‘. National identity could become a much more 
complex and controversial issue than it is today. 
For example, national histories that are taught in school, as well as foundational myths 
and shared symbols of national identity could be inadequate or even offensive for ethnic 
communities whose traditions do not coincide with the dominant traditions in the receiving 
society. In one way or another, multicultural societies may end up undermining the shared 
images and representations that are currently the basis of the political identity of nation-states 
of ethnically heterogeneous developed countries. Weak or debatable national identities will 
make it more difficult to perceive or define national interests [34, 2]. 
Such scenarios would be more probable if immigrants in multicultural societies were 
organized as transnational communities with diasporic identities, networks of active 
connections with their countries of origin and divided political loyalties [48, 57]. 
Understandably the weakening of the political identity will be more clearly appreciated 
when it rests on an ethnic nationalism. But even if the identity is based on civic nationalism, 
the fight to protect the group identity of ethnic immigrant communities can conflict with the 
dominant notion of identity, which is based on the acknowledgement of individual rights, as 
is common in liberal democracies. 
In the United States, conservatives such as Huntington [30] have expressed their concern 
that the waves of immigrants will end the inherited ‗Anglo-Protestant‘ tradition that according 
to him defines the national identity of the country. In Europe the fundamental concern in this 
regard focuses on Muslim immigrants. 
The potential eclipse of the national identities of developed countries that receive 
immigrants has led to bitter and highly emotional political and moral debates. What for some 
is a dreadful loss that puts the very essence of Western societies in danger, for others 
represents an opportunity to create more inclusive identities or citizenship. 
Either way, it is clear that the impact of cultural diversity and the weakening of national 
identity associated with ethnic heterogeneity will depend on the capacity of the receiving 
society to integrate immigrants, to make them participants in dominant cultural values, 
thereby incorporating them into the predominant identity. 
In this process the frequency of intermarriage between people of different ethnic origins 
and the development of mixed forms of identity will play a relevant role [41]. 
But the definition of cultural identity itself and the distance it establishes with immigrant 
communities of different ethnic origins is decisive; therefore, how the collective identity is 
defined is vital, because it translates into criteria for belonging to the receiving society and 
serves as the basis of the measures taken to integrate immigrants into receiving societies. 
 
 
 

Miguel Requena 
66
POLITICAL RESPONSES TO IMMIGRATION: 
MIGRANT INTEGRATION MODELS 
 
Starting in approximately the 1960s, receiving societies have had to establish a way to 
regulate processes through which immigrants could become part of the receiving society. 
Immigration rules and policies grant or deny rights to immigrants —such as admission, 
citizenship, work, family, education, healthcare, housing and culture— which define the ways 
in which migrants can be incorporated into the receiving society. The objective is to establish 
who is allowed entrance as an immigrant and what rights they are given once they have 
settled in the country, including total or partial citizenship. The need to articulate coherent 
public policies to regulate integration processes did not seem as urgent in the past, when 
migration flowed predominantly from the Old World in Europe to the new immigration 
countries in North America or Oceania10. Later, when the trend began to reverse itself, it was 
thought that the number of immigrants arriving at rich countries would not be large enough to 
form culturally diverse ethnic communities, and therefore managing diversity still did not 
seem like a political priority. However, in the current era of global migrations, creating policy 
to manage ethnic diversity and the integration of immigrants into the cultural mosaics that 
have emerged in receiving countries has become an obligation that is difficult to avoid. 
According to experts [9], these public policies are among the factors that most affect the 
integration of immigrants into receiving societies. 
When minimally coherent, immigration policies establish models to manage diversity 
that shape a substantial part of the context in which immigrants are integrated, affect their life 
experiences in the receiving countries and guide the ways in which they are incorporated into 
the receiving society. There are currently three main models to manage diversity that are 
usually distinguished. These three models are ideal types that are never perfectly replicated in 
practice; the models employed in different countries more or less approach one of the ideal 
types, but do not coincide exactly with it. Furthermore, the models are the product of complex 
historical processes in which great importance is given to the experience of establishing 
nation-states, their national identities, the prominence of their cultural traditions, the legacy of 
their colonial pasts and migratory antecedents and their levels of ethnic homogeneity. 
The first can be denominated as the ‗guest workers‘ (gastarbeiter) model and is well 
represented by the German case (the Austrian and Swiss cases also approach this model). 
Starting with the programs designed to regulate immigration at the end of the 1950s, 
Germany has viewed immigrants as temporary foreign workers, denying them the status of 
permanent residents and not granting social rights to those living irregularly in their country 
[6]. Given that immigrants were expected to only be temporary workers in the country, family 
regrouping was not guaranteed or facilitated. Moreover, in countries like Germany the basis 
for citizenship was fundamentally ethnic: the acquisition of nationality was based on ius 
sanguinis (that is, having parents who were already citizens of the country), not on ius soli 
(which gives anyone born in the territory of a state the right to citizenship); and the periods of 
residence necessary for naturalization were very long. The guest workers model has been 
qualified as ‗differential exclusion‘: its objective is to facilitate the incorporation of the 
                                                           
10 Even so, to ensure that immigrants culturally and ethnically identified with receiving populations, in the United 
States, Canada, New Zealand and Australia filters were put in place and quotas established that selected the 
flows into the country according to race (white) or nationality. 

International Migrations, Security and Identity 
67
immigrant into the domestic labor market, but not in other areas of social and political life. It 
should be noted that the German model was changed recently due to the undesired results that 
it produced. When it became clear that many immigrants (especially Turkish) were not really 
temporary guest workers, but rather stayed in the country with their children and reunified 
with their family members, forming very large ethnic communities, the model was 
substantially altered at the end of the 1990s: the acquisition of dual nationality was facilitated 
to the children born of parents who had previously resided in the country for various years 
and the periods required for naturalization were shortened. 
The second model is represented by France and it is usually referred to as the 
‗assimilation‘ model, since its objective is not for immigrants to be incorporated, integrated or 
adapted into the receiving society, but rather for them to be completely absorbed by the 
dominant culture of the country. Many believe that the assimilation model tries to imprint a 
predefined character on immigrants, in the sense that it wants them to acquire all the cultural 
trappings (e.g., linguistic, social and political) that will turn them into genuine French men 
and women; in other words, to make them indistinguishable from natives. The ideological 
basis of this model can be traced back to the days of the French Revolution and its political 
basis can be found in a civic (not ethnic) conception of national identity and republican 
citizenship. According to this conception, for immigrants to become part of the political 
community of the nation they must adhere to the basic values of the republican democracy 
and adopt its national culture. Needless to say, France is one of the paradigmatic cases of the 
application of ius soli in the acquisition of nationality. Under the assimilation model 
immigrants can opt to remain foreigners or to become citizens, therefore, French, as long as 
they adopt and respect the civic values of the Republic. Naturalization acquires a voluntary 
nature in accordance with that universal interpretation of citizenship and the rights of citizens. 
Those who wish to become French citizens must adopt republican values that includes, for 
instance, embracing secularity. The French model does not acknowledge the rights of 
collectives; rights are reserved for individuals who have accepted the implicit commitment to 
the Republic to become one of its citizens [29]. 
The French assimilation model has far from produced expected results. In a generic 
sense, observers of the French case refer to the problems derived from the lack of integration 
by immigrants as the maladie republicaine (republican disease). 
The third major model of managing cultural diversity is referred to as ‗multiculturalism‘ 
(and sometimes as ‗minority policies‘ or ‗equality and freedom of choice‘). Countries such as 
Canada, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom or Sweden fit this model. In contrast to 
assimilation, the multiculturalism model offers immigrants from other cultures (sometimes 
also non-immigrant minority communities) the option of maintaining their particular 
characteristics in a system that recognizes the identity of groups that form part of the 
receiving society even if they do not adopt the customs of the majority. 
The most distinctive aspect of this third model is that the receiving society acknowledges 
cultural differences as one of its defining characteristics and the cultural diversity of 
immigrants is accepted as a basic right that should be protected by the state. 
In countries that follow the multiculturalist model, the defense and maintenance of 
cultural diversity is a public policy. The origins of multiculturalism and the reasons why it 
has been implemented in certain countries does not have a simple historical explanation, 
although a tradition of ethnic, cultural, linguistic or religious diversity may have been an 
important factor. 

Miguel Requena 
68
The Netherlands, for example, in accordance with its communitarian tradition, has been 
very sensitive to the cultural differences of immigrants who have settled in the country11. One 
‗soft‘ variation of the multicultural model is represented by the United States, where the 
existence of ethnic communities and their associated cultural differences are perfectly 
acceptable; however, the state does not actively protect them. Because the United States has a 
long immigration tradition, to some degree connected to its foundation as a country, cultural 
differences are admissible as long as they lead to the formation of that ‗melting pot‘ that is 
often used to represent its national identity. 
The assessment of the effectiveness of these different models does not lead to conclusive 
results. As Castles et al. [9] have pointed out, ‗all of the different approaches to incorporation 
have proved problematic in one way or another, so that by the early twenty-first century there 
appears to be a widespread ―crisis of integration‖ ‘. On the one hand, it is not clear how well 
the three models coherently summarize all of the complex national variations of migration 
policies. For example, a recent study [35] shows how over the past few decades the process of 
attributing different citizenship rights to immigrants has not followed a consistent pattern 
across countries, but rather has tended to reproduce the preexisting differences between 
nations. On the other —and putting aside the heuristic value of the triple typology—, the 
practical results of these models have been subject to two kinds of substantial criticisms. The 
first has to do with the relative failure of integration processes; to be more specific, the 
inability of the receiving countries to substantially neutralize the immigrant disadvantage [18, 
27, 37, 53]. In receiving societies, immigrants and descendants continue to live in segregated 
communities, experiencing higher rates of unemployment and school failure than natives, to 
mention just three important indicators. This disadvantage is often transmitted to the second 
generation. In this sense, the results of every model in terms of integration are disappointing. 
Second, events such as the murders in the Netherlands of the ultra-right wing leader Pim 
Fortuyn in 2002 and the filmmaker Theo Van Gogh (2004) by Islamic extremists, the 
immigrant riots in the periphery of large French cities (2005) or the crisis provoked by the 
publication of caricatures of Mohammed in the Danish newspaper Jyllands-Posten (2005) 
have devalued both the image of multiculturalism and assimilation, as well as their ability to 
establish stable systems of coexistence and manage diversity. 
 
 
MUSLIM MIGRANTS IN EUROPEAN COUNTRIES: A CASE IN POINT 
 
Possibly the most interesting current example of the tensions that can be provoked by 
cultural diversity in developed societies that receive immigrants is that of the Muslim 
communities settled in Western Europe. First of all, they are one of the largest ethnic 
minorities brought about by the migratory flows toward Europe over the last half century; 
furthermore, they are expected to grow at a faster pace than the native populations over the 
neext few decades. Second, there tends to be a large distance between Muslim immigrants 
                                                           
11 Before the Netherlands began to receive immigrants, it was organized in a system in which Catholics and 
Protestants coexisted known as pillarization (verzuiling). Each of the pillars that integrated its society had its 
own communitarian representation and even its own institutions and areas for interaction. When in the 1960s 
immigrants began to arrive from non-European countries, their representatives included the recently formed 
communities in the system of pillars, adding complexity to it and institutionalizing the growing diversity of its 
society. 

International Migrations, Security and Identity 
69
and the dominant cultural core in host countries due to differences in language, religion, 
family structures and behavior, sexual mores, artistic tastes, dietary habits and sometimes 
their mode of dressing. Further proof of this large cultural distance is the powerful feeling of 
rejection that native populations manifest toward Muslim immigrants. The visibility of many 
of these ethnic identifiers on a daily basis reinforces that antipathy and widens the culture 
gap. Third, Muslim immigrants in Europe have low levels of social integration in receiving 
populations when compared to other immigrants, as well as a relatively low level of adhesion 
to the basic symbols of identity in those societies. Fourth, the distance that separates Muslim 
immigrants from the dominant culture of the receiving countries has dramatically increased in 
recent years due to the development of Islamic terrorism. The 9/11 attacks in the United 
States, the Madrid (March, 2004) and London (July, 2005) bombings, and other foiled 
terrorist operations since then, have converted Muslim communities into the primary target 
for surveillance by law enforcement agencies and has established in the European imaginary a 
powerful link between Muslim immigration and insecurity. And as if that were not enough, 
the concern over the social conditions of Muslim immigrants and the levels of cultural tension 
have increased further with the perception that radical Islam is the result of flawed approaches 
to incorporating Muslim immigrants into European societies —and the inability of these 
societies to integrate them— rather than the specific product of the traditional communities of 
the countries of origin. 
Starting with demography, the first thing to point out is that estimates on the size of 
Muslim communities in Europe are necessarily imprecise. In contrast to Anglo-Saxon world 
in which censuses routinely collect information on ethnicity or religion, in many European 
countries these kinds of questions are not permitted, so indirect estimation procedures that 
produce variable results are used. Despite these inevitable imprecisions, different estimates 
indicate that the Muslim populations are very large in Europe and have been the main source 
of immigration and the largest diasporas in various European countries. A Pew Research 
Center report [42] revealed that 18.1 million Muslims were living in the EU15 plus 
Switzerland in 2010, representing around 5% of the total population of these countries. 
Unlike those residing in Russia or other countries of Eastern Europe12, the vast majority of the 
Muslims in Western Europe are immigrants or children or grandchildren of immigrants. In 
2010 these Muslim communities contained more than one million people in five countries —
Germany (4.7), France (4.1), the United Kingdom (2.8), Italy (1.5) and Spain (1)— and the 
Netherlands (0.9) also came very close to this number. Eight of every ten Muslims that live in 
Western Europe reside in those six countries, although Austria, Belgium, Greece, Sweden and 
Switzerland also have relatively large communities. Of these EU15 countries plus 
Switzerland, the largest proportion lives in France (7.5%). Muslim populations in Germany, 
Greece, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Sweden and the United Kingdom represent 
approximately 5% of the total population. In Southern Europe, in countries such as Italy or 
Spain, the proportions are smaller (around 2.5%) due to their brief histories as immigrant 
receiving countries, although they have grown more quickly over the past few decades. 
Just as interesting as the demographic size of these communities, or perhaps more so, is 
the impressive rate at which they have grown over the past several years. The number of 
Muslims who lived in these countries in 1990 was estimated at 6.8 million, which means that 
                                                           
12 In accordance with the same estimate by the Pew Research Center, if Russia and the other Eastern European 
countries are included, the total number of Muslims in Europe would increase to 44 million [42]. 

Miguel Requena 
70
between 1990 and 2010 it increased around 11.3 million or multiplied 2.6 times, that is, it 
grew at an annual rate of nearly 5%. Although the rate of growth predicted for the next twenty 
years is lower than what has been observed over the past decades, it is estimated that 30 
million Muslims will live in Western Europe by 2030. In some countries, such as Austria, 
Belgium, France or Sweden, the proportion of Muslims will approach or surpass 10%. A 
large part of this growth can be explained by the contribution of migration flows; but even in 
the absence of large inflows, it has to be taken into consideration that on average these 
Muslim populations are younger and have higher fertility rates than natives, which means that 
their growth will greatly outpace that of the native populations, which will increase more 
slowly or simply diminish. 
One of the most distinctive characteristics of these growing communities of Muslim 
immigrants settled in Western European countries is their relatively low levels of social 
integration in their host countries. All the indicators commonly used to measure the level of 
integration show the difficulties that these Muslim immigrants face in their incorporation into 
the receiving societies. Thus, the educational achievements of Muslims are inferior to those of 
other immigrants [16]; their employment rates are lower (due to low levels of economic 
activity among the women); their unemployment levels are higher and their salaries lower 
[60]; and their levels of ethnic exogamy are lower than those of other groups of immigrants 
[33, 10]. An indicator that provides a good synthesis of the integration difficulties of these 
Muslim immigrants is their high residential concentration in the poor neighborhoods of 
European cities. In some of them the numbers of Muslims are much larger than the aggregate 
proportions in each country would indicate. Residential segregation of Muslims is a constant 
concern for experts [39, 43] because it can lead to ‗ghettoization‘ and reduce their 
opportunities to interact with native populations. A study of Moroccans living in France, the 
Netherlands and Spain [11] shows that these immigrants are a particularly disadvantageous 
group (in education, work, segregation and ethnic exogamy) in comparison to not only 
natives of those countries, but also other immigrants. Furthermore, this disadvantageous 
situation occurs independently of the receiving context, which does not appear to have a 
systematic effect on the opportunities for social integration of these Moroccan immigrants. In 
summary, although Muslim immigrants in Western Europe are not a monolithic block —there 
are significant national, ethnic and sectarian differences among them— they all appear to 
share low levels of social integration that establish barriers through which interethnic social 
capital is unable to circulate. And what is more surprising, their levels of integration do not 
appear to improve over generations, but rather it is a highly persistent trait of these 
communities. In fact, integration problems may be even more notable among second or third 
generation youths than among their parents or grandparents. 
This systematic deficit in the integration of European Muslims not only leads to social 
isolation, but perhaps also to a defensive self-encapsulation. 
It also promotes powerful feelings of cultural alienation among youths who barely 
identify with the major national symbols of the country in which they live, a problem that 
cannot be corrected simply by acquiring citizenship. An analyst has described the condition of 
these Muslims in the following terms: 
 
Younger Muslims are adopting attributes of the European societies in which they 
were born and raised… Yet, generally they do not feel part of the larger society nor that 
they have a stake in it. Conversely, even though they may be third-generation citizens, 

International Migrations, Security and Identity 
71
they often are not viewed as fellows citizens by the general public but are still identified 
as foreigners and immigrants instead [47]. 
 
Although in reality this is only half the story of the process of alienation, because these 
young Muslim immigrants alienated from the native cultures in which they live also do not 
identify with the traditional Islam of their parents or grandparents. It is true that they travel 
with some frequency to their places of origin, as they maintain connections there through 
satellite, cell phones and the Internet. Even so, their countries of origin no longer serve as 
valid references and symbols of cultural identification. This lack of solid references seems to 
bound them to oscillating between a painful cultural schizophrenia and the alienating feeling 
of not belonging to any culture in particular. At the same time, these processes of cultural 
alienation have a significant political derivation. In religious terms, many of these young 
Muslims have abandoned the traditional Islam of the diaspora and experienced a Universalist 
re-Islamization whose ideal is a global community of the faithful —the Muslim umma. And 
this transnational and Universalist Islam is one of the factors fomenting the political 
radicalization from which many of the terrorist activities of European Muslims have emerged 
[46]. 
It is possible that Muslim immigrants in Western Europe are simply experiencing the 
same identity conflicts and cultural tensions as other diasporas that have occurred over the 
history of international migrations. If this was the case, perhaps the problems would be 
limited to the speed and pace of incorporation. However, the demographic, sociological and 
cultural characteristics of these communities argue against optimism. The rapid growth, large 
relative size, and future demographic perspectives of Muslims in Western Europe make it 
highly doubtful that their situation is comparable to that of other migrant communities. The 
low levels of social and cultural integration that persist over generations in these 
communities, and the fact that the religion is their basic common identifier despite their 
different national origins, also advise against easy comparisons. For example, comparing 
them with Muslims in the United States is probably not very useful because they constitute a 
much smaller portion of the population there (less than 1%). In contrast to Europe, the 
absorption of immigrants in the United States has been a persistent historical characteristic 
and one of the most distinctive traits of this country; and the distinctive signs of national 
identity in the United States do not include the same level of religious homogeneity as in 
European societies. 
As a consequence of these factors and processes, Muslim immigration is testing the 
capacity of Western European societies to coexist with diversity while maintaining their own 
cultural identity. Possibly the most visible effects of the tensions produced by diversity have 
to do with security and violence: European —or radicalized during their stay in Europe— 
Muslims taking part in terrorist activities and murders of notable public figures. But other 
events also point in the same direction: the public threats to activists who criticize Islam, such 
as the Somalian Ayaan Hirsi Ali in the Netherlands, the recurring crises caused by female 
students wearing the headscarf in public schools or the disturbances in predominantly Muslim 
neighborhoods on the periphery of various French cities in the fall of 2005, and the 
controversy over the caricatures of Mohammed in Denmark. 

Miguel Requena 
72
All these phenomena have sparked a wave of xenophobic feelings rejecting Islam13, a 
clear manifestation of the tensions caused by cultural diversity that has already crystallized 
into the programs of various political parties and that obviously only serves to fan the flames 
of hostility and conflict between natives and immigrants. But the difficulties involved in 
managing ethnic differences in multicultural European societies are not just a manifestation of 
prejudice, they also lead to reasonable disquiet in the political, journalistic and academic 
spheres; and they have led to justified concerns about the limits of civic tolerance [7] and the 
degree to which acceptance of certain forms of diversity is a threat to the political identity of 
liberal democracies. As Timothy Garton Ash [21] has put it, speaking of the increasing 
alienation of European Muslims, ‗If things continue to go as badly as they are at the moment, 
this alienation, and the way it both feeds and is fed by the resentments of mainly white, 
Christian or post-Christian Europeans, could tear apart the civic fabric of Europe‘s most 
established democracies‘. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
Whenever social and economic inequality between countries, political oppression, 
insecurity and natural disasters have existed in the world, people have migrated in search of 
better living conditions and opportunities than those that exist in their places of birth. But 
although population movements have continuously affected human history, today they occur 
on a larger scale. Over the past sixty years international migrations have intensified and 
accelerated, coinciding with —in fact, forming part of— the multiple changes and 
transformations associated with globalization. Our globalized world, with its vibrant and 
continuous transnational flow of information about living conditions in other countries and 
the opportunities they offer, and with fast and inexpensive modes of transportation, has 
enormously facilitated international population movements that, until now, were directed 
from developing to developed countries. Some authors believe that our historical era should 
be called the ‗age of migration‘ [9] due to the magnitude of the migrations, as well as their 
economic, social and political relevance. It is highly probably that all of this will continue 
occurring in the future. As globalization advances, it is expected that international migrations 
will accelerate even more, although its origins and destinations may diversify and the 
migrants may become more heterogeneous. In one way or another, the need to regulate these 
growing flows of population will also become more urgent. 
The need to regulate international migratory flows is due to, among other reasons, the 
possibility that they suppose a security threat to the states involved. In the past, concerns 
about the insecurity that could be caused by migrations were limited to how to impede the 
flow of unwanted immigrants at borders. In this sense, the security threats that could be 
provoked by migrations fit in well with the conception of security as state security. But lately 
the conceptual content of security has been extraordinarily broadened. The tangible and 
intangible entities that the new ideas of security —e.g., human security, societal security— 
believe must be protected include much more than just the physical integrity of the state‘s 
                                                           
13 An extreme and ultimately delirious version of Islamophobia can be found in two books that announce the next 
transformation of Europe into ‗Eurabia‘ [4, 59]. On the other hand, Caldwell [8] offers a much more nuanced 
interpretation of the impact of the Islam on Europe. 

International Migrations, Security and Identity 
73
territory in the face of military aggression from rival states. When this broader perspective of 
security is adopted, objects of protection that were once ignored or barely relevant have 
become part of the security agenda. 
From the point of view of societal security, one of the objects threatened by migrations is 
the cultural cohesion and identity of societies that receive them. Therefore, security problems 
associated with migrations have become problems of identity. 
The basic process by which international migrations put the cultural identity of host 
societies at risk is the increase in ethnic heterogeneity that they produce. The growing ethnic 
diversity in developed societies —to date the main receivers of international migrations— is a 
well-documented tendency that will very probably continue in the future. One of the basic 
mechanisms that explain the weakening of cultural identity and cohesion in ethnically diverse 
societies is the destruction of social capital —that is, interpersonal trust— caused by growing 
heterogeneity. This is because the feelings of mutual trust that are the foundation of social 
identity are weakened if they are unable to bridge the cultural gaps that separate segregated 
ethnic communities. In a nutshell, a deficit of social capital undermines social identity. 
Moreover, the association between immigration and the decrease in cultural cohesion has 
very clear political implications: multicultural societies can undermine the shared images that 
are the basis of the political identity of the nation-states of developed receiving countries. The 
different political models that have been used to manage diversity —guest workers, 
assimilation, multicultural— have attempted to facilitate the integration of ethnic immigrants 
in host societies, but the results have been to some degree disappointing in that they have not 
been able to avoid the disadvantages immigrants have and the levels of integration they have 
achieved have been lower than expected. The most visible manifestations of these integration 
difficulties appear among Muslim immigrant communities settled in Western European 
countries. Both the problems of terrorist violence originating in Muslim communities and the 
bitter debates on the public protection (of some elements) of their way of life clearly reveal 
the difficulties involved in managing diversity in the multicultural environments produced by 
immigration. 
As Fukuyama [20] pointed out, the poor results achieved when trying to integrate Muslim 
communities in receiving societies in Western Europe reveal the basic tension faced by liberal 
democracies that must manage cultural diversity: on the one hand, to maintain their own 
political identity based on a civic tradition of respecting individual rights and, on the other, 
acknowledging the group rights of ethnic minorities in order to achieve greater integration. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Adamson, F. B. (2004). Displacement, Diaspora Mobilization, and Transnational 
Cycles of Political Violence. In: J. Tirman (Ed.), The Maze of Fear: Migration and 
Security after 9/11 (pp. 45-58). New York: New Press. 
[2] 
Adamson, F. B. (2006). Crossing Borders. International Migration and National 
Security. International Security, 31(1), pp. 165-199. 
[3] 
Bali, S. (2008). Population Movements. In: Paul D. Williams (Ed.), Security Studies. An 
Introduction (pp. 520-534). Abingdon: Routledge. 

Miguel Requena 
74
[4] 
Bawer, B. (2006). While Europe Slept: How Radical Islam Is Destroying the West from 
Within. New York: Doubleday. 
[5] 
Bobbitt, Ph. (2009). Terror and Consent. The Wars for the Twenty-first Century. New 
York: Anchor Books. 
[6] 
Brubaker, R. (1992). Citizenship and Nationhood in France and Germany. Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press. 
[7] 
Buruma, I. (2006). Murder in Amsterdam: Liberal Europe, Islam, and the Limits of 
Tolerance. New York: Penguin. 
[8] 
Caldwell, C. (2009). Reflections on the Revolution in Europe: Immigration, Islam, and 
the West. New York: Doubleday. 
[9] 
Castles, S., de Haas, H. and Miller, M. J. (2014). The Age of Migration. International 
Population Movements in the Modern World. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
[10] Cebolla, H. and Requena M. (2009). Los inmigrantes marroquíes en España. In: D. 
Reher and M. Requena (Eds.), Las múltiples caras de la emigración en España (pp. 
251-287). Madrid: Alianza. 
[11] Cebolla, H. and Requena M. (2010). Marroquíes en España, Holanda y Francia: 
¿importa el modelo de gestión de la diversidad para explicar la integración? Historia y 
Política, 23, pp. 55-83. 
[12] Coleman, David (2009). Divergent Patterns in the Ethnic Transformation of Societies. 
Population and Development Review 35(3), pp. 449-478. 
[13] Coleman, David (2012). The Changing Face of Europe. In: J. A. Goldstone, E. P. 
Kaufmann and M. D. Toft (Eds.), Political Demography. How Population Changes Are 
Reshaping International Security and National Politics (pp. 176-193). Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
[14] Collier, P. (2013). Exodus. How Migration is Changing Our World. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
[15] Cornelius, W. (2001). Death at the Border: Efficacy and Unintended Consequences of 
US Immigration Control Policy. Population and Development Review, 27(4), pp. 661-
685. 
[16] EUMC (European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia) (2006) Muslims in 
the European Union: Discrimination and Islamophobia. Vienna: European Monitoring 
Centre on Racism and Xenophobia. 
[17] Faist, Thomas (2008). The migration-security nexus. International migration and 
security before and after 9/11. (Willy Brandt Series of Working Papers in International 
Migration and Ethnic Relations 4/03). Malmö: Malmö University. Retrieved from 
http://dspace.mah.se/bitstream/handle/2043/686/Willy%20Brandt%202003-4.pdf? 
sequence=1. 
[18] Fleischmann, F. and Dronckers, J. (2010). Unemployment among immigrants in 
European labour markets: an analysis of origin and destination effects. Work, 
Employment and Society, 24(2), pp. 337-354. 
[19] Frontex (2014). Annual Risk Analysis 2014. Frontex reference number: 5119/2014. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://frontex.europa.eu/assets/Publications/Risk_Analysis/Annual_ 
Risk_Analysis_2014.pdf. 
[20] Fukuyama, F. (2006). Identity, Immigration, and Liberal Democracy. Journal of 
Democracy, 17(2), pp. 5-20. 
[21] Garton Ash, T. (2006). Islam in Europe. The New York Times Review of Books, 53(15). 

International Migrations, Security and Identity 
75
[22] Goldstone, J., Kaufmann, E. P. and Toft, M. D. (Eds.) (2012). Political Demography. 
How Population Changes Are Reshaping International Security and National Politics. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
[23] Guild, E. (2009). Security and Migration in the 21st Century. Cambridge: Polity. 
[24] Hatton, T. J. (2009). The rise and fall of asylum: what happened and why? The 
Economic Journal, 119, F183-F213. 
[25] Hatton, T. J. and Williamson, J. G. (1998). The Age of Mass Migration: Causes and 
Economic Effects. London and New York: Oxford University Press. 
[26] Hatton, T. J. and Williamson, J. G. (2005). Global Migration and the World Economy. 
Boston: MIT Press. 
[27] Heath, A. and Cheung, S. Y. (Eds.) (2007). Unequal Chances: Ethnic Minorities in 
Western Labour Markets. Oxford: British Academy/Oxford University Press. 
[28] Heisler, M. O. and Layton-Henry, Z. (1993). Migration and the links between social 
and societal security. O. Waever, B. Buzan, M. Kelstrup, and P. Lamaitre (Eds.), 
Identity, Migration and The New Security Agenda in Europe (pp. 148-166). London: 
Pinter Publisher Ltd. 
[29] Haute Conseil à l‘Intégration (2004). Le contrat et l‟intégration. París: La 
Documentation Francaise. 
[30] Huntington, S. P. (2004). Who Are We? The Challenges to Americas‟s National 
Identity. New York: Simon and Schuster. 
[31] Jervis, R. (1976). Perception and Misperception in International Politics. Princeton: 
Princeton-University Press. 
[32] Kagan, R. (2008). The Return of History and the End of Dreams. New York: Alfred A. 
Knopf. 
[33] Kalmijn, M. and van Tubergen, F. (2006). Ethnic intermarriage in the Netherlands: 
confirmations and refutations of accepted insights, European Journal of Population, 22 
(4), pp. 371-397. 
[34] Katzenstein, P. J. (Ed.) (1996). The Culture of National Security: Norms and Identity in 
World Politics. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
[35] Koopmans, R., Michalowski, I. and Waibel. S. (2012). Citizenship Rights for 
Immigrants: National Political Processes and Cross-National Convergence in Western 
Europe, 1980-2008, American Journal of Sociology, 117(4), pp. 1202-1245. 
[36] Livi Bacci, M. (2010). In cammino: breve storia delle migrazioni. Bologna: Il Mulino. 
[37] Marks, G. N. (2005). Accounting for immigrant non-immigrant differences in reading 
and mathematics in twenty countries. Ethnic and Racial Studies, 28(5), pp. 925-946. 
[38] Marshall, G. M. and Cole, B. R. (2011). Global Report 2011: Conflict, Governance, 
and State Fragility. Vienna, VA: Center for Systemic Peace. 
[39] Musterd, S. (2005). Social and Ethnic Segregation in Europe: Levels, Causes, and 
Effects. Journal of Urban Affairs, 27(3), pp. 331-48. 
[40] Paris, R. (2001). Human Security. Paradigm Shift or Hot Air? International Security, 26 
(2), pp. 87-102. 
[41] Perez, A. D. and Hirschman, C. (2009). The Changing Racial and Ethnic Composition 
of the US Population: Emerging American Identities. Population and Development 
Review, 35(1), pp. 1-51. 

Miguel Requena 
76
[42] Pew Research Center (2011). The Future of the Global Muslim Population.  
Retrieved from http://www.pewforum.org/2011/01/27/the-future-of-the-global-muslim-
population/ 
[43] Phillips, D. (2010). Minority Ethnic Segregation, Integration and Citizenship: A 
European Perspective. Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies, 36(2), pp. 209-225. 
[44] Poku, N. K. and Graham, D. T. (Eds.) (1998). Redefining Security. Population 
Movements and National Security. Westport: Praeger. 
[45] Putnam, R. D. (2007). E Pluribus Unum: diversity and Community in the Twenty-first 
Century. The 2006 Johan Skytte Prize Lecture. Scandinavian Political Studies, 30(2), 
pp. 137-174. 
[46] Roy, O. (2003). EuroIslam: The Jihad Within? The National Interest, (Spring 2003), pp. 
63-73. 
[47] Savage, T. M. (2004). Europe and Islam: Crescent Waxing, Cultures Clashing. The 
Washington Quarterly, 27(3), pp. 25-50. 
[48] Sheffer, G. (2003). Diaspora Politics: At Home Abroad. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
[49] Tadjbakhsh, S. and Chenoy, A. M. (2007). Human Security: Concepts and 
Implications. London: Routledge. 
[50] Theiler, T. (2003). Societal security and social psychology. Review of International 
Studies, 29(2), pp. 249-268. 
[51] Tirman, J. (Ed.) (2004). The Maze of Fear: Migration and Security after 9/11. New 
York: New Press. 
[52] United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division 
[UNDESA] (2013). Trends in International Migrant Stock: The 2013 Revision (United 
Nations database, POP/DB/MIG/Stock/Rev.2013).  
[53] Van Tubergen, F., Maas, I. and Flaap, H. (2004). The Economic Incorporation of 
Immigrants in 18 Western Societies: Origin, Destination, and Community Effects. 
American Sociological Review, 69(5), pp. 704-727. 
[54] Waever, O., Buzan, B., Kelstrup, M., and Lamaitre, P. (Eds.) (1993). Identity, 
Migration and The New Security Agenda in Europe. London: Pinter Publisher Ltd. 
[55] Weiner, M. (1992). Security, Stability, and International Migration. International 
Security, 17(3), pp. 91-126. 
[56] Weiner, M. (Ed.) (1993). International Migration and Security. Boulder: Westview 
Press. 
[57] Weiner, M. and Teitelbaum, M. S. (2001). Political Demography, Demographic 
Engineering. New York and Oxford: Berghahn Books. 
[58] Weiner, M. and Russell, S. S., (Eds.) (2001). Demography and National Security. New 
York: Berghahn Books. 
[59] Ye‘or, B. (2005). Eurabia: The Euro-Arab Axis. Cranbury: Associated University 
Presses. 
[60] Zimmermann, K. F., DeVoretz, D., Kahanec, M., Gataullina, L., Constant, A., and 
Zaiceva, A. (2007). Study on the Social and Labour Market Integration of Ethnic 
Minorities. IZA Research Report No. 16. Bonn: IZA - Forschungsinstitut zur Zukunft 
der Arbeit. 

In: Globalization and International Security: An Overview 
ISBN: 978-1-63463-075-7 
Editors: T. Rodrigues, R. García Pérez et al.  
 
© 2015 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 5 
 
 
 
RECONCEPTUALIZING THE HUMAN RIGHTS 
HERITAGE: CHALLENGES AND PROSPECTS 
ON THE RESPONSIBILITY TO PROTECT 
 
 
Ana Isabel Xavier 
New University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
This chapter aims to provide an overview of Human Rights‘ four generations and 
explore the required balance between intervention and protection in order to safeguard 
fundamental and basic living conditions. Moreover, it will highlight Canada‘s and United 
Nations pioneering role and focus on the current challenges and prospects within the 
debate on the Responsibility to Protect. For that purpose, we will show some empirical 
dilemmas - ―Tell me something new Vs. the need for a new narrative‖; ―Legitimating to 
intervene Vs. License to kill‖; ―Narrow Vs. broad scope‖; ―Double standards Vs. 
International Community awareness‖ – and conclude how this emerging label urges clear 
guidelines if it wants to give a step further in the traditional right/duty to intervene 
patterns. 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Inspired by the French Revolution virtuous triangle of ―Liberty, equality and fraternity‖, 
we owe to the Czech Jurist Karel Vasak the first proposal of the Human Rights division into 
three generations. Vasak‘s theory [16] was rooted in the representation of the potential claims 
of individuals or groups towards the State, both for the State (as the second generation claims 
the interference of a Welfare State) and against or beyond the State (as the first generation 
specifically asks the noninterference and the third generation agrees upon the idea that the 
State is no longer able to assure certain Human Rights). 
                                                           
 Corresponding author: Ana Isabel Xavier. New University of Lisbon (Portugal). E-mail: aix@fcsh.unl.pt. 

Ana Isabel Xavier 
78
Moreover, some authors accept a fourth generation of Human Rights [6] even if they both 
lack legal and political recognition in the main International Treaties and Conventions. 
Besides the traditional debates on Rights vs. Duties and Universality vs. Western 
Imperialism, this article attempts to rethink the Human Rights heritage, questioning some of 
its philosophical and normative assumptions, namely between (humanitarian) intervention 
and protection (of Human Rights) in what regards the legitimacy and morality of the 
Responsibility to Protect. 
In fact, in the last few years, the ―Responsibility to Protect‖ (R2P or RtoP) became one of 
the most ―trendy‖ or ―buzz‖ words ever and it was soon welcomed by the academic literature 
as a moral duty to protect those who need support and are in situations of compelling need for 
humanitarian protection. 
This concept was first labelled in the 2001 Report of the International Commission on 
Intervention and State Sovereignty (ICISS) and set out in the Final Document of the UN 
Summit in September 2005, in which the States committed to protect their populations from 
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. 
In addition, in January 12th 2009 meeting of the General Assembly, Ban Ki Moon‘s 
Report on implementing the Responsibility to Protect moved forward with concrete proposals 
to implement the concept through three pillars: first, State‘s responsibilities on protection; 
second, international assistance and national capabilities building; and third, the International 
Community‘s response. 
However, if for some [19] the concept was already implemented in Libya and Syria, 
others [14] highlight that the concept is still in process of recognition given the side debate of 
the right of intervention (even if the former would be driven by the prospect of the object of 
the action, requiring a ―protection‖ in the broader commitment of the "human security‖). 
We will conclude that the ―Responsibility to Protect‖ is a useful paradigm to rethink 
international law [10, 13] but we should be aware of the ethical boundaries that underlie the 
acknowledgment of rights and responsibilities. Moreover, we will outline one of the most 
interesting paradoxes of a globalized era: concepts like RtoP (that we would place beneath the 
third generation of HR) deal both with the acceptance of the ―retreat of the State‖ [15] in its 
ability to act in the name of Human Rights, as well as with the need to reinforce the State‘s 
role as a welfare player and security provider. 
 
 
HUMAN RIGHTS GENERATIONS – TIMELINE 
 
Like all normative traditions rooted in the International Law, the Human Rights speech is 
a product of human history. Therefore, if we want to trace a timeline and agree upon four 
generations of Human Rights, it is rather useful to note the mainstream debates, schools of 
thoughts and priorities, since the 13th century to modern times (Table 5.1). 
Although the four generations framework seeks to be a valuable conceptual tool for 
thinking about Human Rights in a globalized era, it is worth questioning some of its 
assumptions before moving to the Responsibility to protect paradigm. Therefore, does this 
timeline suggest a progression of rights based in the ―generations‖ metaphor, presuming that 
the first rights‘ generation created the background conditions necessary for the exercise of the 
second rights‘ generation, and so on? 

Reconceptualizing the Human Rights Heritage 
79
Table 5.1. The four generations of Human Rights – Historic background, legal 
principles and moral features 
 
Generation 
and principles 
Historic 
background 
Main legal 
diplomas 
Assumptions and features 
Right to… 
First 
Generation 
 
Civil-political 
Rights 
 
―Liberty‖ 
1215Magna 
Carta 
 
1789 United 
States Bill of 
Rights 
 
1789 French 
Declaration of 
the Rights of 
Man and of 
citizen. 
1948 United 
Nations Universal 
Declaration of 
Human Rights 
 
1966 United 
Nations 
International 
Covenant on Civil 
and Political 
Rights. 
 
European 
Convention on 
Human Rights 
Strongly individualistic 
and mainly negative, the 
first generation is designed 
to protect the individual 
from the unrestrained 
behavior of the state 
interference. 
 
The first generation‘ rights 
include areas where 
governments refrain from 
certain activities and that 
the state should not 
intervene. 
Physical and civil 
security (no torture, 
slavery, inhumane 
treatment, coercion or 
abuse; arbitrary arrest; to 
appeal; equality 
before/protection of the 
law; fair trial) 
 
Civil-political liberties or 
empowerments (freedom 
of thought; vote; free 
speech; conscience; 
religion; assembly and 
voluntary association; 
political participation at 
meetings of associations 
and unions; right to 
access information). 
Second-
Generation 
 
Economic, 
social and 
cultural 
 
―Equality‖ 
19th Century, in 
response to 
widespread 
poverty, rise of 
the demands 
and ideals of 
the working 
class struggles 
and human 
dignity, in the 
wake of the 
industrial 
revolution. 
1948 United 
Nations Universal 
Declaration of 
Human Rights 
 
1966 United 
Nations 
International 
Covenant on 
Economic, Social, 
and Cultural 
Rights 
 
European Social 
Charter 
Positive rights that compel 
national governments to 
take measures to promote, 
fulfil and improve rights 
that are not directly 
possessed by individuals 
but depend on the overall 
social situation. 
 
Those rights impose upon 
the state the duty to be a 
truly ―welfare state‖ as it is 
the state that controls the 
availability of its own 
resources 
 
They are much more 
controversial than the first 
generation rights, since 
they take for granted a 
positive intervention by 
governments and entitle 
individuals to get 
protection from state if 
third parties interfere with 
their rights. 
Are related to the way 
people live and work 
together and the basic 
necessities of life, such 
as: nutrition, housing, 
health care, education; 
employment, adequate 
income and fair wages; an 
adequate living standard, 
a social security net and 
unemployment benefits. 
 
 

Ana Isabel Xavier 
80
Table 5.1. (Continued) 
 
Generation 
and principles 
Historic 
background 
Main legal 
diplomas 
Assumptions and features 
Right to… 
Third 
Generation 
 
Collective-
developmental 
 
―Solidarity‖ 
Second half of 
the 20th 
Century, in 
response to a 
global 
awareness of 
human dignity 
in terms of 
threats that may 
come in the 
achievement of 
the previous 
generations of 
Human Rights. 
1981 African 
Charter on Human 
and People's 
 
1972 Stockholm 
Declaration of the 
United Nations 
Conference on the 
Human 
Environment 
 
1992 Rio 
Declaration on 
Environment and 
Development 
 
1994 Draft 
Declaration of 
Indigenous 
Peoples‘ Rights. 
Remains largely contested 
and hard to enact in legally 
binding documents as they 
constitute a broad 
spectrum of rights that 
aspire a ―soft law‖ 
dimension beyond the 
preponderance of the 
national sovereignty. 
 
The key idea behind this 
third generation of rights is 
solidarity, embracing the 
collective rights of people 
as a whole. 
 
It‘s upon the International 
Community and not the 
States that rely the 
responsibility to foster a 
more active and 
participatory citizenship in 
order to accomplish these 
rights. 
People‘s autonomy 
(political status, 
economic, social, and 
cultural development); 
rights of ethnic and 
religious minorities 
(enjoyment of their own 
cultures, languages, and 
religions); economic 
development; prosperity; 
benefit from economic 
growth; social harmony; a 
healthy environment, 
clean air and water; 
participation in cultural 
heritage; 
intergenerational equity 
and sustainability; 
sustainable development, 
peace, humanitarian 
assistance, sharing of the 
common heritage of 
humanity. 
Fourth 
Generation 
 
Bio-Life 
 
―Preservation‖ 
21st Century 
2000 Charter of 
Fundamental 
Rights of the 
European Union 
These rights are also 
known as "emerging" as 
they are still completing 
the process of recognition 
and acceptance. 
 
They have a global 
dimension and are 
common to the entire 
International Community 
and its preservation. 
Bioethics; preservation of 
genetic heritage: non-
commercial exploitation 
of the human genome; 
preservation of natural 
bodies; non-privatization 
of plants and living 
organisms; regulation of 
transgenic; free access to 
information technologies; 
confidentiality of the 
contents of databases; 
privacy against electronic 
systems and surveillance; 
preservation of children 
to the threat of pedophilia 
on the Internet. 
Source: Compiled by the author. 
 
In other words, does a society that is now in condition to assure fourth generation‘s rights 
has already consolidated the three first generations, as if one generation takes precedence over 
another? How to deal with the fact that most of western societies are already in an advanced 
stage of Human Rights Generation, but its populations are struggling to recover the ―welfare 
State‖ in their daily life? 

Reconceptualizing the Human Rights Heritage 
81
In fact, the four generations framework surely encourages us to take a critical approach in 
challenging our own assumptions about Human Rights, especially regarding some of the real-
world problems in the globalized era that involve Human Rights in practice. 
 
 
RESPONSIBILITY TO PROTECT: THE ORIGINS OF THE CONCEPT 
 
When the Rwandan (1994) and Bosnian (1995) Genocides dramatically revealed [11] the 
failure of the International Community to intervene for the sake of the protection of the 
Rwandese population in the mid 90´s, soon the International Organizations (such as the 
United Nations) realized that an answer should be given to the world. 
So it began the debate on how to react effectively when citizens‘ Human Rights are 
grossly and systematically violated, if States have unconditional sovereignty over their affairs 
or whether the International Community has the right to intervene in a third country for 
humanitarian purposes. 
Therefore, it is not surprising that in its 2000 Millennium Report1, the United Nations 
Secretary-General Kofi Annan addressed the failures of the Security Council to act. At the 
time, Annan recalled the Member States to answer to one simple question: "If humanitarian 
intervention is, indeed, an unacceptable assault on sovereignty, how should we respond to a 
Rwanda, to a Srebrenica, to gross and systematic violation of Human Rights that offend every 
precept of our common humanity?" 
The answer came from the Canadian government that, in September 2000, sponsored the 
establishment of the International Commission on Intervention and Sovereignty of the State 
(ICISS), aiming to reflect on how and when States and Intergovernmental Organizations 
should intervene for humanitarian reasons and concerns. This Commission soon started to 
meet in round tables format and, in February 2001, the co-founders Gareth Evans 
(International Crisis Group) and Mohamed Sahnoun (Berkley Center for religion, peace and 
world affairs) suggested the term "Responsibility to Protect" as a way to keep away from the 
"right to intervene" or "obligation to intervene" doctrines and yet carry on with a certain 
degree of duty to resolve humanitarian crises. 
But it was only after the September eleven events, in December 2001, that the ICISS 
released the report ―The Responsibility to Protect” [12], insisting on the idea that sovereignty 
remains the State‘s ―realm‖ but the International Community has the responsibility to prevent 
mass atrocities if and when the State fails in that mission. 
In fact, Gareth Evans argued: 
 
The dilemma of humanitarian intervention has been overtaken by other concerns 
since the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, but it was not resolved or disappeared. 
When, if ever, is appropriate countries, individually or collectively, exercise action 
enforced, in particular military action against another country - not the end self-defense, 
or to prevent a greater threat to peace and security internationally, as traditionally 
understood, but for the purpose to protect people at risk within that country? [5, 7, 8]. 
 
                                                           
1 The full Report is available at https://www.un.org/millennium/sg/report/full.htm (accessed on 10/03/2014). 

Ana Isabel Xavier 
82
The answer to this challenge was then first provided by the Commission, in an attempt to 
create the first conceptual framework and normative reflection on the concept of 
Responsibility to Protect. In fact, according to the International Commission, all measures 
(economic, political and social) must be used along with diplomatic engagement in order to 
assure a long lasting peace and security, bringing justice to the victims and finding the root 
cause of the mass atrocities within a comprehensive approach. A military intervention might 
be possible, but only as a last resort or as an extraordinary measure of intervention, fulfilling 
the following six criteria [12]: 
 
1 
Just Cause - The cause must be fair and the threat must be a serious and irreparable 
harm occurring to human beings. As the report highlights, in order to justify military 
intervention for humanitarian protection, must be to be inflicted, or likely imminent 
being, serious and irreparable harm to humans, the following type: loss of lives on a 
large scale (actual or apprehended), with genocide (intent or not, that is, either from 
deliberate state action, or negligence or inability to act, or a failed state situation), or 
large-scale ethnic cleansing (actual or apprehended), carried out by massacres, forced 
expulsion, acts of terror or rape. 
2 
Right Intention - There must be a clear intention and the main intention of the 
military action must be to prevent human suffering. In other words, the primary 
purpose of the intervention, whatever other motives intervening States may have, 
must be to halt or avert human suffering. 
3 
Final Resort - Military action should only be a last resort after exhausting all 
political, economic or legal measures, so we must question if every other measure 
besides military invention has been taken into account, and even if they were not 
even applied, if only military action would work in that situation. In fact, military 
intervention can only be justified after all non-military options for the prevention or 
peaceful resolution of the crisis being explored, with sufficient reason to believe that 
less radical measures would not be successful. 
4 
Legitimate Authority - There should be an appropriate authority and the authority to 
employ the last resort and intervene militarily rests solely within the United Nations 
Security Council. In fact, there is no better or more appropriate forum than the 
Security Council to give permission to a United Nations military intervention for 
humanitarian protection purposes. For those who criticize the Security Council 
legitimacy, the challenge is not to find other institutional alternatives but make the 
Security Council work better than what has happened so far. 
5 
Proportional Means - The means must be proportionate in order to assure the 
minimum necessary military means applied to secure human protection. In fact, the 
size, duration and intensity of the planned military intervention should be the 
minimum necessary to achieve the defined objective of protecting humanity. 
6 
Reasonable Prospect - The prospects of success must be realistic and it must be likely 
that the military action will succeed in protecting human life, and that the 
consequences of this action are not to be worse than no action at all. There must be a 
reasonable likelihood to halt or prevent the suffering which has justified the 
intervention and the consequences of action should not be worse than the 
consequences of inaction. 
 

Reconceptualizing the Human Rights Heritage 
83
Bearing those six criteria in mind, for the authors of the Report, the R2P would be, in 
fact, a three-phase process concerning: 
 
 
The responsibility to prevent: to address both the root causes and the direct causes of 
internal conflict and other man-made crises putting population at risk. 
 
The responsibility to react: to respond to situations of compelling human need with 
appropriate measures, which may include coercive measures like sanctions and 
international prosecution, and in extreme cases military intervention. 
 
The responsibility to rebuild: to provide, particularly after a military intervention, full 
assistance with recovery, reconstruction, and reconciliation, addressing the causes of 
the harm the intervention was designed to halt or avert [17]. 
 
Those ―three responsibilities‖ have also been addressed by the United Nations since 
2004, embracing a comprehensive protection approach based on the International law as the 
main added value of the concept. 
 
 
THE ROLE OF THE UNITED NATIONS 
 
When we needed to trace the origins of the concept, we highlighted the leading role of 
Canada who endorses R2P as a duty to protect those who need support and are in situations of 
compelling need for humanitarian protection. Although it was not formerly adopted by 
national governments per se, the 2001 Report is widely accepted as a common theoretical 
ground which was then followed by Regional and International Organizations worldwide. 
In fact, in the founding charter of the African Union2, the protection of human and 
people‘s rights is pursued as one of the main objective and the AU has the right to intervene 
in a Member State according to a Assembly decision in respect of grave war crimes, genocide 
and crimes against humanity. The African Union also welcomed the R2P as a tool to prevent 
mass atrocities as stated in the Ezulwini Consensus, also adopted in 20053. 
But without undermining the importance of the African Union, it is widely accepted that 
the United Nations is ―the‖ reference of the implementation of the concept. In fact, in 2004, 
the Report of High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change4, set up by Secretary-
General Kofi Annan, endorses the R2P emerging norm and agrees upon the idea that the 
International Community has a collective responsibility to intervene in cases of genocide and 
other large-scale killing, ethnic cleansing and serious violations of humanitarian law. It also 
clarifies that the intervention is due in situations in which sovereign governments have proved 
to be powerless or unwilling to prevent crisis situations. Moreover, the 2004 Report insists 
that ―protect‖ is a broader normative concept that aims to go further than ―intervene‖, because 
it not only reacts but specially avoids a more severe crisis, covering all the dimensions from 
the ―traditional‖ humanitarian intervention to post-reconstruction building. 
                                                           
2 ―Constitutive Acts of the African Union‖, Documents and speeches, African Union Summit, South Africa 2002. 
3 ―The common African position on the proposed reform of the United Nations: The Ezulwini Consensus‖. 
Executive Council, 7th Extraordinary Session, March 7-8 2005 Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, Ext/EX.CL/2 (VII). 
4 Report available at http://www.un.org/secureworld/ (accessed on 20/02/2014). 

Ana Isabel Xavier 
84
A year after, in the 2005 report ―In larger freedom‖5 Secretary-General Kofi Annan 
―strongly agreed‖ with the approach outlined by the High-level Panel and suggested the need 
of setting basic criteria that would legitimize the authorization of the use of force by the UN 
Security Council. That would include seriousness of the threat, proportionality of the response 
and chance of success. 
At the 2005 World Summit, the UN Member States included R2P in the paragraphs 138 
and 139 (UN General Assembly 2005, Sixtieth session, A/60/L) of the Outcome Document 
and formally accepted the responsibility of each State to protect its population from genocide, 
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity: 
 
138. Each individual State has the Responsibility to Protect its populations from 
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. This responsibility 
entails the prevention of such crimes, including their incitement, through appropriate and 
necessary means. We accept that responsibility and will act in accordance with it. The 
International Community should, as appropriate, encourage and help States to exercise 
this responsibility and support the United Nations in establishing an early warning 
capability. 
139. The International Community, through the United Nations, also has the 
responsibility to use appropriate diplomatic, humanitarian and other peaceful means, in 
accordance with Chapters VI and VIII of the Charter, to help protect populations from 
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. In this context, we 
are prepared to take collective action, in a timely and decisive manner, through the 
Security Council, in accordance with the Charter, including Chapter VII, on a case-by-
case basis and in cooperation with relevant regional organizations as appropriate, should 
peaceful means be inadequate and national authorities manifestly fail to protect their 
populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. 
We stress the need for the General Assembly to continue consideration of the 
Responsibility to Protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and 
crimes against humanity and its implications, bearing in mind the principles of the 
Charter and international law. We also intend to commit ourselves, as necessary and 
appropriate, to helping States build capacity to protect their populations from genocide, 
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity and to assisting those which 
are under stress before crises and conflicts break out. 
 
These paragraphs are rather important, because they clarify that the scope of R2P applies 
to the four mass atrocity crimes and identifies nations first and regional and International 
Community‘s second as the main victim‘s guardians. 
They also agreed that when the national authorities ―manifestly fail‖ to protect their 
populations and all peaceful means (including diplomatic, humanitarian) are prove to be 
inadequate, all States (the ―International Community‖) are responsible for helping to protect 
people threatened with such crimes. 
Moreover, they should act collectively in a ―timely and decisive manner‖ through the UN 
Security Council and in accordance with the UN Charter - on a case-by-case basis and in 
cooperation with regional organizations as appropriate. 
 
                                                           
5 Report available at http://www.un.org/largerfreedom/ (accessed on 20/02/2014). 

Reconceptualizing the Human Rights Heritage 
85
A year later, in April 2006, the United Nations Security Council formalizes their support 
for the concept and makes the first official reference to the Responsibility to Protect civilians 
in armed conflict in the resolution 16746. In 2008, the Secretary-General appointed7 Edward 
Luck as his Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect8, asking him to make all the 
efforts to the further development and refinement of the concept as well as for the 
continuation of the political dialogue with Member States and other stakeholders towards its 
implementation. In July 2009, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon releases the report 
―Implementing the Responsibility to Protect (A/63/677)”9 and relaunches the debate within 
the General Assembly. The most important outcome of this discussion was the first resolution 
(A/RES/63/308) ever mentioning the R2P within the UN. This Resolution expressed the 
commitment of the International Community to continue the discussion on the Responsibility 
to Protect. It also highlighted the need for regional organizations (such as the African Union) 
to play a stronger role in implementing it, for stronger early warning mechanisms within the 
UN, as well as the need to clarify the role that the UN bodies would play in implementing it 
in crisis situations around the world. 
Moreover, it allowed the outline of a strategy around three pillars: 
 
1 
The State carries the primary responsibility for protecting populations from genocide, 
war crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing, and their incitement; 
2 
The International Community has a responsibility to encourage and assist States in 
fulfilling this responsibility; 
3 
The International Community has a responsibility to use appropriate diplomatic, 
humanitarian and other means to protect populations from these crimes. If a State is 
manifestly failing to protect its populations, the International Community must be 
prepared to take collective action to protect populations, in accordance with the UN 
Charter. 
 
On October 2nd 2009, the General Assembly adopted a new resolution (A/RES/63/308) to 
continue consideration of the Responsibility to Protect10. 
                                                           
6 ―Resolution 1674 (2006), S/RES/1674 (2006)‖. General distribution to the media. United Nations Security 
Council. April 28, 2006. 
7 Earlier, in 2004, the UN Secretary-General appointed the first Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, 
Juan Méndez, followed by Francis Deng in 2007 and Adama Dieng in 2012. The Special Adviser is 
responsible for collecting information on massive and serious violations of human rights and international 
humanitarian law; acting as a mechanism of early warning to the Secretary-General, and through him to the 
Security Council; making recommendations to the Security Council, through the Secretary-General, on actions 
to prevent or halt genocide and liaising with the United Nations system on activities for the prevention of 
genocide. The joint office on Genocide Prevention and on the Responsibility to Protect is tasked with 
preserving and enhancing existing arrangements, including for capacity building and for the gathering and 
analysis of information from the field, while adding value on its own in terms of new arrangements for 
advocacy, cross-sectorial assessment, common policy, and cumulative learning on how to anticipate, prevent 
and respond to crises relating to the responsibility to protect. (―Mission Statement‖, UN, Office of the special 
adviser on the prevention of genocide). 
8 His mission was about to end in June 2012, but until now no successor has been appointed. 
9 ―Implementing the responsibility to protect. The 2009 General Assembly Debate: An Assessment‖. GCR2P 
Report. Global Centre for the Responsibility to Protect, Ralph Bunche Institute for International Studies. 
CUNY. August 2009. 
10 ―Resolution adopted by the General Assembly, 63/308. The responsibility to protect. A/RES/63/308‖. General 
distribution to the media. United Nations General Assembly, Sixty-third session: Agenda items 44 and 107. 
October 7, 2009. Earlier was adopted the ―Report on the General Assembly Plenary Debate on the 

Ana Isabel Xavier 
86
On August 9th 2010, the Secretary-General launches a report on ―Early warning, 
Assessment and the Responsibility to Protect‖ (A/64/864)11. The purpose is to identify gaps, 
find ways to improve the UN‘s ability to use early warning mechanisms more effectively, 
including information from field operations, as well as improve early, flexible and balanced 
responses where there is risk of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes or ethnic 
cleansing. 
On the 12th of July 2011, the Secretary-General presents a new report on ―The role of 
regional and sub-regional arrangements in implementing the Responsibility to Protect‖ (A/65/ 
877-S2011/393)12 emphasizing the need for global and regional collaboration to help 
implement the Responsibility to Protect. The report suggests that the UN must strengthen its 
cooperation and draw on information from regional and sub-regional arrangements to identify 
signs of danger and undertake or support timely and effective preventive action at the sub-
regional, regional or global level. While emphasizing that the Responsibility to Protect is 
universal and each region ―must move forward‖, the report also acknowledges that ―each 
region will implement the principle at its own pace and in its own way‖. 
More recently, on the 5th of September 2012, the Secretary-General presented a report 
entitled ―The Responsibility to Protect: timely and decisive response‖ (A/66/874-S/2012/ 
578)13 at the fourth annual informal, interactive, dialogue on the Responsibility to Protect in 
the General Assembly. In fact, Ban Ki-moon tried to explore the idea of a ―timely and 
decisive response‖ when a State fails to protect its people. The report also examines the range 
of tools available under the third pillar of the Responsibility to Protect (response), partners 
willing to implement it and the close connection between prevention and response. A total of 
58 Member States and one regional organization spoke during the debate. 
Besides Canada, in the recent months Brazil is becoming one major activist within the 
United Nations in approaching the discussion with the emphasis on ―Responsibility while 
protecting‖. In fact, on February 12th 2012, the Brazilian Foreign Minister António de Aguiar 
Patriota, has defended a shift from the Responsibility to Protect to the responsibility in or 
while protecting. With this approach, Brazil foresees six main principles: prevention is the 
best policy; collateral damages must be avoided (primum non nocere); civilians must be 
protected; the actors responsible for the use of force must be responsible; the use of force 
must be responsible, justified, authorized and legitimated by the Security Council; the 
assessment and evaluation procedures must be improved14. 
Thus, in the past months, the ―emerging Latin America norm entrepreneur‖ [4] seems 
quite committed with this new approach, willing to gain its permanent seat in the Security 
Council with full support of the Portuguese diplomacy15. 
The most recent debate on the issue remains part of the Top 10 Conflicts Agenda: the 
United Nations welcomed, on the 9th of July, the statement of the UN Office of the High 
                                                                                                                                                               
Responsibility to Protect‖. International Coalition for the Responsibility to Protect, New York, NY. September 
15, 2009. 
11 Available at http://www.responsibilitytoprotect.org/N1045020(1).pdf (accessed on 20/02/2014). 
12 Available at http://www.un.org/en/ga/president/65/initiatives/Report%20of%20the%20SG%20to%20MS.pdf  
(accessed on 20/02/2014). 
13 Available at http://www.responsibilitytoprotect.org/UNSG%20Report_timely%20and%20decisive%20response 
(1).pdf (accessed on 20/02/2014). 
14 For further details, please access http://www.responsibilitytoprotect.org/index.php/ component/content/article/35-
r2pcs-topics/4002-informal-discussion-on-brazils-concept-of-responsibility-while-protecting and http://www. 
un.int/brazil/speech/Concept-Paper-%20RwP.pdf (both accessed on 03/03/2014). 
15 http://www.responsibilitytoprotect.org/Portugal%2021%20Feb%20RwP.pdf (accessed on 03/03/2014). 

Reconceptualizing the Human Rights Heritage 
87
Commissioner for Human Rights that ―Criminalization of torture in the DRC is moving 
forward‖; on 24 June 2013, the United Nations Security Council held an open debate on 
sexual violence in armed conflict, during which Council Members unanimously adopted 
Resolution 2106 (S/RES/2106); the current situation in Syria is reaching new levels of 
concern, according to the Special Adviser Adama Dieng; the Security Council is urged to take 
action to end impunity in Darfur and Mali. 
 
 
A CRITICAL INSIGHT – 4 DILEMMAS IN PRACTICE 
 
Because it is a quite recent concept, the R2P has not yet been mainstreamed as a formal 
principle of international law, nor truly consolidated in the practice of States or 
Organizations. The critics‘ scope is considerably extent: how do we recognize it when we see 
it? How to avoid double standards? Do we really need ―new labels for old bottles‖? We can 
summarize the main critics in four major dilemmas. 
 
 
1. “Tell Me Something New vs. the Need for a New Narrative” 
 
R2P provides a framework for using tools that already exist and are widely accepted and 
implemented by International Organizations. The United Nations charter explicitly addresses 
mediation, early warning or economic sanctioning as key mechanisms. 
In fact, the chapter VII embodies the member States with specific powers to prevent mass 
atrocities. For instance, the principle that Sovereignty is no longer exclusive and no longer 
protects States from foreign interference (it is a charge of responsibility where States are 
accountable for the welfare of their people) is enshrined in article 1 of the 1948 Genocide 
Convention [13]. 
Moreover, some argue that R2P has no added value and represents the same as the ―right 
to intervention‖ but under a new ―umbrella‖. However, Holzgreve and Keohane clarifies that 
Humanitarian Intervention is 
 
the threat or use of force across state borders by a state (or group of States) aimed at 
preventing or ending widespread and grave violations of the fundamental Human Rights 
of individuals other than its own citizens, without the permission of the state within 
whose territory force is applied [11]. 
 
Therefore, we could argue that the question of the State‘s permission is apparently what 
distinguishes a humanitarian intervention from a R2P approach. 
 
 
2. “Legitimating to Intervene vs. License to Kill” 
 
This is the traditional debate that clashes with the national sovereignty: what is the 
legitimacy to intervene in a foreign country and who makes this decision on behalf of the so 
called ‗International Community‘? 

Ana Isabel Xavier 
88
The supporters of the concept advocate that the only occasions where the International 
Community will intervene in a State without its consent is when the State is either allowing 
mass atrocities to occur, or is committing them. In both cases, the State is no longer 
upholding its responsibilities as sovereign. But several States have argued that R2P should 
not allow the International Community to intervene militarily on States, because to do so is a 
violation upon sovereignty. Others argue that this is a necessary aspect of R2P, and is 
necessary as a last resort to stop mass atrocities. 
A more balanced approach argues that more specific criteria should be developed to 
decide in what conditions the Security Council should allow a military intervention [17]. 
Those who oppose stress that the problems in a certain country are best resolved amongst the 
population and what those countries need is more Development and Cooperation to reinforce 
a state‘s sovereignty, not other State´s intervention on domestic affairs. And when 
intervention clashes with sovereignty the result is, they argue, a ―license to kill‖. 
 
 
3. “Narrow vs. Broad Scope” 
 
Some argue that the scope of R2P should include other crimes beside genocide, war 
crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing, like protecting civilians in peril 
following natural disasters [1, 9]. For others, the scope should remain narrow and well-
defined, because broadening the applicability of R2P could diminish its effectiveness, 
especially because there are still some resistances to accept the current one. 
Moreover, besides the debate on the scope of the concept, Bellamy poses some additional 
prudential considerations: 
 
Translating the promise of RtoP into decisive action to prevent atrocities and respond 
effectively to them will be no easy task. It involves preserving, marshalling and 
managing global consensus whilst maintaining forward momentum. It requires careful 
thinking about the causes of mass killing and the steps needed to prevent it and provide 
early warning. It demands the building of international capacities to respond effectively 
when mass atrocities break out. It requires political courage and consensus in the face of 
grave and complex emergencies. In short, implementing the RtoP requires nothing less 
than the reconfiguring of state identities and national interests so that the prevention of 
atrocities becomes habitual and decisive responses the norm rather than the exception [2]. 
 
 
4. “Double Standards vs. International Community Awareness” 
 
When deciding to which crises R2P applies, the Security Council has been selective and 
is randomly used by the member States self-interests. It seems that there are double standards 
even in bringing up to the Security Council the concept to raise awareness and encourage a 
Resolution´s discussion. If we agree that the R2P concept was already used in Darfur, Côte 
d‘Ivoire, South Sudan, Yemen and Libya, what about Syria [17]? 
In fact, we should recall that the first time the Security Council referred to the 
Responsibility to Protect in a specific case was in August 2006, when passing resolution 1706 
authorizing the deployment of UN peacekeeping troops to Darfur, Sudan. 

Reconceptualizing the Human Rights Heritage 
89
But after 2006, the Responsibility to Protect featured in a number of other resolutions 
adopted by the Security Council. 
Most of the literature agrees that the first test case was Libya in 2011. In fact, following 
"the gross and systematic violation of Human Rights" against the civilian population by the 
regime in Libya, the UN Security Council, on February 26th 2011, unanimously adopted 
resolution 1970, recalling the Libyan authorities‘ Responsibility to Protect its population and 
end violence. The Council also decided to impose a series of sanctions and submit the 
situation to the International Criminal Court. 
On March 19th, the resolution 197316 reiterated the responsibility of the Libyan 
authorities to protect the Libyan population and demanded an immediate ceasefire in Libya, 
including an end to ongoing ―crimes against humanity‖, authorizing Member States to take 
―all necessary measures‖ to protect civilians under threat of attack in the country. It also 
imposed a ban on all flights in the country‘s airspace, a no-fly zone, and tightened sanctions 
on the regime and its supporters. This resolution passed with ten in favour, none against and 
five abstentions, including China and Russia. A few days later, apparently encouraged by a 
broad interpretation of the UN resolution, NATO started striking at Qadhafi‘s forces. 
Also in 2011, three other cases figured in the international agenda: Côte d‘Ivoire, South 
Sudan and Yemen. 
In the case of Côte d‘Ivoire, the UN Security Council, on 30 March 2011, unanimously 
adopted resolution 1975 in response to the escalating, post-election violence against the 
population, condemning the gross Human Rights violations committed by supporters of both 
ex-President Laurent Gbagbo and President Ouattara. 
This resolution also appealed to ―the primary responsibility of each State to protect 
civilians‖, recognized the victory of President Ouattara and authorized UN Operation in Côte 
d‘Ivoire (UNOCI) to use ―all necessary means to protect life and property‖. In an effort to 
protect the people of Côte d‘Ivoire from further atrocities, UNOCI began a military operation 
on the 4th of April 2011, and President Gbagbo‘s hold on power ended on April 11th. In 
November 2011, was transferred to the International Criminal Court to face charges of crimes 
against humanity as an ―indirect co-perpetrator‖ of murder, rape, persecution and other 
inhumane acts. On the 26th of July 2012, the Council adopted resolution 2062 renewing the 
mandate of UNOCI until July 31th 2013. 
In the case of South Sudan, on the 8th of July 2011, the Security Council, in resolution 
1996, established a UN peacekeeping mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), in order to advise 
and assist the government in fulfilling its Responsibility to Protect civilians from the violent 
ethnic clashes between the Lou Nuer and Murle people of South Sudan‘s Jonglei state. 
Regarding Yemen, on the 21st of October 2011, the resolution 2014 condemned Human 
Rights‘ violations by the Yemeni authorities, recalling that the ―primary responsibility is to 
protect its population‖ and encouraged the Presidential elections holding. 
In 2012, the most noticeable case was Syria. However, the Security Council members 
couldn‘t agree on a resolution, despite the Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon efforts for an 
urgent political solution to end the humanitarian crisis. 
                                                           
16 ―Security Council Approves 'No-fly Zone' over Libya, authorizing 'all necessary measures‘ to protect civilians, by 
vote of 10 in favour with 5 abstentions. (Includes the full text of resolution 1973)‖. Security Council SC/ 
10200. United Nations, Department of Public Information, News and Media Division, New York, NY. March 
17, 2011. 

Ana Isabel Xavier 
90
Ki-moon aimed also to support the action of the Joint Special Representative of the 
United Nations and the League of Arab States (Lakhdar Brahimi) to help the Syrian people 
reach a political solution to the conflict. 
Both the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council have strongly condemned the 
continued ―widespread and systematic‖ Human Rights‘ violations in Syria and demanded that 
the government immediately ceases all violence and protects its people. The High 
Commissioner for Human Rights recommended referring the situation in Syria to the 
International Criminal Court and urged the Security Council to assume its Responsibility to 
Protect the population of Syria. The Secretary-General‘s Special Adviser on the Prevention of 
Genocide, Adama Dieng, also agreed in December 2012 that ―The International Community 
must act on the commitment made by all Heads of State and Government at the 2005 World 
Summit to protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes 
against humanity, including their incitement‖. 
The most recent Press remarks on Syria from UN under-secretary-general for 
humanitarian affairs and emergency relief coordinator, Valerie Amos17, reveals the need of 
urgent humanitarian assistance. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
After being first labelled in the 2001 Report of the International Commission on 
Intervention and State Sovereignty and set out in the Final Document of the UN Summit in 
September 2005, in the last few years the ―Responsibility to Protect‖ became one of the most 
―trendy‖ or ―buzz‖ word in the academic literature with several criticisms on the ethical 
boundaries and motives that underlie the rights and responsibilities dilemma, questioning the 
philosophical and normative scope between (humanitarian) intervention and compelling need 
for the protection (of Human Rights) in situations of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing 
and crimes against humanity. 
In this chapter, we assumed the Responsibility to Protect both as an emerging norm and a 
set of moral and ethical principles to address mass atrocity crimes - genocide, war crimes, 
crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing. Moreover, we argued that R2P is built in a 
―virtuous‖ triangle in which the three pillars or vertices are: first, sovereignty is no longer a 
right, but a state‘s responsibility in order to protect its population from mass atrocities; 
second, the International Community has a responsibility to assist the state to fulfil its 
primary responsibility; third, if the state fails to protect its citizens from mass atrocities and 
peaceful measures have failed, the International Community has the responsibility to 
intervene through coercive measures and military intervention. 
In short, the Responsibility to Protect is, first and foremost, a responsibility of the State 
that is facing insecurity, but if that State is unable or unwilling to control the situation, the 
International Community must act in its place. In this perspective, the commitment is based 
upon a collective action authorized by a Security Council Resolution and only if all conflict 
resolution has peaceful means have been triggered and drained out and the national 
                                                           
17 Available at https://docs.unocha.org/sites/dms/Documents/ERC%20Amos%20Press%20Remarks%20on%20 
Syria%20-%207%20June%202013.pdf (accessed on 20/02/2014). 

Reconceptualizing the Human Rights Heritage 
91
authorities manifestly can‘t protect its populations. However, civil society, States, regional 
organizations, and international institutions all have a role to play in the R2P agenda. 
For the International Community, R2P is a norm, not a law, enshrined more in a moral 
and philosophical perspective than a legal one. However, at the same time, R2P is apparently 
grounded in international law, which makes it more confusing to legislate on the concept. 
Moreover, if the concept aims to distinguish from the ―right to intervention‖, arguing that 
R2P would be driven by the prospect of the object action, within a ―protection‖ requirement, 
surely needs to ―be seen less as a normative vocabulary that can catalyze action, and more as 
a policy agenda in need of implementation‖ [3]. 
In fact, as a moral duty or obligation (and therefore as a responsibility), applauded by 
some and highly suspicious for others, R2P surely reminds us that all normative narratives are 
useless if not mainstreamed as part of a policy agenda and with very clear rules of 
engagement to be implemented by State‘s in their commitment to world peace, security and 
Human Rights in a globalized era. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Badescu, C. G. (2010). Humanitarian intervention and the Responsibility to Protect: 
security and Human Rights. New York: Taylor and Francis e-Library. 
[2] 
Bellamy, A. J. (2011). Global Politics and the Responsibility to Protect – from words to 
deeds. London and New York: Routledge. 
[3] 
Bellamy, A. J. (2010). The Responsibility to Protect - Five Years On. Ethics and 
International Affairs. Retrieved from http://www.responsibilitytoprotect.org/Bellamy. 
pdf. 
[4] 
Benner, T. (2013). Brazil as a norm entrepreneur: the Responsibility While Protecting 
Initiative. Global Public Policy Institute (GPPi) Working Paper. Retrieved from http:// 
www.gppi.net/fileadmin/media/pub/2013/Benner_2013_Working-PaperBrazil-RWP. 
pdf. 
[5] 
Evans, G. (2008). The Responsibility to Protect: Ending Mass Atrocity Crimes Once 
and For All. Washington DC: Brookings Institution Press. 
[6] 
Evans, G. (2007). Human Rights: four generations of practice and development. In: A. 
Abdi and L. Schultz (Eds.), Educating for Human Rights and Global Citizenship. 
Albany: State University of New York Press. 
[7] 
Evans, G. (2006). From Humanitarian Intervention to the Responsibility to Protect. 
Wisconsin International Law Journal, 3(2). 
[8] 
Evans, G., Sahnoun, M. (2002). The Responsibility to Protect. Foreign Affairs, 
November/December 2002. 
[9] 
Haines, S. and Kassimeris, G. (2010). Chapter 18, Humanitarian Intervention: 
Genocide, Crimes against Humanity and the Use of Force. The Ashgate Research 
Companion to Modern Warfare. Burlington VT: Ashgate Publishing Ltd. 
[10] Hehir, A. and Cunliffe, P. (2011). The Responsibility to Protect and international law. 
In: P. Cunliffe (Ed.), Critical Perspectives on the Responsibility to Protect: 
Interrogating Theory, Practice (pp. 84-100). New York: Taylor and Francis e-Library. 

Ana Isabel Xavier 
92
[11] Holzgrefe, J. L. and Keohane, R. O. (2003). Humanitarian Intervention: Ethical, Legal 
and Political dilemmas. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
[12] ICISS (2001). The Responsibility to Protect: Report of the International Commission on 
Intervention and State Sovereignty. Ottawa, Canada: International Development 
Research Centre, Minister of Foreign Affairs. Retrieved from http://responsibilityto 
protect.org/ICISS%20Report.pdf. 
[13] Judson, A. M. (2012). Where is R2P grounded in international law. Otago University. 
Retrieved from http://otago.ourarchive.ac.nz/bitstream/handle/10523/2279/JudsonAnne 
Marie2012MA.pdf?sequence=4. 
[14] Serrano, M. (2011). The Responsibility to Protect and its Critics: Explaining the 
Consensus. Global Responsibility to Protect 3, 1-13. Leiden: Koninklijke Brill NV. 
[15] Strange, S. (1996). The Retreat of the State: The Diffusion of Power in the World 
Economy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
[16] Vasak, K. (1977). Human Rights: A Thirty-Year Struggle: the Sustained Efforts to give 
Force of law to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. UNESCO Courier, 30 (11). 
Paris: United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. 
[17] Weiss, T. G. (2012). Humanitarian Intervention – War and conflict in the modern 
world. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
[18] Weiss, T. G. (2005). Military-civilian interactions: humanitarian crises and the 
Responsibility to Protect. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. 
[19] Zifcak, S. (2012). The Responsibility to Protect after Libya and Syria. Melbourne 
Journal of International Law, 13(1), 1-35. Victoria: University of Melbourne. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART III: EXOGENOUS ISSUES 
 
 


In: Globalization and International Security: An Overview 
ISBN: 978-1-63463-075-7 
Editors: T. Rodrigues, R. García Pérez et al.  
 
© 2015 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 6 
 
 
 
CLIMATE RISKS: THEORY, DATA AND THE 
GLOBAL GOVERNANCE OF CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
Lara Lázaro Touza1 and Michel Zoghby2,† 
1CES Cardinal Cisneros, Spain 
2Consultant, France 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
This chapter will implicitly assume a weak constructivist perspective of risks in 
highlighting the potential impacts of climate change. It will analyse the vulnerabilities to 
climate change, the mitigation and adaptation options available for effective climate 
action as well as financial and technology transfer issues. A stable climate is a global 
public good that requires concerted action among sovereign nations for its provision. 
International Environmental Agreements (IEAs) have played a central role in the process 
of managing climate change, leading to the consensus that temperature increases above 
2ºC compared to pre-industrial levels will lead to dangerous climate change. While 
targets have been defined and commitments made, the trajectory of current climate action 
will not achieve this goal. Stronger action by the international community is therefore 
needed. Key economic sectors such as energy, building or transport, among other, will 
require both ―soft‖ and ―hard‖ Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emission mitigation technologies1 
and climate change adaptation technologies. However, whatever stabilization is achieved 
through mitigation, short-term and long-term adaptation strategies will be required. The 
current goal to jointly mobilize USD 100 billion a year by 2020 to address the needs of 
developing countries will require the broad participation of all stakeholders as well as 
much stronger efforts by all nations. The pending challenges to reduce climate risks are 
many and they need to be addressed in earnest in the very near future to avoid the worst 
consequences of unabated climate change. 
 
                                                           
† Lara Lázaro Touza: CES Cardena Cisneros. E-mail: laralazaro@cu-cisneros.es. Michel Zoghby: Consultant 
(France). E-mail: mszoghby@gmail.com. 
1 Hard technologies sometimes referred to as capital goods, hardware or embodied technologies, include tools, 
machinery, equipment, and entire production systems. Soft technologies sometimes referred to as software or 
disembodied technologies, concerns the knowledge of methods and techniques for the production of goods and 
services, or for choosing optimal courses of action [88]. 

Lara Lázaro Touza and Michel Zoghby 
96
INTRODUCTION 
 
This chapter, focusing on climate change risk, will implicitly assume a weak 
constructivist perspective of risks in highlighting the potential impacts of climate change, the 
vulnerabilities of our species and our societies to its effects, the mitigation and adaptation 
options available for effective climate action as well as financial and technology transfer 
issues. 
From an economic perspective, a stable climate is a global public good requiring joint 
management by sovereign nations. IEAs such as the United Nations Framework Convention 
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Kyoto Protocol (KP) have played a central role in this 
complex and arduous joint management process. The existing scientific consensus states that 
temperature increases above 2ºC compared to pre-industrial levels will lead to dangerous 
climate change. However, while international targets have been defined and commitments 
have been made, action is insufficient to ensure that the trajectory the world is on will lead to 
meeting its 2°C climate goal. 
Since 2000 GHG emissions have increased 20% reaching 50.1 GtCO2e2, 14% higher that 
the 44GtCO2e needed to ensure a likely3 chance of limiting global average temperature 
increases to 2ºC compared to pre-industrial levels. Given the fact that the emissions gap is 
widening, stronger action by the international community is necessary. Key sectors such as 
energy, building, transport and Land Use Land Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF), where 
emissions are most intensive, will require innovative approaches and hard choices to reduce 
their GHG footprint. 
That also implies widening the participation of all stakeholders, making the process more 
inclusive and, in doing so, supporting international climate negotiators to provide creative 
solutions in future international climate negotiations. 
Whatever the stabilization scenario achieved through mitigation, short-term and long-
term adaptation strategies will nevertheless be required, as the inertia in the climate system 
will ensure that impacts resulting from current warming will be felt for decades or centuries. 
                                                           
2 Carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) is the warming potential of the sum of GHGs emitted. The warming potential is 
analyzed using the IPCC global warming potential of each gas published in the second assessment report 
(AR2). 
3 Please note that throughout this chapter, when referring to data presented by the IPCC, the treatment of uncertainty 
and references to said uncertainty will refer to: a qualitative assessment of uncertainty which is ‗characterized 
by providing a relative sense of the amount and quality of evidence (that is, information from theory, 
observations or models indicating whether a belief or proposition is true or valid) and the degree of agreement 
(that is, the level of concurrence in the literature on a particular finding). This approach is used by WG III 
through a series of self-explanatory terms such as: high agreement, much evidence; high agreement, medium 
evidence; medium agreement, medium evidence; etc. Where uncertainty is assessed more quantitatively using 
expert judgment of the correctness of underlying data, models or analyses, then the following scale of 
confidence levels is used to express the assessed chance of a finding being correct: very high confidence at 
least 9 out of 10; high confidence about 8 out of 10; medium confidence about 5 out of 10; low confidence 
about 2 out of 10; and very low confidence less than 1 out of 10. Where uncertainty in specific outcomes is 
assessed using expert judgment and statistical analysis of a body of evidence (e.g., observations or model 
results), then the following likelihood ranges are used to express the assessed probability of occurrence: 
virtually certain >99%; extremely likely >95%; very likely >90%; likely >66%; more likely than not > 50%; 
about as likely as not 33% to 66%; unlikely <33%; very unlikely <10%; extremely unlikely <5%; 
exceptionally unlikely <1%‘ (IPCC a, 2007, p. 27). 

Climate Risks: Theory, Data and the Global Governance of Climate Change 
 
97
However, unlike mitigation, where action has measurable effects on GHG emissions, 
adaptation cannot be measured using such a single, commonly understood and accepted 
indicator. 
Adaptation is fundamentally determined by the socio-economic context in which it is 
applied, making its implementation that much more challenging. Furthermore, there is a 
significant level of uncertainty in medium and long-term adaptation requirements. 
If human beings are to limit temperature increases to 2ºC compared to pre-industrial 
levels, both ―soft‖ and ―hard‖ GHG emission mitigation technologies and climate change 
adaptation technologies will need to be deployed en masse. However, not all countries have 
the same capacity to respond to climate change. Industrial countries, by and large, can muster 
the resources necessary to cope, while most developing countries have limited capacity to 
take action. Here again, IEAs are expected to play a significant role in fostering the transfer of 
technology from North to South. However, many questions have been raised regarding the 
equity and efficacy of the process. Clearly, the private sector has and will continue to play a 
critical role in technology transfer, but Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) issues will have to 
be addressed to ensure they are not stumbling blocks in the transfer of technologies to the 
developing world. 
Last but not least, the financing of climate action is, as was the case in mitigation, based 
on the concept of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities. In 
essence, equity. Developed countries have historically emitted the largest amounts of GHGs, 
and hence, arguably, they should take the lead in financing climate action. While various 
stakeholders have advanced a range of divergent figures, developed countries have agreed to 
commit to the goal of jointly mobilizing USD 100 billion a year by 2020 to address the needs 
of developing countries. Progress as regards climate action has been, to date, inadequate, 
making current prospects for jointly achieving a stable climate in time to limit temperature 
increases to 2ºC compared to pre-industrial levels appear slim. 
The remainder of the chapter is structured as follows. Section 3 will introduce the 
concept of risks and how climate change poses risks to current societies. Section 4 will briefly 
reflect on the key environmental, social and economic impacts of climate change. Section 5 
will analyze the governance of climate change from a global perspective. Section 6 
concludes. 
 
 
RISKS: KEY CONCEPTS AND FEATURES 
IN THE CLIMATE CHANGE ARENA 
 
In a post-industrial revolution world, science through technological development and the 
industrial use of said technology, has contributed to increases in (unevenly distributed) 
welfare [24]. Welfare increases have not however been provided devoid of unprecedented 
risks. Beck [6] among others have argued that we live in a risk-distributing society where 
‗bads‘, environmental or otherwise, are disbursed, potentially undermining the development 
process that modernity has strived to promote. Therefore, parallel to the Marxist or Weberian 
class society, where unequal yet acceptable wealth distribution is conceptualized, the ‗new‘ 
paradigm of the risk society seeks to prevent and manage hazards with the aim of not 
exceeding acceptable ecological limits, among others. 

Lara Lázaro Touza and Michel Zoghby 
98
Traditionally, risks have been defined as the probability of harm taking place and the 
severity of its impacts [2]. More recently, risks have also been defined as a perceived hazard 
[24] occurring in social settings where more or less resilience to these can be observed. 
Hazards in turn can be understood as ‗a situation or intrinsic property with the potential 
to cause a problem‘ [61]. Loosely speaking then hazard will be understood as the potential to 
do damage and risk as the probability (and severity) of the damage materializing. 
As regards risks, there are two main schools of thought [24]. The realist school states that 
scientific enquiry and calculations provide us with all necessary information about risks. This 
perspective assumes that ‗experts‘ are right and other views are wrong. Additionally, it 
contends that it is ignorance and lack of information that explain differences in perception 
regarding risks. The assessment and management of risks from this perspective has, by and 
large, relied on a top-down, positivist approach whereby experts have ‗objectively‘ analyzed 
risks, quantified these risks and suggested policy actions to minimize risks according to cost/ 
benefit analysis criteria. This technical perspective is criticized for ignoring the contextual 
dimensions of risk. It also tends to ignore equity issues and public participation processes [2]. 
The constructivist school of thought asserts that perceptions regarding risks are socially 
constructed. Risks, from a constructivist perspective, can be ‗real‘ (weak version of the 
constructivist risk theory school of thought) or they can be constructed according to the social 
context (strong version of the constructivist risk theory school of thought). 
Evidence indicates that risks are indeed interpreted in different ways by different people 
[24]. Along with this social construct of risks comes, according to the constructivist 
perspective, the social construction of knowledge and its validation as pillars of science. This 
means that experts do not act in a vacuum; their actions can reflect ideologies and interests 
that are determined by variables outside the scientific realm [6]. 
The remainder of this chapter will implicitly assume a weak constructivist perspective 
whereby risks are considered ‗real‘, i.e., their knowledge derives from scientific enquiry 
despite inherent knowledge limitations and potential bias. The perception of risk is however 
assumed to be socially constructed. The impacts of climate change (see section 4 below) are 
therefore based on the latest available scientific knowledge. Governance of risk through 
regulation and climate management approaches (see section 5), we assume, reflect socially 
constructed perceptions of risk that permeate international climate negotiation efforts. 
Given the above, it can be argued that climate change is a prime example of risk, which 
has been defined as ‗a statistically significant variation in either the mean state of the climate 
or in its variability, persisting for an extended period (typically decades or longer)‘ [30]. 
Where the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) considers both natural and 
anthropogenic factors driving climate change, the UNFCCC attributes climate change solely 
to anthropogenic causes. In its article 1, the UNFCCC defines climate change as ‗a change of 
climate which is attributed directly or indirectly to human activity that alters the composition 
of the global atmosphere and which is in addition to natural climate variability observed over 
comparable time periods‘ [81]. 
Some of the key physical and management related features of the risks brought about by 
climate change include: 
 
● 
Complexity: its analysis is complex with uncertainties arising regarding the exact 
magnitude and timing of occurrence of climate hazards; 
● 
Long time-scales: the consequences of emitting GHGs are long-lived; 

Climate Risks: Theory, Data and the Global Governance of Climate Change 
 
99
● 
Lag times: the effects of actions undertaken today are only discernible in the future; 
● 
Transboundary: damages are not limited to the local scale. GHG emissions cause 
damages of varying severity in different geographical regions, on a planetary scale; 
● 
Harm results from a repetitive action or activity derived from the „normal‟ 
functioning of society: climate change derived hazards are not the consequence of a 
one-off activity but the product of continuous release of GHGs; 
● 
Government response tends to be reactive: this is especially true in adaptation 
matters, both in developing as well as developed countries. For an empirical 
discussion of the latter see Lázaro-Touza and López-Gunn [40]; 
● 
Collective action problem where the public seems ambivalent: individuals state that 
their concern for climate change is significant [13] but actions depart from intentions 
[16, 17, 72]; 
● 
Existing institutions and values are threatened: climate change can be considered 
from a political perspective as a ‗wicked problem‘ [34]. All sectors and activities 
produce GHGs, an externality in economic parlance. Hence, all production processes 
and consumption patterns must change, through for example choice editing [1], if the 
issue of climate change is to be effectively tackled. 
 
 
IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
Since the creation of the IPCC in 1988, its landmark reports have undoubtedly been the 
key source of information to turn to in order to stay abreast of the scientific consensus 
regarding climate change4. The IPCC‘s Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) was released in 
November 2013 in an unedited form5. Hence, the information provided in this section will be 
based on the AR5 Summary for Policymakers, the Fourth Assessment Report (AR4) released 
in 2007 in addition to key authoritative sources published since and up to December 2013. 
As Richardson [56] states ‗determining what is dangerous climate change is a societal 
value judgment, but must ultimately be based on a risk assessment informed by knowledge of 
potential impacts, vulnerability and adaptive capacity‘. 
It is to the impacts on a global scale that we now turn, focusing on temperature and sea-
level rise, water, ecosystems, food, agriculture and food security, health and economics. The 
costs of these impacts will be succinctly discussed. 
 
 
Temperature 
 
According to the Potsdam Institute, as of 2012, the IPCC data on temperature increases 
has largely remained unaltered compared to the data published in the AR4 in 2007. Mean 
global warming since pre-industrial levels has increased by 0.8ºC [26, 44, 54]. Should no 
further action be taken to mitigate GHG emissions, the world is likely to warm more than 
3ºC, and there is a 20% chance of exceeding 4ºC average temperature increases, compared to 
                                                           
4 It is important to note that the IPCC does not produce primary research. It reviews and assesses state-of-the-art 
knowledge regarding climate change and its impacts. 
5 See http://www.ipcc.ch/ for further information and details of the AR5. 

Lara Lázaro Touza and Michel Zoghby 
100 
pre-industrial levels, by 2100 [54]. According to the AR5 Summary for Policy makers, for a 
doubling of CO2 the global mean surface temperature increase is likely to be in the range of 
1.5ºC to 4.5ºC (high confidence). 
This may not seem as a significant temperature increase, but the existing consensus states 
that any average temperature increase above 2ºC compared to pre-industrial levels should be 
avoided if we are to avert dangerous climate change. 
We are already experiencing more frequent warmer days and nights and decreases in the 
frequency of cooler days and nights [44]. 
Increases in the frequency of extreme heat waves that have occurred during the last 
decade [54] are also expected to continue to occur in the future. 
 
 
Sea-Level Rise 
 
During the 20th century the average increase in sea level has ranged between 15 and 20 
centimeters. Should a 4ºC warmer world materialize, we can expect a sea-level rise of 0.5 to 1 
meter by the end of the century, with tropical regions experiencing larger sea-level increases 
in addition to more extreme weather events as well as more intense cyclones and droughts 
[54]. According to AR4, the expected sea-level rise is significantly higher than model 
predictions under different scenarios for 2090 to 2099, which range from 0.18 to 0.59 meters 
[28]. 
According to the AR5 Summary for Policymakers, the range of sea level rise has been 
narrowed down ranging from 0.4 to 0.63 meters for 2081 to 2100 [27]. Low-lying islands and 
developing countries with large populations living along the coast are most vulnerable to 
these impacts as their adaptive capacity is either physically or economically limited. 
 
 
Water 
 
The key insights from the AR4, and the AR5‘s Summary for Policymakers, tell us that, 
despite the inherent uncertainty in predicting rainfall patterns and water availability, existing 
trends will be exacerbated. This means that moist tropics and high latitudes will experience an 
increase in water availability while mid-latitudes and semi-arid regions will be affected by 
reductions in water availability. Southern Europe, most of the American continent, southern 
Australia and Africa (except for the north-eastern region) will become drier. 
These trends are expected to result in hundreds of millions of people being exposed to 
water stress, an impact that will be more severe as temperatures rise [28]. Northern Europe, 
Northern America, Siberia and some monsoon regions will become wetter [54]. 
In fact, the AR4 states that it is likely that 20% of the global population will live in flood 
prone areas by the last quarter of the century. 
In countries with a significant agricultural activity relative to other economic sectors, e.g., 
Sub-Saharan Africa, water availability has been shown to affect GDP growth rates. 
Developing countries in Asia and South America that are heavily dependent on water 
from glaciers are also particularly vulnerable to diminishing water supplies. 
Developed regions such as the Mediterranean, Southwest US and Australia are also 
affected, with agricultural production and urban areas being particularly vulnerable [56]. 

Climate Risks: Theory, Data and the Global Governance of Climate Change 
 
101
Ecosystems 
 
The AR4 reported that between 20% and 30% of plant and animal species were likely to 
experience increased risk of extinction for rises in global average temperatures greater than 
1.5ºC to 2.5ºC [28]. The 4ºC scenario envisaged by the Potsdam Institute [54] depicts a world 
in which climate change is the key stress factor causing ecosystem changes and biodiversity6 
losses. These losses endanger key ecosystem services such as fisheries or coastal protection 
from extreme weather events such as tsunamis and cyclones, among other. 
While self-adaptation is expected, with some species moving to more climate benign 
areas, there is a limit to this adaptation which is argued to be in the range of mean global 
temperature increases above 2ºC compared to pre-industrial levels [28]. 
 
 
Agriculture and Food Security 
 
Despite the fact that climate change can provide new opportunities for agricultural 
activity in certain areas in mid to northern latitudes [28], e.g., Northern Ireland and Scotland 
[44], mean global temperature increases above 4ºC compared to pre-industrial levels could 
potentially threaten global food security [54].  
Food security is not expected to be a problem for regions that have low levels of 
undernourishment, long term expectations of economic growth, despite the current economic 
downturn, and strong positions in world food markets coupled with considerable adaptation 
capacity [44]. In countries where the above conditions are not met, food security is expected 
to be a significant concern.  
 
 
Health 
 
The impacts of climate change on health will vary geographically. Overall, the AR4 
report expected negative health consequences from climate induced malnutrition, death and 
injuries from extreme weather events, increases in infectious diseases and heart and 
respiratory illnesses in densely populated areas with high ground level ozone concentrations. 
The above negative impacts contrast with the expected benefits of warmer temperatures 
regarding the reduction of cold-related deaths. The above subsection on food and agriculture 
stressed the potential reduction in global food production. Linked to potential food insecurity, 
nutritional deficits may hinder the ability to cope with epidemic diseases. 
Healthy ecosystems also provide disease control services and these can be compromised 
by climate change. Cesario et al., (2009) in Richardson et al., [56] illustrate this by providing 
information about the resurgence of two infectious diseases7 in the Amazonian region as a 
consequence of biodiversity loss. The knowledge of the direct links between changes in 
ecosystems and human health is however still limited. 
                                                           
6 According to Richardson et al. [56] ‗Biodiversity represents the fabric of life itself. It is comprised not only of 
numbers of species, but also includes the variety of all life forms and their genes as well as the communities 
and ecosystems of which they are a part‘. Traditional sources of ecosystem losses have been habitat 
encroachment and human use of ecosystems. 
7 The American Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis and the Bartonellosis. 

Lara Lázaro Touza and Michel Zoghby 
102 
Economics 
 
This subsection will very briefly reflect on the relationship between climate change and 
economic growth in the past. It will then provide some recent estimates of the different costs 
of stabilizing GHGs. 
Development and climate conditions have been of interest to scholars since at least the 
14th century [11]. Large uncertainties and heated debates remain however regarding the 
economics of climate change. Economic modelling of the costs associated with protecting the 
climate system requires decision-makers to make a number of value-based assumptions in a 
very uncertain climate future. According to Garnaud [18] there are four types of costs of 
climate change: type 1 costs include data that is precise enough for quantitative analysis 
through general equilibrium modelling; type 2 costs comprise data that is not sufficiently 
precise to be modelled and must therefore be estimated; type 3 costs include data on extreme 
outcomes; and type 4 costs comprise non-market benefits lost in the absence of mitigation, 
such as species lost. Many economic models of climate change only capture type 1 costs, and 
none cover the entire range of impacts within each type [56]. In addition, defining what is the 
appropriate discount rate to use in comparing climate change impacts in the future with 
climate mitigation actions today is also fundamentally a value-based choice [56]. 
Bearing in mind the above limitations, recent empirical studies use both past temperature 
and precipitation data in examining their effects on economic performance. Their results 
indicate that in poor countries, temperature increases of 1ºC have resulted in economic 
growth reductions of 1.3%. The effects of past precipitation data are milder and possibly 
positive for poor and agricultural dependent countries. Agricultural as well as industrial 
output and political stability in poor countries are all said to have been affected by rising 
temperatures. For rich countries however the analysis of past temperature increases does not 
show significant variations in GDP [56]. 
As regards future actions to curb GHG emissions, Nordhaus [47] states that moderate 
action followed by increased efforts in mitigation strategies, the so called climate policy 
ramp, is the most reasonable strategy given the opportunity cost of capital spent on mitigation 
policies. Stern [63] contends, in stark contrast to Nordhaus, that urgent and significant action 
is needed if the most serious consequences of climate change are to be avoided. Stern 
concludes that unabated climate change will imply GDP losses of 5% to 20% ad infinitum, 
depending on the damages included in the calculations. 
The AR4 report presented the consensus peer reviewed range of GDP variation estimates 
for different GHG stabilisation levels, see Table 6.1. According to the table below, for 
different GHG stabilization pathways, the economic impacts may range from 1% gains in 
GDP to losses of less than 5.5% in the two time horizons studied, 2030 and 2050. 
Overall, the IPCC concludes that climate change impacts will most likely impose net 
annual costs, especially as temperature increases. The international community has yet to 
devise the specific pathway that will ensure policy actions to tackle climate change yield net 
benefits. 
 
 
 

Climate Risks: Theory, Data and the Global Governance of Climate Change 
 
103
Table 6.1. Estimated changes in global GDP for different stabilization levels 
 
Stabilization 
levels 
(ppm CO2e) 
Mean GDP reduction (%) 
Range of GDP reduction (%) 
Reduction of average annual 
GDP growth rates (%) 
 
2030 
2050 
2030 
2050 
2030 
2050 
445 – 535 
Not available 
<3 
<5.5 
<0.12 
<0.12 
535 – 590 
0.6 
1.3 
0.2 to 2.5 
Slightly negative to 4 <0.1 
<0.1 
Stabilization 
levels 
(ppm CO2e) 
Mean GDP reduction (%) 
Range of GDP reduction (%) 
Reduction of average annual 
GDP growth rates (%) 
590 – 710 
0.2 
0.5 
-0.6 to 1.2 -1 to 2 
<0.06 
<0.05 
Source: IPCC [28]. 
 
 
THE GOVERNANCE OF CLIMATE CHANGE: 
INTERNATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL AGREEMENTS 
 
‗Regulation can be seen as being inherently about the control of risks‘ [2]. Regulation can 
also be understood as steering, controlling or influencing [48]. When regulation is dispersed 
to decision levels other than national governments, to institutions that include private firms, 
international institutions or NGO‘s, and when policy instruments include not only traditional 
command and control, but extend to economic instruments, allocation of property rights, 
voluntary agreements and moral suasion, we can speak of governance, even if no agreed 
definition exists yet in the literature [35]. 
An exhaustive analysis of climate governance mechanisms, although desirable, is beyond 
the scope of this chapter. This section will mainly focus on international climate negotiations 
while also briefly reflecting on the need to consider polycentric collective action for climate 
change in order to effectively reduce climate risks [46, 52]. 
So far, as we will see in the next subsection8, progress has been made in creating the 
framework for managing climate change. This progress has however clearly been insufficient 
to avoid the risks posed by the dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system. 
 
 
a. Negotiations and Shared Vision 
 
From an economic perspective, a stable climate is a global public good. Its benefits are 
non-rival and non-excludable. A priori, a world used to unilateral (national) management of 
environmental resources will underprovide a stable climate that requires joint management of 
public goods [64]. In order to provide a stable climate, we need to move from unilateral 
decision-making, whereby countries have little incentives to reduce GHGs, to joint decision-
making among sovereign countries. Said joint management of a stable climate can be 
                                                           
8 Please note that the structure of the remainder of this section on the governance of climate change mirrors that of 
the Bali Action Plan that was structured around five key areas: shared vision, mitigation, adaptation (that 
includes risk management and risk reduction strategies), technology development and transfer and provision of 
financial transfers. For further information please refer to: http://unfccc.int/ resource/docs/2007/cop13/eng/06a 
01.pdf. 

Lara Lázaro Touza and Michel Zoghby 
104 
articulated through IEAs. Mitchell [45] defines IEAs as ‗legally binding intergovernmental 
efforts directed at reducing human impacts on the environment‘. 
Negotiating IEAs is no easy task, as countries have to voluntarily change their behaviour 
given the lack of a global government to ensure participation in IEAs and compliance with 
the commitments made. There are however certain elements that can be said to be conducive 
to IEAs. These are summarized in Box 6.1. 
 
Box 6.1. Elements that facilitate an International Environmental Agreement 
 
1. Net benefits of the accord 
2. Fair burden-sharing arrangements 
3. Allowing for adaptation by countries with less ability to mitigate 
4. Existence of scientific certainty with regards to the problem 
5. Existence of close and cheap substitutes 
6. Existence of a reduced number of countries to negotiate (bilateral or ―mini lateral‖ accords) 
7. Similarity in the level of development, capabilities and resilience to the threat 
8. Negotiations that are repeated over time so as to establish trust 
9. Sanction measures that the parties accept, aimed at preventing non-compliance 
10. Mechanisms to dissuade free riders 
11. Using flexible mechanisms which increase static and dynamic efficiency 
12. Consider compensation to those who lose out from the agreement 
13. Limited cession of sovereignty by the countries that ratify the agreement 
Source: Adapted from Barrett [5], Bretteville-Froyn [8] and Sandler [57] in Lázaro-Touza [39]. 
 
Beyond the above mentioned facilitative elements, in order for IEAs to be successful, 
participation needs to be broad (inclusion of main emitters9 is paramount), parties to the 
agreement must comply with their voluntarily undertaken commitments and the behavior of 
emitters needs to substantially change, i.e., significant action to reduce GHGs needs to 
happen [3]. The ultimate goal in joint climate change action is to achieve reductions that will 
ensure humans avoid dangerous interference with the climate system. 
Climate change is said to be a ‗wicked problem‘ [34] as most of the above facilitative 
elements and requirements for a successful IEA are elusive. Net benefits of joint mitigation 
are not always clear from the perspective of short term political cycles, equity issues have not 
been resolved, scientific certainty is still work in progress and no close substitutes exist for 
GHGs produced by virtually all human activities. 
Not all main emitters are part of the KP, countries such as Canada have withdrawn from 
the KP arguing their commitments are too costly, and globally, behaviour has changed little. 
In sum, the current prospects for jointly achieving a stable climate in time to limit temperature 
increases to 2ºC compared to pre-industrial levels appear slim. 
The existing barriers to a successful agreement have not however halted international 
negotiation efforts. 
                                                           
9 Please note that main emitters refer to China, the US, the EU, India, Japan and Russia [43]. 

Climate Risks: Theory, Data and the Global Governance of Climate Change 
 
105
International climate negotiations and actions are taking place across a number of 
institutions. The key international institutions10 established in the 1990‘s by the international 
community to fight climate change are: the UNFCCC and the KP11. Parties to the UNFCCC 
and the KP have undertaken continuous work that is showcased to the world in annual mega 
Conferences of the Parties (COP) and Meetings of the Parties (MOP). 
These macro events help advance commitments in mitigation, adaptation, technology 
transfer and finance, among others. Table 6.2 presents the key milestones in the international 
climate negotiation scene since the late 1980‘s. 
 
Table 6.2. Key milestones in climate change negotiations 
Source: Adapted and updated based on: Secretaría de Estado de Cambio Climático [59], Vrolijk [85], 
Blanchard et al. [7] and UNFCCC website: http://unfccc.int/2860.php. 
                                                           
10 Institution in this context is defined as ‗the prescriptions that humans use to organize all forms of repetitive and 
structured interactions including those within families, neighborhoods, markets, firms, sports leagues, 
churches, private associations and governments at all scales‘ [53]. 
11 Other key institutions where climate negotiations and actions are taking place at an international level include: the 
GEF, WTO, G8, MEF, IMO, ICAO, OECD, among other. 
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
COP1
1996
COP2
1997
COP3
1998
COP4
1999
COP5
2000
COP6
2001
COP6-bis & 
COP7
2002
COP8
2003
COP9
2004
COP10
2005
COP11 - MOP1
2006
COP12 - MOP2
2007
COP13 - MOP3
2008
COP14 - MOP4
2009
COP15 - MOP5
2010
COP16 - MOP6
2011
COP17 - MOP7
2012
COP18 - MOP8
2013
COP19 - MOP9
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Bali Action Plan : Frouth IPCC Assessment Report (AR4) is published.  The AR4 is key in the COP13 
where governments agree to engage in a new negotiating process that focuses on: shared vision, 
mitigation, adaptation, technology and financing.
Copenhagen Accord : Outside the UNFCCC but establishes key elements for the COP 16 including: 
limiting temperature increases to 2ºC, endorsement by developed and developing countries, new and 
additional funding commitments, Green Climate Fund & progress on verification. 
Cancun Agreement : Enshrined the Copenhagen Accord within the UNFCCC framework.
Doha Climate Gateway (DCG) : The DCG is responsible for defining the future climate agreement that 
will replace the KP.  
Durban Platform for Enhanced Action :  A new process is launched to develop 'a protocol, another 
legal instrument or an agreed outcome with legal force under the Convention applicable to all Parties' 
to be negotiated by 2015 and entering into force by 2020. In the interm, the KP will remain in force in 
its second commitment period. 
Entry into force of the New Climate Agreement that will replace the Kyoto Protocol
                                    UNITED NATIONS FRAMWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHAHGE (UNFCCC)
KP First commitment 
period
KP Second commitment 
period
                                                                 KYOTO PROTOCOL (KP)
Open for ratification
Russia ratifies
Entry into force
Geneva: Anthropogenic CC is acknowledged and non-uniform commitments are accepted.   
Entry into force
The Hague  meeting ends without agreement. US withdrawas from the KP.  
Agreement
Open for signature
Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and damage.  Addresses the loss and damage of climate 
change in especially vulnerable developing countries. 
Release of the Fifth IPCC Assessment Report
Finalising the release of the Fifth IPCC Assessment Report
New Climate Agreement to replace the KP should be agreed on in COP 21, Paris
Berlín Mandate : agreement on willingness to reduce GHGs. Establishment of the Special Group on the 
Berlin Mandate that will result in the KP. Developing countries are exempted from mitigation 
commitments. 
Second IPCC Assessment Report (AR2) is published. 
KYOTO PROTOCOL : First global agreement that limits GHGs (5.2% below 1990 levels).
Buenos Aires Plan of Action : The rules for the implementation of the KP are negotiated. Developed 
and developing countries differ in their views regarding acceptable Burden Sharing Agreements (BSA). 
Bonn: 'The triumph of multilateralism' meant the world continued negotiating without the US.
Marrakech Accords : Legal rules for the implementation and interpretation of the KP are adopted. 
Third IPCC Assessment Report (AR3) is published.
Montreal Action Plan : The goal was to extend the first commitment period and to commit to greater 
emission reductions. 
Timeline of the international negotiation processes
IPCC established
Adoption and open for signature
First IPCC Assessment Report (AR1) is published

Lara Lázaro Touza and Michel Zoghby 
106 
Over two decades of international climate negotiations and assessment of existing peer 
reviewed scientific literature by the IPCC have helped develop a top-down negotiation 
framework that could provide the institutional space for effective climate action. The efforts 
made so far have to be evaluated against the goals the world strives to achieve in terms of 
limiting global average temperature increases. 
The following subsection will tell us that we have, so far, failed in this endeavor and it 
will suggest how our goals could be advanced in the future. 
 
 
b. Mitigation 
 
Mitigation can be loosely defined as the array of actions that reduce human influence on 
the climate system. These actions include reducing the amount of GHGs released or 
enhancing the GHG absorption capacity of sinks such as forests and oceans12. 
The opening statement of the World Energy Outlook‘s (WEO) special report on climate 
and energy states that ‗there is a growing disconnect between the trajectory that the world is 
on and one that is consistent with a 2°C climate goal‘ [26], with May 2013 hitting a record 
high in the concentration of GHGs in the atmosphere (equal to 400 ppm13). Similar statements 
have been issued by UNEP since it first published its emissions gap report in 2010, 
subsequently updated in 2011, 2012 and 2013 [71-74]. 
Pledged emission reductions have been stated in ways that have not been easy to compare 
with countries using ranges, some pledges being unconditional and others conditional upon 
the actions of other countries, with said pledges being referenced to different baseline years 
and under lenient or strict implementation rules14 [56]. 
The UNEP reports have helped clarify the extent to which current pledges will lead to 
limiting global average temperature increases to 2ºC. 
The first emission‘s gap report [74] stated that, in the aftermath of the Copenhagen 
Accords, the pledges made by both annex-I and non-Annex-I countries would not be enough 
to ensure the avoidance of dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system.A 
likely chance of avoiding this interference would imply emissions of 44 gigatonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (GtCO2e) by 2020. Business as usual (BAU) projections would rise to 
56Gt CO2e, leaving an emissions gap of 12GtCO2e. However, as shown in table 6.3 below, 
depending on the scenario, the emissions gap could theoretically range from 5GtCO2e and 
9GtCO2e. But even if emissions remained on the lower part of that range, the world 
community would be 60% on track to limiting temperature increases to 2ºC compared to pre-
industrial levels. 
UNEP‘s 2011 [73] report included updated information from countries on commitments, 
changing baselines, effects of the economic crisis in increasing surplus emissions available 
under various scenarios. The report concluded that the emissions gap had widened and could 
                                                           
12 Please refer to http://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/wg2/en/annexessglossary-e-o.html for a complete 
glossary of climate terms used by the IPCC. 
13 ppm means number of parts of a chemical found in one million parts of a particular gas, liquid, or solid. Please 
refer to http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/glossary.html#PPM for a complete glossary of terms used by the 
US Environmental Protection Agency. 
14 Note that the UNEP defines lenient rules as ‗pledge cases with maximum Annex I ―lenient LULUCF credits‖ 
(credits given for carbon removals from existing forests or other sinks that would have occurred without policy 
intervention) and surplus emissions units‘ [74]. 

Climate Risks: Theory, Data and the Global Governance of Climate Change 
 
107
range between 6GtCO2e and 11GtCO2e even though its BAU projections remained at 
56GtCO2e. While it stated that there was still room for bridging the gap, under the most 
favorable case, pledges would still be 50% on track to meeting the 2ºC target. 
The 2012 UNEP report stated that, since 2000, GHG emissions increased 20% reaching 
50.1 GtCO2e and being 14% higher that the emissions needed to ensure a likely chance of 
limiting global average temperature increases to 2ºC compared to pre-industrial levels. The 
gap in this report was believed to range between 8GtCO2e and 13GtCO2e, as economic 
growth was expected to return and the calculations were inclusive of potential double 
counting15. Expected business as usual GHG emissions according to this report would amount 
to 58GtCO2e. Under the most favorable case, commitments would imply only 40% of the 
road to limit temperature increases to 2ºC would be travelled. 
The UNEP 2013 report points out that the pledges stated by countries have not changed 
significantly since the 2012 report, despite some tighter accounting rules. The BAU scenario 
has increased, reaching 59GtCO2e. The gap, according to this latest UNEP emissions gap 
report can range between 8GtCO2e and 12GtCO2e. Current commitments would limit the 
mitigation of GHGs to less than 50% of what is needed to stay within the 2ºC mark. Table 6.3 
summarizes the main data from the UNEP‘s reports. 
 
Table 6.3. GHG emissions and gap under different conditionality  
and implementation scenarios 
 
 
Emissions 
2010 
(GtCO2e) 
Gap 2010 
(GtCO2e) 
Emissions 
2011(GtCO2e) 
Gap 2011 
(GtCO2e) 
Emissions 
2012(GtCO2e) 
Gap 2012 
(GtCO2e) 
Emissions 
2013(GtCO2e) 
Gap 2013 
(GtCO2e) 
Business as 
usual 
56 
 
56 
 
58 
 
59 
 
Unconditional 
pledges, 
lenient rules 
53 
9 
55 
11 
57 
13 
56 
12 
Unconditional 
pledges, strict 
rules 
52 
8 
53 
9 
54 
10 
55 
11 
Conditional 
pledges, 
lenient rules 
51 
7 
53 
9 
55 
11 
54 
10 
Conditional 
pledges, Strict 
rules 
49 
5 
50 
6 
52 
8 
52 
8 
Road travelled 
to meet the 
2ºC target 
~60% 
50% 
~40% 
~45% 
 
Source: UNEP [71-74]. 
 
As was stated at the outset of this subsection, the pledges made in the aftermath of the 
Copenhagen Accords afford us only part of the fuel needed to travel down the winding road 
leading to the increasingly elusive 2ºC target. According to Table 6.3, the gap can be partially 
bridged by implementing conditional pledges, applying strict rules to LULUCF and surplus 
                                                           
15 Double counting means that ‗emission reductions are counted towards meeting two countries‘ pledges‘ [73]. 

Lara Lázaro Touza and Michel Zoghby 
108 
credits, and avoiding double counting. But even these positive steps in the right direction will 
not be enough. More needs to be done. 
Additional efforts need to be aligned with economic development priorities [72]. Key 
sectors in which further action is suggested are related either to energy use or to GHG 
absorption capacities. As an intensive energy consumer (and GHG producer), the building 
sector for example could aid mitigation initiatives with the expansion of building codes, the 
use of appliance standards or the development of energy efficiency finance initiatives such as 
the PACE model [72-83]. The transport sector could also apply more stringent fuel standards 
and public transport could be improved in many countries. Better public transport systems 
could be coupled with better land-use policies that could facilitate the development of multi-
functional cities conducive to the reduction in transport needs. Companies could increase 
home office working arrangements, reducing work-related transport [40]. 
Another promising area in which GHG emission reductions are possible is the forestry 
sector. Increasing the protection of certain areas, while allowing indigenous communities to 
benefit from ecosystem services16, could help reduce GHG emissions from this sector. Paying 
for said ecosystem services could be another way of avoiding land use change [73], although 
issues of additionally17 would have to be addressed. 
How could the above-mentioned mitigation actions be included in a future climate 
architecture? One promising approach would be to increase the legal status of lower echelons 
of government in international climate negotiations [46, 52]. This is so as subnational and 
local levels of government are where GHGs are emitted and they are the institutional 
structures that are closer to emissions. These lower government levels also have the power, in 
many cases, to regulate emissions. Cities for example produce between two thirds and three 
fourths of GHG emissions and consume similar amounts of energy. 
Additionally, two thirds of global mitigation potential is held within city boundaries [63]. 
Yet, city representation has been limited at the global level until COP 16 [84]. Difficulties in 
this polycentric approach to climate governance are expected, as it is countries, and not cities, 
that are the subjects of international law. Despite the difficulties, the need to engage actors at 
all levels might help international climate negotiators provide creative (and increasingly 
inclusive) solutions in future international climate negotiations. 
 
 
c. Adaptation 
 
No matter how successful mitigation efforts are in reducing GHGs, the effects of climate 
change will continue to be felt in the coming decades due to the delayed effects of emissions. 
This reality requires an additional response to climate change, based on the 
implementation of adaptation measures to manage the consequences of climate change on 
ecological, social, and economic systems. 
                                                           
16 Ecosystem services are the benefits derived from ecosystems by humans. See: http://www.iucn.org/about/union/ 
commissions/cem/cem_work/cem_services/ 
17 According to Gillenwater (2012, p. 4) ‗additionality is a determination of whether a proposed activity will 
produce some "extra good" in the future relative to a reference scenario, which we refer to as a baseline. In 
other words, additionality is the process of determining whether a proposed activity is better than a specified 
baseline‘. 

Climate Risks: Theory, Data and the Global Governance of Climate Change 
 
109
While adaptation has been defined in various ways [58], the IPCC‘s AR4 [29] defines it 
as an ‗adjustment in natural or human systems in response to actual or expected climatic 
stimuli or their effects, which moderates harm or exploits beneficial opportunities‘. 
Adaptation is not new to the human species, as it has had to respond, throughout its 
history, to various short and long-term changes in its environment. However, what is new is 
the anticipation and incorporation of future climate risk in policy making [41]. 
The UNFCCC describes the adaptation process in five stages (Figure 6.1): 
 
 
‗Observation: observation and monitoring of climatic and non-climatic, socio-economic and 
environmental variables‘ 
Assessment of impacts, vulnerability and risks: identify options to adapt to climate change, 
and evaluate them in terms of (various) criteria 
Planning for adaptation: identify and prioritize urgent and immediate needs with regard to 
adaptation to the effects of climate change 
Implementation of adaptation measures: implementation of national adaptation plans and 
work programs 
Monitoring and evaluation of adaptation interventions: regular monitoring, evaluation and 
revision, ‗both in terms of the validity of the underlying scientific assumptions and the 
appropriateness of projects, policies and programs‘ 
„The findings from the last stage feed back into the first, ensuring that the adaptation process is 
iterative and dynamic over time‟ 
Figure 6.1. The Adaptation Process 
Source: Adapted from UNFCCC [75] and UNFCCC [78]. 
 
In adapting, policy-makers and other stakeholders are confronted with a number of 
uncertainties that stem from the limitations of our scientific knowledge of the climate system, 
future levels of GHGs, the impact of future climate on the environment, society or the 
economy [86]. Nevertheless, they are expected to assess the implications of climate change 

Lara Lázaro Touza and Michel Zoghby 
110 
for natural systems and human society, whether detrimental or beneficial, and develop 
appropriate adaptation measures. 
While mitigation and adaptation were, for years, considered alternative strategies to 
climate change management, there is today a growing recognition that mitigation alone 
cannot avoid all climate change impacts. 
Whatever the stabilization scenario achieved through mitigation, short-term and long-
term adaptation strategies are required, as the inertia in the climate system will ensure that 
impacts resulting from current warming will be felt for decades or centuries. Even so, 
numerous barriers to successful adaptation exist, while in some cases adaptation will simply 
be ineffective (e.g., disappearance of mountain glaciers or significant sea level rise). The 
challenge is therefore to integrate mitigation and adaptation measures in a synergistic way so 
that they complement each other to significantly reduce the risks of climate change [28, 40]. 
However, unlike mitigation, where action has measurable effects of GHG emissions, 
adaptation cannot be measured using such a single, commonly understood and accepted 
indicator. Adaptation is fundamentally determined by the socio-economic context 
(institutional, cultural, equity, economic, social and governance) in which it is applied. 
Therefore, to be successful, adaptation has to be considered within a broader set of national 
policy objectives. Consequently, there has been a significant push for mainstreaming18 
adaptation policies into development policies, especially sustainable development policies. 
As with mitigation, the main institutional settings for international adaptation 
negotiations and financing are the UNFCCC and the KP. However, while mitigation has been 
central to the Convention since its inception, the recognition of the importance of adaptation 
to global climate change has been much slower. It could be argued that adaptation only began 
to be perceived as an important and equal complement to mitigation after the IPCC‘S AR3 
and the subsequent adoption of the Marrakesh Accords at COP7 in 2001, where new funding 
and planning tools for adaptation were put in place. The Bali Road Map adopted during 
COP13 in 2007 further highlighted the importance of adaptation when it was included with 
mitigation as one of five key elements required for a more robust response to climate change. 
The challenge today for policy-makers and stakeholders is to translate the political 
momentum in support of adaptation into operational success [18]. 
While impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change are inextricably linked, 
there are differences in the way they are studied. The impacts-oriented approach to climate 
change first endeavors to construct a climate scenario, from which a number of potential 
biophysical impacts will emerge, stimulating individual and societal responses (i.e., 
adaptation). However, the inherent level of uncertainty, especially in downscaling global 
climate model information to short time and small spatial scales, limits the usefulness of this 
approach for on-the-ground adaptation [56]. On the other hand, the adaptation-vulnerability 
approach to climate change focuses on the socio-economic context (institutional, cultural, 
equity, economic, social and governance) to help define vulnerability, as well as the range of 
external factors that affect people‘s livelihoods and well-being. This approach considers 
                                                           
18 Mainstreaming: ‗The iterative process of integrating adaptation considerations into policy-making, budgeting and 
implementation processes at national, sector and subnational levels. It is a multi-year, multi-stakeholder effort 
that entails working with government actors (head of state‘s office, environment, finance and planning bodies, 
sector and subnational bodies, political parties and parliament, national statistics office and judicial system), 
non-governmental actors (civil society, academia, business and industry, general public and communities, and 
the media) and development actors‘ (UNDP, 2007 in UNFCCC [82]). 

Climate Risks: Theory, Data and the Global Governance of Climate Change 
 
111
climate change as an additional external factor often interacting with other stressors instead of 
impacting individuals and society in isolation [56]. 
Whatever the approach, four major questions at the heart of any strategic approach to 
adaptation should be considered: Where to adapt, When to adapt, How to adapt, and Who 
should adapt? [15]. Answering these questions is especially challenging for developing 
countries as they are the most vulnerable and the least prepared to deal with climate change  
induced impacts and risks. Additionally, the poorest countries with the most vulnerable 
populations amongst this group are usually disproportionally affected by climate change [49]. 
Recognizing that providing vulnerable populations in developing countries with better 
protection against loss and damage caused by climate change was needed, the parties 
established at COP19 (November 2013) the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and 
Damage associated with climate change impacts.The mechanism is expected to become the 
Convention‘s primary vehicle through which loss and damage will be addresses in a 
comprehensive fashion19. 
 
 
d. Technology Transfer 
 
Technology transfer in the context of climate change is defined by the Global 
Environment Facility as: 
 
A broad set of processes covering the flows of know-how, experience and equipment 
for mitigating and adapting to climate change amongst different stakeholders such as 
governments, private sector entities, financial institutions, non-governmental organization 
(NGOs) and research/education institutions… the broad and inclusive term ‗transfer‘ 
encompasses diffusion of technologies and technology cooperation across and within 
countries. It covers technology transfer processes between developed countries, 
developing countries and countries with economies in transition, amongst developed 
countries, amongst developing countries, and amongst countries with economies in 
transition. It comprises the process of learning to understand, utilize and replicate the 
technology, including the capacity to choose and adapt to local conditions and integrate it 
with indigenous technologies [20]. 
 
‗To a large extent, the state of the environment today is the result of the technological 
choices of yesterday. Similarly, the state of the environment in the 21st century will be 
determined largely by the technologies we choose today‘ [66]. Therefore, a broad range of 
technologies, particularly environmentally sound technologies (ESTs)20, will have to be 
deployed if human beings are to limit temperature increases to 2ºC compared to pre-industrial 
levels, entailing GHG reductions in the range of 25–40% below 1990 levels by 2020 for 
developed countries and 15–30% by 2020 for developing countries [14]. These mitigation 
                                                           
19 For the UNFCCC Secretariat press release subsequent to COP19, please see: http://unfccc.int/ files/press/news_ 
room/press_releases_and_advisories/application/pdf/131123_pr_closing_cop19.pdf. 
20 Environmentally Sound Technologies (ESTs): technologies that protect the environment are less polluting, use all 
resources in a more sustainable manner, recycle more of their wastes and products, and handle residual wastes 
in a more acceptable manner than the technologies for which they were substitutes and are compatible with 
nationally determined socio-economic, cultural, and environmental priorities. ESTs in this report imply 
mitigation and adaptation technologies, both ―soft‖ and ―hard‖ [31]. 

Lara Lázaro Touza and Michel Zoghby 
112 
efforts coupled with the necessary adaptation to unavoidable global climate change will have 
to include both GHG emission mitigation technologies and climate change adaptation 
technologies, both ―soft‖ and ―hard‖. 
However, countries clearly do not have the same capacities to address climate change. 
Generally speaking, developed nations have the means to meet the challenges of climate 
change, while many, if not most, developing nations lack the capacities to act effectively.  
Additionally the majority of technology transfers occur within the countries that generate 
them, an outcome of the tendency of nations throughout history to ensure that technological 
know-how remains in country, as military and economic power is technology driven. That 
being said, there has been growing momentum, through intellectual property legislation, 
multilateral organizations as well as private sector entities, for greater technology transfer 
[33]. 
In line with this trend, the Technology Transfer Framework was agreed during COP 7 
(2001) under the Marrakesh Accords and was comprised of five key ‗themes‘ which included: 
Technology Needs Assessment (TNA) aimed at assessing technology priorities for developing 
and non-annex II countries, Enabling (policy) Environments that facilitate technology 
transfer, Technology Information that may facilitate the development of said technology, 
Capacity Building that will be conducive to gauge and implement technology, and finally 
Technology Transfer Mechanisms that include finance, cooperation, endogenous development 
of technologies and joint research initiatives. 
Later, as part of the Cancun Agreements signed at COP 16 in 2010, a Technology 
Mechanism was established. It is comprised of21: 
 
1 
A Technology Executive Committee (TEC) tasked with further implementation of 
the Technology Transfer Framework. TEC is intended to provide support to all 
relevant stakeholders in their mitigation and adaptation activities through the 
promotion of technology development and transfer 
2 
A Climate Technology Centre and Network (CTCN) mandated to assist developing 
country Parties, encourage technology cooperation as well as technology 
development and transfer. 
 
In addition, the market-based Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), established by the 
Kyoto Protocol, while not having an explicit technology transfer mandate, has contributed to 
the sustainable development of developing countries by supporting the transfer of 
technologies to projects aimed at reducing emissions [79]. Through the CDM, such projects 
can earn certified emission reduction (CER) credits, each corresponding to a ton of CO2, 
which under the Kyoto Protocol can be traded and sold to developed countries to meet their 
emission reduction targets. The CDM is also the primary financing mechanism for the 
Adaptation Fund22, via a 2% levy on CERs. 
A number of studies have attempted to establish the degree of technology transfer taking 
place through the CDM [10, 60]. The results indicate that there is much disparity in 
technology transfer between countries as well as insufficient volume and reach in CDM 
                                                           
21 For more information, please see http://unfccc.int/ttclear/pages/home.html. 
22 ‗The Adaptation Fund was established in 2001 to finance concrete adaptation projects and programmes in 
developing country Parties to the Kyoto Protocol that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate 
change‘https://www.adaptation-fund.org/about. 

Climate Risks: Theory, Data and the Global Governance of Climate Change 
 
113
projects to create the necessary momentum towards cleaner technologies. Amendments to the 
CDM, such as sectorial or technological benchmarks, have the potential to improve 
technological standards [69]. 
However, while many delegates during COP19 in Warsaw expressed concern over the 
state of the CDM, further discussions on the topic, including possible amendments to the  
CDM, were referred to a subsidiary body for consideration in 2014 [67]. 
Another important multilateral body responsible for technology transfer is the Global 
Environmental facility (GEF). Since its inception in 1991, the GEF has been the largest 
source of public finance for ESTs [21] and is mandated by the UNFCCC to finance their 
transfer in the context of both mitigation and adaptation. GEF supports the transfer of a full 
range of emission reduction technologies, from pilot projects to commercially viable systems. 
The GEF Trust Fund is primarily programmed to support mitigation measures while its two 
special funds under the UNFCCC, the Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF) and the Least 
Developed Countries Fund (LDCF), also address adaptation [20]. 
The GEF is said to have made progress in the reduction of GHG emissions primarily 
through the support of projects in energy efficiency and renewable energy [22]. Reproach of 
the GEF approach includes its reactivity in responding to opportunities, the lengthiness of its 
approval process and the fact that it is underfunded (Marcellino, 2010). These weaknesses are 
important barriers to technology transfer and often discourage private actors in participating 
in GEF projects (Chuffart, 2013). Lingering issues regarding governance structure and 
operational principles are still being raised by developing nations, especially small island 
developing states (SIDS) that are concerned over its system for allocating its climate change 
funds as well as its limited funding for adaptation [42]. 
While multilateral organizations and governments can act as catalysts in support of 
technology transfer, it is predominantly private companies that are the producers and owners 
of ESTs. It is therefore relevant to identify the private sector pathways that can facilitate 
technology transfer. These pathways may involve international trade in hard and soft 
technologies through foreign direct investment (FDI), license or royalty agreements, turnkey 
projects, joint ventures, technical agreements, or other forms of cooperation arrangements. 
These pathways provide commercial and trade linkages between companies and need to be 
taken into consideration in the broader debate on the role of trade and technology transfer in 
mitigating and adapting to climate change [88]. 
A persistent hurdle on the path to technology transfer, and a hotly debated issue involving 
all stakeholders, is the issue of intellectual property rights (IPRs). The debate has mostly been 
framed in a developed vs. developing nations context. For some, IPRs are considered 
essential for fostering innovation in ESTs, making IPRs a must for any subsequent 
technology transfer. For others, IPRs are perceived as a barrier to rapid access and widespread 
dissemination of ESTs. A range of measures and options have been advanced to further the 
issue, including the ‗expanded use of flexibilities in international intellectual property 
instruments; the exclusion of climate change technologies from patentability; and the 
consideration of arrangements such as patent pools to facilitate access to these technologies‘ 
[37]. However, it has been argued that the UNFCCC is not the appropriate forum to negotiate 
these issues, which are considered by many to be better addressed at the World Intellectual 
Property Organization (WIPO) or under the TRIPS Agreement as some of the above options 
may require changes in global intellectual property rules [37, 55]. The COP19 climate talks in 

Lara Lázaro Touza and Michel Zoghby 
114 
Warsaw resulted in no significant advance in either IPRs or ESTs, recommending the issue to 
be further discussed by a subsidiary body in 2014 and results reported at COP20 [65]. 
 
 
e. Financing 
 
‗Climate finance refers to local, national or transnational financing, which may be drawn 
from public, private and alternative sources of financing. Climate finance is critical to 
addressing climate change because large-scale investments are required to significantly 
reduce emissions, notably in sectors that emit large quantities of greenhouse gases. 
Climate finance is equally important for adaptation, for which significant financial 
resources will be similarly required to allow countries to adapt to the adverse effects and 
reduce the impacts of climate change‘ [76]. 
The underlying premise for climate finance is based on the concept of equity. Article 3 of 
the Convention states that the 
 
‗Parties should protect the climate system for the benefit of present and future 
generations of humankind, on the basis of equity and in accordance with their common 
but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities. Accordingly, the developed 
country Parties should take the lead in combating climate change and the adverse effects 
thereof‘ [81]. 
 
The 1998 legally binding Kyoto Protocol also based the implementation of the 
Convention on the same principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and 
respective capabilities [36]. Table 6.4 shows the wide range of figures that are put forward 
regarding annual estimated costs of climate adaptation in developing countries that range 
from USD 4 billion to USD 105 billion in the short-term and from USD 15 billion to USD 
100 billion in the medium-term. 
 
Table 6.4. Estimated costs of climate adaptation in developing countries 
 
 
Source: Spratt and Ashford [62]. 
 

Climate Risks: Theory, Data and the Global Governance of Climate Change 
 
115
In spite of these divergent figures, developed nations party to the UNFCCC agreed in the 
2009 Copenhagen Accord to provide new financing approaching USD 30 billion for the 
period 2010-2012 to be allocated in a balanced way between adaptation and mitigation (fast-
start finance). They also agreed to commit to the goal of jointly mobilizing from multilateral, 
bilateral, public and private sources USD 100 billion a year by 2020 to address the needs of 
developing countries. Furthermore parties to the Convention agreed to establish a Green 
Climate Fund in support of developing countries‘ mitigation and adaptation efforts [80]. 
Following the Copenhagen Accord, the Secretary General of the United Nations 
established in 2010 a High-level Advisory Group on Climate Change Financing. 
The Advisory group was tasked to report on the various sources of revenue susceptible to 
contribute to meeting the USD 100 billion a year by 2020 goal, which can be summarized as 
follows [68]: ‗public sources for grants and highly concessional loans, development bank-
type instruments, carbon market finance and private capital‘. 
The conclusion of the Advisory Group was that while meeting the US$100 billion per 
year by 2020 goal would be challenging, it was feasible [68]. 
 
 
Figure 7.2. Potential Sources of Finance. 
Source: UN [68]. 
 
These potential finance sources were analyzed based on [68]: 
 
● 
Revenues: revenue potential; 
● 
Efficiency: carbon-related efficiency and overall efficiency; 
● 
Incidence: ‗who really pays‘ for revenue; 
● 
Equity: in terms of the distributional impact of different measures; 
● 
Practicality: in terms of the feasibility of implementation; 
● 
Acceptability: whether a revenue source is politically acceptable; 
● 
Additionally: whether a revenue actually provides new resources; 
● 
Reliability: whether the finance source will lead to a predictable revenue stream. 

Lara Lázaro Touza and Michel Zoghby 
116 
Table 6.5. below summarizes the financing sources identified by the Advisory Group. 
As of the end of 2012, developed countries self-reported the delivery of more than $33 
billion in fast-start finance for the period 2010-2012 [87]. However, reporting and accounting 
issues make it difficult to say how much funding has been disbursed or where it is going. As 
Parties have outlined during UNFCCC‘s COP17 and COP18, there is a continuing need for 
developed nations to improve reporting on their fast-start finance commitment as well as to 
expedite its full disbursement [77]. 
 
Table 6.5. Potential Sources of Finance 
 
PUBLIC 
SOURCES 
Revenues from the international auctioning of emission allowances  
(such as assigned amount units (AAU) under the Kyoto Protocol) 
Revenues from the auctioning of emission allowances in domestic emissions 
trading schemes (as in the European Union Emission Trading Scheme  
phase III) 
Revenues from offset levies 
Revenues generated from taxes on international aviation and shipping 
Revenues from a wires charge 
Revenues generated by removing fossil energy subsidies in developed countries 
Revenues from fossil fuel extraction royalties/licenses 
Revenues from carbon taxes 
Revenues from a financial transaction tax 
Direct budget contributions 
DEVELOPMENT 
BANK 
INSTRUMENTS 
Resources generated via multilateral development banks using current balance 
sheet Headroom (i.e., the amount of money the multilateral development bank can 
raise on the capital markets given the assets on its balance sheet) 
Resources created via potential further replenishments and paid-in  
capital contributions by countries to multilateral development banks  
(i.e., generating new cash resources for multilateral development banks) 
Potential contribution to a fund dedicated to climate-related investment financed 
on the back of commitment of existing or new special drawing rights 
CARBON 
MARKET 
FINANCE 
Carbon market finance refers to transfers of resources related to purchases  
of offsets in developing countries. Presently, the majority of resources are 
generated via private entities and Governments in developed countries purchasing 
project-based offsets from private entities in developing countries through the 
CDM. The potential scale of resources is dependent on the stringency of the 
emissions reduction commitments of developed countries, on carbon market 
design and on the availability of eligible emissions reductions in developing 
countries. 
PRIVATE 
CAPITAL 
Private capital refers to flows of international private finance resulting from 
specific interventions by developed countries. This includes the use of risk 
mitigation or revenue-enhancing instruments that compensate private investors for 
otherwise lower than risk-related required rates of return (also referred to as 
―crowding in‖) as well as capacity building for adaptation and implementation of 
climate policies in developing countries. 
Source: UN [68]. 
 
 

Climate Risks: Theory, Data and the Global Governance of Climate Change 
 
117
Since 1998, OECD‘s Development Assistance Committee (DAC) has monitored climate 
change related aid through its ‗Creditor Reporting System‘ (CRS) using the four ‗Rio 
markers‘, which cover biodiversity, desertification, climate change mitigation, and climate 
change adaptation (the latter having been introduced in 2010). Data for 2011 show that total 
bilateral climate change-related aid by DAC‘s OECD members was USD 17.1 billion in 
2011, of which two-thirds was for mitigation, and one-third for adaptation. Multilateral 
climate change-related aid was USD 894 million in 2011 [50]. 
Disappointingly, these numbers reflect a nearly 6 billion decline in climate change-
related aid in 2011 compared to 2010 [51]. While data for two consecutive years cannot be 
interpreted as a trend, the overall numbers seem to suggest that the world is far from being on 
track to meet its USD 100 billion a year by 2020 goal. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
As stated by Richardson [56], while determining what is dangerous climate change is a 
societal value judgment, it must be grounded on a risk assessment informed by knowledge of 
potential impacts, vulnerability and adaptive capacity. This chapter on climate change risk has 
highlighted that: 
 
● 
Mean global warming since pre-industrial levels has reached 0.8ºC. Without 
significant climate action, this is likely to lead to a 3ºC world, with a 20% chance of 
exceeding 4ºC by 2100. 
● 
In the last century, sea-level rise has ranged between 15 and 20 centimeters. 
According to the AR5 Summary for Policymakers, the range of sea level rise will 
spread from 0.4 to 0.63 meters for 2081 to 2100. 
● 
Despite the inherent uncertainty in predicting rainfall patterns and water availability, 
existing trends will be exacerbated. Hundreds of millions of people will be exposed 
to water stress, with agricultural production and urban areas being particularly 
vulnerable.  
● 
Between 20% and 30% of plant and animal species are likely to experience increased 
risk of extinction for rises in global average temperatures greater than 1.5ºC to 2.5ºC, 
causing ecosystem changes and biodiversity losses. 
● 
Mean global temperature increases above 3ºC compared to pre-industrial levels are 
expected to reduce food production capabilities. A 4ºC warmer world, however, 
could potentially threaten global food security. 
● 
Negative health consequences from climate induced malnutrition, death and injuries 
from extreme weather events, increases in infectious diseases and heart and 
respiratory illnesses in densely populated areas are expected. 
● 
In poor countries, temperature increases of 1ºC have resulted in economic growth 
reductions of 1.3% in the past. Some argue that unabated climate change will imply 
GDP losses of 5% to 20% ad infinitum. 
 
While the science of climate change is becoming clearer, climate change is nevertheless a 
‗wicked problem‘ as most facilitative elements and requirements for successful IEAs such as 

Lara Lázaro Touza and Michel Zoghby 
118 
the UNFCCC and the KP are elusive. Net benefits for nations of joining said IEAs are not 
always clear from the perspective of short term political cycles, equity issues have not been 
resolved, scientific certainty is still work in progress, no close substitutes exists for GHG 
produced by virtually all human activities, and not all main emitters are parties to IEAs 
creating free-rider incentives. 
Since 2000 GHG emissions have increased 20%, 14% higher than what is needed to 
ensure the world‘s 2ºC goal. Additional efforts need to be aligned with economic 
development priorities. Key sectors such as energy, building, transport and LULUCF where 
emissions are most intensive will require innovative approaches to reduce their GHG 
footprint. However, no matter how successful mitigation efforts are in reducing GHGs, the 
effects of climate change will continue to be felt in the coming decades due to the delayed 
effects of emissions on the climate system. Adaptation will become critical for many 
countries, no matter the uncertainties involved. 
A great deal of effort is still needed to ensure IEAs are inclusive of all stakeholders and 
are delivering as designed. As COP19 in Warsaw has shown, the bridge between developed 
and developing countries is still wide. In the wake of typhoon Haiyan, the latest achievements 
of this interim conference have fallen short of the initial expectations, which were already 
low. The main outcomes of this conference are as follows. First, a loss and damage 
mechanism to compensate for climate change consequences has been established. Second, 
delegates have been sent back home with the mandate of producing information on their 
mitigation ‗contributions‘ for the first quarter of 2015 and finally, REDD+, the mechanism 
for reducing deforestation and deforestation, has finally been completed. 
Both ―soft‖ and ―hard‖ GHG emission mitigation technologies and climate change 
adaptation technologies will need to be deployed en masse. The private sector must be a part 
of that process and Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) issues will have to be addressed to 
ensure they are not stumbling blocks in the transfer of technologies to the developing world. 
In terms of finance, the current goal by developing nations to jointly mobilizing USD 100 
billion a year by 2020 to address the needs of developing countries will require the broad 
participation of all stakeholders as well as much stronger efforts by developed nations. Data 
by the OECD for 2011 suggests that bilateral and multilateral climate change-related aid was 
below 20 billion, reflecting an overall decline compared to 2010. In sum, progress to date has 
clearly been insufficient to avoid the risks posed by the dangerous anthropogenic interference 
with the climate system. The prospects for jointly achieving a stable climate in time to limit 
temperature increases to 2ºC compared to pre-industrial levels appear slim. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Assadourian, E. (2010). Cultural Change for a Bearable Climate. Real Instituto Elcano, 
ARI 163/2010 - 17/11/2010. Retrieved from http://www.realinstitutoelcano.org/wps/ 
portal/rielcano_eng/Content?WCM_GLOBAL_CONTEXT=/elcano/elcano_in/zonas_i
n/international+economy/ari163-2010. 
[2] 
Baldwin, R., Cave, M. and and Lodge, M. (2012). Understanding Regulation: Theory, 
Strategy and Practice. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Climate Risks: Theory, Data and the Global Governance of Climate Change 
 
119
[3] 
Barrett, S. (2013). Climate treaties and approaching catastrophes. Journal of 
Environmental Economics and Management. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.jeem.2012.12.004. 
[4] 
Barrett, S. (2009). Rethinking Gobal Climate Change Governance. Economics: The 
Open-Access, Open-Assessment E-Journal, 3, 2009-5. Retrieved from http://www. 
economics-ejournal.org/economics/journalarticles/2009-5. 
[5] 
Barrett, S. (2007). Why Cooperate? The Incentive to Supply Global Public Goods. New 
York: Oxford University Press. 
[6] 
Beck, U. (1992). Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity. London: Sage Publications. 
[7] 
Blanchard, O., Criqui, P. and Kitous, A. (2002). After The Hague, Bonn and 
Marrakech: the future international market for emissions permits and the issue of hot 
air. Cahier de recherché, 27. Institut D‘Economie et de Politique de L‘Energie. 
Retrieved from http://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/docs/00/19/63/64/PDF/Cahier27Angl.pdf. 
[8] 
Bretteville-Froyn, C. (2007). International Environmental Cooperation: The Role of 
Political Feasibility. In: G. Atkinson, S. Dietz and E. Neumayer (Eds.), Handbook of 
Sustainable Development (pp. 345-412). Northampton: Edward Elgar Publishing. 
[9] 
Chuffart, S. (2013). Technology Transfer and Dissemination under the UNFCCC: 
Achievements and New Perspectives. New York: Columbia Law School, Center for 
Climate Change Law. Retrieved from http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_ 
id=2294642. 
[10] Dechezleprêtre, A., Glachant, M. and Ménière, Y. (2009). Technology transfer by CDM 
projects: a comparison of Brazil, China, India and Mexico. Energy Policy, 37(2) 
(February), 703-711. Retrieved from http://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/docs/00/43/75/47/ 
PDF/TechTransfCDM.pdf. 
[11] Dell, M., Jones, B. F. and Olken, B. A. (2011). Temperature Shocks and Economic 
Growth: Evidence from the Last Half Century. American Economic Journal: 
Macroeconomics, 4(3), 66-95. Retrieved from http://www.kellogg.northwestern.edu/ 
faculty/jones-ben/htm/climatechange.pdf. 
[12] European Commission (EC) (2013). An EU Strategy on adaptation to climate change. 
Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the 
European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions. Brussels: 
European Union. Retrieved from http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do? 
uri=COM:2013:0216:FIN:EN:PDF. 
[13] European Commission (EC) (2011). Special Eurobarometer 372. Climate change. 
Retrieved from http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/archives/ebs/ebs_372_en.pdf. 
[14] European Commission (EC) (2009). Towards a comprehensive climate change 
agreement in Copenhagen, Communication to the European Parliament, the Council, 
the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions. 28 
January 2009, COM (2009) 39 final. Retrieved from http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUri 
ServLexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2009: 0039:FIN:EN:PDF. 
[15] Fankhauser, S. and Soare, R. (2012). Strategic Adaptation to Climate Change in 
Europe. Vivid Economics report prepared for the European Investment Bank. London. 
Retrieved from http://www.vivideconomics.com/uploads/reports/ strategic-adaptation-
to-climate-change-in-europe/Strategic_Adaptation_to_Climate_Change_in_Europe. 
pdf. 

Lara Lázaro Touza and Michel Zoghby 
120 
[16] Fischer, A., et al. (2012). Climate Change? No, Wise Resource Use is the Issue: Social 
Representations of Energy Climate Change and the Future. Environmental Policy and 
Governance, 22, 161-176. 
[17] Fishbein, M. and Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, Attitude, Intention and Behaviour: An 
Introduction to Theory and Research Reading. MA: Addison-Wesley. Retrieved from 
http://www.people.umass.edu/aizen/fanda1975.html. 
[18] Garnaud, B. (2009). An analysis of Adaptation Negotiations in Poznan. Policy Brief, 
01/2009. Institute for Sustainable Development and International Relations (IDDRI). 
Paris. Retrieved from http://www.iddri.org/Publications/Collections/Syntheses/PB_ 
0901_Garnaud_Adaptation-Poznan.pdf. 
[19] Garnaut, R. (2008). The Garnaut Climate Change Review. Melbourne: Cambridge 
University Press. Retrieved from http://www.garnautreview.org.au/CA25734E0016 
A131/WebObj/GarnautClimateChangeReview-FinalReport-30September2008 
(Fullversion)/$File/Garnaut%20Climate%20Change%20Review%20-%20Final%20 
Report%20-%2030%20 September%202008%20(Full%20version).pdf. 
[20] Global Environment Facility (GEF) (2012, November). Implementing the Poznan 
Strategic and Long-Term Programs on Technology Transfer. Retrieved from http:// 
www.thegef.org/gef/sites/thegef.org/files/publication/GEF_PoznanTT_lowres%20final.
pdf. 
[21] Global Environment Facility (GEF) (2009a). Technology Transfer for Climate Change. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.thegef.org/gef/sites/thegef.org/files/publication/Tech 
Transfer-FS-June2009.pdf. 
[22] Global Environment Facility (GEF) (2009b). Fourth Overall Performance Study of the 
GEF: Progress Toward Impact (OPS4). Retrieved from http://www.thegef.org/gef/ 
sites/thegef.org/files/documents/FULL%20REPORT_OPS4%20Progress%20Toward%
20Impact_0.pdf. 
[23] Gillenwater, M. (2012). What is additionality? GHG Management Institute. Discussion 
paper 001, January, 1-29. Retrieved from http://ghginstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/ 
content/GHGMI/AdditionalityPaper_Part-1%28ver3%29FINAL.pdf. 
[24] Howes, M. (2005). Politics and the Environment: Risk and the Role of Government and 
Industry. London: Earthscan. 
[25] International Centre for Trade and Sustainable Development (ICTSD) (2011). 
Overcoming the Impasse on Intellectual Property and Climate Change at the UNFCCC: 
A Way Forward, ICTSD Programme on Innovation, Technology and Intellectual 
Property. Policy Brief, 11. Retrieved from http://scholarship.law.duke.edu/cgi/ 
viewcontent.cgi?article=3105andcontext=faculty_scholarship. 
[26] International Energy Agency (IEA) (2013). Redrawing the Energy-Climate Map. World 
Energy Outlook Special Report. Retrieved from http://www.iea.org/publications/ 
freepublications/publication/WEO_redrawingEnergyClimateMap.pdf. 
[27] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) (2013). Climate Change 2013: The 
Physical Science Basis. Summary for Policy Maker. Retrieved from http://www.climate 
change2013.org/images/uploads/WGI_AR5_SPM_ brochure.pdf. 
[28] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) (2007a). Climate Change 2007: 
Synthesis Report. Retrieved from http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/syr/ar4 
_syr.pdf. 

Climate Risks: Theory, Data and the Global Governance of Climate Change 
 
121
[29] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) (2007b). Glossary. Climate 
Change 2007: Synthesis Report. Retrieved from http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-
report/ar4/wg2/ar4-wg2-app.pdf. 
[30] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) (2001a). IPCC Third Assessment 
Report - Climate Change 2001. The Scientific Basis. Cambridge: UK. Retrieved from 
http://www.grida.no/publications/other/ipcc_tar/?src=/climate/ipcc_tar/ 
[31] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) (2001b). Glossary, IPCC Third 
Assessment Report - Climate Change 2001. The Scientific Basis. Cambridge. Retrieved 
from http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/glossary/tar-ipcc-terms-en. pdf. 
[32] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) (2000a). IPCC Special Report. 
Emission Scenarios. Summary for Policy Makers. Retrieved from http://www.ipcc.ch/ 
pdf/special-reports/spm/sres-en.pdf. 
[33] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) (2000b). Methodological and 
technological issues in technology transfer. A special report of the International Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC) Working Group III. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. Retrieved from http://www.ipcc.ch/ipccreports/sres/tectran/index.php?idp=1. 
[34] Jordan, A., et al. (2010). Climate Change Policy in the European Union. Confronting 
the Dilemmas of Mitigation and Adaptation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
[35] Jordan, A., Wurzel, R. and Zito, A. (2005). The Rise of ‗New‘ Policy Instruments in 
Comparative Perspective: Has Governance Eclipsed Government? Political Studies, 53, 
477-496. 
[36] Kyoto Protocol (KP) (1998). Kyoto Protocol To The United Nations Framework 
Convention On Climate Change. Retrieved from http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/ 
convkp/kpeng.pdf. 
[37] Latif, A. A., et al. (2011). Overcoming the Impasse on Intellectual Property and Climate 
Change at the UNFCCC: A Way Forward. ICTSD Programme on Innovation, 
Technology and Intellectual Property. Policy Brief nº. 11. November 2011. Retrieved 
from http://www.ictsd.org/downloads/2012/02/overcoming-the-impasse-on-intellectual-
property-and-climate-change-at-the-unfccc-a-way-forward.pdf. 
[38] Lázaro-Touza, L. E. (2011). Ciudades y cambio climático: retos, oportunidades y 
experiencias. ARI, 56/2011, 1-10, Real Instituto Elcano. 
[39] Lázaro-Touza, L. E. (2010). Climate Change Talks: Breakdown in Copenhagen; Next 
Stop, Mexico 2010 (COP 16). ARI, 9/2010, 1-15, Real Instituto Elcano. 
[40] Lázaro-Touza, L. E. and López-Gunn, E. (2012). Climate Change Policies - Mitigation 
and Adaptation at the Local Level: The Case of the City of Madrid (Spain). In: M. 
Tortora (Ed.), Sustainable systems and energy management at the regional level: 
comparative approaches (pp. 261-287). Hershey: IGI Global. 
[41] Lim, B., et al. (Eds.) (2004). Adaptation Policy Frameworks for Climate Change: 
Developing Strategies, Policies and Measures. Cambridge: United Nations 
Development Program (UNDP). Retrieved from http://www.preventionweb.net/files/ 
7995_APF.pdf. 
[42] Marcellino, D. and Gerstetter, C. (2010). Technology Transfer in the International 
Climate Negotiations: Assessment of Proposals and Discussion of Open Questions. 
Ecologic Institute. Washington DC. Retrieved from http://www.ecologic.eu/sites/files/ 
project/2013/8208_Ecologic_Technology_Transfer_Final.pdf. 

Lara Lázaro Touza and Michel Zoghby 
122 
[43] Marín González, M. (2011). Seguridad, Modelo Energético y Cambio Climático. In: 
Ministerio de Defensa (Ed.), Seguridad, Modelo Energético y Cambio Climático. 
Cuadernos de Estrategia (pp. 15-25). Cuadernos de Estrategia, 150. Madrid: Instituto 
Español de Estudios Estratégicos. 
[44] Met Office (2011). Climate: observations, projections and impacts. Retrieved from 
http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/climate-change/policy-relevant/obs-projections-impacts. 
[45] Mitchell, R. B. (2003). International Environmental Agreements: A Survey of their 
Features, Formation, and Effects. Annual Review of Environmental Resources, 28, 429-
61. 
[46] Moncel, R. (2012). Unconstructive Ambiguity in the Durban Climate Deal of COP17/ 
CMP7. Sustainable Development Law and Policy, 2, 6-11. Retrieved from http://digital 
commons.wcl.american.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1507andcontext=sdlp. 
[47] Nordhaus, W. (2007). A Review of the "Stern Review" on The Economics of Climate 
Change. Journal of Economic Literature, XLV, 686-702. 
[48] Ogus, A. I. (2004). Regulation: Legal Form and Economic Theory. Oxford: Hart 
Publishing. 
[49] Olhoff, A. and Schaer, C. (2010). Screening Tools and Guidelines to Support the 
Mainstreaming of Climate Change Adaptation into Development Assistance – A 
Stocktaking Report. New York: United Nations Development Program (UNDP). 
Retrieved from http://www.undp.org/content/dam/aplaws/publication/en/publications/ 
environment-energy/www-ee-library/climate-change/stocktaking-of-tools-and-
guidelines-to-mainstream-climate-change-adaptation/UNDP%20Stocktaking%20 
Report%20CC%20mainstreaming%20tools.pdf. 
[50] Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) (2013, 
September). OECD DAC Statistics on Climate-Related Aid. Retrieved from http:// 
www.oecd.org/dac/stats/factsheet%20on%20climate%20change_update%202013.pdf 
[Accessed on September 2013]. 
[51] Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) (2012, June). 
OECD DAC Statistics on Climate-Related Aid. Retrieved from http://www.oecd.org/ 
dac/stats/FactsheetRio.pdf [Accessed on September 2013]. 
[52] Ostrom, E. (2010). Polycentric systems for coping with collective action and global 
environmental change. Global Environmental Change, 20, 550-557. 
[53] Ostrom, E. (2005). Understanding Institutional Diversity. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press. 
[54] Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research and Climate Analytics (2012).  
Turn Down the Heat: Why a 4ºC Warmer World Must be Avoided. World Bank. 
Retrieved from http://climatechange.worldbank.org/sites/default/files/Turn_Down_the 
_heat_Why_a_4_degree_centrigrade_warmer_world_must_be_avoided.pdf. 
[55] Rimmer, M. (2011). Intellectual Property and Climate Change: Inventing Clean 
Technologies. Cheltenham (UK) and Northampton (Mass.): Edward Elgar Publishing. 
[56] Richardson, K., Steffen, W. and Liverman, D. (2011). Climate Change: Global Risks, 
Challenges and Decisions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
[57] Sandler, T. (2009). Kyoto Protocol: difficulties blocking collective action. Papeles de 
economía española: Economía y Cambio Climático, 121, 14-24, FUNCAS. 
[58] Schipper, L., et al. (2010). Review of climate change adaptation methods and tools. 
MRC Technical Paper, 34. Mekong River Commission, Vientiane. Retrieved from 

Climate Risks: Theory, Data and the Global Governance of Climate Change 
 
123
http://www.mrcmekong.org/assets/Publications/technical/Tech-No34-Review-of-
climate-change.pdf. 
[59] Secretaria de Estado de Cambio Climático (Ed.) (2009). Guía para Periodistas sobre 
Cambio Climático y negociación internacional. Madrid: Ministerio de Medio 
Ambiente, Medio Rural y Marino. Retrieved from http://www.magrama.gob.es/es/ 
ceneam/recursos/mini-portales-tematicos/Gu%C3%ADa_periodistas_sobre_CC_tcm7-
12466.pdf. 
[60] Seres, S. and Haites, E. (2008). Analysis of technology transfer in CDM projects. 
Report prepared for the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
Registration and Issuance Unit. Retrieved from http://cdm.unfccc.int/Reference/ 
Reports/TTreport/TTrep08.pdf. 
[61] Singley, J. A. (2004). Hazard versus Risk. Chemical Health and Safety. V.11(1), 14-16. 
[62] Spratt, S. and Ashford, C. (2011). Climate Finance: A tool-kit for assessing climate 
mitigation and adaptation funding mechanisms. London: Institute of Development 
Studies and Stamp Out Poverty. Retrieved from http://unfccc.int/files/cooperation_ 
support/financial_mechanism/long-term_finance/application/pdf/climate_finance_and 
_the_financial_transaction_tax.pdf. 
[63] Stern, N., et al. (2006). Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change. Cambridge: 
Cambrige University Press. Retrieved from http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/ 
+/http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/independent_reviews/stern_review_economics_ 
climate_change/stern_review_report.cfm. 
[64] Swanson, T. and Johnston, S. (1999). Global Environmental Problems and 
International Environmental Agreements. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing. 
[65] Tbach (2013). US-China relations post-COP19. Vermont School of Law. Retrieved 
from http://vlscop.vermontlaw.edu/ 
[66] Trindade, S. C. (2000). Paper 2: A Flexible Framework for Meaningful and Effective 
Actions to Enhance the Implementation of Article 4.5 of the UNFCCC. Retrieved from 
http://unfccc.int/files/documentation/workshops_documentation/application/pdf/trind.p
df. 
[67] Twidale, S. (2013). U.N. Carbon offset market seen ‗in a coma‘ for years after 
Warsaw‘. Reuters. Retrieved from http://in.reuters.com/article/2013/11/29/us-un-carbon 
-idINBRE9AS0H520131129. 
[68] United Nations (UN) (2010). Report of the Secretary-General‟s High-level Advisory 
Group on Climate Change Financing. Retrieved from http://www.un.org/wcm/webdav/ 
site/climatechange/shared/Documents/AGF_reports/AGF%20Report.pdf. 
[69] United Nations (UN) (2009). Department of Economic and Social Affairs. World 
Economic and Social Survey: Promoting Development, Saving the Planet. U.N. Doc. E/ 
2009/50/Rev.1, ST/ESA/319. Retrieved from http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/ 
policy/wess/wess_archive/2009wess.pdf. 
[70] United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 2007. Monitoring and Evaluation 
Framework for Adaptation to Climate Change. Draft for Comments, United Nations 
Development Programme, July 2007). Retrieved from http://www.seachangecop.org/ 
files/documents/2007_UNDP_ME_Framework_for_CCA_draft.pdf. 
[71] United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP) (2013). The Emissions Gap Report 
2013. A UNEP synthesis Report. Retrieved from http://www.unep.org/publications/ 

Lara Lázaro Touza and Michel Zoghby 
124 
ebooks/emissions ga pre port2013/portals/50188/EmissionsGapReport%202013_high-
res.pdf. 
[72] United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP) (2012). The Emissions Gap Report 
2012. A UNEP synthesis Report. Retrieved from http://www.unep.org/pdf/2012gap 
report.pdf. 
[73] United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP) (2011). Bridging the Emissions 
Gap. A Synthesis Report. Retrieved from http://www.unep.org/pdf/UNEP_bridging_ 
gap.pdf. 
[74] United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP) (2010). The Emissions Gap Report. 
Are the Copenhagen Accord Pledges Sufficient to Limit Global Warming to 2° C or 
1.5° C? Retrieved from http://www.unep.org/publications/ebooks/emissionsgapreport/ 
pdfs/GAP_REPORT_SUNDAY_SINGLES_LOWRES.pdf. 
[75] United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) (2013a). 
Elements of Adaptation. Retrieved from http://unfccc.int/adaptation/items/7006.php# 
Observation. 
[76] United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) (2013b). 
Focus: Finance. Retrieved from https://unfccc.int/focus/finance/items/7001.php#intro. 
[77] United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) (2013c). Fast 
Start 
Finance. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://unfccc.int/cooperation_support/financial_ 
mechanism/fast_start_finance/items/5646.php. 
[78] United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) (2011). 
Assessing the Costs and Benefits of Adaptation Options - An Overview of Approaches. 
The Nairobi Work Programme on Impacts, Vulnerability and Adaptation to Climate 
Change. Retrieved from http://unfccc.int/files/adaptation/nairobi_work_programme/ 
knowledge_resources_and_publications/application/pdf/2011_nwp_costs_benefits_ada
ptation.pdf. 
[79] United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) (2010). The 
Contribution of the Clean Development Mechanism Under the Kyoto Protocol to 
Technology Transfer. Retrieved from https://cdmunfccc.int/Reference/Reports/TT 
report/TTrep10.pdf. 
[80] United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) (2009). 
Copenhagen Accord. Retrieved from http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2009/cop15/eng/ 
l07.pdf. 
[81] United 
Nations 
Framework 
Convention 
on 
Climate 
Change 
(UNFCCC)  
(1992). 
Retrieved 
from 
http://unfccc.int/files/essentialbackground/background 
publications htmlpdf /application/pdf/conveng.pdf. 
[82] United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) (n.d.). CGE 
Training Materials for Vulnerability and Adaptation Assessment. Chapter 9: 
Integration, Mainstreaming, Monitoring and Evaluation. Retrieved from http://unfccc. 
int/files/cooperation_support/nama/application/msword/ch9_integration.doc. 
[83] Van Nostrand, J. M. (2011). Legal Issues in Financing Energy Efficiency: Creative 
Solutions for Funding the Initial Capital Costs of Investments in Energy Efficiency 
Measures. Journal of Ennergy and Environmental Law, Winter, 1-16. 
[84] Von Lehe, A. (2011). Cities, climate and COPs. Southeastern Environmental Law 
Journal, 19, 217-230. 

Climate Risks: Theory, Data and the Global Governance of Climate Change 
 
125
[85] Vrolijk, C. (2001). The Bonn Agreement – The World agrees to leave the US on the 
sideline. The Royal Institute of International Affairs: Energy and Environment 
Programme. Retrieved from http://www.chathamhouse.org/sites/default/files/public/ 
Research/Energy,%20Environment%20and%20Development/bonnagreement.pdf. 
[86] Willows, R. and Connell, R. (Eds.) (2003). Climate adaptation: Risk, uncertainty and 
decision-making. UK Climate Impacts Programme Technical Report. Oxford: UKCIP. 
Retrieved from http://www.ukcip.org.uk/wordpress/wp-content/PDFs/Risk.pdf. 
[87] World Resources Institute (WRI) (2012). Fast-Start Finance: Where Do We Stand at the 
End of 2012? WRIInsights. Retrieved from http://insights.wri.org/open-climate-
network/2012/12/fast-start-finance-where-do-we-stand-end-2012. 
[88] World Trade Organization-United Nations Environmental Programme (WTO-UNEP) 
(2009). Report Trade and Climate Change - A report by the United Nations 
Environment Programme and the World Trade Organization. Retrieved from http:// 
www.wto.org/english/res_e/booksp_e/trade_climate_change_e.pdf. 
 
 
 


In: Globalization and International Security: An Overview 
ISBN: 978-1-63463-075-7 
Editors: T. Rodrigues, R. García Pérez et al.  
 
© 2015 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 7 
 
 
 
FIGHT FOR NATURAL RESOURCES: 
THE GEOGRAPHY OF WARS 
 
 
Américo Zuzarte Reis 
Institute of Geography and Spatial Planning, 
University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Researches into the relationships between environmental factors and violence or 
environmental related conflicts constitute a much debated research field nowadays. Over 
the past two decades much attention has been paid to the role of natural resources in post-
cold war conflicts, particularly in Africa. Several authors think that environmental 
scarcity, which is scarcity of renewable resources, can contribute to generate violence or 
social unrest, particularly within states scarcely endowed with technical know-how and 
social structures, such as developing countries. On the other hand, several African 
countries, firstly in West Africa and afterwards in East Africa, have demonstrated a 
‗paradox of plenty‘, in which dependence on the extraction of and trade in high-value 
natural resources has contributed to economic and state decline and aided rebel group 
mobilization. While it is debated to what extent and under which conditions abundant 
resources in Africa increase the risk of conflict, it is clear that resource governance 
should form an intrinsic part of peacemaking and development building on the continent. 
Both Geographies, of civil war and conflicts, coincide and reinforce theories that 
associate the wealth of natural resources and conflict. 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The end of the 20th century was marked by the fall of the Berlin Wall in the late 1980s, 
by the fading of bipolarization and the dawning of a reconfigured political map of Europe. 
The political and social instability has been spreading across the Middle East, North Africa 
                                                           
 Corresponding author: Américo Zuzarte Reis. Institute of Geography and Spatial Planning, University of Lisbon 
(Portugal). E-mail: areis@campus.ul.pt. 

Américo Zuzarte Reis 
128 
and Southeast Asia. The most affected countries by this growing violence have several main 
features in common: inequality and disparity in access to wealth, absence of democracy, 
challenging states legitimacy, lack or weakness of public institutions, strong informal or 
illegal economy, high rates of violence, forced displacements and political marginalization of 
sectors of the population (see e.g Jensen and Wantchekon [28] and Schafer [51]). 
Contrastingly, most of the above described situations are found in countries where natural 
wealth is abundant, so as the dependence on the exportation of these resources. 
According to resource pessimists, as revenues generated by extractive industries rise, the 
quality of governance inevitably declines, reducing economic competitiveness and leaving the 
poor behind. 
In theory, natural resource wealth should strengthen economic growth, provide 
governments with an opportunity to support human development, and create employment. In 
practice, it has often led to poverty, inequality and violent conflict. These are symptoms that 
have been widely attributed to a resource curse or to mineral-based poverty traps1. 
The Oil World is increasingly fussing with the worsening of the internal tensions in 
several of the countries producers of oil and gas – from the Middle East to Latin America and 
Brazil, North and West Africa, and emerging oil countries of East Africa. Even the Eurasia is 
going through difficult times – aggravated by the Ukrainian crisis – which may jeopardize the 
energy security of many European countries2. Given this status of instability, affecting the 
oil‘s economy, is it plausible to expect a future escalation of tensions between European 
countries, on the energy subject? 
History has shown that the disruption in oil or gas flows shakes the world‘s economy, as 
it is easily concluded from the analysis of the past oil clashes (see, e.g., Hamilton [20])3. 
Today, more than in a not so distant past, energy security is a pressing concern of developed 
countries and of growing economies, as well as an inseparable subject from homeland 
security policies. 
This chapter explores the recent trends and connections between violent armed conflicts 
and natural resources, in the age of globalization. It results from the author‘s research project 
Geopolítica dos Recursos Naturais e dos Conflitos Armados4 and it is structured in two parts. 
In what concerns future developments, the author aims to advance a methodology supported 
in multivariate analysis and in GIS spatial analysis, having for purpose the early identification 
of potential conflicts triggered or aggravated by the abundance or lack of natural resources, 
which are vital to the sustainability of human life. 
Thus, the first part revisits the major analytical perspectives on the links between 
resources and conflict. Firstly, it discusses the recent trends of the world‘s population 
evolution and the growing demand for natural resources. 
                                                           
1 The theoretical possibility of poverty traps in the neoclassical growth model is briefly approached in the economic 
growth textbook by Barro and Sala-i-Martin [1], which also discusses shortly the possible case for large-scale 
development assistance to overcome such traps. 
2 For the concepts of energy dependence and security of energy supply, see ―Member States‘ Energy Dependence: 
An Indicator-Based Assessment‖. European Commission, Occasional Papers 145, April 2013. Available at: 
http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/publications/. 
3 Key post-World-War-II oil shocks reviewed include the Suez Crisis of 1956-57, the OPEC oil embargo of 1973-
1974, the Iranian revolution of 1978-1979, the Iran-Iraq War initiated in 1980, the first Persian Gulf War in 
1990-91, and the oil price spike of 2007-2008. Other more minor disturbances are also discussed, as are the 
economic downturns that followed each of the major postwar oil shocks. 
4 Geopolitics of Natural Resources and Armed Conflicts. 

Fight for Natural Resources: The Geography of Wars 
 
129
Secondly, it introduces the main theories and concepts about resources and conflicts, 
namely resource scarcity, resource conflicts, resource curse, among others. 
The analysis was carried out at a national level and applied, fundamentally, to the case of 
North, West and East Africa. A first phase of the work included a careful selection of 
databases  related to renewable resources (PRIO – Diamond Dataset and Petroleum Dataset)5 
and databases related to conflicts (UCDP/PRIO Armed Conflict Dataset)6. 
The results enabled the identification of areas suffering from scarcity of one or more 
renewable resources and/or suffering from the resource curse, indicating different levels of 
gravity. Accounts from West and East Africa countries seem to confirm our results, reporting 
struggles between internal groups over access to scarce resources in areas that our work 
showed to be at high risk. 
Finally, the second part consists on a brief geopolitical analysis on the global energy 
sector, highlighting the demand and the increasing consumption of oil and gas, the 
geographical allocation of the production and the main threats that the oil and gas 
transportation face between the production and the consumption site. 
Data for the first part was found with ESRI as well as the Department of Peace and 
Conflict Research at the Uppsala University and the Conditions of War and Peace Program at 
the International Peace Research Institute, Oslo (PRIO). My goal is to use easily available 
spatial databases to map the various sources of valuable resources in a correlation with recent 
or current conflicts through geographic information systems, in order to locate the areas 
apparently most at risk of suffering negative social effects and their consequences in terms of 
internal security. 
The statistical component of the second part is mostly supported by the data of the 
International Energy Outlook 2013 – US Energy Information Administration (EIA) – and 
from BP Statistical Review of World Energy, June 2013 [6]. The data related to sea shipping 
come from the Review of Maritime Transport 2013 [61]. 
 
 
RESOURCES AND CONFLICT – LITERATURE REVIEW (A SYNOPSIS) 
 
According to the Uppsala Conflict Data Program (UCDP)7 an armed conflict ―is a 
contested incompatibility that concerns government and/or territory where the use of armed 
force between two parties, of which at least one is the government of a state, results in at least 
25 battle-related deaths in one calendar year‖. 
The heated academic and institutional debate over the security dimension of non-
traditional threats is fairly recent and its decisive start may be dated by the end of the Cold 
War. 
                                                           
5 The diamonds dataset offers a comprehensive list of all known diamond deposits throughout the world. The 
dataset is available as GIS shapefiles as well as in spreadsheet (Excel) format. The petroleum datasets contain 
information on all known oil and gas deposits throughout the world. Two datasets are available: one for on-
shore deposits and another for off-shore deposits. 
6 The codebook for the UCDP GED Point Dataset: Sundberg, Ralph, Mathilda Lindgren and Ausra Padskocimaite, 
2010, ―UCDP GED Codebook version 1.0-2011‖, Department of Peace and Conflict Research, Uppsala 
University. 
7 The UCDP is a Program of the Department of Peace and Conflict Research of the Uppsala University. This 
program collects data and information on armed conflicts and on a large number of aspects of armed violence 
since 1946 (http://www.pcr.uu.se/research/UCDP/). 

Américo Zuzarte Reis 
130 
Both political science and critical geopolitics have discussed the role of natural resources 
upon governance and conflict [9, 18, 33]. Oil and diamonds are frequently reported as cause 
of violent conflict. Analysis of diamond wars suggests that ―conflict commodities‖ are not 
only financing hostilities, but also shape the motives of violence and behavior of armed 
parties [33]. Since the late 1990s, many scholars have studied the relationship between natural 
resource wealth and civil war, and found a positive relationship between resource scarcity and 
conflict. Most of them have been motivated by a series of violent resource conflicts – in 
Angola, Colombia, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Sudan 
[47]. However, critics of the neo-Malthusian approach either argue that there are too many 
intervening non-environmental variables to establish a direct link between population growth 
and scarcity-induced conflicts [7, 19, 33, 57]. 
Actually, there has been renewed and increasing interest in the two central theoretical 
approaches focusing on the topic of resource abundance: the rentier state theory and the 
resource curse thesis. Both argue that resource-exporting countries are negatively affected by 
political, economic, and social distortions. 
The concept of the rentier state was particularly expanded by Hazem Beblawi and 
Giacomo Luciani [34], who classified a rentier state as a state in which at least 40 percent of 
the global government revenue consists of economic rents [38]. According to this theory, the 
three central effects of dependence on economic rents are economic inefficiency, the 
obstruction of socioeconomic development, and the use of resource revenues by governments 
for costly policies such as large-scale re-distribution and security apparatuses, buying off 
potential dissidents or effectively suppressing rebellion [34]. 
Several studies show, against nature, that the discovery of a natural resource may be a 
curse rather than a blessing since resource-rich countries grow slower than others. According 
to recent quantitative studies, oil is, perhaps, the only resource that is robustly linked to civil 
war onset [12, 48]. Looking back in time, resource abundance has been a main driver of 
growth rather than the opposite. In, for example, Finland, Sweden, Norway, Australia, 
Canada, and the United States, there is little doubt that resources have historically promoted 
growth and industrialization (see, for example, David and Wright [10]). ―Contrasting the 
literature in economic history with the literature on the resource curse, one is led to question 
whether the effect of resource abundance has changed over time—and, if so, why?‖ [58]. 
Basedau and Richter [3] argue that debates around the nexus of oil and civil war have 
neglected two fundamental considerations: "there are a number of peaceful oil-rentier states, 
and there have been few efforts to explain why some oil-exporting countries have 
experienced civil war and others have not‖. According to these authors, ―methodologically 
the debate has been dominated by research using either quantitative methods or case studies, 
with little genuine medium-N comparison‖. 
As Torvik [58] exemplifies, in early 1900s, Norway was (together with Ireland) one of 
the poorest countries of Europe and today is one of the richest countries in the world. ―This 
remarkable transition has been driven by exploitation of natural resources (…) and since the 
1970s oil and natural gas have been key sectors.‖ Oil and natural gas from the North Sea, in 
the late 1960s, proved to be a blessing and made the great economic and social development 
of Norway8 possible. 
                                                           
8 See, for example, Larsen, Erling R. [32]. 

Fight for Natural Resources: The Geography of Wars 
 
131
On the reverse side, Nigeria‘s oil has proved to be a curse for the bulk of the Nigerian 
population, since the wealth generated by the oil exploration was suitable for a small elite 
associated with power. Moreover, the majority of the population is confronted with the darker 
side of the unregulated exploitation of oil, particularly with the heavy pollution in the Niger 
delta and habitats‘ destruction, with serious losses for the small local economy and livelihood 
[50]. Similar trend to the resource curse also noted in countries rich in precious stones, gold 
and other valuable metals, rare earth elements, and timber. ―The demand for these resources 
will grow substantially owing to an increase in the global population. Tackling problems 
pertaining to one commodity will be linked to supply and demand for the others‖ [43]. 
Another research pathway, more recent, and, in a way, influenced by the climate change 
sets of the IPCC9, aims to relate the repercussions of climate change over the spreading of 
civil violence. The climate, migration, and security nexus is a key test case because it is likely 
to exacerbate all of these existing risk factors [63]. 
The Quadrennial Defense Review Report (QDR), February 2010, emphasized the 
importance of addressing such non-traditional threats to the US and international security: 
 
The rising demand for resources, rapid urbanization of littoral regions, the effects of 
climate change, the emergence of new strains of disease, and profound cultural and 
demographic tensions in several regions are just some of the trends whose complex 
interplay may spark or exacerbate future conflicts [59]. 
 
The vast body of literature about the relationship between resources and conflict can be 
broadly divided into two groups: studies which focus on resource scarcity and conflict, and 
studies that explore the relationship between resources‘ abundance and conflict. The methods 
applied vary from vast quantitative efforts (econometric modeling and statistical regressions, 
cross-country and time-series analyses), to qualitative analyses. 
Summarizing the varied approaches that relate to resources and conflicts highlight that 
natural resources can trigger violence through three main causal mechanisms [24, 33, 47]: a) 
motivation to take up arms may result from resource-related grievances, such as ecological 
damage or the withholding of resource revenues, costs and benefits related to resources are 
the driving forces of conflict; b) resources also provide the opportunity for conflict by making 
rebellion or warfare financially (or militarily) feasible, particularly through the ―lootability‖ 
of resources; and, c) resources may make indirect mechanisms work, directly providing 
neither motive nor opportunity but exerting a detrimental influence on other areas such as 
state institutions (the ―weak state‖) and socioeconomic development (―Dutch disease‖), which 
in turn makes civil war more likely [3]. 
 
 
URBAN POPULATION GROWTH, 
CLIMATE CHANGE AND CONFLICT NEXUS 
 
At the turn of the last century, the World‘s Economic Center of Gravity accentuated its 
displacement to southeast due to the strong demographic and economic growths in China, 
India and the rest of East Asia. 
                                                           
9 IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). http://www.ipcc.ch/. 

Américo Zuzarte Reis 
132 
These emerging economies have maintained high levels of economic growth, 
unparalleled in Western economies, and have accentuated the strong tendency for the 
increasing density of population around large cities and the brutal augmentation of 
consumption of goods. The distribution of global political, economic, and military power is 
becoming more diffuse. 
The seven largest megacities (defined as areas of continuous urban development of over 
10 million people) are located in Asia. More than half of the population of large urban areas 
(500,000 and over) is in Asia, living in 473 of the 922 largest urban areas. China and India 
alone bear more urban concentrations over 500,000 habitants (respectively 194 and 93) than 
North America and Europe together (268). In the beginning of the 21st century, for the first 
time in history, urban population exceeds the rural population. 
Nowadays there are 29 megacities in the world (Table 7.1). 
China has the most megacities than any other country, four. The second fastest growing 
megacity over the past decade, Shenzhen (historically called ―Bao‘on‖), was a small fishing 
village. In 1979, Deng Xiaoping established Special Economic Zones (SEZs) in the Pearl 
River Delta region, with Shenzhen being one of the zones receiving the same economic 
treatment as its peers. Shenzhen soon stood out among the SEZs not solely due to the growth 
of its population or economy, but also due to the amount of constructed landscape that totally 
changed the geography of the region. 
In 1989, Shenzhen already had an ambitious plan to grow from 30,000 to 1 million in 10 
years. By 2000, the official population was 10 million. Its rise has been so quick that the Asia 
Society has labeled it ―a city without a history‖10. 
Figure 7.1 represents the population‘s distribution – rural and urban – since the middle 
20th century and the projection period to 2050. The intersection between the two lines 
occurred in the beginning of the 21st century, significantly increasing the number of people 
living in urban settlements from about 1.5 billion in 1990s to 3.6 billion (more than 50 per 
cent of the world‘s population) in 2011. Estimates suggest that this population may achieve 4 
billion in 2030. 
The large cities are vastly concentrated in coastal zones, which put a large portion of the 
urban population at risk from rising sea levels and intensifying storm surges. Areas of high 
population growth and high vulnerability to climate change impacts overlap. 
 
Table 7.1. Urban Areas 500.000 and Over Population 
 
Geography 
Cases 
Population 
Average Density: 
Square Kilometer 
% of Urban 
Areas 
% of 
Population 
Africa 
103 
198.429.000 
7.000 
11,2% 
10,3% 
Asia 
473 
1.073.840.000 
7,000 
51,3% 
56,0% 
Europe 
144 
209.505.000 
3,200 
15,6% 
10,9% 
North America 
124 
259.238.000 
1,600 
13,4% 
13,5% 
Oceania 
7 
14.357.000 
1,400 
0,8% 
0,7% 
World 
922 
1.917.558.000 
4,300 
100,0% 
100,0% 
Source: Demographia World Urban Areas [11]. 
 
                                                           
10 ―A city without a history‖ in http://asiasociety.org/business/development/history-city-without-history. 

Fight for Natural Resources: The Geography of Wars 
 
133
—
1.000.000
2.000.000
3.000.000
4.000.000
5.000.000
6.000.000
7.000.000
Population (thousands)
Urban
Rural
 
Source: United Nations [62]. 
Figure 7.1. Urban and Rural Population of the World, 1950-2050. 
Table 7.2. Cities in Coastal Zones. Share of Urban Settlements Whose Land Area 
Intersects the Low Elevation Coastal Zone (LECZ), by urban Settlement Size, 2000 
 
Region 
<100K (%) 
100-500K 
(%) 
500K-1M 
(%) 
1-5M (%) 
5M+ (%) 
Africa 
9 
23 
39 
50 
40 
Asia 
12 
24 
37 
45 
70 
Latin Europe 
11 
25 
43 
38 
50 
Australia and New Zealand 
44 
77 
100 
100 
N/A 
North America 
9 
19 
29 
25 
80 
Small island States 
51 
61 
67 
100 
N/A 
World 
13 
24 
38 
44 
65 
Source: McGranahan, G., D. Balk and B. Anderson [41]. 
 
Facts suggest that the poorest countries and poorest groups within a population are most 
vulnerable to climate-related hazards such as floods, droughts, and landslides11. 
More than a third of the world‘s total population lives in urban areas in low-and middle-
income nations12 and they are at risk from direct and indirect impacts of climate change 
(Table 7.2). Much of this population resides in the world‘s 30 largest cities, including Jakarta, 
Shanghai, Mumbai (Bombay), Bangkok, London and New York. Even in Europe, 70% of the 
largest cities have areas that are less than 10 meters above sea level [41]. 
Climate change has the potential to increase flooding risks in cities in three ways: from 
the sea, from rainfall, and from changes that increase river flows. 
                                                           
11 The affectation intensity and the climate change potential consequences on violent events (e.g., earthquakes, 
tsunamis and tornadoes), take on very different dimensions depending on the level of development of the 
regions or countries affected. Considering two recent examples, the violent Haitian earthquake (7.0 Mw) in 
2010 triggered high levels of violence on the streets and looting after the natural disaster, and the even more 
violent earthquake in Japan (9.0 Mw) followed by a tsunami did not. 
12 United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2012). World Urbanization 
Prospects: The 2011 Revision. 

Américo Zuzarte Reis 
134 
For instance, last January (2014), England has been hit with the heaviest rainfall in 250 
years, causing widespread flooding in the south west and near London. Water levels have 
risen across the country's south, causing flood waters to inundate parts of West London as the 
River Thames reached its highest level in 60 years. 
The scale of the devastation to urban populations and economies caused by extreme 
weather events in recent years highlights their vulnerabilities. Too little attention has been 
given to the vulnerability of urban populations to climate change – and especially to the 
vulnerability of their low-income populations [44]. 
Population growth and scarcity of natural resources are often perceived as severe threats 
to sustainable development. World population is confronted with a natural resource supply 
that is limited in the end. Population growth is already putting a strain on the world‘s limited 
supply of freshwater. More than 45 countries are currently experiencing water scarcity or 
stress, with the majority of these countries in Africa [62, 17]. Cities generally rely on their 
immediate surroundings for water. While the effect of climate change on water resources of a 
particular city cannot be predicted at this stage, the competition for water can be expected to 
intensify in the areas that will become dryer than they are now [29]. 
The last century has seen unprecedented growth in human population and economic 
wellbeing for a huge portion of the world. This growth has been fed by equally unprecedented 
natural resource consumption and environmental impacts, including conversion of large 
portions of the natural world to human use, which have prompted recurring concern about 
whether the world‘s natural resources‘ base is capable of sustaining such growth. Access to 
natural resources is increasingly perceived as the security risk of the 21st century. 
According to the WTO13, natural resources are ―stocks of materials that exist in the 
natural environment that are both scarce and economically useful in production or 
consumption, either in their raw state or after a minimal amount of processing‖ [65]. In 
another definition, according to the Organization for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD), natural resources are ―natural assets (raw materials) occurring in 
nature that can be used for economic production or consumption‖. One way to classify natural 
resources is based on their renewability. Natural resources can be renewable if after 
exploitation they ―can return to their previous stock levels by natural process of growth or 
replenishment‖, such as trees, water, grass, solar and wind energy. Conversely, natural 
resources which cannot be regenerated after exploitation are considered non-renewable, like 
mineral resources, fossil fuels, oil, diamonds, and gold, among others14. 
The ancient negative [39] perception of population growth is well represented in the 
literature; see e.g., Meadows et al. [42] and Ehrlich [13]. The Club of Rome published The 
Limits to Growth [42], which predicted dire consequences by the early part of the twenty-first 
century, unless population and economic growth were significantly curtailed. 
According to Homer-Dixon [22], the environmental effects of human activity are a 
function of two factors: the vulnerability of the ecosystem and the product of the total 
population and population‘s physical activity per capita in the region. 
                                                           
13 The World Trade Report 2010 [65] focuses on trade in natural resources, such as fuels, forestry, mining and 
fisheries. The Report examines the characteristics of trade in natural resources, the policy choices available to 
governments and the role of international cooperation, particularly of the WTO, in the proper management of 
trade in this sector. Available at: http://www.wto.org/english/res_e/booksp_e/ anrep_e/ world_trade 
_report10_e. pdf. 
14 See OECD, Glossary of Statistical Terms, available at https://stats.oecd.org/glossary/index.htm. 

Fight for Natural Resources: The Geography of Wars 
 
135
Homer-Dixon uses the term ―environmental scarcity‖ to refer to scarcity of renewable 
resources, and he identifies scarcities of agricultural land, forests, water, and fish as the 
environmental problems that contribute the most to violence (Figure 7.3). 
These social effects, both singly or in combination, can produce and exacerbate conflicts 
between groups. Most of such conflicts are sub-national, diffuse, and persistent [23]. 
The genocide in Rwanda, which started in April 1994, sparked a heated debate about the 
underlying causes at its origin, and, in this research approach, some analysts stated that 
environmental and demographic factors were the major trigger for violence. 
Even though it is true that such factors were important to the conflict, since Rwanda is 
predominantly a rural-based society and is consequently vulnerable to the effects of 
environmental stress, subsequent studies revealed that environmental factors per se do not 
provide a suitable explanation for the genocide of Rwanda. 
Environmental degradation and high population levels contributed to migrations, 
declining agricultural productivity, and the weakening of the legitimacy of President Juvenal 
Habyarimana‘s regime. At rest, a correlation between the scarcities of renewable resources 
and the outbreak of violence is not adequate proof that the violence was caused primarily by 
resources‘ scarcity [45]. 
Northwest Africa is crisscrossed with climate, migration, and security challenges. The 
rising coastal sea level, desertification, drought, and numerous other potential effects of 
climate change have the capacity to increase the numbers of migrants and make these routes 
more hazardous in the future. For example, from Nigeria to Niger, Algeria, and Morocco, this 
region has long been marked by labor migration, bringing workers from sub-Saharan Africa 
to the Mediterranean coastline and Europe. The climate, migration, and security nexus is a 
key test case because it is likely to exacerbate all of these existing risk factors [63]. 
As the 2013 Heidelberg Institute for International Conflict Research Conflict Barometer 
[21] shows, resource conflicts are a serious phenomenon across the world. Conflicts 
concerning resources, i.e., natural resources, raw materials, or the profit generated thereof, 
amounted to 90 cases. Of those, 59 displayed violence and nine conflicts reached the intensity 
level of war. Six of these wars took place in Sub-Saharan Africa and one war each in the 
Americas, the Middle East and Maghreb, and Asia (Figure 7.4). 
 
 
Source: Adapted from: Homer-Dixon [22]. 
Figure 7.3. Environmental Scarcity and the Four Principal Social Effects. 

Américo Zuzarte Reis 
136 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
frequency
High Intensity
Medium Intensity
Low Intesity
 
Source: Conflict Barometer 2013 [21]. 
Figure 7.4. Global Frequencies of Conflict Items in 2013 by Intensity Groups. 
In the Americas, about 80 percent of the 26 conflicts pertain to resources such as coca, 
illicit drugs, and arable land included violent means, with drugs being part of highly violent 
conflicts in Mexico, Colombia, and Brazil. In total, almost half of the conflicts observed in 
this region had resources as at least one of their items. In 30 percent of all conflicts in Sub-
Saharan Africa, e.g., arable land, cattle, minerals, and oil, were contested. 
In nineteen of the region's 31 conflicts related to resources, the conflict parties resorted to 
violence (61.3 percent). Almost similar results were found for Asia with 63.6 percent and the 
Middle East and Maghreb with 57.1 percent. The latter region thereby accounted for four 
violent conflicts of its seven conflicts regarding this item. In Europe, four conflicts concerned 
resources (i.e., 6.3 percent), with only one involving violence. 
Europe, after almost two decades of relative calm, contrary to what could have been 
predicted given the implosion of the former Soviet Union and the independences of the 
former Soviet Socialist Republics, faces serious challenges imposed by natural causes - 
storms, floods, desertification – and by causes induced by the fierce and growing struggle for 
energy resources. 
Russia, a global player in the energy market, has seen its ancient boundaries retreating to 
East and is losing its regional leading role against the influence of the European Union in its 
former republics. However, the Russian Federation owns a powerful unconventional weapon, 
the oil and gas weapons. Given the current scenario of energy dependence of most Member 
States of the European Union and some former Soviet Republics, that weapon can be a strong 
enough argument to shake the Transatlantic relationship, particularly in view of the 
atmosphere of friction created by the growing Russian-Ukrainian crisis. 
The serious cooling of East-West relations is not yet foreseen, but it is not unreasonable 
to highlight the influence of the potential Russian energy weapon in the relations with 
European states and future outcomes in the web that has been weaving with neighbor China. 
The use of energy resources for retaliation or conflict resolution is not unprecedented, as has 
already been noticed in recent situations in relations with former republics (e.g., Georgia, 
2008; Ukraine, 2006, 2009 and 2014). 

Fight for Natural Resources: The Geography of Wars 
 
137
FIGHTING WITH OR FOR RESOURCES? 
 
Scarcity of natural resources represents the limited availability of, or limited access to, a 
particular natural asset. It can be a function of environmental change, resource depletion or 
degradation (and it can be absolute or relative)15. 
Access to natural resources is the key that underlies all livelihoods. 
 
Livelihoods are the mechanisms through which people translate natural resources 
into the things they need to survive and thrive. A failure to ensure sustainable and 
equitable resource use, over-consumption of resources in support of particular 
livelihoods, or the impacts of a sudden shock such as war or disaster on natural resources 
or their rate of consumption, can lead to a loss of livelihoods [40]. 
 
Dependence and abundance have different implications for the likelihood of civil war [2]. 
Resource dependence may be especially violent enhancing at higher levels. Countries are 
vulnerable to price shocks, which in turn create economic crisis and (thus) make conflict 
more likely. 
The petroleum sector is increasing world-wide – the number of relevant producer 
countries is growing, including in poor states with weak governance systems – and prices 
remain high. The threat of the ―oil curse‖ where private companies and corrupt elites capture 
most of the benefits for themselves is posing global challenges, including to democracy and 
gender gains (see, e.g., Basedau and Mähler [4]). 
Based on the International Energy Outlook 2013 [26] reference case, world liquids 
consumption increases by about one-third (28 million barrels per day), from almost 87 
million barrels per day in 2010 to 115 million barrels per day in 2040. Petroleum and other 
liquids remain the world‘s dominant fuel source through the projection period, although their 
share of global primary energy consumption has decreased. 
The growth in non-OECD liquids demand is led by the countries of non-OECD Asia 
(particularly, China and India). Non-OECD Asia accounts for almost 70 percent of the 
increase in global liquids demand, rising by more than 19 million barrels per day from 2010 
to 2040. Demand growth in China and India surpasses the combined liquids demand growth 
of the rest of the world [26]. 
According to the Oil and Gas Journal16 (cited by EIA [26]), proved17 world oil reserves 
were estimated at 1,638 billion barrels, about 7 percent higher than the estimate for 2012, and 
approximately one-half of the world‘s proved oil reserves are located in the Middle East, and 
more than 80 percent are concentrated in eight countries. Figure 7.5 illustrates the major 
urban concentrations and the main concentrations of large oilfields. 
The largest increases in non-OPEC supplies come from the nations of non-OECD Europe 
and Eurasia. 
                                                           
15 See, for example, Baumgärtner, B. and Faber, M. [5]. Relative and absolute scarcity of nature. Assessing the roles 
of economics and ecology for biodiversity conservation. Available at: http://bscw-app1.ethz.ch/pub/bscw.cgi/ 
d239215/baumgartner_2006.pdf. 
16 ―Worldwide look at reserves and production,‖ Oil and Gas Journal, Vol. 110.12 (December 3, 2012), pp. 28-31, 
http://www.ogj.com (subscription site). 
17 Proved reserves of crude oil are the estimated quantities that geological and engineering data indicate can be 
recovered in future years from known reservoirs, assuming existing technology and current economic and 
operating conditions (EIA, IEO 2013, p. 37). Available: http://www.eia.gov/forecasts/ieo/pdf/0484(2013).pdf. 

Américo Zuzarte Reis 
138 
 
Source: Oil data [37]; Cities [61]; Base Map [16]. 
Figure 7.5. World‘s Urban Population and Oil. Cities Over 750K habitants and Giant Oil Fields – EUR. 
Liquid fuels production in Kazakhstan grows by an average of 3.0 percent per year, from 
1.6 million barrels per day in 2010 to 3.9 million barrels per day in 2040 [26]. 
Central Asia and the Caspian region, bridging the gap between the abundant energy 
resources of the vast territory of the Russian Federation and the avid markets of Southeast 
Asia, are fundamental pieces in the complex chessboard of geopolitics of energy18. The wide 
reserves of oil and natural gas deposited under and around the Caspian Sea, in addition to the 
major transport of oil and gas infrastructures crossing those territories, redoubled the 
geostrategic importance of this region. According to M. Klare [31], energy prominence of 
Central Asia have induced a rare change in the geography of the US military in October 1991 
to protect the normal supply of vital resources, especially oil and natural gas. 
Over the past several decades, globalization contributed to a phenomenal increase in the 
volume of seaborne trade: in 2012, about 9.2 billion tons of goods were loaded in ports 
worldwide, with tanker trade (crude oil, petroleum products and gas) accounting for less than 
one third of the total and dry cargo being responsible for the remaining lion‘s share [61]. 
In 2011, total world oil production amounted to approximately 87 million barrels per day 
(bbl/d), and over one-half was moved by tankers on fixed maritime routes. By volume of oil 
transit, the Strait of Hormuz, leading out of the Persian Gulf, and the Strait of Malacca, 
linking to the Indian and Pacific Oceans, are two of the world's most strategic choke points19 
(see Figure 7.6). 
                                                           
18 In 2004, China surpassed Japan, the second largest consumer of oil in the world after the United States of 
America. Additionally, the lessons received from the Angarsk struggle and the Iraqi War determined China to 
diversify its energy supplies. In this context, the economic relations with the Central Asian republics, mainly 
in the energy field, have been developing faster. For more detailed information see, for example, Peterson and 
Barysch [46]. 
19 Choke points are narrow channels along widely used global sea routes, some so narrow that restrictions are placed 
on the size of the vessel that can navigate through them. They are a critical part of global energy security due 
to the high volume of oil traded through their narrow straits. EIA, 2014, available: http://www.eia.gov/ 
countries/regions-topics.cfm?fips=wotc&trk=p3. 

Fight for Natural Resources: The Geography of Wars 
 
139
 
Source: Oil data [37]; Oil Chokepoints [15]; Base Map [16].  
Figure 7.6. Giant Oil Fields and World Chokepoints. 
Maritime security has attracted a great deal of attention from scholars, analysts and 
journalists over the past decade and especially since the Al Qaeda attacks in the United States 
on September 11th 2001 (9/11). Salient issues under examination include incidents of piracy 
and sea robbery20, the threat of maritime terrorism, illegal trafficking in weapons, people and 
narcotics, territorial and maritime boundary disputes and the transit by sea of weapons of 
mass destruction (WMD). 
The waterways of the Middle East and North Africa (MENA region) and Southeast Asia 
are among the most important in the world. They facilitate the export of large volumes of oil 
and natural gas from the region, while also bridging traders in the Eastern and Western worlds 
through the Red Sea, Suez Canal, Strait of Malacca and South China Sea [53]. 
The Suez Canal is a vital waterway for bridging trans-hemispheric ocean freight, and is 
particularly important given its location near key oil-producing states. Egypt plays a vital role 
in international energy markets through the operation of the Suez Canal and Suez-
Mediterranean (SUMED Pipeline). In 2012, about 7% of all seaborne traded oil and 13% of 
liquefied natural gas (LNG) traded worldwide transited through the Suez Canal. The majority 
of crude oil transiting through the Suez Canal was destined for Europe and North America 
markets. 
A large portion of the world‘s natural gas exports are also shipped through the canal. In 
2012, roughly 13% of the world‘s exported LNG transited the canal – 1.5 trillion cubic feet 
worth [14]. The Suez Canal creates an essential link between the Mediterranean and the Red 
Sea, shaving off nearly 10,000 km by saving tankers from a 10-to-15 day trip around the Cape 
of Good Hope, the southern-most tip of Africa. The violence in Egypt could lead to the 
closure of its Suez Canal trade routes. 
According to EIA, the Egypt's 2011 revolution and the unrest that has followed have not 
had any noticeable effect on oil and LNG transit flows through the Suez Canal or SUMED 
Pipeline. 
The Strait of Hormuz occupies a fundamental geostrategic position in the Persian Gulf. 
                                                           
20 See IMB Piracy Reporting Centre http://www.icc-ccs.org/piracy-reporting-centre. 

Américo Zuzarte Reis 
140 
The strategic importance of the Gulf will increase significantly in the decades ahead. The 
Energy Information Administration‘s International Energy Outlook 2013 estimates that 
Middle East oil production will reach approximately 25.4 million barrels per day in 2011 to 
35.8 million barrels per day by 2040. Using the Reference case assumptions, the implied 
combined production of Saudi Arabia, Iran, and Iraq rises from 17.9 million barrels per day in 
2011 to 25.1 million barrels per day in 2040 [26]. 
The Strait of Hormuz is located between Oman and Iran, and connects the Persian Gulf 
with the Gulf of Oman and the Arabian Sea. Flows through the Strait in 2011 were roughly 
35 percent of all seaborne traded oil, or almost 20 percent of oil traded worldwide. More than 
85 percent of these crude oil exports went to Asian markets, with Japan, India, South Korea, 
and China representing the largest destinations. 
Supply issues are the most strategically significant element of China‘s energy security 
dilemma. Substantial oil demand growth and geopolitical uncertainties have increased 
pressure on China to import greater volumes of oil from a wide range of sources. The Chinese 
energy matter is a relevant issue in the analysis of oil‘s global geopolitics. In 2009, China 
became the second-largest net oil importer in the world behind the United States (Figure 7.7). 
In 2013, an estimated 75% of the country‘s oil imports came from the Middle East or 
Africa. A growing majority of Chinese‘s oil imports are therefore coming from potentially 
unstable regions in a political or security sense. 
In addition, the supply of oil to China also means depending on international sea lines of 
communication (SLOCs) and a number of geographical constraints. The Strait of Malacca is 
vital to China´s growing dependence on energy imports. 
The Strait is a narrow passage situated between Malaysia, Indonesia and Singapore 
linking the Indian and Pacific Oceans, ―with no real viable maritime alternative‖ [52]21. 
 
 
Source: [15]. 
Figure 7.7. China Oil Data, Production, Demand and Net Imports, 1985-2009 (Left) and China‘s Crude 
Oil Imports by source, 2013 (Right). 
For China, Russian oil and gas reserves and the Central Asian reserves – a neighbor 
region, rich in oil and natural gas – represents a strategic diversity in the face of Middle 
Eastern and African oil imports, given their geographic proximity. China inaugurated its first 
transnational oil pipeline in May 2006, when it began receiving Kazakh and Russian oil from 
a pipeline originating in Kazakhstan. China also revived its plans to construct an oil import 
                                                           
21 According to John Seamman [52], ―Alternative passages do exist further south and east, such as the Straits of 
Sunda and Lombok, but the added distance makes them economically unviable and doesn‘t adequately resolve 
the problem of strategic vulnerability‖. 

Fight for Natural Resources: The Geography of Wars 
 
141
pipeline from Myanmar through an agreement signed in March 2009. With this pipeline, 
China intends to have an alternative for oil coming from the Middle East that would bypass 
the Strait of Malacca. Actually, about 80 percent of Chinese oil imports traverse that potential 
choke point. The current Ukraine crisis and the crescent tensions between Russia and the 
West could strengthen Russia-Iran-Chine ties, namely in terms of energy agreements. 
 
 
THE COMING RESOURCE WARS? 
 
Michael Klare [30] considers that we have entered a new age, the Geo-Energy Age, in 
which disputes over vital resources will dominate world affairs. According to this author, ―in 
2012 and beyond, energy and conflict will be bound ever more tightly together, lending 
increasing importance to the key geographical flashpoints in our resource-constrained 
world‖22. The author highlights that in the next few years the location of energy sources and 
energy transportation routes - pipelines, oil ports, and tanker roots – will be pivotal landmarks 
on the global strategic map. Therefore, on the global strategic map, the Strait of Hormuz23, 
the Strait of Malacca, the East and South China Seas, the SLOCs, the Caspian Sea Basin, and 
the Arctic stand out. 
Looking closely to the pivotal landmarks noted by Michael Klare [30], they are all indeed 
central in the Global Geo-energy. The Strait of Hormuz occupies a key geostrategic position 
in the maritime transport of liquid fuels on routes between the Persian Gulf to markets in the 
West and East. Any disruption in the normal flow through this strait will have repercussions 
worldwide. Iran is perfectly aware of the strategic importance of potential ―weapon‖ Strait of 
Hormuz, as well as the United States, which therefore maintain a strong military presence in 
that region. 
The South China Sea is also a critical and favorable region to the outbreak of conflicts 
between states nowadays. Besides being an important fishing ground, the Strait of Malacca is 
a fundamental passing point to the commercial routes between East Asia and Europe. More 
recently, it acquired significance as a potential source of oil and natural gas. The disputes are 
ancient and arose after World War II when the littoral states – China and four countries of the 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines and the 
Vietnam (joined later) scrambled to occupy the islands there. 
Currently the issue has gone beyond territorial claims and access to energy resources, as 
the South China Sea has become a focal point for the US - China rivalry in the Western 
Pacific. Since around 2010, the sea has started to become linked with wider strategic issues 
relating to China‘s naval strategy and America‘s forward presence in the area [8]. 
The Caspian Sea Basin is in the center of a complex web of interests and disputes that 
involve the former Soviet Socialist Republics, China, the Russian Federation and the United 
States. Those enclosed waters and their surroundings contain valuable energy and mineral 
resources and are crucial to the energy infrastructure (pipelines and gas pipelines) network. 
This territory is highly disputed, both internally and externally, and violent conflict is a likely 
scenario. 
                                                           
22 Danger Waters, The Three Top Hot Spots of Potential Conflict in the Geo-Energy Era, http://www.tomdispatch. 
com/blog/175487/, posted by Michael Klare, January 10, 2012. 
23 According to Klare [30], the Strait of Hormuz is, however, is only one of several hot spots where energy, politics, 
and geography are likely to mix in dangerous ways in 2012 and beyond. 

Américo Zuzarte Reis 
142 
Finally, the instability that may be installed in the Artic is closely related to climate 
change and the menaces and opportunities created by changing natural conditions24. As the 
Arctic becomes more accessible and competition for resources and territory accelerates25, the 
risk of oil spills and other catastrophic accidents, territorial disputes, and security challenges 
will rise. 
The pressures caused by climate change will influence resource competition while 
placing additional burdens on economies, societies, and governance institutions around the 
world. These effects are threat multipliers that will aggravate stressors abroad such as 
poverty, environmental degradation, political instability, and social tensions – conditions that 
can enable terrorist activity and other forms of violence [59]. 
In conclusion, population, natural resources, climate change and conflicts are related in 
numerous ways and interact with each other. Several authors argue that natural resources 
rarely are the only cause of a conflict, however recent research suggests that the linkages here 
are real and important. Population growth, environmental degradation, and natural resource 
competition have interacted in many instances to produce or exacerbate civil and ethnic 
violence. The energy sector, for example, reached a dangerous boiling point and we live in a 
nervous world where ―a single incident at an energy‖ choke point could set the region in 
flames, provoking bloody encounters, boosting oil prices, and putting the global economy at 
risk‖ [30]. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Barro, R. J. and Sala-i-Martin, X. (2003). Economic Growth (2nd edition). Cambridge: 
MIT Press. 
[2] 
Basedau, M. and Jann, L. (2009). Resource Curse or Rentier Peace? The Ambiguous 
Effects of Oil Wealth and Oil Dependence on Violent Conflict. Journal of Peace 
Research, 46(6), 757-776. 
[3] 
Basedau, M., Richter, T. (2011). Why do some oil exporters experience civil war but 
others do not? A qualitative comparative analysis of net oil-exporting countries. GIGA 
working papers, 157. Retrieved from http://www.econstor.eu/handle/10419/47791. 
[4] 
Basedau, M. and Mähler, A. (2011). New Oil Finds in the Region: New Risks for the 
Region?. In: Fuelling the World – Failing the Region? Oil Governance and 
Development in Africa‟s Gulf of Guinea. Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung, Nigeria, 73-101. 
http://library.fes.de/pdf-files/bueros/nigeria/08607.pdf. 
[5] 
Baumgärtner, S., Becker, C., Faber, M., Manstetten, R. (2005). Relative and absolute 
scarcity of nature. Assessing the roles of economics and ecology for biodiversity 
conservation. Ecological Economics 59(4), 487-498. Retrieved from http://bscw-app1. 
ethz.ch/pub/bscw.cgi/d239215/baumgartner_2006.pdf. 
[6] 
BP (2013) BP Statistical Review of World Energy June 2013. Retrieved from http:// 
www.bp.com/content/dam/bp/pdf/statistical-review/statistical_review_of_world_ 
energy_2013.pdf. 
                                                           
24 See, for example, National Snow and Ice data Center https://nsidc.org/. 
25 The Arctic could hold about 22 percent of the world‘s undiscovered conventional oil and natural gas resources. 
EIA, Release date: October 19, 2009, http://www.eia.gov/oiaf/analysispaper/arctic/ (consulted 27 March 
2014). 

Fight for Natural Resources: The Geography of Wars 
 
143
[7] 
Brown, I. (2010). Assessing eco-scarcity as a cause of the outbreak of conflict in 
Darfur: A remote sensing approach. International Journal of Remote Sensing 31(10), 
2513-2520. 
[8] 
Buszynski, L. (2012). The South China Sea: Oil, Maritime Claims, and US - China 
Strategic Rivalry. The Washington Quarterly, 35(2), Spring, 139-156. 
[9] 
Collier, P. and Hoeffler, A. (2004). Greed and Grievance in Civil War. Oxford 
Economic Papers, 56(4), 563-595. 
[10] David, P. and Wright, G. (1997). Increasing Returns and the Genesis of American 
Resource Abundance. Industrial and Corporate Change 8, 203-45. 
[11] Demographia World Urban Areas: (Built-Up Urban Areas or World Agglomerations), 
10th Annual Edition, May 2014 Revision. Retrieved from http://demographia.com/db-
worldua.pdf (Accessed 29May14). 
[12] Dixon, J. (2009). What Causes Civil Wars? Integrating Quantitative Research Findings. 
International Studies Review, 11(4), 707-735. 
[13] Ehrlich, P. R. and Ehrlich, A. E. (1990). The Population Explosion. London: 
Hutchinson. 
[14] EIA (2013) Suez Canal, Sumed Pipeline are key parts of Egypt‘s role in international 
energy markets. Today in Energy. Retrieved from http://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/ 
detail.cfm?id=12371. 
[15] EIA (2014) World Oil Transit Chokepoints (Last Updated: August 22, 2012). Retrieved 
from 
http://www.eia.gov/countries/analysisbriefs/World_Oil_Transit_Chokepoints/ 
wotc.pdf. 
[16] ESRI (2009). ESRI data & Maps 9.3.1. Redlands ESRI. 
[17] FAO (2011). Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Aquastat 
Country Database. Rome: FAO. 
[18] Gilmore, E., Gleditsch, N. P., Lujala, P., and Rød, J. K. (2005). Conflict Diamonds: A 
New Dataset. Conflict Management and Peace Science, 22(3), 257-292. 
[19] Giordano, M. F., Giordano, M. A. and Wolf, A. T. (2005). International Resource 
Conflict and Mitigation. Journal of Peace Research, 42(1), 47-65. Retrieved from 
http://jpr.sagepub.com/content/42/1/47.full.pdf+html. 
[20] Hamilton, James D. (2011). Historical Oil Shocks. NBER Working Paper 16790, 
February 2011. Retrieved from http://www.nber.org/papers/w16790. 
[21] HIIK (2014). Conflict Barometer 2013. Heidelberg Institute for International Conflict 
Research, 
Heidelberg, 
2014. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://hiik.de/de/downloads/data/ 
downloads_2013/ConflictBarometer2013.pdf. 
[22] Homer-Dixon, T. (1991). On the threshold: Environmental changes as causes of acute 
conflict. International Security, 16(2), Fall, 76-116. 
[23] Homer-Dixon, T. (1994). Environmental scarcities and violent conflict: Evidence from 
cases. International Security, 19, Summer. 
[24] Humphreys, Maccartan (2005). Natural Resources, Conflict, and Conflict Resolution – 
Uncovering the Mechanisms. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 49(4), 508-537. 
[25] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) (2001). Climate Change 2001: 
Synthesis report. A Contribution of Working Groups I, II, and III of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
[26] IEO (2013). International Energy Outlook 2013, DOE/EIA-0484(2013), July 2013. 
Retrieved from http://www.eia.gov/forecasts/ieo/pdf/0484(2013).pdf. 

Américo Zuzarte Reis 
144 
[27] IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) (2007). Climate Change 2007: 
Synthesis report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II, and III to the Fourth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
[28] Jensen, N., Wantchekon, L. (2004). Resource wealth and political regimes in Africa. 
Comparative Political Studies, 37(7), 816-841. 
[29] Kamal-Chaoui, L. and Alexis, R. (Eds.) (2009). Competitive Cities and Climate 
Change. OECD Regional Development Working Papers, 2. 
[30] Klare, M. (2012). Tomgram: Michael Klare, Energy Wars 2012. TomDispatch.com. 
Retrieved from http://www.tomdispatch.com/blog/175487/. 
[31] Klare, M. T. (2001). Resource Wars: The New Landscape of Global Conflict. New 
York: Metropolitan Books. 
[32] Larsen, Erling R. (2004). Escaping the Resource Curse and the Dutch Disease?, 
available at http://www.ssb.no/a/publikasjoner/pdf/DP/dp377.pdf. 
[33] Le Billon, P. (2008). Diamond Wars? Conflict Diamonds and Geographies of Resource 
Wars. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 98(2), 345-372. 
[34] Luciani, G. (1987). Allocation vs. Production State. In: H. Beblawi and G. Luciani 
(Eds.), The Rentier State (pp. 63-84). London: Croom Helm. 
[35] Lujala, P., Gleditsch, N. P. and Gilmore, E. (2005). A Diamond Curse? Civil War. 
Journal of Conflict Resolution, 49(4), 538-562. 
[36] Lujala, P., Rød, J. K. and Thieme, N. (2007a) PRIO 2007. 
[37] Lujala, P., Rød, J. K. and Thieme, N. (2007b). Fighting over Oil: Introducing A New 
Dataset. Conflict Management and Peace Science 24(3), 239-256. Retrieved from 
http://www.prio.org/Data/Geographical-and-Resource-Datasets/Petroleum-Dataset/ 
Petroleum-Dataset-v-12/. 
[38] Mähler, A. (2010), Nigeria: A Prime Example of the Resource Curse? Revisiting the 
Oil‐violence Link in the Niger Delta, GIGA Working Papers, 120. http://www.giga-
hamburg.de/de/system/files/publications/wp120_maehler.pdf. 
[39] Malthus, T. (1798). An Essay on the Principle of Population, Electronic Scholarly 
Publishing Project, London. Retrieved from http://www.esp.org/books/malthus/ 
population/malthus.pdf. 
[40] Matthew, R. A., Halle, M. and J. Switzer (2002). Conserving the Peace: Resources, 
Livelihoods and Security. Winnipeg: International Institute for Sustainable 
Development. 
[41] McGranahan, G., Balk, D. and Anderson, B. (2007). The rising tide: assessing the risks 
of climate change and human settlements in low elevation coastal zones. Environment 
and Urbanization, 19(17), 17-37. 
[42] Meadows, D. H., Dennis, L., Meadows, J. R., and William, W. B. (1972). Limits to 
Growth. New York: Potomac Associates. 
[43] National Intelligence Council (NIA) (2012). Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds. 
http://www.dni.gov/nic/globaltrends. 
[44] Nicholls, R., et al. (2008). Ranking Port Cities with High Exposure and Vulnerability to 
Climate Extremes. OECD Environment Working Papers, 1. Paris: OECD Publishing. 
[45] Percival, V. and Homer-Dixon, T. (1996) Environmental scarcity and violent conflict: 
The case of Rwanda. Journal of Environment and Development, 5(3), September, 270-

Fight for Natural Resources: The Geography of Wars 
 
145
291. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.homerdixon.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/02/ 
Environmental-Scarcity-and-Violent-Conflict-the-Case-of-Rwanda.pdf. 
[46] Peterson, Alexandros and Barysch, Katinka, 2011. ―Russia, China and the geopolitics 
of energy in Central Asia”, Centre For European Reform. Available http://www.cer. 
org.uk/publications/archive/report/2011/russia-china-and-geopolitics-energy-central-
asia. 
[47] Ross, M. L. (2004), What Do We Know About Natural Resources and Civil War? 
Journal of Peace Research, 41(3), 337-356. 
[48] Ross, M. L. (2004a). How Do Natural Resource Influence civil war? Evidence from 
Thirteen Cases. International Organization, 58(1), 35-67. 
[49] Ross, M. L. (2006). A Closer Look at Oil, Diamonds, and Civil War. Annual Review of 
Political Science, 9(1), 265-300. 
[50] Sala-i-Martin, X. and Subramanian, A. (2013) Addressing the Natural Resource Curse: 
An Illustration from Nigeria. Journal of African Economies, 22(4), 570-615. Centre for 
the Study of African Economies (CSAE). Retrieved from http://www.nber.org/papers/ 
w9804. 
[51] Schafer, J. (2002). Supporting Livelihoods in Situations of Chronic Conflict and 
political Instability; Overview of Conceptual Issues. Working Paper, 183. London, UK: 
Overseas Development Institute (ODI). 
[52] Seaman, J. (2010). Energy Security, Transnational Pipelines and China‘s Role in Asia. 
Asie. Visions, 27, April. 
[53] Shelala II, R. M. (2014). Maritime Security in the Middle East and North Africa: A 
Strategic Assessemente. Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS). 
Retrieved 
from 
http://csis.org/files/publication/140206_maritime_security_shelala_ 
report.pdf. 
[54] Solow, R. M. (1974). Intergenerational Equity and Exhaustible Resources. Review of 
Economic Studies, Symposium, 29-45. 
[55] Stiglitz, J. E. (1974). Growth with exhaustible natural resources: efficient and optimal 
growth paths. Rev. Econ. Stud. Symposium on the Economics of Exhaustible Resources, 
123-138. 
[56] Sundberg, Ralph, Mathilda Lindgren and Ausra Padskocimaite, 2010, “UCDP GED 
Codebook version 1.0-2011”, Department of Peace and Conflict Research, Uppsala 
University. 
[57] Theisen, O. M. (2008). Blood and soil? Resource scarcity and internal armed conflict 
revisited. Journal of Peace Research, 45(6), 801-818. Retrieved from http://www.prio. 
no/Global/upload/CSCW/Data/Geographical/codebook.pdf. 
[58] Torvik, R. (2011). Why do some resource-abundant countries succeed while others do 
not? Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 25(2), 2009, 241-256. 
[59] US Department of Defense (2010). Quadrennial Defense Review Report the US, 
Retrieved from http://www.defense.gov/qdr/images. 
[60] US Department of Defense (2014) Quadrennial Defense Review 2014. Retrieved from 
http://www.defense.gov/pubs/2014_Quadrennial_Defense_Review.pdf. 
[61] UNCTAD 2013. Review of Maritime Transport 2013. Retrieved from http://unctad.org/ 
en/publicationslibrary/rmt2013_en.pdf. 
[62] United Nations Population Division (UNPD) (2012). World Population Prospects: The 
2011 Revision. New York: UN Population Division. 

Américo Zuzarte Reis 
146 
[63] Werz, M. and Conley, L. (2012). Climate Change, Migration, and Conflict in 
Northwest Africa. Rising Dangers and Policy Options Across the Arc of Tension. 
Center for American Progress, April. 
[64] ―Worldwide look at reserves and production,‖ Oil and Gas Journal, Vol. 110.12 
(December 3, 2012), pp. 28-31, http://www.ogj.com (subscription site). 
[65] World Trade Organization (2010). World Trade Report 2010, Trade in Natural 
Resources. Retrieved from http://www.wto.org/english/res_e/booksp_e/anrep_e/world_ 
trade_report10_e.pdf. 
 
 

In: Globalization and International Security: An Overview 
ISBN: 978-1-63463-075-7 
Editors: T. Rodrigues, R. García Pérez et al.  
 
© 2015 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 8 
 
 
 
ENERGY SECURITY: CONCEPTS, SHIFTING 
ENERGY LANDSCAPE AND MAIN PLAYERS 
IN THE 21
ST CENTURY 
 
 
Catarina Mendes Leal 
International Relations Department of the Authority  
for Food and Economic Safety, Portugal 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
In the 21st century, energy issues have a central role on the international agenda. 
These are global issues creating interdependencies between producers/suppliers, 
transporters and consumers, affecting both States and individuals. This chapter focuses its 
attention on energy security issues (namely those arising from oil and natural gas) in a 
globalized world. It is divided into three parts, with a large commented bibliography. 
Firstly, it begins by analyzing the main energy risks, some concepts about energy 
resources, the strategic-institutional aspects of oil and natural gas, emphasizing the 
reorganization of oil and natural gas companies and its consequences in geopolitics. 
Secondly, presents an outlook of the present energy landscape (either, conventional, 
either unconventional): reserves, producers, consumers, flow trades and future trends. 
Thirdly, it focuses on the present structural changes and future main geopolitical 
challenges on energy. In final remarks, it stresses, on the one hand, the current major 
energy game changers that will shape energy world in the near future of this century; and, 
on the other hand, it underlines the implementation of some solutions. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
 Corresponding author: Catarina Mendes Leal. International Relations Department of the Authority for Food and 
Economic Safety, (Portugal). E-mail: catarina.mleal@gmail.com. 

Catarina Mendes Leal 
148 
ENERGY RESOURCES FRAMEWORK – MAIN 
CONCEPTS, KEY PLAYERS AND SECURITY RISKS 
 
Main Concepts 
 
Currently, we witness the reconfiguration of a new international order, no longer the 
post-Cold War, nor the post-09/11, but the post-2008 financial crisis. We are the stage of an 
international system characterized by the emergence of new actors, powers, threats, risks, 
conflicts and challenges. This new order was and is marked by the intensification of the 
globalization process - as a fundamental shift or transformation in the spatial scale of human 
social organization that links distant communities and expands the reach of power relations 
across regions and continents. 
After the end of the Cold War, the concept of security has been rethought and extended to 
non-military dimensions. Since then, security has been interpreted as an integrated concept, 
with different levels of analysis – the individual, the state, regional and systemic -, and with 
different dimensions - political, military, economic, societal and environmental. 
The birth of international energy security concerns began before the 1st World War. After 
1906 the oil concession of William K. d'Arcy was put under British soldiers‘ protection in 
order to replace coal by oil as English war navy ships' carburant. In 1912, Winston Churchill 
took the decision to switch the entire Royal Navy to oil. The strategic advantages of oil were 
multiple: ships were faster, more easily refueled, and enjoyed increased range due to oil‘s 
high thermal content. A year later the British acquired 51% of the stakes in Anglo-Iranian Oil 
Company and, as W. Churchill said, ―for the victory, His Majesty has its owns carburant 
resources‖ [13]. 
Since then, energy has been steadily gaining importance within security circles in recent 
years due to the military and security dimensions of this mainly economic issue. 
As a concept, energy security has been progressively defined as a sharing of interests 
among several actors of the oil world system, more than a game, in which producers‘ victory 
means the defeat of consumers and vice-versa [17]. 
Just after the end of the Cold War, researchers like Michael Klare [9], argued that the 
international post-1991 would be characterized by conflicts between nations for basic reasons 
of sustainability and survival, i.e., conflicts arising from disputed natural resources. 
Nowadays, the world has a new geo-economical division – on one side, the exporters of 
fossil fuels that dominate the market for oil and natural gas (Russia, former colonies and 
medium regional powers) that can capture huge inflows of dollars and acquire geopolitical 
projection; and, on the other side, importers of those strategic raw materials - chronic deficit 
countries in the energy balance (most OECD powers and two emerging powers - China and 
India - the vast majority of countries of intermediate development and a wide range of poor 
countries). 
In a multipolar world with scarce resources, we will inevitably assist to unbridled 
competition. M. Klare [9] notes that the shortage of resources led to a change in military 
strategy of some countries and the ideological conflicts of the Cold War are giving rise to 
conflicts that are based on the energy security concept. Thus suggesting a kind of baseline 
below which the state goes to conflict for the achievement of the needed resource. 

Energy Security 
 
149
The only possible solution to these problems - the ecosystems and environment 
degradation, and the upward pattern of regional conflicts by energetic reasons - will be a 
drastic a shift in western lifestyle, in order to reduce the levels of energy consumption, and 
adoption, by developing countries of a more clean model, adopted by the developed West. 
However it should be noted that M. Klare‘s [9] theory does not consider, on the one hand, 
the historical-civilizational elements of political communities - the historical and cultural 
heritage of a people by their religion, the collective natural predispositions - and, on the other 
hand, neglects the phenomenon of regional integration and competitiveness advantages. 
To sum up, in the 21st century we are assisting to the redefinition of the energy security 
concept [21], with wider challenges and multiple threats. They can be summarized as follows: 
terrorism, piracy, internal destabilization in producing countries, erosion of the ―spare 
capacity‖, increasing dependence on OPEC, disruption of production and distribution power 
networks, emergence of hurricanes (like Rita and Katrina), black-out‘s, extreme price 
volatility, climatic threat, demographic factor, unsustainability of the existing energy model. 
 
 
Energy Market: Key Players and Functions - Free Market vs. Mercantilism 
 
The oil market is a stage where a range of actors, both public and private, are involved 
with different dimensions that dominates all or part of the sector (upstream and/or 
downstream). Although there is a wide open market for oil, we are gradually seeing an 
evolution towards the establishment of an increasingly mercantilist model in this sector. 
The offer of this hydrocarbon depends on the geography and history of the country 
(where the production areas are localized), of Governments and of oil players. The richest 
area in this energy resource is the Persian Gulf, which concentrates two thirds of conventional 
oil reserves, followed by the former Soviet Union, North America, South America, and the 
Gulf of Guinea. Within the oil market, two major groups of companies arise: the National Oil 
Companies (NOCs) and International Oil Companies (IOCs). In addition to these two groups, 
there are oil companies which focus only on a part of the oil business (mainly from the US), 
as can be seen in Table 8.1. 
Increasingly the oil and natural gas sectors become politicized. The NOCs have become 
key players, either nationally, either in the international oil market. Indeed, a set of events led 
to its emergence: since the wave of nationalizations cross the oil-producing countries like 
Angola to Venezuela in the 1960s and 1970s; the consolidation of state control over the oil 
companies and gas in Russia and Central Asia; the dynamic growth of Asian states, such as 
China and India; and volatility of oil price. Commonly described as oil and gas companies 
largely owned by governments, NOCs now control most of the world's most lucrative oil 
reserves. In case of major oil consuming and industrialized countries, NOCs have been 
empowered to ensure access to the production of reserves in order to meet the growing needs 
of oil among populations. The following graphic (Figure 8.1) clearly shows the increasingly 
importance of NOCs in terms of access and production, since the 1970s. 
NOCs control 80% to 85% and 60% to 70% of oil and gas respectively which are 
controlled by governments or public enterprises. IOCs (which only control 7% oil reserves) 
have difficulty in accessing new reserves. 

 
Table 8.1. Energy Market Players 
 
National Oil Companies (NOCs) 
 
Companies owned wholly or mainly by the respective 
State. 
International Oil Companies (IOCs) 
 
Oil companies mostly private 
Specialized Oil Companies 
 
Oil companies engaged in 
only a part of the chain of the 
oil business 
Examples 
New “Seven Sisters" 
Majors 
Supermajors 
First “Seven Sisters" 
Examples 
Adnoc (UAE), CNOOC 
(China), EcoPetrol 
(Colombia), ENI (Itália), 
Gazprom (Russia), INA 
(Croatia), INOC (Iraq), 
KMG (Kazaquistan), KPC 
(Koweit), MOL (Hungary) 
NIOC Iran), NOC (Lybia), 
ONGC (India), PEMEX 
(Mexico), PDVSA 
(Venezuela), Petrobras 
(Brazil), PDO (Oman), 
PetroChina (China), PNC 
(Nigeria), Petronas 
(Malaysia), Sinopec (China), 
Sonangol (Angola), QP 
(Qatar), STATOIL 
(Norwege), Saudi Aramco 
(Saudi Arabia), ... 
In an article published on 
March 11th, 2007, the 
Financial Times has 
identified the "New Seven 
Sisters". That is, the oil 
companies and gas from 
non-OECD countries most 
influential (which are 
mostly held by the states). 
(1) Saudi Aramco (Saudi 
Arabia); (2) Gazprom 
(Russia); (3) CNPC 
(China); (4) NIOC (Iran); 
(5) PDVSA (Venezuela); 
(6) Petrobras (Brazil); (7) 
Petronas (Malaysia) 
Companies which have a 
high dimension, but not 
so high as the 
Supermajors: 
ConocoPhillips (US); 
Occidental (US); 
Unocal (US) 
Within the international 
companies there is a "hard core" 
formed by a large vertically 
integrated companies operating 
in the crude oil production. 
They have the largest network 
of refining capacity, distribution 
networks in developed 
economies. They are important 
Customers of OPEC crude oil 
producers: ExxonMobil; Royal 
Dutch/Shell; BP Amoco; 
TotalFna Elf; Chevron/Texaco; 
ENI 
This designation was given by Enrico 
Mattei to seven oil companies that 
controlled oil production, refining 
and distribution, being able to take 
advantage of the growing demand for 
oil and obtaining high profits. These 
companies were very organized and 
formed a strong cartel, having a 
strong influence on the major oil 
producing countries. 
The power of the seven sisters began 
to decline when the Arabs began to 
take control over prices and 
production, through the creation of 
OPEC, in the early 1960s. 
Companies that still exist today are: 
ExxonMobil, Chevron, Shell and BP 
- currently members of the 
supermajors; 
Standard Oil of New Jersey (Esso); 
Royal Dutch Shell; 
Anglo-Persian Oil Company 
(APOC); Standard Oil of New York 
(Socony); Texaco; 
Standard Oil of California (Socal); 
Gulf Oil. 
ALONUSA (US), Amerada 
Hess Corp. (US), Anadarko 
(US), 
Apache (US), BG (UK), 
Burlington (US), Cairn 
Energy plc (Scotland), 
Chesapeake Energy (US), 
CNR (Canada), 
Devon (US), Encana 
(Canada), EOG (US), Maersk 
(Denmark), Marathon (US), 
Maurel et Prom (France), 
Nippon (Japan), Newfield 
(EUA), Nexen (Canada), 
Novatek (Russia), Santos 
(Australia), Sibneft (Russia), 
SOCO Internacional (UK), 
Talisman (Canadá), 
Transmeridian (US), Vintage 
(US), Woodside (Australia), 
XTO (US) 
Source: Leal [12]. 

Energy Security 
151
 
Source: Produced by Catarina Mendes Leal  (based on NPC, ―Global Access to Oil and Gas‖, 18/07/07, 
p. 11). 
Figure 8.1. NOC-IOC: Access and Reserves versus Production,  Evolution from 1970 to 2005. 
In similar terms, it can be considered that the ―New Seven Sisters‖ have natural 
resources, while the Western majors have the financial resources and technical know-how and 
management. Cooperation between the ―New Seven Sisters‖ and Western majors will be 
required for the development of reserves. 
To conclude, in the world energy system we can identify a set of functions played by 
distinct actors – private and public (already identified), namely: 
 
● 
Generation of demand led to the world market for oil and natural gas; 
● 
Production offer for the world market of oil and natural gas; 
● 
―Production‖ of new reserves of oil and natural gas by the discovery of deposits; 
● 
Generation of new technologies; 
● 
Short-term regulation of world oil market from the physical point of view (quantity 
traded); 
● 
Security's offer of supply services, either by providing military protection to the 
producer countries, either by ensuring the security of Sea Lanes of Communication 
(SLOC); 
● 
Technologies generation that obviate the use or reduce the need for use of oil and 
natural gas; 
● 
Use oil as a financial asset and a valuable reserve by intervening in energy financial 
markets (e.g., spot markets and futures market); 
● 
Control over reserves of other fossil fuels partially competing with oil and/ or natural 
gas. 
 
 
12%
6%
23%
59%
1980
86%
13%
1%
1970
7%
12%
16%
65%
2005
8%
11%
17%
64%
1998
LEGEND:
Full IOC Acess
NOC Reserves (Equity Acess)
Soviet Reserves (1980-1980) / Reserves     
Held by Russian Companies (1998-2005)
NOC Reserves (Limited Equity Acess)

Catarina Mendes Leal 
152 
ENERGY CURRENT OUTLOOK 
 
In order to understand the energy current outlook, we should begin by analyzing the non-
political issues that are behind it and have an important impact on the energy's trends, 
namely: population, economic growth, energy prices, CO2 emissions and technology. 
A rapidly rising global population and growing prosperity are putting unsustainable 
pressures on resources. Demand for energy is expected to rise by 30% to 50% in the next two 
decades, while economic disparities encourage short-term responses in production and 
consumption that undermine long-term sustainability. Significant long-term trends continue 
to shape the modern energy economy: industrialization, urbanization and motorization. These 
trends are associated with increasing amounts of energy consumption; increase the efficiency 
of energy use, production and consumption. In 2008, energy markets experienced extreme 
volatility and the crossing of a landmark. Despite their rapid growth, non-OECD economies 
still account for only 25% of global GDP. But this 25% is produced by 82% of the global 
population. And because of the importance of industry in growth, and also because of 
inefficiencies, it takes more energy to produce one unit of GDP in the non-OECD than in the 
OECD. 2008 was the first year that non-OECD countries consumed more energy than the 
OECD [20]. 
Several factors explain the extreme volatility of energy prices1: such as supply 
disruptions2, economic growth, OPEC spare capacity quotas limitations, increase on world oil 
stockpiles, developed countries shift to unconventional gas production. 
The last decade has seen unprecedented rise in energy prices. From 1998 (when oil prices 
were below 10 US$/bbl) until July 2008 (when they reached 147 US$/bbl), the tenfold 
increase was followed by a decline, with prices reaching 32 US$/bbl at the end of 2008; the 
price volatility had major implications for business and investment planning activities. 
Regarding natural gas there is no global price. Therefore Regional price changes provide 
a first glimpse of the underlying forces of demand and supply and the patterns of change in 
any given period. Annual average spot prices for LNG can be driven by a combination of 
higher oil prices pushing up oil-indexed contract prices, and strong additional demand for 
LNG (for example, from Japan, to displace losses in nuclear power). 
The strong energy growth translates negative consequences for carbon emissions. Over 
the past decade emissions grew 2,8% per annum (faster than primary energy consumption). 
With coal consumption growing at the highest rate among fossil fuels, global CO2 emissions 
from energy – measured by standard conversion rates have been growing faster than total 
energy consumption. Emissions are growing strongly either in the OECD either non-OECD 
(which is higher than in the OECD). 
Finally regarding technology, some important progresses are happening allowing a 
maximization of recovery factors and delaying the ―Peak Oil‖. At the exploration level, a tool 
called Seabed Logging (SBL) based on electro-magnetic methods, with a integration with 3D 
Seismic allows a better resolution; at the development/production level, a new approach in 
                                                           
1 Oil is priced in markets completely liberalized. Consequently, price evolves as function of supply and demand. 
Schematically, the international trade of crude is organized in two modalities: short-term (spot market) and 
long term (around two financial markets - International Petroleum Exchange (IPE) and Nymex). 
2 OPEC action to restrain production, political unrest and violence caused outages in oil and gas production in parts 
of the Arab world, The shut-down of Fukushima and earthquake related damage to Japanese coal-fired power 
stations, plus the subsequent closure of additional reactors in Japan and Europe. 

Energy Security 
 
153
gathering and processing data called Digital Field Concept, detects what is happening in the 
reservoir (allowing a better placement of wells, steer and complete wells through different 
zones of the reservoir, remote gathering of well and field data and an optimized decision 
process). However, these technologies will require substantial investments. 
 
 
Energy Landscape: Oil and Gas Reserves, Production, Consumption  
and Global Trade 
 
In the future, fossil fuels will continue to have a central weight in energy demand (over the 
Outlook period, as we can see on Figure 8.2). Oil will remain the dominant fuel in the 
primary energy mix until 2035 (in the New Policies Scenario), but its share drops to 27% in 
2035, from around 32%  on 2011 with demand increasing from 87 million barrels per day (mb/d) 
in 2011 to 99.7 mb/d in 2035. The increase in non-OECD energy consumption is led by brisk 
growth in China. India is the second-largest contributor to the increase in global demand. 
After a modest increase to 2020, the aggregate energy demand in OECD countries 
stagnates. Nonetheless, by 2035 the United States is still the world‘s second-largest energy 
consumer, well ahead of India, which is a distant third [15]. 
Although, oil is still the main source of energy on the planet, it's a richness that is not 
evenly distributed among countries and is a non-renewable resource. Hence it has become an 
important raw material traded between countries. 
In the last century it has become an important political factor, having already been at the 
root of crises between governments, often triggering wars and disputes. 
 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
5000
1990
2010
2015
2020
2030
2035
Oil
Gas
 
 
Source: Produced by Catarina Mendes Leal (based on OCDE/IEA [15]). 
Figure 8.2. Oil and Natural Gas World Primary Energy Demand in the New Policies Scenario (1990-
2035). 
Mtoe 

Catarina Mendes Leal 
154 
Due to economic and ecological advantages, natural gas has become very attractive to 
many countries. Indeed, the product has characteristics that transform it in one of the safest 
energy sources of our times. Similar to what occurs in relation to oil, natural gas reserves are 
also geographically unbalanced allocated. 
Despite globalization promotes economic interaction between different players, in what 
concerns the access to resources3, those are mostly located on states that do not follow 
Western norms (Table  8.2 ex-Figure 8.4). 
Two-thirds of the conventional oil reserves are in the Persian Gulf, Russia (Caspian Sea) 
and in the Gulf of Guinea. Currently, NOCs hold more than 75% of proven oil reserves, while 
IOCs control less than 10%. In terms of production, NOCs also have a dominant position. Of 
the 25th largest oil companies‘ world producers, 16 are NOCs. However, little is known about 
the NOCs in the Middle East and North Africa. 
World proved oil reserves at the end of 2012 reached 1668.9 billion barrels (against 
1652.6 billion barrels on 2011), sufficient to meet 52.4 years of global production. The 
continuing increase in official Venezuelan reserves pushed the South and Central American 
R/P ratio above 100. 
The large increase in Middle Eastern production reduced the region‘s R/P ratio despite an 
increase in reserves; the region holds 48.1% of the global proved reserves [3]. 
 
Table 8.2 ex-Figure 8.4. Leaders in Oil and Gas Reserves in 2012 
 
Oil                                                                    Natural Gas 
Ran 
king 
Country 
Thousand 
million tonnes 
 
Ran 
king 
Country 
Trillion cubic 
metres 
1 
Venezuela 
46.5 
1 
Iran  
33.6 
2 
Saudi Arabia 
36.5 
2 
Russia 
32.9 
3 
Canada 
28.0 
3 
Qatar 
25.1 
4 
Iran 
21.6 
4 
Turkmenistan 
17.5 
5 
Iraq 
20.2 
5 
US 
8.5 
6 
Kuweit 
14.0 
6 
Saudi Arabia 
8.2 
7 
UAE 
13.0 
7 
UAE 
6.1 
8 
Russia 
11.9 
8 
Venezuela 
5.6 
9 
Libya 
6.3 
9 
Nigeria 
5.2 
10 
Nigeria 
5.0 
10 
Algeria 
4.5 
Source: Produced by Catarina Mendes Leal, 2013, (based on BP [4]). 
                                                           
3 We should have in mind the difference between reserves and resources. Mineral Reserves are identified resources-
- the extraction of which is known to be economically and/or technically feasible at present prices and with the 
existing technology. There are Probable Reserves and Proved Reserves. Resources are portions of a mineral 
commodity which have been indicated, but whose extraction is not economically and/or technically feasible at 
present prices and with the existing technology, because they are often too deep, too low grade or too difficult 
to reach. 

Energy Security 
 
155
Table 8.3. Top 10 Countries with Technically Recoverable Shale oil  and Shale Gas 
Resources  ex-Figure 8.5. Shale Gas e Tight Oil 
 
Technically Recoverable Shale Oil 
Resources 
 
Technically Recoverable Shale Gas 
Resources 
Ran 
king 
Country 
Billion 
barrels 
Ran 
king 
Country 
Trillion 
Cubic 
Feets 
1 
Russia 
75 
1 
US 
1,161 
2 
US 
48 
2 
China 
1,115 
3 
China 
32 
3 
Argentina 
802 
4 
Argentina 
27 
4 
Algeria 
707 
5 
Lybia 
26 
5 
Canada 
573 
6 
Australia 
18 
6 
Mexico 
545 
7 
Venezuela 
13 
7 
Australia 
437 
8 
Mexico 
13 
8 
South Africa 
390 
9 
Pakistan 
9 
9 
Russia 
285 
10 
Canada 
9 
10 
Brazil 
245 
11 
Others 
65 
11 
Others 
1,535 
Total 
335 
Total 
7,795 
Source: Catarina Mendes Leal, 2013, (based on BP [4]). 
 
World proved natural gas reserves at end-2012 were sufficient to meet 55.7 years of 
production. The Middle East still holds the largest reserves (43.0% of the world total, 
compared with 31.2% for Europe and Eurasia) and has a R/P ratio of over 150 years. 
In terms of countries, the Russian Federation, Iran and Qatar (with 17,6%, 18%, 13,4% 
respectively) are the top three. 
There is a Strategic Ellipse for both resources which encompasses the Persian Gulf area: 
inside the ellipse are 71% of the world oil reserves and 69% of the world natural gas reserves. 
Simultaneously, we are assisting to an increase in the discovery of non-conventional 
resources4 (Table 8.3 ex-figure 8.5). 
 
 
                                                           
4 Non-conventional resources are hydrocarbons (oil and gas) found under conditions that do not allow them to flow, 
because they are either trapped in low permeability rock or are very high viscosity oils. These resources 
require special technology to be extracted, be it due to the hydrocarbon's own properties or those of the rock 
that contains it. Currently, they are an interesting type of resource, since many of them lie in fields that were 
considered to be depleted. It is also estimated that the volume left in them could be large. Types of non-
conventional crude: heavy oil; oil shale; oil sands or bituminous sands; tight oil. Types of non-conventional 
gas: shale gas; tight gas; coal bed methane; methane hydrates. 

Catarina Mendes Leal 
156 
Table 8.4. Top Five Oil Producers and Top Five Gas Producers in 2012 (ex-Figure 8.6) 
 
        Oil                                                                  Natural Gas 
Ran 
king 
Country 
Tousand 
barrels daily 
 
Ran 
king 
Country 
Billion cubic 
metres 
1 
Saudi Arabia 
11.5 
1 
US 
681.4 
2 
Russia 
10.6 
2 
Russia 
592.3 
3 
US 
8.9 
3 
Iran 
160.5 
4 
China 
4.1 
4 
Qatar 
157.0 
5 
Iran 
3.7 
5 
Canada 
156.5 
Source: Catarina Mendes Leal, 2013, (based on BP [4]). 
 
These findings will have important geopolitical and geo-economic consequences. 
Regarding the non-conventional crude, oil sands or bituminous sands it represents a potential 
roughly equivalent to the oil reserves of the Middle East, lying in Venezuela and Canada. 
Regarding gas, the exploitation of shale gas in the US will introduce profound changes in the 
energy landscape in this country with shifts in world markets. 
In terms of production, positions correspond to the proven oil reserves (unlike what 
happens in the natural gas sector). Middle East is the region that has the largest reserves and 
is the region that produces more (32, 5%), highlighting Saudi Arabia (13.3%) (contrary to 
what happens in natural gas), followed by Europe and Eurasia (20.3%), highlighting the 
Russian Federation (12, 8%) [4]. 
Last year, natural gas production growth was moderated (1,9%). Global production was 
up 3.1% (98 bcm), slightly above the trend (2.8%). Growth originated in the Middle East 
(16,3%), North America (20,4%) (which recorded in 2012 the largest volumetric increase and 
remained the world largest producer) and the Former Soviet Union (17,6%). Major producers 
are the US and Russia, followed by Canada, Iran and Qatar [4]. 
Globally, oil consumption has a very uneven geographical distribution. The three areas 
that are consuming more are Asia/Pacific (32.4%), North America (25.38%) and Europe and 
Eurasia (22.1%). Not reaching 10% of oil consumption we find regional areas such as the 
Middle East (9.1%), Central America and South America (7.1%) and Africa (3.9%). If we 
look at countries individually, in terms of per capita consumption, the US is the largest 
consumer (20.9%), followed by China (11.4%), the Russian Federation (5%) and Japan (5%). 
With the exception of the US and the Russian Federation, the major oil-producing 
countries, aren‘t important consumers. In terms of outlook, consumption will continue to 
grow steadily until 2030, following an average annual rate of 1.3%. 
World natural gas consumption grew by 2.2% in 2012. Worldwide natural gas 
consumption presents an unbalanced geographic distribution. Two areas consume between 
25-35% - Europe and Eurasia (32.6%) and North America (21.9%); other 2 between 10 to 
20% - Asia/ Pacific (18.8%) and Middle East (12.4%); and two almost have no expression - 
Central America and South America (5.3%) and Africa (3.7%). 
If we look countries' individually, in terms of per capita consumption, major consumers 
are the US and the Russian Federation. Nevertheless, non-OECD countries consumed more 
than OECD countries (52% and 48% respectively). 

Energy Security 
 
157
In terms of oil exporters, the main flows range from four main types of suppliers‘ zones, 
according to the diversification of consumer markets: 
 
1 
A Central Region - Middle East/Persian Gulf - which supplies Asia/Pacific, US and 
Europe; 
2 
A First Crown constituted by Eurasia, which supplies Europe and Asia (so far), with 
the predominance of the first, but evolving to become more involved with the 
supplies to Asia; 
3 
A Second Crown, which includes exporting countries that supply Europe, and to a 
lesser extent, the US and China (the case of West Africa); 
4 
A Third Crown composed by regional suppliers: Indonesia, Brunei and Malaysia for 
Asia/Pacific; Canada, Mexico and South America to the US, Africa (North Africa/ 
Mediterranean) to Europe. 
 
Regarding natural gas main flows, we can also identify four main types of supplier‘s 
areas, according to the consumer markets diversification: 
 
1 
A Central Region, Middle East/Persian Gulf, which supplies Asia/ Pacific, US and 
Europe; 
2 
A First Crown composed by Eurasia, which supplies Europe and Asia, (so far), with 
the predominance of the first, but evolving to become more involved with the 
supplies to Asia, either by Russia, either by Turkmenistan, being China and in a 
lower scale Japan the shift motor towards Asia/ Pacific; 
3 
A Second Crown, which includes exporting countries that supply Europe, and to a 
lesser extent, the US (North and West Africa); 
4 
A Third Crown composed by regional suppliers: Indonesia, Brunei, Malaysia and 
Australia for Asia/ Pacific (although they may also come to export to the US), 
Canada and the Caribbean (Trinidad and Tobago) to the US 
 
Regarding oil and natural gas transport infrastructure, those are extremely expensive and 
their constructions involve long periods and economic and political predictable contexts, so 
that investors have confidence in investing capital and know-how. 
While the oil market is global, we cannot say the same about natural gas market, that is 
still regional. In both resources there is a long distance between producing centers and 
consumption areas (the US, Western Europe, China, Brazil, India). In this century, we will, 
inevitably, assist to the reshape of major oil and natural gas movements from producers to 
consumers. Indeed, given the new context, it will be necessary to redesign the entire 
infrastructure of energy supply as well as the functionality of supply routes. 
In short, the current challenge lies not so much in terms of quantities available, but on 
how to conduct it to where they are needed to consume. 
The relationships emerging among the major final key consumers will create new 
thoughts that will reflect on the high levels of economic policy and in security. 
 
 

Catarina Mendes Leal 
158 
STRUCTURAL CHANGES 
 
In a context in which oil geopolitics currently presents certain characteristics, the 
conception of energy security and the mechanisms to achieve it has to be rethought. As a 
matter of fact, today we are assisting to: the dependence of more developed economies from 
massive oil imports; concerted action between main producers (controlling the prices of crude 
oil); the Persian Gulf as a strategic region; states' instability (at political, social and economic 
levels) which have the largest oil reserves and simultaneously remain important producers; 
challenges that affect their internal stability and can cause interruptions in production.  
Since the first oil shock that energy security has been linked to economic growth and the 
increasing standards of living of the population of the more developed states. Energy security 
has assumed an increasing importance on the international agenda and has been placed on top 
of the strategic priorities of the US and several European countries. With the growing power 
of NOCs it becomes essential to create a new geopolitical energy balance. 
The world oil should increase investment in order to diversify supply. The change of the 
energy behavior of developed countries and of some emerging countries - China and India - is 
a need that has to be answered. 
In the future, the geopolitics of oil and natural gas is expected to face many challenges 
that can be summarized as follows: 
Continued growth in oil and natural gas demand - essentially explained by the growth of 
emerging economies (especially China, and to a lesser extent, India). The major oil-importing 
countries are the US and China (which has over passed Japan), which is now the second 
largest consumer in the world. In 2030, China and India will import four times barrels of oil 
per day (equivalent to today‘s US consumption). We are assisting to an ongoing structural 
shift in consumption patterns worldwide. 
Unbalance between demand and supply - Growing gap between available supply from 
current production base and demand, the continued decline in the world‘s production that may 
lie in the range of 4% to 6% worldwide. Nowadays, the world oil is facing internal instability 
in many key producers, such as Nigeria, Iraq and Venezuela, and uncertainties surrounding 
Iran. Some countries or regions may become challenging after trade or political battles (Gulf 
of Guinea, Algeria and Libya). 
US investments‘ wave in the exploration of shale gas/tight oil - or the US "return" to the 
―natural gas age‖. The US, thanks to technological innovations (horizontal drilling and 
hydraulic fracturing), established a new frontier in the use of unconventional energy 
resources, with the onset of large-scale exploitation of shale gas, which not only will allow 
the United States to be self-sufficient in the coming decades in less polluting fossil fuels, as 
well as, in short-term, becoming an important exporter. 
Discovers and potential reserves of oil and natural gas - in the Eastern Mediterranean - 
Israel, Cyprus and Greece. 
In 2010 the independent North American NOBLE Energy Company announced a very 
significant discovery of natural gas in the concession area of the Leviathan. In that year, the 
US Geological Survey (USGS) published a new report about the province's energy Levant 
(including Israel, the Palestinian territories, Lebanon and Syria), pointing to reserves of 3.5 
trillion cubic meters of natural gas (in deposits onshore and offshore); in 2011 the same Noble 
Energy company announced the discovery of natural gas in the offshore of the Republic of 

Energy Security 
 
159
Cyprus with estimated reserves of 0.2 trillion cubic meters. Later, Israel and Cyprus have 
agreed in the delimitation of their exclusive economic zones. Israel is analyzing the 
construction of an underwater pipeline connecting the Israeli fields to Cyprus and from 
Cyprus to Greece, allowing the interconnection with other European gas pipelines. The 
discovery of this field sparked new tensions between the Republic of Cyprus and Turkey. 
Investment rhythm- Since 1999, investments in the oil world remain insufficient for 
several reasons: shutdown of oil activities of the upstream of producing countries, capitalists‘ 
concentrations in progress, problems and/or conflicts in the production areas. NOCs 
(PEMEX, PDVSA, NIOC, KPC ...) which together hold 80% of world oil reserves invest 
little, requiring technology available to the Western private companies (particularly in 
offshore technologies and technologies of advanced exploration of deposits), with which, 
however, want to share as little as possible of the oil revenues. It is also important to 
underline the global crisis on investment within refining, especially in North America. 
Peak Oil5 fears? – If the world‘s lifestyle doesn‘t change, oil is expected to continue to be 
the main energy source in the future. We are closer to the peak production of conventional oil 
and natural gas in non-OPEC energy provinces and constraints on the availability of spare 
capacity from Saudi Arabia. 
Risk factors in the Middle East – we must distinguish two types of shock, namely, the 
short-term shock (temporary breakthroughs in supplies) and a long-term shock with serious 
geopolitical implications. Middle East is the heart of the oil world with 48.4% of proven 
reserves and 32.5% of the world‘s production. Saudi Arabia is the largest producer in the 
world and the country with the largest reserves (almost a quarter of the world). Iran holds 
18% of gas reserves and 9.4% of oil reserves worldwide. 
The hydrocarbons of the Caspian and Russia - Russia holds 17.6% of the world proven 
reserves of gas and 5.2% of world oil reserves. Heiress of hydrocarbons‘ deposits, 
infrastructure and procurement of the former Soviet Union, today Russia is the world's largest 
oil producer and the second gas producer. Main supplier of Europe, Russia is responsible for 
34% of the supply of natural gas and 33% of oil. 
Currently, the Russian energy diplomacy is structured around three main axes, namely: 
access to resources (especially natural gas from Central Asia), the security of export routes 
(those that pass through the transit countries considered politically unreliable by Moscow) 
and strengthening the presence of Russian groups in the West, particularly through the 
acquisition of stakes in European energy companies. In all these areas, the Russian Federation 
has been adding triumphs. 
The displacement of the former Soviet Union led to the emergence of a new zone as a 
potentially major producer of hydrocarbons - the Caspian region. This region could become 
itself as a major competitor of Russia and even of the Middle East and redraw the map of 
supplies to Europe and Asia. States that are part of the region - outside Iran and Russia - are 
Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan - which have 2.9% of oil reserves and 10.5% of 
natural gas. However the Caspian Sea is a closed sea, whose legal status (sea versus lake) is 
                                                           
5 Peak oil or Hubert‘s theory was created by the North-American geologist M. King Hubert, in the early 50‘s. This 
theory foresees the inevitable decline and subsequent end of oil production in any geographical area. 
According to the theory, either it is just in an oil well or either in the entire planet; the production rate tends to 
follow a regular curve. At the beginning of the curve (pre-peak), production increases with the development of 
productive infrastructure. In the latter stage (post-peak) the output decreases due to the gradual depletion of the 
resource. 

Catarina Mendes Leal 
160 
uncertain, and has been the subject of numerous conflicts and disputes by coastal states on 
account of sharing territorial waters. In this context, the future development of gas and 
oilfields is dependent on the choices of export routes, as well as from the priority export 
markets, Europe or Asia. 
Latin America‘s role - Latin America holds 9.2% of the world‘s oil production and 7.3% 
of the world‘s consumption and has 19.7% of the world's conventional oil reserves. Much of 
these reserves are concentrated in Venezuela and Mexico. 
Meanwhile, Brazil has been discovering significant oil reserves in the Tupi area 
(estimated over 5-8 billion barrels of oil, equivalent to 55% of Brazilian reserves), the pre-salt 
layer (more than 5000 meters deep). This discovery is so enormous that could be equivalent 
to the Mount Everest under water - and on the high seas. 
The Arctic and the ―Great Game‖ - Five Arctic countries - Norway, Russia, US, Canada 
and Denmark - claim to the UN the ownership of the Arctic, encouraged by snowmelt (which 
will allow the Northwest Passage, a route that shortens the path between Tokyo and New 
York in 23% - (providing an alternative to the Panama Canal and there is still the possibility 
of opening the path that connects Northeast Siberia with Alaska in the Bering Sea) and the 
huge reserves of oil and gas located there. According to a report by the US geological Survey, 
in 2008, the Arctic has 22% of unknown reserves of oil and gas. 
The South Atlantic Basin's reemergence -In the future the South Atlantic, will have a 
central role due to four main reasons: 
 
1 
Energy resources - Due to the continuous and massive oil discoveries in Brazil, 
Argentina and the West Africa coast, along with the giant reserves of unconventional 
oil in Canada and in the US, the Atlantic will become a key area for energy policy in 
Europe. The impact of the re-emergence of the Atlantic Ocean as an energy province 
is significant: 91% of the world oil reserves located in the offshore are situated in the 
Atlantic Ocean. 
2 
Sea lanes - 90% of the trade is done by sea. The sea routes have a key role in a 
globalized world. The new transport technology, the expansion of the Panama Canal 
and the piracy in the waters leading to the Suez, could encourage the revival of the 
Cape and the Atlantic routes. 
3 
Security Risks - Europe has a vital interest in the economic growth of this 
transcontinental area and together with the South Atlantic coastal states they could 
contribute to create a maritime control of threats such as drug trafficking, piracy and 
looting of resources. 
4 
Food - South America and Africa are the largest agricultural frontiers of the planet. 
Brazil is very advanced in agricultural research. Africa has the potential, but it lacks 
the infrastructure and research in this area. 
 
The geopolitical consequences of the Atlantic Basin's reemergence will be very important 
to the operation of international energetic system and for mineral and agriculture products, as 
well as in terms of security. In the near future, the Atlantic Ocean could be transformed in a 
crucial platform for the flow of raw materials and energy. The role of offshore resources will 
be likely to grow, trade and energy routes will intensify in the Atlantic and the consequences 
for Europe can be multiple. 

Energy Security 
 
161
Chinese strategy - Given the growing energy dependency, China drew a "pipeline 
diplomacy" through a geostrategic approach. This diplomacy links closely foreign policy with 
energy interests, aiming to avoid a rupture supply and, simultaneously, ensure the energy 
conditions of economic expansion. Three groups dominate oil sector in China - CNOOC, 
SINOPEC and CNPC (the latter has the control of 70% of the country's oil pipelines). These 
groups are organically linked to the State Party, featuring up its activities with the outside 
through: (1) investments and agreements, (2) oil-for-loans, (3) construction of pipelines. To 
mitigate China's dependence on imports from the Middle East, Chinese groups are investing 
heavily in Africa (having become an important trading and diplomatic partner). 
Passage from a natural gas regional market towards a global and interdependent. Indeed, 
a number of developments – increase of demand, technological advances, cost reduction in 
production and delivery of LNG to markets and the liberalization of gas are encouraging a 
trend of integration of natural gas markets. Such links between markets will have major 
ramifications for either consumers or producers. 
Changing of Governments‘ roles - From builder to facilitator. The Governments‘ role in 
the development of natural gas market will change dramatically. As market liberalization 
advances in many key consuming countries and the global trade in natural gas expands, the 
role of governments is becoming less important as builders, or as operators, or as financiers of 
projects. Nowadays, governments are playing a bigger role, as regulators and the creators of 
―environments‖ for private investment. 
Supply‘s Security - Constitution of a feasible cartel? - The creation of a cartel could 
reconcile supply and demand, anticipating the intervention of regulators that sometimes can 
be enemies of competition. Along with coordination among key players and, consequently, a 
more effective strategy of expansion to new markets, more stable prices and higher power. 
Nevertheless, it is difficult to follow the same path of OPEC due to differences on the gas 
market. At present, gas is sold through long-term contracts and most of its infrastructure is 
rigid. 
The foregoing discussion suggests that any gas producer group is unlikely to exercise 
significant market power in the near term. While Russia currently has a large share of the 
export market, its sales are directed at Europe where there are several alternative sources of 
supply-especially from North Africa and Northern Europe. In the intermediate term, Russia‘s 
dominance is predicted to decline but a small group consisting of Russia, and several 
members of OPEC (Algeria, Nigeria, Indonesia, Qatar and Venezuela) could command as 
much as forty-nine percent of the export market by 2020 [23 ex-22]. 
Challenges for the future of gas - Potential obstacles – The fast change towards a global 
gas market is not certain. In part, it will depend on the context in which investors will have 
confidence in applying large amounts of financial and intellectual capital; it will require 
finding solutions to adverse social and political consequences of natural resources 
development in countries where governments are weak, and based on the assumption of a 
continued global growth in the electricity sector. 
Other obstacles to overcome will be: coordination between actors and differences in 
markets; long-term contracts and a rigid transportation infrastructure. The growing 
geopolitical importance of gas will imply more attention to energy supply security. 
 
 

Catarina Mendes Leal 
162 
CONCLUSION 
 
We live in a globalized world that can be defined as the process of increasing 
interconnectedness between societies in such a way that events in one part of the world have 
effects on peoples in societies far away [2]. Globalization has several dimensions - economic, 
political, cultural, social,... - Not coincident in origin. 
Table 8.5 presents the main dates/ events of globalization and in energy. 
Naturally, the financial crisis that we are passing through is and will have important 
consequences, both in the energy world and in energy security. 
 
Table 8.5. Globalization and Energy - Main Events 
 
 
Globalization 
Energy 
1960s  
Global Village (McLuhan) 
 
OPEC‘s creation 
 
Six Day War between Israel and Arab countries 
1970s 
 
"Global City" (Z. Brzezinski) 
 
Beginning of the liberalization of capital 
movements 
 
Club of Rome Report's publication about the 
long term extinction of hydrocarbons reserves 
 
First oil shock following the war of Yom 
Kippur 
 
Saudi Arabia nationalizes Aramco 
 
Second oil shock following the Islamic 
Revolution in Iran 
1980s 
 
"Markets' convergence worldwide‖ (T. 
Levitt) 
 
Internet 
 
End of Cold War 
 
Energy market in New York launches oil long-
term contracts 
 
Fall in the barrel of oil price due to 
overproduction 
1990s 
 
Enlargement of the concept "to the whole 
chain of value creation" (K. Ohmae) 
 
Collapse of the USSR 
 
Acceleration of globalization 
 
ICT revolution 
 
Unification of the World Economic 
 
First Gulf War 
 
Price of oil dropped to $ 10 due to 
overproduction 
2000s 
 
9/11 Attacks 
 
Invasion and fall of the regime of 
Saddam Hussein in Iraq. 
 
Globalization: assumed dominance of 
market economy and private entities 
 
Economic and financial crisis 
 
Toxic debts rapidly infected the global 
financial system. 
 
the end of one version of globalization, 
rather than the end of globalization 
 
Responses to climate change are now a 
key driver of future shape of global 
economy 
 
Oil became a financial asset and has taken ―a 
second identity‖ 
 
Saudi erosion of spare capacity 
 
Globalization of Oil Demand (from 2000-2007 
85% of growth from developing countries; 
combined effects of income and population 
growth; global demand increased 33% from 
2004/2008) 
 
Oil price volatility (less than 40 US$/bbl in 
2004 47 US$/bbl in July 2008; back to 32 
US$/bbl in December 2008 
 
Sovereign-Wealth Funds: control Assets 
mounting to more than 2 200 billion US$ 
 
Technology advances (deep shore/ digital 
fields) 
 
Non-conventional discoveries 
Source: Produced by Catarina Mendes Leal, June 2013. 

Energy Security 
 
163
In the first decades of the 21st century, six game challengers [21] can be identified, 
namely: 
 
● 
Shale Gas - If the estimated reserves are confirmed they may range from 60% to 
250% of the conventional ones and this may dramatically change US and Europe‘s 
landscape with implications for gas developments and supply in Europe. However, 
some obstacles related to the environment implications and costs need to be 
addressed. 
● 
BP‘s Macondo Oil Spill - The Blow-Out that occurred in the Gulf of Mexico in the 
offshore Macondo well, in April 2010, led to serious implications on safety and 
environmental issues related to offshore operations. The accident was a wake-up call 
for the whole industry and the consequences are more tight regulations, impact on 
costs, implications on long-term supply for offshore production and new 
requirements for Risk Management and Deep-offshore Safety. 
● 
Iraq‘s Upstream Potential: Iraq is with Venezuela the founder of OPEC but the 
country today is not encompassed by the quota‘s policy of the cartel. Given its huge 
reserves potential, Iraq announced a plan to increase oil production 6 times from 
current 2.4 mb/d to more than 12 mb/d in the next 6 years; it's a very ambitious plan 
implying enormous challenges, but the potential is there and the technical and 
political implications may be huge starting with the impact on OPEC policies and 
cohesion. 
● 
Shifting of Power from Atlantic to Pacific Basin: the role of leading emerging 
countries like China and India in the world energy matrix and in the growth of 
energy demand is shifting power to the Indian and Pacific basins. This may trigger 
major implications on the world‘s balance of power; there are already significant 
changes in trade, finance and investment patterns and this raises issues about the 
replies in terms of European Companies, Corporate. 
● 
The Japanese Earthquake and Tsunami (2011) and its Consequences - Another key 
event that emerged in 2011 and became a game changer. The power supply was 
disrupted with a likely permanent loss of a significant portion of Japan‘s nuclear 
power generation capacity. The energy market provided a strong answer to replace 
the failure of the nuclear power generation and the LNG market was instrumental to 
this response. The LNG gave birth to a very flexible and versatile market and this 
proved to be a strong competitive advantage providing Japan, already the top LNG 
consumer, with additional LNG volumes of 8 to 10 million tones. Key LNG 
producers like Russia, Indonesia, Qatar and Oman have been quick to offer LNG 
cargos to help Japan to restore and maintain power supplies. The LNG market will be 
totally globalized by 2022/2025, the flexibility in LNG transport responses quickly to 
shifts in demand and LNG will be the driving force for the Globalization of the Gas 
Market. 
● 
―Arab Spring‖ - The situation in North Africa and Middle East with the Arab 
Regional upheavals eroded a good part of the strategic balance in the oil and gas 
markets and may have major consequences for the stability of the Region and for 
European oil and energy security. The case of Libya is critical because if a failed 
state emerges in the Mediterranean Basin, the impact for energy security in the whole 
area and for Europe may be dangerous. In terms of the oil and gas market, the rupture 

Catarina Mendes Leal 
164 
of production in one important producing country leads to important increases in oil 
prices. The most critical issue is the spread of the revolt to the Arabian Peninsula 
with upheavals in Yemen, Bahrain and Syria. Saudi Arabia intervened military in 
Bahrain to protect the sunny monarchy in a country where 70% of the population are 
Shia. The key consequence for the future is that Saudi Arabia, the heart of the world 
oil system, is circumvented by an Arch of Instability that ranges from Yemen in the 
South to Bahrain and goes deep to the Saudi Eastern Province (Qatif). The 
geopolitical situation is quite unstable and the consequences are deep in terms of 
increasing oil prices, threats to the supply, disruptions in production and restrictions 
in the export quantities and problems in the energy security system. A specific 
illustration of this geopolitical uncertainty is related to the Hormuz Strait from where 
19% of European oil supply flows every day. 
 
Currently, in the energy sector, we witness a set of geo-economical and geopolitical 
changes in three dimensions: (1) structural changes in the energy markets, (2) strategic 
changes in international financial markets, (3) redistribution of power and wealth. 
Power dispute is an economic struggle, of influence and resources. And control over 
energy supplies has become a central element of this competition; however, it is increasingly 
supported by military force. Because of the subventions and potential conflicts, it is 
undoubtedly relevant to policy planners that competition regarding energy suppliers can drive 
to bigger conflicts or even to global conflicts with critical military dimension, even though 
none of the global players is compromised with the unfolding of such events. 
In this new context, marked by changes in the oil geo-economy, towards the unstable 
areas‘ strength of the power (Arabian Gulf and Caspian – e.g., OPEC countries and Russia) 
with reflections on geopolitics, given the emergence of two powers without energy resources 
(China and India) and a dominant power that is discovering resources (US), we face a 
situation that will lead to a players‘ reconfiguration in the international system. So energy 
security should be examined from a double perspective: economic strategy and strategic 
planning. In economics, the challenge is to unveil how to reduce the economic blackmail 
from suppliers on consumers. In the second case, we should know how consumer countries 
can be protected against possible turbulence arising from producing regions, which may lead 
to restrictions/breakthroughs in supply. 
Summing up, nowadays in a globalized world the main energy security problems are the 
growing dependence on foreign energy resources; decreasing of fuel resources and 
vulnerability of energy transports. Simultaneously, we look for solutions that should be 
global, such as: local energy resources; increase of energy efficiency; increase in non-fossil 
energies and a decentralized energy supply. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Baker Institute (2007). The Role of National Oil Companies in International Energy 
Market. The Baker Institute Energy Forum. Retrieved from http://www.rice.edu/energy/ 
publications/nocs.html. 

Energy Security 
 
165
[2] 
Baylis, J., Smith, S. and Owens, P. (2011). The Globalization of World Politics (5th ed.). 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
[3] 
BP (2013), BP Magzine, Issue 2. [on-line]. Retrieved from http://www.bp.com/home. 
[4] 
BP (2013), Statiscal Review of World Energy. Retrieved from http://www.bp.com/ 
home. 
[5] 
Chevalier, J. M. (2004). Les Grands Batailles de L‟Énergie. Paris: Gallimard. 
[6] 
Ciattoni, A. and Veyret, Y. (2007). Géographie et Géopolitique des Énergies. Paris: 
Hatier. 
[7] 
Géopolitique du Gaz du Schiste (2013) La Diplomatie n.º 62. Paris, May-June. 
[8] 
Isbell, P. (2012, December). Energy and the Atlantic: The Shifting Energy Landscape of 
the Atlantic Basin, Wider Atlantic Series, German Marshall Fund (GMF) e OCP 
Foundation. Washington: GMF. 
[9] 
Klare, M. (2001). The New Geography of Conflict. Foreign Affairs, May-Jun., 49-61. 
[10] Leal, C. M. (2007). Gás Natural no Século XXI: Uma Visão Geoeconómica‖. Da 
Sphera. Lisboa: DPP. Retrieved from http://www.dpp.pt/pages/pub/electronico.php? 
cod_per=11andcmr=7andcm=2. 
[11] Leal, C. M. (2007). Segurança Energética e Reorganização Empresarial do Sector 
Energético a Nível Mundial‖. Da Sphera 2007. Lisboa: DPP. Retrieved from http:// 
www.dpp.pt/pages/pub/electronico.php?cod_per=11andcmr=7andcm=2. 
[12] Leal, C. M. (2011). O Magrebe e o Islamismo - Risco Energético de Portugal. Lisboa: 
Tribuna da História. 
[13] Mongrenier, J. S. (2012) Du Pétrole à la Géopolitique, Paris: Studyrama, December. 
[14] OCDE/IEA (2010). World Energy Outlook 2010. Paris: International Energy Agency. 
[15] OCDE/IEA (2012). World Energy Outlook 2012. Paris: International Energy Agency. 
[16] Paskal, C. (2009, April). The Vulnerability of Energy Infrastructure to Environmental 
Change. Briefing Paper, Chatham House. 
[17] Pulido, J. G. and Fonseca, P. (2004). O Petróleo e Portugal – O Mundo do Petróleo e o 
seu Impacto no Nosso País. Lisbon: Tribuna da História. 
[18] Rodrigues, J. C. (2010). Petróleo - 88 perguntas (in)convenientes. Lisboa: Almedina. 
[19] Rodrigues, T. F., Ribeiro, J. F. and Leal, C. (2011). Uma Estratégia de Segurança 
Energética para o Século XXI em Portugal. Lisboa: Imprensa Nacional / Instituto da 
Defesa Nacional. 
[20] Rühl, C. (2009). BP Statistical Review of World Energy. London, June 2009. 
[21] Silva, A. C. (2012). Global Security Challenges for Europe: Structural and Strategic 
Changes in Energy Markets and Major Implications. EUI Working Papers, RSCAS 
2012/24, Global Governance Programme-19. Florence: Robert Schuman Centre for 
Advanced Studies. 
[22]  US EIA (2013). Technically Recoverable Shale Oil and Shale Gas Resources: An 
Assessment of 137 Shale Formations in 41 Countries Outside the United States. US 
Department of Energy. Washington DC, June 2013.  
[23] Victor, David G.; Jaffe, Amy M.; Hayes, Mark H. (2007). Natural Gas and 
Geopolitics: From 1970 to 2040. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
[24] Yergen, D. (2008). The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money and Power (2nd ed.). 
Detroit: Free Press. 
[25] Yergen, D. (2011). The Quest: Energy, Security, and the Remaking of the Modern 
World. New York: Penguin Group. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART IV: NEW SECURITY THREATS 
 
 


In: Globalization and International Security: An Overview 
ISBN: 978-1-63463-075-7 
Editors: T. Rodrigues, R. García Pérez et al.  
 
© 2015 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 9 
 
 
 
CYBER THREATS, STRATEGIC IMPACT AND LEGAL 
FRAMEWORK OF CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE 
 
 
Paulo Fernando Viegas Nunes 
Military Academy, Portugal 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The rapid pace of technological development, recorded over the last three decades, 
largely concurred to expand the use of internet worldwide. Cyberspace, only accessible 
through the internet, has become a true mediator of social relations and a driver of 
economic development in most developed countries. This new virtual space came to 
promote and simplify the relationship between citizens, government and businesses 
assuming a central role in providing essential and critical services that support the 
functioning of Information Age societies. 
Cyberspace, as a global common, has no physical borders and no spaces of 
sovereignty clearly defined. It makes it difficult to differentiate between what is public or 
private, civil or military, national or international. Leveraging existing regulatory 
difficulties that may arise, new threats emerged. They explore innovative virtual features 
and somewhat less traditional ways of thinking and acting, increasingly linked to 
cyberspace. Both the number of cyber-attacks and their disruptive impact have been 
experiencing a sharp growth over the past few years. 
In a networked and hyper-connected world, this new global space has been 
transformed into a privileged vector for conducting attacks against individuals, 
enterprises, public or private networks, critical infrastructures or even against the very 
processes that control the information systems of states‘ electronic governance. In this 
context new social risks arise that have to be properly analyzed and managed. 
The increasing number of cyber conflicts in general and the progressive 
militarization of cyberspace in particular, boost the probability of the ―use of force‖ 
situations and the occurrence of armed conflicts in cyberspace. This calls for a concerted 
effort conducted by the international community in order to guarantee the convergence 
and to promote the adjustment of national legislation in order to facilitate the fight against 
cybercrime and reduce the number of cyber conflicts. 
                                                           
 Corresponding author: Paulo Fernando Viegas Nunes. Military Academy (Portugal). E-mail: nunes.pfv@mail. 
exercito.pt. 

Paulo Fernando Viegas Nunes 
170 
Collective consciousness on the existing vulnerabilities, the increase in cyber threats 
impact and risks arising therefrom, has led to the development of national synergies and 
international cooperative efforts. The most recently issued national policies and 
strategies, specifically designed to cope with all forms of cyber-attacks, have already 
started to deepen a culture of cyber security and cyber defense at both national and 
international levels. 
 
 
INTERNET: EVOLUTION AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES 
 
When the Internet was created in the 1960s, the challenge raised by the United States 
Department of Defense to the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), was to create a 
highly reliable and flexible network in order to ensure its availability in extremely difficult 
operating conditions. A fully distributed network management system was then adopted, in 
order to increase the network resilience and survivability. 
Since the initial number of users was relatively low and most of them were associated 
with the academic community the Internet specific information security aspects didn‘t got 
great attention. Network designers were then mainly focused and concerned with ensuring the 
network availability and reliability. 
Over the past few years, the increasing demand for information services and higher 
bandwidth communications have led to the development of infrastructures capable of 
supporting an increasingly high speed data transmission, paving the way to the so-called 
―information highways‖. Given the structural importance of these communication 
infrastructures it constitutes today a factor of development and progress of modern societies, 
shaping the ―information and knowledge Society‖ in which we live in. 
With the Internet widespread, the access to information and computational resources 
linked with this network became universally accessible. These resources are now available 
online at any time, regardless the user location and almost without restrictions, leading 
Thomas Friedman [4] to claim that ―the world is flat‖. 
Nevertheless, despite the apparent democratization of Internet access, the interaction 
context is substantially different from place to place and from user to user, generating thus 
clear asymmetries between the various actors who use cyberspace. 
States are increasingly committed to ensure a sustainable social development in order to 
improve their framing structure and its overall economic competitiveness. They also decided 
to avail the benefits of the so called ―new economy‖, focusing on the virtualization of 
administrative procedures and electronic governance. Internet has definitely benefited from 
this political-strategic vision, acting as a major strategic vector in support of the ―digital 
economy‖ and the very governance of nation states. 
The various stages that shaped the development and sustained the internet growth were 
marked by the progressive absorption of other telecommunications services, such as telephony, 
video streaming, and more recently, television. The need to ensure Internet compatibility and 
interoperability in the development of new equipment and services became mandatory since 
otherwise they incur the risk to face a possible market rejection. Internet is now a real 
integrating platform for electronic services and Information Communications Technology (ICT) 
equipment, creating the vision that everything should be connected and reachable using an 
internet unique reference (IP address). 

Cyber Threats, Strategic Impact and Legal Framework of Conflicts ... 
 
171
The ability to uniquely referencing any object and to network it, in particular through the 
use of sensors, eventually also opens space for its integration and management through the 
Internet, allowing the discovery of the ―internet of things‖. 
Thus, we have witness a true revolution in the way ICT products and processes are being 
conceived, based on the attribution of electronic identities to objects of everyday use, which 
can be equipped with sensors, interacting with the physical environment around them. 
Over the next few years mobile devices and their applications will increasingly continue 
to grow and influence our lives. Throughout the Internet and cyberspace, where everyone and 
everything is networked, we will have a growing ―digital footprint‖ and we will inevitably be 
more intertwined and interdependent. Our future will be deeply influenced by the ―things of 
the internet‖ but also increasingly by the ―internet of things‖. 
 
 
CYBER THREATS IMPACT AND RISK MANAGEMENT 
 
Given the large number of interactions and the amount of overlays that information 
infrastructures present, cyberspace development requires a strong interdependence between 
the construction of a global network such as the Internet and the various National Information 
Infrastructures, where geographical boundaries are becoming less and less relevant. 
The network dynamics associated with the Internet, mainly due to the existence of large 
asymmetries of knowledge among its users, can easily generate ―black swans‖, as pointed out 
by Nicholas Taleb [12]. 
Taleb uses this metaphor to characterize the occurrence of rare events, difficult to predict, 
which invariably cause great impact, such as the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 or the 
designated ―Arab Spring‖, where social networks like Facebook were instrumental in the 
evolution of the revolutionary processes taking place in the Middle East. 
Since we are not usually prepared to deal with this kind of events and that reality presents 
an increasing complexity and uncertainty, these events are, according to this author, 
―increasingly common (and influential) in the future‖ [12]. 
Despite the undeniable value associated with networking, different actors have been 
maliciously exploring the existing asymmetries of knowledge to attack the availability and 
integrity of cyberspace, and the authenticity and confidentiality of data exchanged in 
integrated networked systems. Depending on their nature and the estimated degree of 
disruption, these attacks can affect the regular functioning and endanger state‘s critical 
infrastructures, considered vital to the safeguard of national sovereignty. 
Taking into account the need to assure cyberspace security and mitigate social risks, a 
threat spectrum analysis is of particular importance and should be conducted since it allows 
the identification of potential sources of attack. 
These can affect every information infrastructure, either individually or in an aggregated 
manner. Based on the motivations of each actor, assessing its capabilities and the likelihood 
of occurrence of a cyber-attack, we will inevitably verify, to a greater or lesser degree, the 
existence of a possible social risk. 
Among the potential sources of cyber threats, it is possible to identify disgruntled 
employees, amateurs, hackers, crackers, cyber criminals, spies seeking commercial secrets, 
hacktivists, terrorists and even nation states. 

Paulo Fernando Viegas Nunes 
172 
Additionally these cyber threats [3, 8] can take the form of social intervention (Cyber 
activism and Cyber hactivism), criminal activities (hacking, cracking, Cybercrime, Cyber 
terrorism or cyber espionage) or even the form of acts of war (Cyber war). 
Regardless the threat source, attackers motivations are quite variable and are inevitably 
associated with their abilities and the goals they want to achieve. 
According to this rational, some authors [1] reported that cyber-attacks can be oriented to 
obtain: fame or revenge (hackers and disgruntled employees), economic benefits (cyber 
criminals, industrial spies and disgruntled employees), tactical or competitive advantages 
(nations and industrial spies), political dividends (terrorists, hacktivists and states) and 
destruction or damage (terrorists or states). 
A first criteria for determining the level of impact of cyber-attacks can be set through the 
analysis of their level of organization, allowing to group such attacks as follows [1, 5]: 
 
● 
Simple Attacks: have a low average impact. This type of attack is executed without 
coordination or with a very low level of organization, being led by one or several 
people but never forming an organization with its own identity; 
● 
Organized Attacks: its impact is usually moderate but, depending on the goals they 
want to achieve, may become higher. These attacks are usually executed and 
coordinated by an organized group, composed of a significant number of people; 
● 
Advanced Persistent Threats (APT): these threats have high probability of occurrence 
and their impact can be quite strong. The materialization of such threats often 
requires the existence of persons endowed with a very sophisticated level of 
knowledge and technical skills. These attacks remain over time and its development 
is precisely tailored. The fact that its design is customized and focused on a specific 
target, gives these attacks a very high precision; 
● 
Large Scale Coordinated Attacks: its impact can be high or very high. These attacks 
have a high level of coordination and are performed and directed by an organization 
or a nation; they involve a large number of actors who may or may not belong to the 
organization/nation; 
● 
Cyber-attacks coordinated with physical attacks: its impact is extremely high. The 
level of coordination needed to implement this type of attacks is very high; the 
combination and synchronization of cyber-attacks with attacks in different physical 
dimensions (land, sea, air and space) requires a very precise planning and execution. 
 
Within this context, it is not possible to compare the effects of a simple ―denial of 
service‖ attack, as the ones that daily affect many public websites, with a large-scale 
coordinated attack that has the power to affect a state‘s critical infrastructures, causing death 
and producing social chaos. 
The cyber-attacks launched against Estonia (2007), Georgia (2008), Iran (2010) and 
Ukraine (2014), were quite sophisticated and should be seen as large-scale attacks. This kind 
of attacks has proven the need to protect and ensure the flow of vital information between 
governmental structures that are considered critical to the survival of a state during a crisis 
situation. 
Given the disruptive and increasingly destructive impact of cyber threats, risk analysis 
and social risk management associated with cyberspace, increasingly influences the Security 
and Defense of Information Age states. 

Cyber Threats, Strategic Impact and Legal Framework of Conflicts ... 
 
173
Whether or not we believe in the imminence of a large-scale cyber-attack, we cannot 
ignore the increasing disruptive power of cyber threats in our society. Sometimes this kind of 
attacks represents a situation of a possible ―use of force‖ and even a potential act of war. 
 
 
MODERN CONFLICTS AND THE MILITARIZATION OF CYBERSPACE 
 
Violence and war are phenomena as old as man himself, leading some international 
relations researchers to consider its inevitability. The realist school, based on the affirmation 
and safeguard of states interests in the international arena, is opposed to an idealistic 
perspective that looks for a vision of world balance and prosperity, in order to avoid the risk 
of war. Realists (Maquievel, Thomas Hobbes, Edward Carr, Hans Morgenthau) accept the 
natural character of war and consider that, due to the different dynamics associated with 
States‘ exercise of power, one cannot ensure permanent cooperation and perpetual peace 
between the various actors (State and non-State) that interact in the international political 
system. 
The resource to violence and the use of force are thus intrinsically linked to the human 
nature and cannot be decoupled from the safeguard of individual and collective interests, 
occurring at the different fields and levels in which the interaction takes place. In a networked 
world, cyberspace settles permanent virtual connections with all those linked to the Internet. 
This virtual space of global nature increases the probability of occurrence of conflicts and 
constitutes a potential risk to the desirable economic stability and international balance of 
powers. The use of cyberspace as a privileged attack vector is a major security concern and 
assumes today an increasing strategic importance to western societies and world peace. 
In our days we live a new paradigm of modern conflict, which affects not only the 
military arena but also society as a whole. Despite the fact that so far it has not been possible 
to clearly identify the specific instances that may lead to cyber conflicts there are already 
strong indicators and national strategic visions that point to this strong future possibility. In 
this new kind of war, the final end state will be to defeat an opponent or limit its action, by 
affecting sensitive elements of its information infrastructures while protecting our ones. 
Modern conflicts have in cyberspace an important attack vector, affecting all who use it, 
both in the private and public domains, for leisure or for work and in many spheres of 
interaction (social, diplomatic/political, economic and military). Cyber-attacks can be 
launched from anywhere in the world, being led from one or more locations simultaneously, 
and often it is not possible to detect the attacker true identity. 
To develop and ensure the success of this type of actions it is only necessary to possess 
enough expertise and have access to easily available technology. 
An attack launched through cyberspace can have virtual effects but can also potentially 
affect physical systems. If a cyber-attack exclusively strikes resources and information 
systems, we can say that this is a non-kinetic attack. However, in most cases, cyber-attacks 
also affect the functioning of systems and physical infrastructures that depend on these 
information resources and systems. In this case, although the cyber-attack has been virtually 
launched (using non-kinetic means), this can be considered as a kinetic attack as it leads to a 
greater or lesser extent to the disruption and destruction of physical systems. 

Paulo Fernando Viegas Nunes 
174 
According to an international study on cyber terrorism recently published by a group of 
researchers [6], it is clear that the exploitation of cyberspace by transnational terrorism may 
occur in different scenarios1, considering the use of both kinetic and non-kinetic means. 
The numerical values presented in Table 9.1 represent the percentage of responses 
associated with each of these specific scenarios. According to the collected data, it appears 
that there is a much higher probability of exploiting non-kinetic attack vectors (digital) at all 
levels (preparation phase, means and targets). 
In line with this premonitory vision, the Internet has become an authentic digital 
battlefield, and the stage for retaliatory actions of hackers associated with various countries 
and strategic actors such as: US, China, Russia, Brazil, India, Pakistan, Israel, Iran, Syria, 
Palestine, or even North Korea. While in most cases this kind of activities do not constitute a 
direct involvement of nation states, several cases have already been detected were networks 
of hackers have been publicly associated with state actors. 
Authors such as Thomas Rid [10] state that ―cyberwar will not take place‖ and forecast 
that cyber conflicts should be seen as a permanent phenomena and that we have to deal with 
cyber-attacks not as acts of war but rather as acts of sabotage, espionage or subversion. 
Overall, although we tend to agree with many of this author's key ideas and arguments, which 
seem logical and well-articulated, we believe that we must assign to cyberwar at least the 
same probability of occurrence as to any other kinetic conflict. 
 
Table 9.1. Scenarios associated with cyber terrorism 
 
 
Source: MacDonald, Jarvis, Chen and Lavis [6]. 
 
                                                           
1 Eight distinct scenarios (AH) were presented to 105 international cyber security experts, each characterised by a 
combination of different types of preparation (digital or physical), means to be used and type of target. The 
question ―According to your perspective, which of the following scenarios constitutes an act of cyber 
terrorism?‖ was then presented to the group of experts, and they were requested to select one of the following 
three options: ―Yes‖; ―Potentially‖; ―No‖. In total, 92 experts completely answered the question (80% of 
response rate) and 13 only partially. 

Cyber Threats, Strategic Impact and Legal Framework of Conflicts ... 
 
175
The recent occurrence of complex and sophisticated cyber-attacks, launched against 
sovereign states2, led many of the major world powers (e.g., US, China and Russia) to 
develop specific capabilities aimed to collect and analyze information on a global scale, in 
particular, on the grounds that these capabilities have become essential for ensuring their 
security and national defense. 
The PRISM3 program, recently made public by Edward Snowden, a former employee of 
the National Security Agency (NSA), is a good example of this type of systems. 
In order to counter a strategy of increasing assertion of power, followed by some States, 
it should be noted that the actions of ―counter-strategy‖ perpetrated by State and non-State 
actors, are more and more frequent. 
This type of actions, that should be seen as a result of existing competing interests that 
lead to confrontation between states, has been increasingly driven by non-State actors. 
The WikiLeaks case study, where many classified US documents were revealed, and 
some of the attacks led by the hacktivist group ―Anonymous‖, that ended up taking a 
remarkable media attention, can both be framed in this context. 
Despite its global conventional military superiority, this kind of incidents led the US to 
develop new cyber defense capabilities in order to avoid what many authors call a ―Digital 
Pearl Harbor‖. 
With the recent establishment of the US Cyber Command, this country publicly assumed 
that cyberspace is a new operational domain where military operations will be conducted4. 
One of the major strategic advantages of cyber-attacks is related with the fact that they 
have a smaller impact on public opinion than traditional kinetic forms of conflict or war. 
Unless a cyber-attack causes a strong psychological or physical effect per se, 
characterized by a significant degree of physical destruction and the existence of injuries or 
deaths, it is considered likely that such attacks will become increasingly operationally 
exploited as a ―secondary attack‖. 
A cyber-attack could thus be launched to create the ideal conditions or to maximize the 
effects of a conventional military attack, as happened in 2008 in the case of Georgia (2008) 
and in Ukraine (2014). 
The increasing militarization of the Internet raised a major concern in this field because it 
is impossible to ignore that cyber-attacks launched or sponsored by states are those that have 
a greater disruptive power. 
Within the current strategic environment, no war can be won exclusively with the 
military use of cyberspace (pure cyberwar). However, it is also true that no military campaign 
conducted in any other kinetic operational domain can be won without cyberspace. 
 
                                                           
2 The cyber-attacks conducted against Estonia (April/May 2007), Georgia (August 2008) and more recently against 
Ukraine (2014), are good examples. 
3 PRISM is the code name assigned to a secret program of data mining and massive electronic surveillance released 
in 2007 by the National Security Agency (NSA), which also involved the British Agency GCHQ. 
4 In June 2009, the US Secretary of Defence announced the creation of the US Cyber Command. This new military 
command claimed to have acquired its Full Operational Capability (FOC) on 03 November 2010. Military 
operations conducted in cyberspace can achieve goals only in cyberspace or in any other operational domain 
(sea, land, air or space). It is now assumed that cyberspace has a main role to perform in the accomplishment 
of military missions. To face the modern warfare challenges the Armed Forces need to protect the 
Communications and Information Systems (CIS) that support the Command and Control (C2) of their Forces. 
To achieve this objective they need to assure the Information Security of CIS Systems and conduct Computer 
Network Operations (CNO). 

Paulo Fernando Viegas Nunes 
176 
CYBER-ATTACKS: VECTORS OF 
CYBER-VIOLENCE AND USE OF FORCE 
 
A cyber-attack constitutes an act of aggressive contours, whose consequences are felt 
both at the virtual and the real/physical world. According with its effects, a cyber-attack may 
thus constitute an effective use of force and, therefore, be considered an act of violence. 
It should be noted that since the end of the 2nd World War, in practice, there are 
essentially two legal reference documents that regulate conflicts between states: The United 
Nations Charter [9] and the Geneva Convention. The UN Charter, is the international law 
governing the resort to force by States (jus ad bellum), while the Geneva Convention, 
constitutes the main source of international humanitarian law that regulates the conduct of the 
participating parties in armed conflicts and is considered the law of war (jus in bello). 
Within this legal framework, an attack conducted in cyberspace leading to injury, causing 
the death of people, that would cause damage or destroy resources, may be unambiguously 
considered a use of force. However, there are cases where this does not become so clear. The 
Tallinn Manual [11] considers that if a State provides sanctuary to a group that engages in 
cyber operations against another State this cannot be considered a use of force. In the opposite 
way if a State provides sanctuary and offers a clear and substantial support to that group, such 
situation can be set and assumed as an effective use of force. 
Since it is not easy to derive clear eligibility criteria to define a situation of ―cyber use of 
force‖, the Tallinn Manual [11] suggests eight criteria that should be clearly identified in such 
a situation: severity, immediacy, directness, invasiveness, measurability of effects, military 
character, state involvement, presumptive legality. 
Despite its undeniable disruptive effect, in light of these criteria, the cyber-attack 
perpetrated against Estonia in 2007 is not considered an effective use of force due to both its 
consequences (non-lethal) and to the difficulties felt at the identification of its originator5 
(only non-state actors were identified). As a matter of law, given the available information, 
the conclusion that can be drawn is that this was a large-scale law enforcement issue that 
affected the state‘s national security. This massive attack derived from a concerted action 
orchestrated by several international criminal groups who violated the law and developed 
wrongful actions against the interests of Estonia. 
On the other hand, regarding the use of the Stuxnet malicious code, which in 2010 
affected the Iranian nuclear facilities, the Tallinn Manual [11] considers that this qualifies as 
an effective use of force if it can be proven that a State6 (not officially identified) was its 
originator. Therefore, unless conducted in self-defense, this action should be considered 
illegal due to the absence of an UN Security Council authorization. 
Underlying the difficulty of framing these two cases is the principle of conferral. In fact, 
due to concealment techniques used and the difficulty of defining the true identity of the 
attacker, the authorship of the action becomes very difficult to clarify. In this case, we could 
only unequivocally impute the cyber-attack to a State actor if it was possible to assign the 
actions conducted to: the organs of that State, people/entities responsible for the exercise of 
                                                           
5 The responsibility of this attack was not officially assumed but has been attributed to Russia. Supposedly this 
attack was launch in retaliation for the removal of a Russian soldier statue from one of the Tallinn squares in 
2007. 
6 Although not officially confirmed, the responsibility for this attack was attributed to United States and Israel. 

Cyber Threats, Strategic Impact and Legal Framework of Conflicts ... 
 
177
governmental authority, persons or groups acting in accordance with instructions or under the 
direction of a State. 
More recently, in August 2012, a virus called Shamoon infected around 30,000 
Windows-based7 computers of the Saudi Aramco oil company. This malicious code changed 
the computer‘s hard drive, making it impossible to recover them and originating drilling and 
production systems data loss. The recovery of the systems took more than two weeks, 
yielding extremely high economic losses to Saudi Arabia. Again, despite the negative effects 
of by this cyber-attack, it was not possible to attribute this action to a specific state and to 
apply the internationally legal framework that regulates the use of force. 
In the specific case of a large-scale cyber-attack, a State may invoke a reason of self-
defense to undertake countermeasures against the responsible parties when threatened by 
operations conducted in cyberspace that constitute a ―serious and imminent danger‖ capable 
of threatening the achievement of their essential interests and compromise national 
sovereignty. In this case, the injured State, in order to be able to defend itself, may violate the 
rights of other States. The need for this action does not require the attribution of the attack to 
a State. Rather it may be invoked only in exceptional circumstances and provided it does not 
harm the essential interests of other States. As previously mentioned, in this context applies 
Article 2 (4) and Article 51 of the UN Charter [9] which frame and legitimize the right to 
individual and collective self-defense of a UN member state (Jus ad Bellum). 
 
 
ARMED CONFLICTS IN CYBERSPACE 
 
Following the same legal principles that govern conflicts in the ―real‖ world, conflicts in 
cyberspace are managed in accordance with the existing legal framework both nationally and 
internationally. Recognizing that cyberspace is a natural extension of the real/physical world 
and that people stand responsible for the actions taken place in this virtual space, it makes 
sense to assume that the same law applies to these two domains (physical and virtual). 
Building on the legal framework of cyber conflicts, the NATO Cooperative Cyber 
Defense Centre of Excellence (CCD COE), located in Tallinn (Estonia), presented in March 
2013 an interesting systematization of international law [11]. The Tallinn Manual, produced 
by an international group of experts of 20 scholars and practitioners, without the intention to 
develop a prescriptive document, prove itself to be extremely useful since it presented a set of 
fundamental principles of international law associated with cyberspace and cyber operations. 
This publication successfully builds the legal grounds that should be applied to international 
cyber conflicts, facilitating the creation of specific legislation by each state. Despite their 
specific differentiating aspects, it is expected that in the near future national laws will rely in 
the same basic principles and progressively converge towards the creation of a similar legal 
                                                           
7 This virus shows great similarities with the Flame malicious code. It was identified due to its characteristics and 
behavior distinct from another type of malware used in cyber espionage attacks [15]. The Shamoon virus is 
able to rapidly spread itself to all computers on a network, through the use of shared resources. Once a system 
is infected, the virus compiles a list of files residing in specific locations, deletes them and sends information 
about them to the attacker. Finally, the virus modifies the startup software system (boot sector) to prevent its 
boot. The Group "Cutting Sword of Justice" has officially confirmed the attack, but it is believed that it has 
been planned by Iran. 

Paulo Fernando Viegas Nunes 
178 
basis, thus facilitating the fight against cybercrime and reducing the number of cyber conflicts 
both at a national and international level. 
Since there is no internationally agreed definition on what constitutes an armed attack in 
cyberspace, the Tallinn Manual [11] defines it as a ―cyber operation that injures or kills 
persons or damages or destroys objects‖, but CCD COE also recognizes that the ―law is 
unclear as to the precise point at which the extent of such consequences fails to qualify as an 
armed attack‖. 
Concerning this point it is also important to recognize that an armed attack is the most 
serious form of use of force but that not all use of force situations constitutes an armed attack. 
Thus, a cyber-operation that causes brief or periodic interruption of non-essential services is 
not an armed attack. However, if this operation causes serious and long term damage to 
critical infrastructures or essential services, it may qualify as an armed attack in cyberspace. 
When we consider the right to self-defense and the possibility of retaliation by the injured 
State, we again face an attribution problem, in particular because an armed attack in 
cyberspace could be considered a Casus Belli. 
In such kind of situations, we have to clarify who carries the burden of proof (who is 
responsible to prove that a specific State was or not behind a cyber-operation), the degree of 
probability (how sure we need to be about the attacker identity) and the method of proof (how 
we can prove that a given state is behind a cyber-operation). 
Since an armed conflict in cyberspace constitutes, for all purposes, a situation of war, the 
law governing the armed conflicts (Jus in Bello) also applies. The pertinent question that 
should be then raised is when will we be in the presence of a cyber-armed conflict? 
To find a clarifying answer, taking into account the previous definition of a cyber-armed 
conflict, it is important to distinguish an international armed conflict from a non-international 
armed conflict, the latter naturally of less magnitude and conducted by one or more organized 
armed groups. 
The best example of an armed conflict conducted in cyberspace we have so far occurred 
in August 2008, during the invasion of Georgia by Russian troops. Cyberspace Operations 
were articulated with traditional military kinetic operations, causing the unavailability of 
websites linked with government, media and financial sectors. Contrary to what happened in 
2007, these cyber-attacks were directly associated with military operations, reflecting a better 
planning and organization than the attacks against Estonia. 
The military or civilian nature of cyber-attacks (principle of distinction) is also an 
important factor conditioning the framework of cyberspace operations that should be taken 
into consideration. Under the Geneva Convention (1949), namely according with its Article 
48 (Additional Protocol I), attacks may only be directed against combatants and military 
objectives. According to this article, ―The Parties to the conflict shall at all times distinguish 
between the civilian population and combatants and between civilian objects and military 
objectives and accordingly shall direct their operations only against military objectives.‖ The 
problem is that many of the attackers are not military and the resources used by the Armed 
Forces today are of dual-use (civilian-military). To highlight this fact, it suffices to note that if 
the national power grid is attacked the vast majority of the military systems will be affected, 
thus reducing their own operational capacity. According to Article 51 (3) of the Additional 
Protocol I and Article 13 (3) of the Additional Protocol II of the Geneva Convention, Rule 35 
of the Tallinn Manual [11] conclude that ―all civilians should enjoy protection against attack 
unless and for such time as they directly participate in hostilities‖. 

Cyber Threats, Strategic Impact and Legal Framework of Conflicts ... 
 
179
Thus, ―an act of direct participation in hostilities by civilians renders them liable to be 
attacked, by cyber or other lawful means‖ [11] (Rule 35 (3)). 
Against this background, the level of negative impact caused by a cyber-attack unleashed 
by civilians is likely to trigger a military response when it adversely affect military 
operations/capacity or is likely to cause death, injury or destruction to protected persons/ 
objects. Thus, the existence of a causal link between an action and its potential negative 
impact can grant the status of belligerent to individuals or civilian groups that conduct 
cyberspace operations. 
The principle of neutrality, when applied to armed conflicts, allows a state not to take 
part in a conflict. A State declares itself neutral essentially in order to protect its citizens from 
the harmful consequences of a conflict, assuming before the belligerent parties that will not 
develop any action (or inaction) that could benefit its opponent/enemy. However, this 
principle is likely to be also seriously challenged by cyber conflicts since cyberspace 
operations are conducted in an open operational environment without physical boundaries 
where one cannot apply the traditional principles of national jurisdiction and guarantee the 
full exercise of State‘s sovereignty. If during a conflict a neutral state fails to prevent that one 
of the belligerents launches a major cyber offensive operation against another belligerent, 
using ICT resources located inside its own territory, its neutrality may be compromised. 
Namely, if this action constitutes a serious and imminent threat to the injured belligerent, a 
neutral state may lose its status and be directly involved in the conflict as another belligerent. 
All States will thus have to have a credible cyber capacity in order to ensure the right to 
assert its neutrality. Failure to safeguard this pre-requisite, in this particular case, may be 
taken as a sign of favoring one party, compromising the status of neutrality that a State 
intends to assume and assert. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The accelerated pace of ICT changes and the growing importance of Internet shaped the 
strategic environment of the past three decades, making the world increasingly dependent on 
network interactions and intangible resources (information and knowledge). 
In modern societies, Internet and cyberspace are seen today as important enablers of 
social inclusion, structural development and economic growth. 
In a hyper connected world, cyberspace has emerged as a global interaction space where 
everything and everyone tends to be linked. 
Cyberspace has no defined physical borders, making it hard to differentiate public from 
private sphere, governmental from nongovernmental, civilian from military and national from 
international. Cyberspace offers new opportunities but, due to its very nature, it also favors 
the development of new threats and largely expands the attack surface at both individual and 
collective levels. This raises new security challenges that may limit the state‘s ability to 
defend national interests and achieve its strategic objectives. 
Cyber-attacks can be launch from anywhere in the world, can be led from one or more 
locations simultaneously, often without it being possible to detect the attacker true identity. 
The increasing Internet-based connectivity of critical information infrastructures and the high 
level of its information systems interdependence can very quickly widespread the impact of 

Paulo Fernando Viegas Nunes 
180 
cyber-attacks both at national and international level. The adoption of protection mechanisms 
and information security processes very often fails to keep the pace of the growing number of 
vulnerabilities. Emergent threats and risks associated with cyberspace cannot therefore be 
ignored or neglected. This is a privileged area of ―asymmetric warfare‖ that could be explored 
by several malicious actors. 
Cyber threats are transversal to all activities of modern societies, affecting many aspects 
of their ―interaction spaces‖ not only at the social domain but also at the political, economic 
and military arenas. Given the emergent competitive and conflictive dynamics that currently 
take place in cyberspace, we will only be able to generate a ―trust environment‖ if we will be 
able to properly build the foundations of an internationally accepted code of conduct. 
Only then, it will be possible to establish a sustainable cyberspace model, increasingly 
free and open but also safer and more secure. 
We have been witnessing a growing military exploitation of cyberspace. Although the 
violent pursuit of political goals using exclusively this new operational environment is not a 
current reality, that scenario should be forecasted because a large scale cyber-attack may 
compromise National Security and Defense. 
In order to increase the protection level of information infrastructures and reduce 
conflicts, countries have to review their current legal framework, creating new doctrines, 
structures and means to implement its cyber security and cyber defense capabilities. 
Building an effective National Cyber Security Strategy inevitably involves the adoption 
of a new vision of the international security environment where cyberspace should be looked 
as a new important strategic vector that more and more assumes an essential role for the 
defense of national values and interests. To that end, national synergies and international 
cooperation should be explored in order to guarantee, at all times and with the available 
means, the right conditions to effectively ensure National Security and Defense in cyberspace. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Benavente, D. and Spanish Defence Staff (2012). Threat Analysis Methodology. 
Spanish input for MNE 7 Objective 3.1 Risks, Vulnerabilities and Threats. 
[2] 
CG (1949). Convenção de Genebra (ratificada a 12 Agosto de 1949). Retrieved from 
http://www.abong.org.br/final/download/DH.pdf. 
[3] 
Denning, D. (1999). Activism, Hacktivism, and Cyberterrorism: The Internet as a Tool 
for Influencing Foreign Policy. Washington DC, Retrieved from http://www.nautilus. 
org/info-policy/workshop/papers/denning.htm. 
[4] 
Friedman, T. (2006). O Mundo é Plano: uma história breve do século XXI. Lisboa: 
Actual Editora. 
[5] 
IDN-CESEDEN (2013). Estratégia da Informação e Segurança no Ciberespaço, 
Investigação conjunta IDN-CESEDEN. Caderno do IDN, 12. Lisboa: Imprensa 
Nacional Casa da Moeda. 
[6] 
Macdonald, S., Jarvis, L., Chen, T., and Lavis, S. (2013). Cyberterrorism: A Survey of 
Researchers. Cyberterrorism Project Research Report, 1, Swansea University. 
Retrieved from www.cyberterrorism-project. 

Cyber Threats, Strategic Impact and Legal Framework of Conflicts ... 
 
181
[7] 
Morgenthau, H. (2005). Politics Among Nations: the Struggle for Power and Peace. 
New York: McGraw-Hill. 
[8] 
Nunes, P. (2010). Mundos Virtuais, Riscos Reais: Fundamentos para a definição da 
Estratégia da informação Nacional. Atas do I Congresso Nacional de Segurança e 
Defesa, Editora Diário de Bordo. 
[9] 
ONU (1945). Carta da Organização das Nações Unidas (ratificada a 26 Junho de 
1945). Retrieved from http://docentes.por.ulusiada.pt/rmmarr/CNU2003.pdf. 
[10] Rid, T. (2011). Cyber War Will Not Take Place. Journal of Strategic Studies, 1-28. 
[11] Schmitt, M. (Ed.) (2013). Tallinn Manual on the International Law Applicable to Cyber 
Warfare. Prepared by the International Group of Experts at the Invitation of the NATO 
Cooperative Cyber Defense Centre of Excellence. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
[12] Taleb, N. (2009). O Cisne Negro – O Impacto do Altamente Improvável (3rd ed.) 
Lisboa: Dom Quixote. 
[13] Vihul, Liis (2013). Cyber Conflict and International Law - The Tallinn Manual. 
Conference 4th of December 2013, ESDC, Bruxelas. 
[14] Wikipedia (2014). Repositório de informação/enciclopédia. [on-line]. Retrieved from 
http://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/WikiLeaks. 
[15] Wikipedia (2014a). Repositório de informação/enciclopédia. [on-line]. Retrieved from 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shamoon. 
 
 


In: Globalization and International Security: An Overview 
ISBN: 978-1-63463-075-7 
Editors: T. Rodrigues, R. García Pérez et al.  
 
© 2015 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 10 
 
 
 
TRANSNATIONAL TERRORISM AND 
DIFFUSED RISKS IN A GLOBALIZED WORLD 
 
 
Susana de Sousa Ferreira 
IPRI - Portuguese Institute of International Relations, Portugal 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The growing interconnection between globalization and terrorism is one of the main 
paradigms of the twenty-first century. Terrorism is not a new phenomenon, but the 
terrorist attacks in New York and Washington in 2001 gave it a new boost and 
international concern. Transnational terrorism has become a main idiosyncrasy of modern 
times and poses compelling challenges to international security. 
It is our aim to take a closer look to the relationship between globalization and 
transnational terrorism, by: (a) analyzing the link between transnational terrorism and 
globalization; (b) exploring key trends in transnational terrorism; and (c) assessing the 
interconnection between new transnational threats and terrorism. 
 
―Terrorism remains a complex phenomenon in which violence is used to obtain 
political power to redress grievances that may have become more acute through the 
process of globalization. Globalization has improved the technical capabilities of 
terrorists and given them global reach, but has not altered the fundamental fact that 
terrorism represents the extreme views of a minority of the global population. In other 
words, globalization has changed the scope of terrorism but not its nature.‖ 
Kiras [19] 
 
 
SECURITY AND MOBILITY IN THE ERA OF GLOBALIZATION 
 
The international system of the 21st century is characterized by its interconnectedness. 
This global interconnection takes place in different fronts: political, economic, social, 
                                                           
 Corresponding author: Susana de Sousa Ferreira. IPRI - Portuguese Institute of International Relations (Portugal). 
E-mail: sferreira@igm.uned.es. 

Susana de Sousa Ferreira 
184 
cultural. The dynamic process of globalization has brought the world together, while 
deepening gaps and accentuating asymmetries. 
The debate on globalization, on its benefits and opportunities but, at the same time, on its 
disadvantages and threats, is central to understanding the current international system and the 
society of risk in which we live. It is a dynamic process characterized by global circulation of 
goods, services and capital as well as people, information and ideas [24]. Globalization is a 
process of contradictions per se. Contradictions that generate problems and threats as well as 
opportunities, and dependencies as well as development [6]. 
The idea of time and space has changed. Our ―old‖ ideas of geographical space and 
chronological time are eroded as distances are curtailed by new technologies. New 
technologies of information and communication have revolutionized the way we perceive the 
world. Technological innovation is responsible for greater access to information, easiness to 
communicate and contact with the world, reducing distances and the cost of trade. The global 
and local dimensions are closer than ever. The intensification of relations and the interrelation 
of different regions and social environments have brought individuals together while creating, 
at the same time, a sense of individualization and loneliness. 
Economic progress, as a symbol of this new era, accentuated the gap between rich and 
poor countries. Uneven rhythms of economic growth, asymmetric human development 
patterns, imbalanced regional development, along with unequal demographic trends 
challenges geopolitical balances and motivates human mobility. 
Globalization gave a new impulse to transnational movements and activities placing new 
challenges to Western societies. New atypical actors now play an asymmetrical chess in the 
international system. The erosion of physical borders and barriers provided by technological 
advances has brought populations and nations together. 
Nevertheless, the intensification of human mobility fluxes questions the security of 
individuals, societies and states and strains the paradigm of human security [13]. 
The intensity of transactions has increased along with the amount of threats and risks. 
The local and identified enemy has been replaced by innumerable unidentifiable and hard to 
locate enemies. In this society of risk, states are confronted with faceless actors who seek 
geostrategic positions and regional power. With the appearance of new actors in the 
international system and the permeability of borders, new global and transnational threats and 
risks arise. Nowadays traditional threats and risks coexist with new ones. The attention is now 
focused in transnational threats, such as terrorism and organized crime. This greater number 
of vulnerabilities amplified the perception of threat and the feeling of insecurity. 
Thus, conceptions of security have changed significantly in the past decades and the 
distinction between internal and external security is increasingly hard to make, given the 
conceptual convergence between these two dimensions of security [12]. 
Agamben [1] states that ―security finds its end in globalization: it implies the idea of a 
new planetary order which is in truth the worst of all disorders‖. The end of the classical war 
and the new challenges posed by a post-Cold War world ask for new collective measures of 
security and defense. The international system after September 11th is made up of a net of 
global threats [2]. We witness a new era of violence, where violence has ―become more 
globalized and fragmented at the same time‖ [4]. 
Terrorism is an international problem. It takes place everywhere and targets innocent 
people. 

Transnational Terrorism and Diffused Risks in a Globalized World 
 
185
Terrorism is not a new phenomenon, yet nowadays it has a global reach and concerns 
everyone. Terrorists use terror as a strategic and political action [23]. The expansion of 
terrorist networks worldwide is a threat to security and international stability. 
Globalization generates instability in societies. The globalization of terror is 
unprecedented and transnational terrorism has evolved by exploiting the avenues of 
globalization. Many authors have acknowledged the relationship between terrorism and 
globalization [1, 6, 8, 19, 20, 27], a widening nexus that poses significant challenges to the 
international system. 
Terrorism can be seen as a reaction to globalization as some groups oppose to the 
―intrusion of foreign cultures that were seen as threatening their societies‖ [20], as an attempt 
to preserve national identities and values that feel threatened by social changes associated 
with globalization [19]. Moreover, as Lutz and Lutz point out [20], ―globalization can also 
disrupt political systems and weaken states. Weak states do indeed provide opportunities for 
terrorists‖. Stevens [27] also argues that ―globalization contributes to the creation of socio-
cultural and psychosocial conditions from which terrorism may emerge‖. Furthermore, 
terrorist organizations have enhanced the ―dark side of globalization‖ shaking the foundations 
of nation-states and their concepts of security [2]. Nevertheless, ―globalization per se does not 
cause terrorism nor does it explain all forms of terrorism‖ [27]. 
In this globalized era states need to cooperate to face transnational threats. In a time when 
a myriad of non-state actors challenge international order and compete with states for power 
[1], it is up to the states to reaffirm their power by seeking their own voice in the international 
arena. 
We live in ―a time of seismic change‖ [29]. The international system is changing rapidly, 
dictated by new technologies, with new threats and challenges to security, economy, politics, 
society and culture. To understand transnational terrorism and the challenges it poses to 
international security we have to consider this phenomenon in the new international reality. 
It is our aim to take a closer look to the relationship between globalization and 
transnational terrorism, by: (a) analyzing the link between transnational terrorism and 
globalization; (b) exploring key trends in transnational terrorism; and (c) assessing the 
interconnection between new transnational threats and terrorism. 
 
 
NEW TRANSNATIONAL THREATS 
 
In the last decades new actors emerged in the international system, as well as new 
regional dynamics, new security complexes and new threats, that deeply transformed 
international relations and particularly security studies. The concept of security has also 
suffered significant changes in the past years. New approaches to security aim to overcome 
the traditional (political-military) framework, by including new areas, such as the societal, the 
economic or even the paradigm of human security. 
In the bipolar world of the Cold War, characterized by the constant nuclear threat, 
dynamics of securitization were under the influence of the US and USSR. The end of the 
Cold War brought significant changes to the international system. It is a new era of transition 
and uncertainty, with power vacuums ambitioned by regional actors, which require new 
collective measures of security and defense. 

Susana de Sousa Ferreira 
186 
The end of the bipolar system, the turbulence and instability in the international system, 
and the high porosity of borders led to the emergence of new transnational non-military 
threats, that cross borders and threat the social and political integrity of states or even the 
security of their inhabitants [14]. As Garcia [14] points out, these threats are characterized by 
their ―exterritorial, disseminated and individualized nature‖, their tendency not to take place 
in a single occurrence or period of time and also for, most times, not having a focal point, in 
which politicians can focus their attentions. 
These threats are posed by new actors in the international system that can elude states, 
thus requiring a holistic and comprehensive approach to address them. 
The paradigm of these new threats is ―hybrid, inter-related and cross-cutting‖ [16]. 
Transnational threats are non-governmental, non-conventional, dynamic, asymmetric and 
unpredictable [14]. Among them we can find terrorism, organized crime, proliferation of 
weapons of mass destruction and energy and environmental security. 
The global impact of these threats and their uncertainty makes them matters of high-
politics. Hatzigeorgopoulos [16] claims that ―although labeled ‗new‘, it is actually their 
increasing prioritization as threatening challenges that is new‖. 
But what are in fact transnational threats? The Congress of the United States adopted the 
following definition: 
 
[t]ransnational threats are defined in statute as: (A) Any transnational activity (including 
international terrorism, narcotics trafficking, the proliferation of weapons of mass 
destruction and the delivery systems for such weapons, and organized crime) that 
threatens the national security (…). (B) Any individual or group that engages in an 
activity referred to in paragraph (A) [7]. 
 
Transnational threats, particularly terrorism, for their random and asymmetric nature pose 
considerable challenges to international security. Greater attention has been paid to terrorism 
after the September 11th attacks to New York and Washington due to the terrifying 
characteristics of these attacks. But how does terrorism pose itself as a new transnational 
threat? We will assess this question in the following section. 
 
 
TRANSNATIONAL TERRORISM – A NEW FRAMEWORK? 
 
States confront a new faceless threat. Hoffman [17] claims that ―we are at the dawn of a 
new era of terrorism violence‖. The attacks of September 11th, 2001 to New York and 
Washington are the epitome of this faceless threat, due to their size and unpredictability. The 
unique characteristics of these attacks have changed the international perception of terrorism. 
The 21st century is witnessing a global development of terrorism. An international 
terrorism of anonymous and unpredictable nature [10] hence called ―transnational terrorism‖. 
It is a terrorism with a set of specific characteristics: theocratic grounds, amorphous and 
diffused structure, based on a transnational network that operates with autonomous cells and 
uses methods and procedures of variable geometry [28]. 
Nevertheless, terrorism is not a new modern paradox. Yet, it was traditionally a domestic 
phenomenon and not an international problem. 

Transnational Terrorism and Diffused Risks in a Globalized World 
 
187
Terrorism is in its essence a political concept, it is the use of violence to achieve a 
political goal. It is the struggle for power. As Hoffman [17] states, 
 
Terrorism is where politics and violence intersect in the hope of delivering power. 
All terrorism involves the quest for power: power to dominate and coerce, to intimidate 
and control, and ultimately to effect fundamental political violence. 
 
Nonetheless, scholars and governments fail to come to an agreement on the definition of 
terrorism. Reaching consensus is difficult due to the nature and scope of terrorism. One thing 
is certain, as Kiras [19] points out, all definitions ―start from a common point of departure. 
Terrorism is characterized, first and foremost, by the use of violence‖. 
Yet, it is distinct from all other kinds of violence (guerrilla, ordinary criminals or a ―crazy 
assassin‖). It is violent and/or threatens violence, has political aims, is designed to have 
extensive psychological repercussions (beyond the victims themselves), is carried out by an 
organization or individuals motivated or inspired by ideological aims, and is perpetrated by a 
non-state entity or subnational group [17]. 
Kiras [19] interlinks the concept of terrorism with globalization, stating that ―[t]errorism 
remains a complex phenomenon in which violence is used to obtain political power to redress 
grievances that may have become more acute through the process of globalization‖. Thus, 
globalization has altered the scope of terrorism by giving it global reach. 
It is a global terrorism, not only due to the global geography of its network but also to the 
repercussions it has worldwide. 
 
 
Traditional Versus New Terrorism 
 
Terrorism is not a modern phenomenon yet it has significantly changed over time. Early 
forms of terrorism go way back to the Greek and Roman Empires, but they got a new 
dimension during the French Revolution, in the 18th century. In fact, during the French 
Revolution, terror was used by organs of power ―to eliminate enemies and pacify the 
populace‖ [27]. Until the beginning of World War I, terrorism was mainly state-sponsored 
and had a revolutionary character. 
After World War II, terrorism had a remarkable expansion and huge impact in the wars of 
independence from colonial rule, in third world countries, such as Kenya or Algeria. Also, 
during the same period, terrorist organizations such as the IRA in Ireland, redefined their 
methods and techniques [23]. 
In the 1960s terrorism becomes an international phenomenon as it goes beyond national 
borders and acquires global impact. Hijacking of airplanes, bomb attacks, murders and 
hostage situations are now used to cause terror and shock the international community. Kiras 
[19] identifies three elements that are at the genesis of transnational terrorism: ―the expansion 
of commercial air travel; the availability of televised news coverage; and broad political and 
ideological interests among extremists that intersected around a common cause‖ [19]. 
This new terrorism has its origins in the Middle East. Indeed, a ―more intense and 
protracted form of terrorism‖ emerged, as radical Palestinians (the Popular Front for the 
Liberation of Palestine – PFLP) targeted Israelis and Israeli institutions and ―escalated their 
methods to include skyjacking, in part because of media attention given to their cause‖ [27]. 

Susana de Sousa Ferreira 
188 
This was the answer given to Israel‘s harshness of counterterrorism measures. As 
Hoffman [17] points out, these events changed dramatically the nature and character of 
terrorism as ―their intent was to shock and, by shocking, to stimulate worldwide fear and 
alarm‖. Moreover, technological advances facilitated these technical changes in terrorism as 
they ―transformed the speed and ease of international commercial air travel and vastly 
improved both quality of television news footage and the promptness with which that footage 
could be broadcast around the world‖ [17]. It is a new terrorism that knows no boundaries and 
targets innocent civilians from other countries. 
The 1960s-1970s witnessed the proliferation of international terrorism in terms of state-
sponsored terrorism as well as its evolution. During the Cold War period both superpowers 
(US and USSR) supported rival groups in third world countries (namely in Angola and 
Namibia). Despite officially condemning terrorism, they both sponsored terrorist movements 
in these countries. 
The association between terrorism and organized crime also led to the transformation of 
international terrorism into transnational terrorism. Indeed, terrorist networks rely on 
organized crime to acquire weapons and equipment, financial resources and also to illegally 
move people across borders [23]. 
Terrorism evolved to include economic and religious motives along with political ones 
[27]. The connection between terrorism and religion goes way back in time, with religious 
fanatics. Modern religious terrorism is a ―mixture of faith, fanatism, and violence‖ and 
embraces the world‘s major religions as well as cults and obscure religious sects [17]. 
Religious terrorist groups grew exponentially in the 1990s. 
Hoffman [17] remarks that the ideological gap left by the end of the Cold War left space 
for religious terrorism to spread. A period of transition and uncertainty began with the end of 
the Cold War. The sense of insecurity due to the vacuum of power left by the end of the 
bipolar system, the fragmentation of power and the proliferation of regional conflicts raised 
fears and motivated religiously driven terrorism. 
In the last decades, ―religious terrorism has increased its frequency, scale of violence, and 
global reach‖ [21]. Still, it is not the only terrorist model; it coexists with other types and 
ideologies. Cronin [8] identifies four types of ―terrorist organizations currently operating 
around the world, categorized mainly by their source of motivation: left-wing terrorists, right-
wing terrorists, ethno nationalist/separatist terrorists, and religious or ‗sacred‘ terrorist‖. 
These categories are not isolated, as Cronin [8] points out, there might be different motivating 
ideologies inside the same group, but usually one prevails. 
The 21st century awakes with a terrorist attack to the heart of America (New York and 
Washington) on September 11th, 2001. September 11 was seen as a pivotal moment in the 
history of political violence and terror [21]. Since then, a series of terrorist attacks have taken 
place worldwide, from Spain to Afghanistan, from Egypt to Mumbai. Nevertheless, 
differences arose since then. ―It was argued that within this new environment, terrorists were 
now quite capable of using - and very willing to use – weapons of mass destruction to inflict 
unprecedented casualties and destruction on enemy targets‖ [21]. 
Rapoport divided modern terrorism into four ―waves‖, as follows (Figure 10.1): (1) the 
Anarchist wave, from the 1880s to the end of World War I; (2) the Anti-Colonial wave, from 
the end of World War I until the late 1960s; (3) the New Left wave, from the late 1960s to the 
1980s; and (4) the Religious wave, from the late 1970s until the present. Yet Rapoport argues 
that ―terrorism occurs in consecutive if somewhat overlapping waves‖ [8]. 

Transnational Terrorism and Diffused Risks in a Globalized World 
 
189
 
Source: Adapted from [25]. 
Figure 10.1. Rapport‘s four waves of terrorism 
Regardless of different motivations to perpetrate terrorist attacks and the nature of 
terrorist attacks per se, they all have in common the use of violence and the killing of 
innocents, in the struggle for power. 
Terrorism is one major threat in the 21st century. This so-called New Terrorism is mostly 
likely to remain in the near future, as Martin [21] points out, because: 
 
1 
People who have been relegated to the social and political margins - or who believe 
that they have been so relegated – often form factions that resort to violence; 
2 
Movements and nations sometimes adopt religious or ethno national supremacist 
doctrines that they use to justify aggressive political behavior; 
3 
Many states continue to value the utility of domestic and foreign terrorism. 
 
Terrorism ―is deeply woven into the fabric of social and political conflict‖ [21] and it 
challenges international security. Numbers show us that terrorist attacks have increased 
worldwide from 1,732 in 2001, to 4,993 in 2005, to 6,659 in 2006 [21]. 
This new terrorism that challenges modern societies is characterized by [21]: 
 
● 
Loose, cell-based networks with minimal lines of command and control; 
● 
Desired acquisition of high intension weapons and weapons of mass destruction; 
● 
Politically vague, religious, or mystical motivations; 
● 
―Asymmetrical‖ methods that maximize casualties; 
● 
Skillful use of the Internet and manipulation of the media. 
 
It contrasts with the so-called ―traditional‖ terrorism, which was defined by Martin [21] 
(Figure 10.2): 
 
● 
Clearly identifiable organizations or movements; 
● 
Use of conventional weapons, usually small arms and explosives; 
● 
Explicit grievances championing specific classes or ethno national groups; 
● 
Relatively ‗surgical‘ selection of targets. 
 
As we can see from Figure 10.2 the ―old‖ terrorism is more specific, as we move away 
from the centre we have a ―new‖ terrorism with indiscriminate targets and higher casualties. 
Thus, as far as we move from the centre more disperse we may find a more disperse kind of 
terrorism. 

Susana de Sousa Ferreira 
190 
 
Source: Author‘s elaboration adapted from [21]. 
Figure 10.2. Old vs. New Terrorism. 
The sources of terrorism (such as intolerance and resentment or even the search for 
power) have not changed significantly in the past years, nor will in the near future. What has 
considerably changed is the behavior and instruments adopted: the growing use of 
communication and information technologies; adaptations of cell-based organizational and 
operational planning by global revolutionary movements; the use of relatively low-tech 
tactics such as suicide bombers; and efforts to build or obtain relatively high-tech weapons of 
mass destruction or, rather, to convert existing technologies into high-yield weapons [21]. 
Despite its intrinsic nature, terrorism can be perpetrated by different actors. Thus, it can 
be state-sponsored or autonomous (Figure 10.3). Garcia [14] considers the latter to be the 
most dangerous one, as it is carried out by independent organizations, with no state 
connection, with high autonomy and flexibility, and with the necessary means to act. 
In the past years terrorism has suffered significant changes and nowadays we talk of 
different kinds of terrorism: cyber-terrorism; bio-terrorism; narco-terrorism; and nuclear 
terrorism, among others. It depends on the actors involved, on the means and methods used, 
and also on the motives. September 11 awoke states to the need to deal with terrorism in an 
international basis. The threat it poses is now greater than ever. Cronin [8] claims that 
 
if there is a trend in terrorism, it is the existence of a two-level challenge: the 
hyperreligious motivation of small groups of terrorists and the much broader enabling 
environment of bad governance, nonexistent social services, and poverty that punctuates 
much of the developing world. 
 

Transnational Terrorism and Diffused Risks in a Globalized World 
 
191
Transnational terrorist organizations have a ‗horizontal‘ structure with autonomous cells 
operating independently ―without reporting to a hierarchical (‗vertical‘) command structure‖ 
[21]. They resort to asymmetrical tactics to perpetrate indiscriminate attacks against ‗soft‘ 
targets [21]. 
 
 
Source: Adapted from [9]. 
Figure 10.3. The spectrum of (terrorist) political violence, according to R. Dekmejian. 
Al-Qaeda, a religiously motivated terrorist organization, epitomizes transnational 
terrorism, as an organization with a network of cells spread around the world and which gets 
support and sanctuary from regions that have not benefited from globalization [8]. 
In the last decades, there has been a dispersal in the geography of terrorist acts. The 
correlation between terrorism and human development is still unclear, but in regions with a 
deficit in terms of human development, where political discontentment rises due to the lack of 
freedom and justice, disappointment arises and may lead to the adherence to radical 
responses. 
The Middle East has been the main focal point of terrorist activity, but over the past 
years, other regions, such as Central and South Asia, the Balkans, and the Transcaucasus have 
been growing in importance [8]. 
To sum up, transnational terrorism has both new and lasting features. The struggle for 
political power is a common feature to all phases of terrorism. 
Cronin (2003, p. 42) acknowledges that religiously motivated terrorism is ―the newest 
and perhaps most alarming aspect‖ of transnational terrorism. 
 
 
Technologies and Terrorism 
 
In this new era of communication, technologies and advanced communications such as 
the Internet are at the disposal of terrorists. They allow terrorists to communicate quickly, 
cheaply, and with little risk of exposure [21]. Transnational terrorism has evolved with the 
resource to new technologies and the ability to cross virtual and international boundaries. 
The globalization of information and greater integration of societies had a ‗spill over‘ 
effect to the globalization of violence and terror. 
As Martin [21] points out, 
 
 

Susana de Sousa Ferreira 
192 
Global trade and political integration permit extremists to provoke the attention of 
targeted audiences far from their home territories. In many respects, because of 
globalized information and integration, terrorists are able to operate on a virtual 
battlefield and cross virtual borders to strike their enemies. Globalized political and 
economic arrangements offer terrorists the capability to affect the global community 
much faster, and more intensely, than could previous generations of terrorists. 
 
Communication technologies have become a main instrument of transnational terrorism. 
Through communication technologies terrorists can spread their message to a global audience 
and reach mass audiences. Publicity is a main feature in transnational terrorism; it allows 
terrorist groups to influence targeted publics and acquire power (at least perceived power). 
The use of digital technologies to broadcast events, such as hijackings, bombings, 
assassinations and others, give media exposure to terrorist attacks and may potentially attract 
certain viewers [21]. Moreover, new technologies are essential in establishing communication 
between terrorist cells. Semiautonomous cells that are spread around the world can easily and 
covertly establish communication and even plan strategic attacks via the Internet and other 
technologies [21]. It also allows terrorist cells to reinforce their presence worldwide. 
Thus, new technologies enable terrorist groups to plan and conduct attacks in different 
countries. With fewer resources than in the past but with access to technology, terrorists can 
now plan far more devastating attacks. 
As Kiras [19] enlightens ―technologies have improved the capability of groups and cells 
in the following areas: proselytizing, coordination, security, mobility, and lethality‖. 
Transnational terrorism is very flexible in terms of its organizational and 
communicational framework. Thus, in many terrorist organizations there are ―sleeper‖ cells 
spread around the world, other groups travel to locations where an attack will be perpetrated, 
facilitated by low-cost travel and integrated economies and regional trade agreements. 
Technologies simplify communication, transportation and travel, weaponry trading, as well as 
the development of bomb-making techniques and strategic planning [21]. 
 
The technological enablers of globalization assist terrorist cells and leaders in 
preserving security in a number of ways, including distributing elements in a coordinated 
network, remaining mobile (…), and utilizing clandestine and/or encrypted 
communications [19]. 
 
Thus, making it even more difficult to monitor terrorist groups and predict when and 
where a terrorist attack will take place. Technological development has improved the 
effectiveness of terrorist groups, as they have adapted their techniques to make the most of 
modern technologies. The image of the modern terrorist reflects the reality of this era: 
technology and loneliness [15]. 
 
 
TERRORISM AND DIFFUSED RISKS 
 
In this society of risk states are challenged by an array of transnational threats that are 
often interconnected. An example of which is ―the merging of transnational organized crime 
and international terrorism is nonetheless on the rise‖ [26]. Transnational organized crime 

Transnational Terrorism and Diffused Risks in a Globalized World 
 
193
places a threat to societies and states. These networks operate in a global scale and in 
different fields, from drug smuggling to trafficking of human beings. 
Just like terrorism, organized crime is not a new phenomenon, yet it has bolstered in the 
last two decades. Globalization and economic, political, social and technological evolution 
have made it possible for organized crime to foster and become a transnational paradox. The 
porosity of borders facilitates the free (almost) uncontrolled circulation of goods, allowing 
illegal activities to cross national borders. 
Organized crime has a network structure and criminal aims; it is violent and corrupt. It 
has a flexible structure that allows it to constantly adapt and expand its activity to new 
geographical areas and markets [14]. 
Technological development has also strengthened criminal activity, with the adoption of 
new, sophisticated and anonymous methods [14]. These are very profitable illegal activities, 
ideal for money laundering. 
The constant changes in the international system in the last twenty years and the 
globalization of markets led to a convergence of transnational organized crime and terrorist 
groups. ―Transnational organized crime and international terrorism increasingly share both 
organizational and operational characteristics, and at times even partner with one another‖ 
[26], as both groups operate outside the law and often need the same resources. 
The duality of globalization, with increasing global integration and escalation of 
asymmetries within regions and states, has led to the growth of weak or failing states. 
As Sanderson [26] points out ―the absence of the rule of law in places such as Somalia, 
Kosovo, and Afghanistan provides ideal conditions for the blending of criminal and terrorist 
activities‖. 
Nowadays, most terrorist groups rely on criminal activity for financial support. Thus, 
many terrorist organizations are engaging with organized crime to satisfy their financial and 
operational necessities. Furthermore, this connection with criminal groups enables terrorist 
organizations to have greater access to arms. 
Asymmetric warfare is one of the main characteristics of transnational terrorism. ―In the 
modern era of asymmetrical warfare, terrorists can theoretically acquire and wield new high-
yield arsenals, strike at unanticipated targets, cause mass casualties, and apply unique and 
idiosyncratic tactics‖ [21]. Thus, through the use of high to low scale weaponry, terrorists can 
redefine international security. 
Transnational terrorism is also typified by the threat of weapons of mass destruction 
(WMD). The proliferation of WMD itself is one major transnational threat. This is an issue 
that concerns the international community, as increasingly more countries aim to have their 
own WMDs and because of the increase of stocks of nuclear and radioactive material [14]. 
Nowadays, a terrorist organization can easily build its own WMD (some of the 
information is even available on the Internet) or have access to nuclear, radiological or 
biochemical material. The threats from ―biological, chemical, radiological, and other nuclear 
weapons are unprecedented in the possible arsenals of terrorists‖ [21]. The impact of these 
different kinds of weapons differs greatly in the number of casualties, but they all have a huge 
psychological effect among populations and affect international security. 
One of the main challenges posed by nuclear proliferation is the possible development of 
a regionally differentiated world, with some nuclear powers changing their strategic thinking 
and other regions exerting nuclear power [18]. 

Susana de Sousa Ferreira 
194 
With the end of the Cold War, terrorist groups have shown greater interest in acquiring 
WMDs and expressed their desire to use them, but they largely did not do so [19]. 
Nevertheless, the possibility of a terrorist attack using WMD threatens international stability. 
Even in the absence of WMD, as Kiras [19] points out, ―globalization has facilitated 
access to weapons, resources, and proficiency required to conduct smaller, but more lethal, 
attacks‖. Despite the possible use of WMDs by terrorist groups, most groups still rely on 
conventional weapons, as explosives and firearms. Nonetheless, the methods used are 
unconventional and unpredictable, and the targets are unexpected. 
The future of the nexus between transnational terrorism and organized crime or even 
WMDs is still unclear, as it is in constant transformation. Yet, the convergence between these 
transnational threats places serious challenges to the international community, calling for 
unilateral, bilateral, regional and global measures. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The increase of terrorist attacks has made it clear that transnational terrorism will 
continue to pose challenges to national and international security in the coming decades. In 
this society of risk, globalization and terrorism are increasingly interconnected, which is one 
of the main features of this new century. 
It is erroneous to advocate that globalization is accountable for terrorism, but it is 
deceptive to analyze terrorism separately from globalization. 
Globalization has changed the scope of terrorism, giving it international reach. Terrorists 
have made considerable use of globalization, exploiting its communication technologies, 
economic integration, the increasing interconnection of societies and the free circulation of 
goods, services and people. We have identified three main connections between terrorism and 
globalization: 
 
1 
Use of communication technologies – the Internet and new information technologies 
have become important tools to prepare and perpetrate terrorist attacks; it eases 
communication between cells around the world; it is essential to spread terrorists‘ 
messages. 
2 
Erosion of physical barriers and porosity of borders – allows terrorists to reach across 
international borders; free circulation of goods, services and people between 
countries (such as the EU or NAFTA) allows terrorist cells to move and establish 
around the world; easier acquisition of weaponry and equipment. 
3 
Global financing networks – association with organized crime to finance terrorist 
activities; it allows to hide financial resources in different legitimate or illegal 
companies and businesses (from non-profit organizations to drug smuggling) 
 
Transnational terrorism is also intertwined with other major transnational threats, namely 
organized crime and WMDs. The potential it can acquire from combining forces with these 
two threats makes it even more dangerous, with greater lethal weaponry and access to 
unlimited (illegal) financing. 

Transnational Terrorism and Diffused Risks in a Globalized World 
 
195
Countering transnational threats will require collaborative efforts of all strategic actors. 
All of these threats offer new challenges for policy-makers about how to respond to them. 
In the new international environment, transnational terrorism will continue to pose a 
serious threat in the near future. The response to transnational terrorism should be based on a 
comprehensive approach, from diplomacy to economic and social measures. It should be a 
global approach, involving all states, widening regional and international cooperation. A 
global strategy should include cooperation on law enforcement, employing international 
norms and the use of law, and intelligence services. 
Combining military and non-military tactics is essential to eliminate terrorist threats 
while also dealing with the root causes of terrorism. 
Transnational terrorism has become a main idiosyncrasy of modern times and poses 
compelling challenges to international affairs. This asymmetrical threat requires a joint 
response of all actors operating in the international system, in the name of the rule of law, 
while protecting civilian populations. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Agamben, G. (2001, September 20). On Security and Terror. Frankfurter Allgemeine 
Zeitung, translated by Soenke Zehle. 
[2] 
Alves, J. B. (2010). Desafios no Século XXI: Terrorismo Islâmico e Crime Organizado. 
Porto: Universidade Fernando Pessoa, Faculdade de Ciências Sociais e Humanas. 
[3] 
Baylis, J. (2011). International and Global Security. In: J. Baylis et al., The 
Globalization of World Politics. An Introduction to International Relations (5th ed.). 
New York: Oxford University Press, 230-245. 
[4] 
Baylis, J., et al. (2011). Introduction. In: J. Baylis et al., The Globalization of World 
Politics. An Introduction to International Relations (5th ed.). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
[5] 
Brandão, A. P. (2011). Dinâmicas transnacionais e securitizadoras: o efeito ampliador 
do 11/09. In: A. P. Brandão (Coord.), A luta contra o terrorismo transnacional: 
contributos para uma reflexão. Coimbra: Edições Almedina, 11-27. 
[6] 
Cescon, C. V. (2011). A Segurança Nacional e o Terrorismo no Processo de 
Globalização. Lisboa: Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Faculdade de Ciências Sociais e 
Humanas. 
[7] 
Congressional Research Service (CRS) (2001, December). Intelligence and Law 
Enforcement: Countering Transnational Threats to the US, Retrieved from http://www. 
fas.org/irp/crs/RL30252.pdf. 
[8] 
Cronin, A. K. (2003). Behind the Curve – Globalization and International Terrorism. 
International Security, 27(3), Winter 2002/03, 30-58. Retrieved from http://belfer 
center.hks.harvard.edu/files/88504_cronin.pdf. 
[9] 
Dekmejian, R. H. (2007). Spectrum of Terror. Washington, DC: CQ Press. 
[10] Delpech, T. (2002). International Terrorism and Europe. Chaillot Papers, 56. 
[11] Fernandes, L. F. (2011). O Terrorismo na era da incerteza. In: A. P. Brandão (Coord.), 
A luta contra o terrorismo transnacional: contributos para uma reflexão (pp. 11-27). 
Coimbra: Edições Almedina. 

Susana de Sousa Ferreira 
196 
[12] Ferreira, S. S. (2010). A Política de Imigração Europeia – Instrumento da Luta Anti-
Terrorista? Dissertação de Mestrado em Ciência Política e Relações Internacionais. 
Lisboa: Universidade Nova de Lisboa. 
[13] Ferreira, S. S. and Rodrigues, T. F. (2013). A Península Ibérica – Novas migrações e 
contextos securitários (1990-2030). Revista de Ciências Militares, 1(2), 87-111. 
Retrieved from http://www.iesm.pt/s/index.php?option=com_contentandview=article 
andid=719andItemid=164. 
[14] Garcia, F. P. (2006). As Ameaças Transnacionais e a Segurança dos Estados. Subsídios 
para o seu Estudo. Negócios Estrangeiros, 9(1), March, 339-374. 
[15] Guidère, M. (2010). Les nouveaux terroristes. Paris: Éditions Autrment. 
[16] Hatzigeorgopoulos, M. (2012). The EU, NATO and Emerging Security Challenges. 
European Security Review, 54. Retrieved from http://www.isis-europe.eu/sites/default/ 
files/publications-downloads/esr54-EU-NATOemergingchallenges-May%202012%20 
MH.pdf. 
[17] Hoffman, B. (2006). Inside Terrorism. New York: Columbia University Press. 
[18] Howlett, D. (2011). Nuclear proliferation. In: J. Baylis et al., The Globalization of 
World Politics. An Introduction to International Relations (5th ed.) (pp. 382-397). New 
York: Oxford University Press. 
[19] Kiras, J. D. (2011). Terrorism and Globalization. In: J. Baylis et al., The Globalization 
of World Politics. An Introduction to International Relations (5th ed.) (pp. 364-380). 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
[20] Lutz, J. M. and Lutz, B. J. (2008). Global Terrorism (2nd ed.). Oxon and New York: 
Routledge. 
[21] Martin, G. (2010). Understanding terrorism: challenges, perspectives, and issues (3rd 
ed.). London: SAGE Publications. 
[22] NATO (2013). Tackling New Security Challenges. NATO Briefing. Retrieved from 
http://www.nato.int/nato_static/assets/pdf/pdf_publications/20120116_new-security-
challenges-e.pdf. 
[23] Ramos, R. C. (2012). O Fundamentalismo Islâmico e o Terrorismo. Das origens aos 
desafios para o século XXI. Covilhã: Universidade Católica Portuguesa, Instituto de 
Estudos Políticos. 
[24] Rodrigues, T. F. and Ferreira, S. S. (2013). A Face Humana da Globalização: Cenários 
Prospetivos para o Mediterrâneo (1950-2050). IPRI Working Paper 51. 
[25] Schmid, A. P. (Ed.) (2011). The Routledge Handbook of Terrorism Research. London 
and New York: Routledge. 
[26] Sanderson, T. M. (2004). Transnational Terror and Organized Crime: Blurring the 
Lines. SAIS Review, XXIV(1), 49-61. 
[27] Stevens, M. J. (2002). The Unantecipated Consequences of Globalization: 
Contextualizing Terrorism. In: C. E. Stout (Ed.) The Psychology of Terrorism: 
Theoretical Understandings and Perspectives – Vol. III. Westport: Preager Publishers. 
[28] Teixeira, N. S. (2003). A UE e o 11 de Setembro. JANUS Anuário de Relações 
Externas, 128-129. 
[29] Whittaker, D. J. (ed.) (2012). The Terrorism Reader (4th ed.). Oxon: Routledge. 
 

In: Globalization and International Security: An Overview 
ISBN: 978-1-63463-075-7 
Editors: T. Rodrigues, R. García Pérez et al.  
 
© 2015 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 11 
 
 
 
GLOBALIZATION AND THE THREATS OF WEAPONS  
OF MASS DESTRUCTION PROLIFERATION  
 
 
Francisco Galamas1, and Francisco Proença Garcia2 
1National Defense Institute, Portugal 
2Portuguese Army, Portugal 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Globalization brought tremendous transformations to the international economy. But 
as these changes created benefits in several areas of economy, politics and science, they 
have also brought significant security challenges. As most publications address the 
strategic issues emanated from the proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction 
(WMD), few are those who explain the proliferation phenomenon from an operational 
perspective. This chapter intends to demonstrate that the same globalization mechanisms 
used every day by individuals and regular companies, have also been used to support the 
phenomenon of proliferation of WMD over the past few years. Furthermore, the chapter 
will also look into the threats that proliferation poses to regional stability as well as the 
risks emanated from non-State actors attempting to acquire such weapons. Finally, we 
also address the existing international mechanisms created to prevent the use of 
globalization channels for the purposes of WMD. 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
According to Thomas Friedman [16], globalization is ―the integration of capital, 
technology, and information across national borders, in a way that is creating a single global 
market and, to some degree, a global village.‖ So, taking into account this definition we may 
consider that individuals, companies and States were allowed by the globalization process to 
extend their actions throughout the World in a more quick and profound way with smaller 
costs [9, 15]. This very same author, also talks about different waves of globalization and 
                                                           
 Email: galamas@netcabo.pt 

Francisco Galamas and Francisco Proença Garcia 
198 
especially the events that made the last globalization wave possible (Globalization 3.0). 
Events such as the fall of the Berlin Wall that opened up borders, the implementation of a 
World Wide Web, the development of commonly adopted software, the extensive use of 
outsourcing and of international supply chains and other forms of the digital revolution 
helped to shape the global world in which we currently live in [16]. 
As these transformations created tremendous benefits in several areas of economy, 
politics and science, they have also brought significant security challenges. This chapter 
intends to demonstrate that the same mechanisms used every day by individuals and 
enterprises have also been used to support the phenomenon of proliferation of weapons of 
mass destruction (WMD). Furthermore, the chapter will also look into the threats posed 
proliferation to stability as well as the risks emanated from non-State actors attempting to 
acquire such weapons. 
 
 
THE STRATEGIC IMPACT OF PROLIFERATION  
 
Before we address the globalization mechanisms used by proliferation networks, it is 
important to define WMD as ―any weapon or device that is intended, or has the capability, to 
cause death or serious bodily injury to a significant number of people through the release, 
dissemination, or impact of toxic or poisonous chemicals or their precursors; a disease 
organism; radiation or radioactivity‖. From this definition provided by the U.S. Code Title 50, 
Chapter 40, Section 2302, it is possible to understand that WMD proliferation intends to 
illegally smuggle these weapons as well as any related materials, technology and equipment 
especially those linked to its production, development or use. 
One of the major problems surrounding the proliferation of WMD, and its parallel 
operations, is that it significantly derives from the current growth of world trade and 
technological and scientific developments, thus making the increasing volume of trade a 
catalyst for the wider diffusion of technology. Such reality makes it progressively more 
difficult to detect any illicit transfers of WMD related materials [31]. 
The perception of this recent challenge allowed policy-makers to summarize a number of 
important conclusions linked to international security. Firstly, the threats do not solely 
emanate from proliferation sponsor States but from non-state actors as well, both of which 
have shown little respect for the international norms regarding the use and nonproliferation of 
WMD. Secondly, the increasingly accepted belief in the vast majority of States in the 
international community that countries do not possess the right to pursue WMD programs 
and/or develop formal or informal relationships with recognized terrorist groups with this 
purpose. Third, States started to acknowledge that the shifts in the international system after 
the end of the Cold War made it increasingly difficult to control the flow of people, 
technology, money and materials, some of them linked to WMD programs. Fourth, the 
awareness that terrorists, especially after the attacks of 9/11, were taking full advantage of the 
constituent elements of globalization [31]. 
As these elements combined, countries understood that non-state groups were able to 
create high degrees of uncertainty in the international security system due to the difficulty of 
States in detecting harmful flows of WMD related cargo while trying – at the same time – to 
support the globalization efforts of their public and private enterprises. 

Globalization and the Threats of Weapons … 
 
199 
Bearing in mind these conclusions, what are the most concerning strategic dangers posed 
by the proliferation of WMD? First, it jeopardizes any regional stability because WMD 
creates additional vulnerability in countries due to any destabilizing deterrence posture or 
coercive threats from rival States. Second, the interests in regional disputes are usually vital 
for the regional power, while the same cannot be said for extra-regional powers [27]. So if the 
interests of the regional power clash with the interests of international powers, the former 
might view WMD as more usable than those who only envisage these weapons as part of a 
last resource response. Third, the proliferation phenomenon ―feeds‖ itself. If only one country 
develops or acquires WMD, especially biological or nuclear, it is enough to serve as a catalyst 
to increase the horizontal or/and vertical proliferation of these weapons throughout nearby 
countries. Obviously, this could lead to further regional instability [27]. The Iranian nuclear 
program is a textbook example of this. After the Iranian nuclear program became high profile, 
the strategic shockwave resulted in the announcement of new nuclear programs, all civilian so 
far, in countries such as Turkey, Egypt, Algeria, and Saudi Arabia [12]. Fourth, there is the 
possibility that States with capability to produce WMD may supply them to terrorists groups, 
so these may perform actions compatible with the supporting States‘ interests. Finally, there 
is the danger that a State with WMD capability collapses and non-State groups access this 
sort of weapons [16]. For instance, throughout the Syrian internal conflict this has been one of 
the biggest concerns of the international community, due to the chemical arsenal possessed by 
this country. 
 
 
TRAFFICKING: TRENDS AND ACTORS 
 
Although globalization is not the main reason behind proliferation, it has indeed altered 
its nature as trafficking networks became global, mostly supported by the wider availability of 
WMD related materials and technology. This happened not only due to the increase of traded 
volumes but also because civilian applications of these materials have allowed proliferation 
networks, an access previously impossible to the latter. As countries responded with the 
implementation of national and multilateral export controls, to prevent such transfers to 
unauthorized end-users, the networks have responded and evolved. Instead of buying 
complete WMD linked systems, they began purchasing single basic sub-components from 
different sources so Customs, Security and Intelligence services were unable to understand 
the authentic use and destination of such materials. One must highlight that materials or 
equipment procurement is one of the leading signs that allow security and intelligence 
services to have an early warning of any ongoing WMD proliferation activities.  
So, to be able to further elude the security services, the proliferation networks structures 
have become more complex by increasing the number of actors involved in their operations, 
resorting to the trade of the already mentioned sub-components and opting for additional 
mechanisms that prevent detection. Additionally, other aspects have also changed. The 
WMD-related materials and equipment market was previously under control by the 
governments or State companies. With the expansion of globalized markets, the transactions 
became almost completely managed by private brokers and their networks of thousands of 
independent manufacturers, most of them with legitimate commercial activities. Furthermore, 
brokers are no longer just a small group. In the case of WMD material traffickers, they 

Francisco Galamas and Francisco Proença Garcia 
200 
became a global community that uses front companies and agencies for trafficking while 
trying to avoid governmental detection. There is also the possibility, which will be addressed 
later in this chapter, of brokers merging their activities with other sorts of illegal trafficking, 
by creating synergies with drug traffickers in order to take advantage of their routes and 
experience [25]. 
In order to carry on these activities undetected, proliferation networks usually work in 
different countries simultaneously, especially in free-trade zones with transshipment centers 
(cargo redistribution locations) or in countries with high volume of international trade so their 
shipments can elude detection methods. Other tactics include the use of front companies, 
brokers, fake end-user and re-export certificates. For example, front companies are entities 
established by the trafficking networks, with apparent legitimate activities, while 
simultaneously resorting to funds from legal and illegal sources. Usually located in a 
transshipment center (known as ―Hub‖) or in a country with lax export controls, these 
companies can also have a fictitious nature and location to evade exposure. Besides, brokers 
are also hired to deal with the purchase, transfer or sell the WMD linked goods as well as to 
provide regular insurance and transportation services. Moreover, illicit brokers may support 
the proliferation networks by circumventing controls and camouflaging illicit trade activities. 
Some reports indicate that brokers have been involved in the illicit trafficking of chemical 
weapons precursors, including Frans van Anraat, a Dutch businessman; Q. C. Chen, a 
Chinese national; and Nahum Manbar, an Israeli citizen, all accused of supporting chemical 
weapons programs in Iraq and Iran by taking advantage of lax national controls [7,34,35]. 
Finally, these type of networks can also resort to financial institutions, such as subsidiaries of 
state-owned banks, to transfer funds of either legal or illegal transactions. 
With these ideas in mind, it is possible to geographically profile places more ―suitable‖ 
for these activities. They usually occur in countries that present certain characteristics like 
significant difficulties in the implementation of nonproliferation related domestic and 
international legislation, inefficient export controls or high corruption indicators. Other 
indicators include lack of ratification of WMD-related Conventions, presence of WMD ―dual-
use‖ industries in their territory, geographical proximity with a commercial hub and/or lack of 
coordination between customs and licensing authorities or other relevant national 
stakeholders. 
One of the most notorious examples of a proliferation network can be found in the A.Q. 
Khan network. Established in the seventies, this network started to illegally supply 
information and materials from Europe to support the Pakistani gas centrifuge program, used 
to produce highly enriched uranium (HEU). As the years went by the network expanded so it 
no longer solely exported gas centrifuges but also weapons assigned to a number of different 
countries. This network supplied sensitive materials and information to numerous countries 
such as centrifuges to Iran and North Korea. It also provided significant support to Libya with 
ten thousand centrifuges. With over one hundred components per centrifuge, one could 
estimate that the A.Q. Khan network sent to Tripoli over one million centrifuge related 
components from all over the World. Equipment was sent, bought or transited from places 
such as Turkey, South Africa, Netherlands, Germany, Switzerland, Italy or Spain, usually 
through Dubai. The network also tried to explore places that poorly apply export controls or 
with industrial capabilities to produce nuclear related equipment or materials but without 
belonging to any nuclear export control regime.  

Globalization and the Threats of Weapons … 
 
201 
Besides, the A.Q. Khan network – described by a former IAEA Director as a ―Wal-mart 
of private-sector proliferation‖ [5] – knew how to explore the legal and administrative 
loopholes of the European export control systems by constantly changing routes and the 
identity of the end-users as well as taking advantage of other instruments of globalization, 
like the international financial system [4]. By having the ability to quickly transfer financial 
assets and doing business in high volume trade areas, the A.Q. Khan network was able to 
further camouflage its own activities. Other concealment tactics included the use of several 
import-export companies and ships with convenient nationalities. Furthermore, Khan‘s 
network had manufacturing facilities in Malaysia, for the production of centrifuge cascades 
with the technical guidance of a Swiss engineer [22].  
Unfortunately, the A.Q. Khan network is far from being the only actor involved in 
nuclear trafficking. Such threat was also defined as a serious concern when the Soviet Union 
collapsed and the theft of nuclear materials in Russia and other former countries of the Soviet 
bloc started to be detected by security and intelligence services. Based on the information 
collected by the Database on Nuclear Smuggling, Theft, and Orphan Radiation Sources of the 
Salzburg University, the author Lyudmila Zaitseva [39] was able to identify three distinctive 
periods. On the first registered period (1991 to 1995) traffickers usually carried radioactive 
goods to Central Europe, hoping to find buyers. During this timeframe, Germany alone 
registered 75 incidents that led to the confiscation of nuclear materials, including plutonium 
and HEU. In the second period (1996-2000), the number of occurrences decreased probably 
due to the fact that traffickers feared getting caught or decided to explore new routes and 
search for new markets to sell their nuclear goods. Other regions appeared to be more 
appealing for nuclear smuggling such as the Middle East, South East Asia or even South 
Africa and other places of Africa. This period also shows us that criminals decided to put 
greater focus on radioactive sources instead of fissile material. The third and last period (from 
2001 onwards) was marked by the events of September 11th and the increasing attention that 
governments started to dedicate to non-state actors. In the 21st century, available data shows 
that episodes involved more radioactive sources than weapons grade nuclear material, which 
accounted for less than 20% of the registered episodes. In order to understand the globalized 
and transnational nature of these organizations we can look at a 2001 nuclear trafficking 
episode, involving the capture of HEU. Even though the apprehension occurred in Paris it 
involved nationals from several countries like France, Cameroon, Portugal, Romania and 
Moldova. The involvement of the organized crime in nuclear trafficking can be understood 
mainly due to financial gains brought by the sale of the nuclear components to a third party. 
Another possibility could include the payment from a State or a terrorist organization to 
criminal organizations to fulfill a particular request associated with nuclear trafficking.  
While the majority of nuclear related equipment and materials have a precise use and 
therefore make nuclear trafficking networks detectable, the same cannot be said about 
biological and chemical weapons related equipment. The chemical and biotechnological 
industries have become so present in our societies and economies that preventing illicit access 
to this ―dual use‖ equipment (terminology applied to components that have a legitimate 
commercial or scientific use while simultaneously allowing the production of WMD) is a 
daunting task. This makes any evaluation of the real dimension of the existing biological and 
chemical ―dual use‖ equipment and materials trafficking highly difficult to perform.  
 
 

Francisco Galamas and Francisco Proença Garcia 
202 
Globalization, Terrorism and Weapons of Mass Destruction 
 
In 2009 NATO‘s ―Comprehensive, Strategic-Level Policy for Preventing the 
Proliferation of WMD and Defending against Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear 
(CBRN) Threats‖ document, acknowledged that the proliferation of WMD and terrorist 
acquisition of WMD materials was the biggest threat to the Alliance in the next 10-15 years 
[26].  
 When debating the issue of WMD and terrorism, it is important to have in mind the 
technical characteristics of the different type of devices and substances involved in these 
weapons. For instance, historically we have witnessed terrorist attacks using chemical and 
biological weapons but not a single episode involving the detonation of a nuclear device. 
Even though, an incident involving radiological substances – known as radiological disperse 
device (RDD) or ―dirty bomb‖ – is much more likely than a terrorist attack involving a 
nuclear device. Thus, it is important that countries address the reasons that can potentially 
make nuclear terrorism a reality, even if an improbable one. 
In 2009, Graham Allison wrote an article on nuclear terrorism that mentioned factors that 
needed to be addressed while debating this type of terrorism. Motivation is an important 
aspect to take into consideration. Past examples from the Japanese cult Aum Shinrikyo and 
the use of chemical and biological weapons are true illustrations of how far terrorist 
organizations are willing to go to fulfill their objectives. Other evidence of the motivation can 
be found in the 9/11 Commission Report [32] that provided evidence of Al-Qaeda‘s efforts in 
the recruitment of Pakistani nuclear scientists. Moreover, with the increased use of 
conventional explosives in terrorist attacks, some terrorist organizations may look into the use 
of new tactics and new weapons in order to further publicize their efforts so to assist their 
recruitment and financial support.  
Another risk factor is the theft or unauthorized access to HEU. The International Atomic 
Energy Agency (IAEA) reported 1266 incidents, between 1997 and 2009, from which 18 
involved HEU or plutonium. Numbers that clearly demonstrate that this problem needs to be 
seriously addressed. For instance, in the International Conference on Nuclear Security, 
occurred in July 2013, the President‘s Conference Summary stated that ―the use and 
availability of nuclear material and other radioactive material can be expected to grow, 
thereby increasing the risks of illicit trafficking and the potential for radioactive material to 
fall out of regulatory control.‖[18]  
The hypothesis of a terrorist group building a nuclear device is another factor to take into 
consideration. Although such attempt requires highly specialized knowledge and it would 
significantly risk an early detection, a United States lawmaker asked three nuclear weapons 
laboratories to make a primitive nuclear device only by using commercially available 
components in the country. Curiously, all of the laboratories were able to do so without 
breaking any United States law. Finally, there is the issue of the delivery of the nuclear 
device. Building and using a missile to deliver a nuclear warhead requires massive amounts 
of expertise and money as well as proper infrastructure. In order to avoid this detectable 
scenario, terrorists might place a crude nuclear device inside a cargo container in the same 
way that legitimate trade arrives to thousands of ports every day. Even if the terrorists desire 
to place the nuclear device in a specific infrastructure other than a port, the device infiltration 
challenges would be similar to those that drug or human traffickers sometimes overcome 
when using their smuggling routes. In order to demonstrate the difficulty of detecting nuclear 

Globalization and the Threats of Weapons … 
 
203 
materials with border controls, ABC‘s journalists smuggled (twice) 6.8 kilograms of depleted 
uranium through United States ports. In those two times the shipment was screened and it still 
remained undetected [5]. 
While there are reasons to worry about nuclear terrorism, we must bear in mind that the 
likelihood of biological and chemical terrorist attack is much higher than the latter. Several 
reasons allow non-state actors more opportunities for the acquisition and the use of chemical 
and biological weapons but it is also important to understand that the identified reasons are 
also being fueled by the globalization phenomenon. The globalized and easier access to 
relevant information and know-how as well as the worldwide expansion of chemical and 
biological industries has a fundamental role in the risk analysis of non-state access to 
biological and chemical materials. 
The first relevant factor is linked, as the chemical and biotechnology industry globally 
expands, to the number of people who may possess the necessary information to produce and 
disseminate chemical and biological agents. In recent years the international number of 
students enrolled in higher-level graduate degrees of chemistry, biology or engineering is 
increasing in parallel with the number of people employed in either the chemical and 
bioscience industry. For example, Yazid Sufaat was one of the scientists working in Al-
Qaeda‘s anthrax project who received his college degree from a United States university with 
a major in biological sciences and a minor in chemistry. In terms of human resources 
dimension, some reports state that biosciences, which include all life sciences, employed 1.3 
million people in the United States alone in 2006. Similar trend was registered in Europe as 
some estimates indicate that there were nearly 1500 biotechnology companies in 2004 [12]. In 
the chemical industry the numbers follow the same tendency. In the European Union alone, in 
the first quarter of 2010, the chemical industry employed around 3.1 million people [20]. It is 
possible that terrorists who wish to use biological and chemical weapons may try to recruit 
highly trained scientists to get access to the required know-how or to steal the needed 
chemicals, precursors or pathogens. Additionally, the increasing use of cyberspace and the 
subsequent access to information allows more people to gather knowledge in chemical or 
biological agent production and dissemination topics [10]. 
Another factor identified, as already mentioned, is the ―dual-use‖ problem. As the United 
States Commission on the Prevention of Weapons of Mass Destruction Proliferation and 
Terrorism noted in its report, equipment relevant to the production and dissemination of 
biological and chemical weapons in the legitimate market is largely available. For example, 
the required equipment to develop biological weapons is almost completely dual-use, so most 
components also have a legitimate commercial purpose. Fermenters that can be used for 
anthrax production can also be used to produce vaccines, vitamins or bio-pesticides. So, as 
globalization and trade volume expands, it is a highly difficult task to control and monitor 
transfers of dual-use equipment. Between 1999 and 2000 the Defense Threat Reduction 
Agency asked microbiologists and engineers from the pharmaceutical and pesticide industries 
to mimic the typical biological weapon production process solely using equipment and 
materials from commercial catalogues and suppliers. Without the presence of any biological 
warfare expert, this group was able to produce one liter of harmless bacteria (yet very similar 
to anthrax), which afterwards was milled to a 1-5 microns size, making it ideal for 
dissemination. The project failed to be detected by any United States law enforcement or 
intelligence agency.  

Francisco Galamas and Francisco Proença Garcia 
204 
Additionally, in 2005, an expert in laboratory equipment stated that it would cost 
US$7320 to equip a lab to produce finely milled anthrax or live virus, in kilogram quantities. 
The price was calculated based on second-hand equipment prices that are not only cheaper 
but whose transactions are more difficult to follow by the authorities [13]. Regarding 
chemical weapons, the ―dual-use problem‖ is similar. Moreover, developing countries have 
acquired, in the last decades, domestic capabilities to produce their fertilizers and other 
chemical products. Multinational chemical companies have also been a part of this 
phenomenon by expanding their facilities to these same countries due to lower operational 
costs and less demanding environmental laws. By increasing the number of countries 
possessing relevant chemical facilities, the difficulty of controlling such substances grows 
considerably. Besides, such wider industrial implementation will not only allow more 
countries to possess the knowledge on how to produce chemical weapons precursors but will 
also avoid any need to deal with other countries‘ export controls [35]. 
The difficulty of controlling biological weapons-related pathogens or chemical weapons 
precursors can be considered as another factor when debating how globalized markets 
unwillingly allow non-state actors to access materials of concern. Most of the biological and 
chemical agents used in the incidents registered are either without legal control or available in 
nature and in the case of chemical agents some of the precursors are accessible through the 
commercial market, as already mentioned. Terrorists may also steal the pathogens, toxins or 
chemicals from those who acquired them for legitimate purposes, exploiting the fact that the 
physical security laws surrounding these substances differ from country to country [11].  
We must also consider additional factors such as operational requirements. Terrorists 
attempting to use chemical and biological weapons, due to the purposes of the attack, may 
have a tendency to be less worried about their own safety or other technical requirements in 
chemical and biological weapons production and dissemination. For instance, bioterrorists do 
not need pathogens to survive long periods in the outside environment when they can 
disseminate the biological weapon in closed spaces or release an aerosol cloud with optimally 
sized particles [14]. Finally, due to improvements in recent years in communications and 
transport systems allowed by the mechanisms that also fuel globalization, non-state actors 
have gained increased flexibility, which makes detection by intelligence and security services 
more difficult[17]. 
 
 
PROLIFERATION PREVENTION MECHANISMS 
 
Since the late 19th century that countries have been negotiating or ratifying different 
multilateral legally binding instruments linked to WMD nonproliferation or arms control 
treaties. There are three major nonproliferation treaties that cover most of WMD related 
substances: the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT), the Biological and Toxin Weapons 
Convention (BTWC) and the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). As these three 
multilateral Conventions allowed the creation of the most important legal cornerstones in 
nonproliferation efforts, countries have also understood the need for more operational 
mechanisms to control the flow of WMD related equipment and materials. One of those 
mechanisms includes multilateral export controls. These non-legally binding agreements are 
made of extensive lists (known as Trigger Lists that are constantly updated) with the 

Globalization and the Threats of Weapons … 
 
205 
description of relevant components and sub-components that require authorization to be 
exported due to the risk of being used in a WMD program. One of the first WMD multilateral 
export controls created was the Nuclear Supplier Group (NSG) as a response to the first 
Indian nuclear test, in 1974. The NSG Guidelines are applied ―to nuclear transfers for 
peaceful purposes to help ensure that such transfers would not be diverted to unsafeguarded 
nuclear fuel cycle or nuclear explosive activities‖[3]. In the same year, the guidelines for the 
Zangger Committee [40] were agreed after three years of negotiations. The guidelines 
required, under NPT‘s article III.2, certain nuclear related materials or equipment to be 
subject to the IAEA‘s safeguards in case any NPT State party supplies them to a non-nuclear 
weapons State. 
On the biological and chemical weapons front, States also decided to create specific 
multilateral export controls. The Australia Group has founded in 1984 after the Iraqi regime 
used chemical weapons on the Iraq-Iran War, whose precursors had been bought through 
legitimate trade operations. To prevent the purchase of chemical weapons‘ precursors or 
equipment, with hostile purposes, the Australia Group‘s countries decided to implement and 
harmonize export controls towards these specific goods. Six years later, in 1990, due to the 
transfer of ―dual-use‖ materials to biological weapons programs, the Australia Group decided 
to implement specific export controls for biological weapons and related equipment as well 
[1]. This Group‘s annual meeting also includes information exchange sessions. Such sessions 
have proved to be very valuable as it allows countries to identify any entities or individuals 
that are seeking chemical or biological materials, equipment or substances in the international 
markets. Finally, there is also a multilateral export control regime for WMD delivery means. 
The Missile Technology Control Regime was created in 1987 with the intent to prevent the 
proliferation of ballistic missiles capable of delivering conventional and/or WMD payloads 
over a distance of 300 kilometers. It is similar to other multilateral export control agreements 
as it is constituted by lists of equipment and technologies that enable the production of rocket 
systems (space launch vehicles or ballistic missiles) and other systems such as UAV, cruise 
missiles and drones.  
These multilateral export controls present one of the most effective tools for 
nonproliferation because they do not only prevent the access of WMD related materials to 
undesired destinies but they also allow security agencies to know which companies are 
seeking these materials and their details. But these export control mechanisms have their own 
downsides. On the one hand, all of these mechanisms are informal agreements, so their 
guidelines are not legally binding. On the other hand, as globalization keeps expanding, the 
task of controlling the transfers of dual-use materials will be increasingly harder to achieve. 
Other possible reasons for lack of compliance may be linked to the companies‘ need for 
additional income or the misevaluation that some export control officers may perform of a 
particular situation. The Syrian chemical weapons program is a sad example of this. 
According to official documents, between 2002-2003 and 2005-2006, the German 
government authorized the export of dual-use chemicals to Syria for 174 thousand Euros. 
These chemicals were sold for civilian purposes but they can also be used for the manufacture 
of chemical weapons, such sarin [30]. A similar situation happened in the United Kingdom. 
In 2012, the British government authorized a United Kingdom company to export two dual-
use chemicals that could be used as precursors for chemical nerve agents. The licenses were 
later revoked due to European Union sanctions [24]. Later in 2014, British Foreign Secretary, 
William Hague, was questioned by the Committee on Arms Export Controls due to the 

Francisco Galamas and Francisco Proença Garcia 
206 
reports of granted export licenses for dual-use chemicals to countries such as North Korea, 
Libya and Burma since 2003 [28].  
As 9/11 shifted the security focus from State centered actors to non-State centered actors, 
countries and international institutions felt the need to update some of the WMD legislation 
and initiatives. In 2004, the Security Council of the United Nations unanimously adopted 
resolution 1540. This resolution legally binds States to adopt all necessary domestic measures 
to prevent non-State actors from developing chemical, biological, nuclear and/or radiological 
weapons and their delivery means. The 1540 Committee, derived from the already mentioned 
resolution, facilitates the provision of technical assistance and cooperates with other 
international organizations in these very same areas. In 2011, the mandate of the 1540 
Committee was extended until 2021[37]. Another State-led initiative is the Global Initiative 
to Combat Nuclear Terrorism (GICNT). This is a US-Russia joint initiative firstly organized 
in 2006, whose main purpose is to prevent terrorists from accessing, producing, transporting 
or using nuclear and radiological substances, materials or equipment. Another purpose of 
GICNT is also to avoid, through international cooperation, any attack against civilian nuclear 
facilities. 
Efforts to combat WMD proliferation also have a more operational approach. Emanated 
from the 2002 US‘s National Strategy to Combat Weapons of Mass Destruction, the 
Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) was born in 2003. Understanding the need to have faster 
and more efficient mechanisms to prevent WMD proliferation through individual and 
collective counter-proliferation efforts, PSI States pledge to interdict, or support the 
interdiction of, WMD related transfers (either by land, air or sea) to and from States and non-
State actors of concern. The PSI also envisions exchanges of information and interdiction 
exercises among its members [29].  
Even though PSI is a fairly recent initiative, it has already achieved some high-profile 
successes. In October of 2003, German and Italian cooperative efforts, under PSI auspices, 
allowed the successful interdiction of the BBC China vessel, which was transporting uranium 
enrichment technology to Libya. This shipment was a part of an A.Q. Khan operation and its 
interdiction led to Tripoli‘s intention of dismantling its WMD programs [22]. Other important 
PSI‘s achievements include the 2007 interdiction of ballistic missile components by four PSI 
members. These components were bound to Syria and could be used to test ballistic missiles 
[34]. Although PSI is a voluntary agreement that produces no legally binding regulations, it is 
supported by international law other than the already mentioned 1540 United Nations 
Security 
Council 
resolution. 
For 
example, 
the 
International 
Civil 
Aviation 
Organization‘s (ICAO), the Beijing Convention of 2010 mandates States to approve domestic 
legislation criminalizing air transportation of WMD-related goods [19]. Linked to maritime 
transports, the International Maritime Organization‘s Suppression of Unlawful Acts 
Convention prohibits the maritime transfer of WMD-related materials in its 2005 Protocol 
[21].  
Although there is plenty of legislation surrounding WMD transportation, the biggest 
problems undermining nonproliferation and counter-proliferation continue to be connected to 
States‘ lack of capability to detect and interdict these sorts of transfers. Not only some 
transfers have dual-use sub-components (that can have a civilian and military use) but, as we 
mentioned earlier, the trafficking networks have devised structures and methods that prevent 
their early detection. Furthermore, some countries in the world lack adequate intelligence and 
operational means to intercept vital information and transfers, so it is easy to understand that 

Globalization and the Threats of Weapons … 
 
207 
globalized efforts against WMD proliferation should have an additional emphasis on 
operational assets and information exchange instead of further legislation.  
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
While debating proliferation we must consider the changes brought by globalization. One 
of the most relevant changes is linked to the increase of trade volume with the simultaneously 
and progressive dismantlement of traditional commercial barriers. Modifications such as 
those created new and beneficial economic dynamics but, at the same time, made 
governmental control of such transactions increasingly hard. Moreover, the higher amount of 
people travelling as well as improved communication technologies made it more complicated 
to notice the movement of terrorists. The same logic can be applied to the difficulty of 
monitoring any exchanges of relevant WMD information between individuals. One curious 
aspect is that while most countries acknowledge this threat, it has been noted that any attempt 
to control transfers of these goods or information, brings economic costs that most societies 
are not willing to endure. So, what is the balanced solution? In a globalized world, solutions 
must also be global. We know that there are numerous fora on disarmament and 
nonproliferation such as the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention, the Nuclear 
Nonproliferation Treaty or the Proliferation Security Initiative. Some of these initiatives are 
legally binding while others merely bind countries politically. Despite the fact that some of 
these fora have a substantial number of members, others are of a more exclusive nature so 
when talking about the elimination of illicit transfers of WMD or their related materials it is 
of the essence that the membership of these multilateral export regimes is significantly 
increased and not dependent on political misunderstandings between a minority number of 
countries. Even if some countries do not meet the technical criteria to join export control 
agreements, other countries should do the utmost to upgrade the former‘s export control 
capabilities, in order to allow them to properly tackle current illicit transfers. Furthermore, 
while remembering that a hypothetical nuclear terrorist attack can profoundly change the 
world we live in, it is important to understand that biological and chemical terrorist attacks 
are much more likely. Besides the likelihood of such attacks, biological and chemical 
substances and equipment are also much more widely scattered in modern societies, so 
increasingly the effectiveness of export controls in this field is paramount.  
As the world is acknowledging the ―darker‖ side of globalization it is imperative that 
instead of creating further barriers, countries understand the supply and demand dynamics of 
this sort of goods as well as how trafficking networks operate. Only then is it possible to 
improve the current mechanisms that address this current threat without jeopardizing the 
prosperity simultaneously allowed by globalization. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Francisco Galamas and Francisco Proença Garcia 
208 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
(2006) The Australia Group. Retrieved from http://www.australiagroup.net/en/origins. 
html. 
[2] 
(2006) The Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism (GICNT). Retrieved from 
http://www.gicnt.org/index.htm. 
[3] 
 (2014) The Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG). Retrieved from http://www.nuclear 
suppliersgroup.org/A_test/01-eng/04-histo.php?%20button=4. 
[4] 
Alisson, G. (2010). Nuclear disorder: Surveying Atomic Threats. Foreign Affais, 89(1). 
[5] 
Allison, G. (2009). A Response to Nuclear Terrorism Skeptics. The Brown Journal of 
World Affairs, XVI(I), Fall/Winter.  
[6] 
Azoulay, Y. & Lins, J. (2007). Parole denied to arms dealer and traitor Manbar, 
Haaretz. Retrieved from http://www.haaretz.com/print-edition/news/parole-denied-to-
arms-dealer-and-traitor-manbar-1.228420. 
[7] 
Azoulay, Y. & Lins, J. (2007, August 29). Parole denied to arms dealer and traitor 
Manbar. Haaretz. Retrieved from http://www.haaretz.com/print-edition/news/parole-
denied-to-arms-dealer-and-traitor-manbar-1.228420. 
[8] 
Bonaglio, F. & Goldstein, A. (2006). Globalização e Desenvolvimento. Barcarena: 
Editorial Presença. 
[9] 
Carus, W. S. (1997). The Threat of Bioterrorism. Strategic Forum, Institute for National 
Strategic Studies, 127, September, p. 3-5. 
[10] Carus, W. S. (2000). Unlawful Acquisition and Use of Biological Agents. In J. 
Lederberg (Ed.), Biological Weapons: Limiting the Threat. Cambridge: MIT Press. 
[11] Cirincione, J. & Leventer, U. (2007, August 13). The Middle East‘s Nuclear Surge. 
International Herald Tribune. Retrieved from http://www.iht.com/articles/2007/08/13 
/opinion/edcirin.php. 
[12] Cordesman, A. (2005). The Challenge of Biological Terrorism. Washington: Center for 
Strategic and International Studies.  
[13] Dando, M. (2005). Bioterrorism:What‘s the Real Threat? Science and Technology 
Report, 3, University of Bradford.  
[14] Friedman, T. (1999). The Lexus and the Olive Tree. Retrieved from http://www. 
thomaslfriedman.com/bookshelf/the-lexus-and-the-olive-tree 
[15] Friedman, T. (2006). The World is Flat. Ney York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 
[16] Galamas, F. (2009). Biotechnology and Biological Weapons: Challenges to the U.S. 
Regional Stability Strategy. Comparative Strategy, 28(2). 
[17] Galamas, F. (2011). Profiling Bioterrorism: Present and Potential Threats. Comparative 
Strategy, 30(1). 
[18] IAEA (2013, July 5). International Conference on Nuclear Security: Enhancing Global 
Efforts. President Executive Summary. Retrieved from http://www.iaea.org/newscenter 
/statements/misc/2013/nspresident050713.pdf. 
[19] International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) (2010). The Convention on the 
Suppression of Unlawful Acts Relating to International Civil Aviation (2010 Beijing 
Convention). 
Retrieved 
from 
http://legacy.icao.int/DCAS2010/restr/docs/beijing_ 
convention_multi.pdf. 

Globalization and the Threats of Weapons … 
 
209 
[20] 
International Labour Organization (ILO) (2011). Restructuring, employment and social 
dialogue in the chemicals and pharmaceutical industries, Retrieved from 
http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_dialogue/---
sector/documents/meetingdocument/wcms_164943.pdf 
[21] International Maritime Organization (IMO) (1988). Convention for the Suppression of 
Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Maritime Navigation, Protocol for the Suppression 
of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental 
Shelf. Retrieved from http://www.imo.org/About/Conventions/ListOfConventions 
/Pages/SUA-Treaties.aspx. 
[22] Joseph, R. G. (2009). Countering WMD: the Libyan experience. National Institute 
Press. 
[23] Lederberg, J. (editor) (2000). Biological Weapons: Limiting the Threat. Cambridge: 
MIT Press. 
[24] Milmo, C., Mcsmith, A. & Kumar, N. (2013, September 2). Revealed: UK Government 
let British company export nerve gas chemicals to Syria. The Independent. Retrieved 
from http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/. 
[25] Naim, M. (2006). Illicit: how smugglers, traffickers and copycats are hijacking the 
global economy. London: William Heinemann. 
[26] NATO (2009). Comprehensive, Strategic-Level Policy for Preventing the Proliferation 
of Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) and Defending against Chemical, Biological, 
Radiological and Nuclear (CBRN) Threats. Retrieved from http://www.nato.int/cps 
/en/natolive/official_texts_57218.htm. 
[27] Payne, K. B. (1996). Deterrence in the Second Nuclear Age. Lexington, KY: University 
Press of Kentucky. 
[28] Press Association (2014). Hague grilled on chemical exports. Retrieved from 
http://news.uk.msn.com/uk/hague-grilled-on-chemical-exports.  
[29] PSI (2003). Proliferation Security Initiative: Statement of Interdiction Principles. US 
State Department. Retrieved from http://www.state.gov/t/isn/c27726.htm. 
[30] Reuters (2013). Germany Sold Syria Chemicals, Government Admits. Huffington  
Post. Retrieved from http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/09/18/germany-sold-syria-
chemicals_n_3948725.html. 
[31] Russel, J. A. & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.) (2008). Globalization and WMD Proliferation: 
Terrorism, Transnational Networks and International Security. London and New York: 
Routledge. 
[32] The 9/11 Commission Report (2004). The Final Report of the National Commission on 
Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States. New York: W.W. Norton. Retrieved from 
http://www.9-11commission.gov/report/911Report.pdf. 
[33] The International Labour Organization (ILO) (2011). Restructuring, employment  
and social dialogue in the chemicals and pharmaceutical industries. Genebra. Retrieved 
from http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_dialogue/---sector /documents 
meetingdocument/wcms_164943.pdf 
[34] The Thelegraph (2008, May 28). Syria-bound missile components intercepted, claims 
US. The Telegraph. Retrieved from http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews 
/2045825/Syria-bound-missile-components-intercepted-claims-US.html. 
[35] Traynor, I. (2005, November 22). Dutch man on trial for genocide. The Guardian. 
Retrieved from http://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/nov/22/iraq.warcrimes. 

Francisco Galamas and Francisco Proença Garcia 
210 
[36] Tucker, J. (2009). The Future of Chemical Weapons. The New Atlantis, Fall 
2009/Winter 2010, 14-15. 
[37] United Nations (UN) (2004). United Nations Security Council Resolution 1540. 
Retrieved from http://www.un.org/en/sc/1540. 
[38] US Department of State (2002, January 24) China: Sanctions Imposed on Chinese 
Entities. US State Department Press Conference. Retrieved from http://2001-
2009.state.gov/r/pa/prs/ps/2002/7485.htm. 
[39] Zaitseva, L., (2008). Organized Crime, terrorism and nuclear trafficking. In J. A. Russel 
& J. J. Wirtz (Eds.), Globalization and WMD Proliferation (pp. 103-106). London and 
New York: Routledge. 
[40] Zangger Committee (2014). Global Security Newswire. Retrieved from http://www.nti. 
org/treaties-and-regimes/zangger-committee-zac/. 

In: Globalization and International Security: An Overview 
ISBN: 978-1-63463-075-7 
Editors: T. Rodrigues, R. García Pérez et al.  
 
© 2015 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 12 
 
 
 
GLOBALIZATION AND CHALLENGES  
FOR INTELLIGENCE ANALYSIS 
 
 
Helena Rêgo* 
Portuguese Intelligence Academy, Portugal 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
This chapter points out some aspects of a PhD thesis that intends to demonstrate that 
in an increasingly globalized and unpredictable world, which is under an accelerated pace 
of transformation, and characterized by technological advancement, intelligence analysts 
face particularly demanding challenges in order to achieve their goals. States‘ intelligence 
must be understood as a higher stage, which allows states to organize themselves, in 
order to survive and provide security and justice for their citizens. This implies their 
adaptive character and awareness regarding the interconnection between past and future 
phenomena. The science of complexity and its theory helps us to find new methods and 
challenge our perceptions, while analyzing such events and the world, as a whole. That is 
especially true when we think about the future, since nonlinearity emerges as the 
dominant pattern. While scenarization helps us to investigate the predictable future, we 
must also prepare for chaos. Changing the way of doing things implies both education 
and leadership. Education plays a critical role in the preparation for the future, which 
implies a holistic organization of knowledge, cross cutting methodologies and the use of 
appropriate tools. Consilience, or the convergence between sciences and humanities, will 
help us to create an integral vision of the world and to prepare the discovery of the 
needed answers to the whole set of challenges facing humanity. A collective mobilization 
will be needed so that states will survive and accomplish their mission. This will take 
place in an international arena, which is shared with other state and non-state actors, and 
under a new geopolitical framework, where cooperation, global justice and ethics must 
prevail. The intelligence analyst must up to date his knowledge constantly to fulfill his 
mission of supporting the decision maker for tactical and strategic issues of the State. 
 
 
 
                                                           
* Email: dcrh@pcm-c.com. 

Helena Rêgo 
212 
―We live not only in a world of thoughts, but also in a world of things.  
Words without experience are meaningless‖ 
Vladimir Nabokov 
 
This chapter summarizes some topics of a PhD thesis (2013), around a fundamental 
question: ―How intelligence analysts can help the State to choose the most appropriate way to 
deal with the current threats posed to its safety and survival‖ and paying a special attention to 
the impact of technology in intelligence skills. 
The problem is to know how to think about the future, in order to comprise threats still 
not yet visible and usually not considered in a more traditional thinking (for instance, the 
consequences of the digital age). Anyway, which approach should guide the intelligence 
analyst, in order to give an effective contribution in the definition of the state‘s grand 
strategy1. 
The question naturally arises due to the fact that we have exercised this profession during 
the last 26 years and felt, throughout our professional lives, a series of difficulties arising 
from some preconceived images about the world of intelligence, or even a lack of knowledge 
regarding it, depending on each state. 
We feel that this is one of the greatest challenges facing the world of intelligence in 
general and, in particular, in countries where there is still a long way to go in terms of culture 
of intelligence. The difference has to be made between what is secret and cannot be shared 
and what should not be seen as secret and, as such, should be shared in a democracy. We refer 
to the importance of transparency of methods, that is, the demonstration of the steps taken by 
the analyst to arrive at a conclusion in a specific subject. As with the scientific method, only 
by making this statement can the person who will use the information have confidence on it. 
Beyond the importance of the reports sent to the decision maker, it is necessary to broaden the 
knowledge of the methodologies used, especially the evolution of critical thinking. By better 
understanding the value of the product, it is possible to use it in the best way, while avoiding 
to lose important competitive advantages to other States or non-states actors. Many of the 
strategic surprises faced by states are a result of problems of understanding between 
intelligence and policy makers. 
To know how to develop the ability to identify and exploit new types of analysis, to be 
imaginative and adaptive to support the policy maker may be the competitive advantage of 
the 21st century [4]. Despite the fact that we feel it difficult to have a profession and, at the 
same time, write about it, we decided to do it in the framework of the dedication and 
sacrifices inherent to it. We believe that only the articulation between the know how to do and 
the know how to think may benefit the State. We then considered which would be the first 
point of reference to develop an investigation and we realized that the State would be a good 
starting point. This is the framework of reference to the intelligence analyst, since he works 
for the State.  
Since Aristotle, most authors conceive the state as a kind of permanent, necessary and, in 
general, useful and positive social organization. 
Despite the crumbling of sovereignties, the evolution of geopolitics and the erosion of the 
state-centric conception of the world and of the territorial state, the state‘s organization is 
essential for the full development, realization and protection of mankind. We live in a new 
                                                           
1 We consider here the definition of General Beauffre, as refered by Couto [8]. 

Globalization and Challenges for Intelligence Analysis 
 
213 
geography of flows – in opposition to territories - and transnational threats. By using the 
purposes of the state as a point of departure, that is security, justice and the well-being of its 
citizens, we try to understand how this state can adapt to new challenges and ensure its 
survival. This kind of state is part of the international system, which should be seen as a 
complex system of global interdependence [24]. This implies, to some extent, its 
unpredictable nature and our limited capacity to control it. In turn, both states and the threats 
they face are also complex systems. 
Both the international system and the elements that compose it are complex, since they 
include several independent parts, which continuously interact, spontaneously organize and 
even reorganize themselves in increasingly elaborate structures, as time goes by. 
In order to make it clear, complexity is characterized by: 
 
a) A great number of elements or similar agents, which are independent; 
b) Movement and persistent responses of those elements regarding other agents; 
c) System‘s adaptability that adjusts to new situations to ensure its survival; 
d) Self-organization, so that the order of the system spontaneously emerges; 
e) Local rules that apply to each agent, and 
f) Progression in complexity, so that, over time, the system becomes larger and more 
sophisticated. 
 
As a result from what was previously stated, the self-organized behavior of complex 
systems cannot be fully predicted or studied by the division of its parts, because it does not 
comply with the principle of addition. That is, the system is not the mere sum of its parts. The 
complex system naturally evolves to a state of self-organization, with a behavior that ranges 
between chaos and order. Although the complex system is unpredictable, it is possible to 
determine, through simulation, the control parameters under which it enters into a chaotic 
behavior. By chaotic behavior we do not mean that the threat will materialize but, due to the 
unpredictability of the system, that we cannot control it. Therefore this means that the 
mechanisms we have to prevent the threat may fail, leading to unpredictable results. Thus, a 
bipolar world is more stable than a multipolar world and democratic states are more peaceful 
than those that are non-democratic. A world where each unit manages its security is less 
stable than a world in which the states defend their security, whether collectively, or in an 
alliance of balance of power. 
The more the parameters where chaos rules, the greater is the instability of the system. It 
became clear to us the need to find new tools for those who have to deal with this complexity, 
namely policymakers and intelligence analysts. Our aim is to find a way to turn the state as 
intelligent as possible, endowed with a broader view of the world’s situation, in order to 
survive the emerging threats. 
We discussed the importance of the intelligence in the context of the purpose of the state, 
namely using the Portuguese case and its history as an example. We were able to demonstrate 
that, in its most remarkable phase, policy was guided by intelligence (under the rule of King 
John II). The intelligent state demands intelligent people who know how to analyze and 
understand their context and act appropriately on it. Intelligence contributes to a more sound 
and reflected government decision-making process, which implies the use of a consistent 
theoretical framework and robust methodologies as guides to the strengthening of the state. 

Helena Rêgo 
214 
We realized that an interaction must take place between intelligence officers and policy 
makers, so that a truly effective support to decision emerges, whether in the case of 
diplomatic negotiations, military actions, or to alert companies regarding new problems and 
threats that lie ahead. 
Taking this assumption, we developed our reasoning around the description of the daily 
challenges facing the intelligence analyst in the context of the intelligence production process, 
while being conscious of their role in support of the policy makers, diplomatic, commercial or 
police actions. This takes place in a complex world, often characterized by information 
overflow, which is very different from the world we had just some decades ago. Through a 
parallel with our brain, the biological intelligence, we designed the path for the analyst, 
sometimes revised, and based on the following principal steps: 
 
1. We must be able to memorize experiences, while learning from the past, and in this 
sense, to be able to use all the knowledge acquired;  
2. Given the unpredictability of the future, we must use imagination to usefully apply 
the experiences and knowledge acquired;  
3. Overcome obstacles that arise, in order to achieve its purposes, with the selection of 
suitable processes, which implies being aware of all developments, while remaining 
flexible and adaptive; 
4. Avoid errors that result from biases in cognitive processes of perception and 
reasoning [3], which are major causes of failures in the realm of the intelligence 
analysis.  
 
Our PhDs work was then structured using this reasoning. 
Given the importance of memorizing experiences and learning from the past, Jared 
Diamond [9] made us aware that all civilizations declined, except ours. Therefore, we focused 
on the underlying causes of their decline and the catastrophe patterns, based in four 
possibilities:  
 
• 
They could not predict a problem before it happened (forecast);  
• 
When the problem arises, it was not detected (misunderstanding what takes place but 
is not visible, that is, what we do not know that we do not know); 
• 
Although detected, no action was taken to solve it; 
• 
Despite action was taken to solve it, they were not able to do it. 
 
The fact that several civilizations have collapsed due to their inability to perceive the 
surrounding environment or even the limit of their resources, shows us the importance of 
being aware that some factors can be replicated (like the scarcity of resources) and the 
importance of knowing how to think ahead, to be able to anticipate threats, and be prepared to 
face them. All collapses of civilizations have in common the inability of their rulers to pursue 
their primary mission, that is, to preserve and protect the society from internal and external 
attacks on its integrity. Many philosophers saw the cycles of rise and fall in terms of personal 
attributes of citizenship or of their leaders, such as Polybius. In his most simple, but perhaps 
reducing formula, he mentioned that people or rulers gained weight and became complacent 
due to success or that it led to imperial ambitions or overconfidence that exceeded their 
capabilities. 

Globalization and Challenges for Intelligence Analysis 
 
215 
Disruptive events, such as earthquakes, volcanoes, financial crises and political 
revolutions destabilize States and have effects that go far beyond their epicenters. While in 
the recent past such events were relatively rare, their frequency may increase in the future. 
The years of 2010 and 2011 showed us just that. Some authors call these events ―high impact 
low probability‖ (HILP) and others ―future global shocks‖. Globalization, which increases 
global interconnections through economic integration, intensifies the risk of contagion of such 
an event to the whole world. We need appropriate tools, in order to prepare ourselves to the 
so-called ―future global shocks‖, especially if we wish to understand the extent of the impacts 
of these events (structured analytic technics). 
The analyst must be conscious regarding the challenges to the security of states and be 
imaginative and creative, so that he may respond to the unpredictability of the future, and 
make a constant effort to update himself in several areas. Technological advances represent a 
true revolution to the intelligence services regarding the way they develop their work. They 
pose new threats and flood us with an overwhelming amount of information, but also provide 
new working tools, which need to be known by the intelligence officers, in order to be used. 
New non-traditional threats affect national security in the 21st century, which must be seen as 
a multi-sum security, global security that includes five dimensions: human, environmental, 
national, transnational and cross-cultural security. 
We looked at several phenomena that will change the balance of power of states: crises 
resulting from environmental problems, demographic issues, food shortages, the rise of the 
BRICS, the end of unipolarity, the impact of non-state actors, asymmetric wars and the 
impact of science and technology, especially strategic emerging technologies, which have an 
enormous potential to change our lives (nanotechnology, biotechnology, information 
technology, artificial intelligence and cognitive science). Our scientific discoveries and 
technological evolution affect our predictions about the future and what we do not know is a 
key issue in the preparation of these forecasts [2]. It is important to know the latest 
technology in order to guarantee security (cybersecurity) or wage war (cyberwar and new 
military technology, with non-lethal weapons), and above all to create an ethic for this new 
world. 
We think it is not so much the method of science that is relevant to import to the 
humanities, but its findings. That is why we advocate a holistic view. Ultimately we sought to 
understand how human societies organized in territorial states may survive the impact of 
technology and consequent globalization and, specifically, how global security will be 
organized. The so-called emerging strategic technologies (EST) have an enormous potential 
to change the geopolitical environment and our existence. Without this awareness it is 
difficult to make medium- and long-term forecasts that may be useful in defining a national 
strategy. 
Another example that challenges our daily life is the global urbanization. For the first 
time in history more than half of the world‘s population lives in urban areas. By 2050 it is 
predicted that 64% of people in the developing world will live in urban areas and 85-89% of 
the developed world‘s inhabitants will call urban areas their home. 
Our ability to collect, store and process data has steadily, and in recent years, rapidly 
increased. 
The internet and the mobile technology have turned the world‘s population into 
individual data factories. 90% of the world‘s data have been created in the last two years 
alone. We are in the digital revolution.  

Helena Rêgo 
216 
Urban informatics can turn data into solutions for the toughest problems faced by cities. 
Solutions are being explored in many application areas, such as mass transit, air quality, aging 
buildings and noise pollution.  
Overcrowded subways affect the well-being of citizens. By using big data, urban 
scientists can maximize efficiencies overcrowding and cut operation cost.  
Utilizing thermal imaging, buildings can be analyzed for energy efficiency and pollution, 
helping to cut greenhouse gases and dangerous emissions. 
Smart buildings can be developed to use resources more efficiently and attract 
commercial tenants vital to the city‘s economy. 
By using networked sensors and sonic analysis, researchers are exploring ways to bring 
down the noise pollution. 
This example of the importance of urban informatics shows us the need of skilled 
practitioners with the ability to use large-scale data from a variety of sources, to understand 
and address real-world challenges in the urban context. 
Also in this context, the European Forum for Urban Security organized in 2013 a survey 
on surveillance and security technology trying to create awareness on the subject. 
Continuing the analyst steps, given the unpredictability of the future and the many 
challenges and obstacles faced by the analyst, we need to be able to select the processes and 
methods that are most adequate. This, in turn, implies being aware of all the technological 
advances and their impact on the diverse stages of the intelligence work. In the last decade, 
we moved from a paradigm of analysis that was based on the mental activity of a single 
analyst into one of collaborative group analysis. In Vision 2015: a globally networked and 
integrated intelligence enterprise [13] it is explained that the driving forces behind the need 
for this transition are: the increasing complexity of international affairs and the consequent 
need for multidisciplinary approaches in most analytical products, the need to share more 
information, both more quickly and internationally, and the need to identify and assess the 
validity of alternative mental models. 
That is, assuming that the intelligence analyst bears in mind the updated geopolitical map 
as a guide, he then must choose the methodologies he will use. It is crucial to understand the 
factors that constrain the power of the states, at each moment. We have started with the 
classical equation of Cline, reflected on the one of Hans Morgenthau and considered recent 
formulas, from China and India, with the aim of approaching as much as possible a formula 
that can be adjusted to a fast evolving world. We made an attempt to define key areas to be 
considered in the summary description of the capabilities of a state, focusing on the 
Portuguese State, in the current geopolitical reality and future trajectories. 
Given the context in which the analyst will have to operate, we concluded that trans-
disciplinarity cannot be avoided if we want to better understand our complex world. To be 
aware of the shortcomings of the analyses based on the incompleteness of the part that is not 
known is of major importance. The holistic approach is critical in order to anticipate and 
respond to unforeseen situations. Also the chapter on methods demonstrated the importance 
of consilience, which is the junction of the two knowledges (sciences and humanities), since 
making predictions requires the use of several disciplines. Changing the scientific paradigm 
in the courses framework seems to us as essential as a sound intelligence analysis. 
After considering all the methods, we tried to apply it to the Portuguese case, in order to 
test a hypothesis of matrix of interdependencies to better perceive threats and opportunities. 
Already after having done most of the research, we became increasingly sure of the 

Globalization and Challenges for Intelligence Analysis 
 
217 
importance of knowing the different methods to analyze   information  (structured analytical 
techniques for intelligence analyses). This is particularly relevant since their underlying 
purpose is to think about the future, predict and prevent threats. The research regarding the 
future is still far from a scientific discipline, but it is an interdisciplinary effort to use the 
forecasting potential of various scientific disciplines. 
 
 
Source: Kurz & Snowden [16]. 
Figure 12.1. Model of contextual complexity, David Snowden. 
 
We realized that we do not always know all the inventions and discoveries that have an 
impact on people's lives and States. In this context, we remembered a book we read, in the 
past, 20 years ago, about the future, while attending the master program. In fact, Alvin Toffler 
[23] was right when he said that several fluctuations could lead to the disruption of the 
international system or its reorganization. The economic crisis shows us how interdependent 
we are and how the system is unpredictable and nonlinear. The ability to think in the long-run 
– to create scenarios - is a characteristic of a mature, robust and enduring civilization. The 
intelligence analyst must train and exercise this ability. Scenarization is essential for strategic 
planning. In our PhD we listed several methods for developing scenarios, namely systemic 
methods, which we consider to be more in line with our work.  
We found and tested one, the ―complexity manager‖, which was useful to understand and 
anticipate changes in complex systems.  
The complexity manager is a simplified approach to understand complex systems- the 
kind of systems in which many variables are related to each other and may be changing over 
time. Government policy decisions are often aimed at changing a dynamically complex 

Helena Rêgo 
218 
system and it is because of this dynamic complexity that many policies fail to meet their goals 
or have unforeseen and unintended consequences [13]. 
This tool allows an identification of opportunities, what needs to be changed or to see 
potential unintended consequences from the pursuit of a policy goal.  
With this help, we noticed possible interactions that must be taken into account when 
analyzing complex systems, namely the state, the international system or terrorist or criminal 
threats.  
We included possible future scenarios as examples, which we collected from several 
authors. We felt the need to better explain the analysis of complex systems as a necessary 
methodology to address new threats. We consider them as a system of interdependent agents 
and therefore complex. 
We realized that complexity theory is an analytical tool, which the state must adopt, in 
order to update and achieve adequate answers. Traditional intelligence analysis models were 
designed for a very different world than we have today. These hold some wrong assumptions 
that must be overcome and explained to the policymaker. This interaction benefits the state. 
Whereas several authors were revised about this subject, David Snowden was the one who 
called our attention to the model of contextual complexity, while approaching intelligence 
and the methodology of the analysis of complex systems. We perceive this as the way to 
improve the solutions to states‘ problems. The security of states is being threatened by 
networks of global terrorism, crime and insurgency, i.e., complex systems of multiple agents 
interacting with each other with non-linear consequences. This implies answers based on 
resilience and adaptive leadership, as well as the need to review some concepts that are 
considered to be true. Some bureaucratic lines that divide the study of some threats do not 
allow an efficient work. 
To better demonstrate our conclusions, while facing an overwhelming amount of 
information, we realized that by associating art and technology we may benefit from the 
power of image, which is easily understood by our brain (visualization). We developed all the 
research bearing in mind a concern we felt through life. That is, we often deceive ourselves 
because our brain plays tricks (cognitive biases risk perception). Today, scientists know much 
more about the brain, but intelligence analysts do not know much. They tend to act intuitively 
and face human error. In our culture, as opposed to the Anglo-Saxon culture, error is 
perceived as  something bad. However, mistakes are useful to learn and turn us into better 
listeners towards those who know more, just as we did while writing our thesis. Then, we 
listed several different ways of thinking, using Bloom's taxonomy (1956) of thinking skills, 
which demonstrates several layers of thinking, from the simplest to the most elaborate. From 
raw data to knowledge and wisdom. Thinking about our thinking emerges as a key task. 
Becoming aware of these processes is essential for the intelligence analyst. To be 
conscious regarding the importance of changing the perspective when analyzing a situation, 
may change the final result. We used the ―method of the six thinking hats‖, from Edward de 
Bono, to illustrate the importance of mental flexibility (Figure 12.2).  
Finally, when describing the several risks faced by the analyst, we have decided to use a 
glossary of cognitive biases, which are patterns of deviant ways of judgment or analysis, 
where we draw conclusions based on cognitive factors in detriment of evidence or proof. 
These cognitive shortcuts make our life easier regarding the tasks we have to perform as 
persons, but cannot be relied upon in all situations. As such, we should avoid such biases 
when making intelligence analysis. 

Globalization and Challenges for Intelligence Analysis 
 
219 
We finished with the possible answer to our initial question. The state can only be 
prepared for current and future challenges if the paradigm of knowledge is changed. States, 
through their security institutions tend to organize according to past experience. However, the 
present is always able to surprise us with something different. That was the case of Anders 
Breivik attacks (22 July 2011, Norway), since mental frames were built to deal with Islamist 
terrorist attacks and not otherwise. When the emerging reality was not even considered as a 
possible scenario by security structures, the result is always more catastrophic, with greater 
psychological impact. Models for interpreting reality are extremely important because if they 
are wrong, the whole building is wrong. 
 
 
Source: Spear [22]. 
Figure 12.2. Six Thinking Hats of Edward de Bono. 
 
The narratives tend to be stronger than history. If we take terrorism as an example, we see 
that, due to its general criminal character, it is adaptive and always “one step ahead”, avoiding 
the scheme set up by security forces. Usually, its successes lie in surprise. For that it is 
necessary that states implement more agile structures able to quickly adapt to threats. These 
should be able to act as mirrors of the organizations they fight. Institutional bureaucracy is 
averse to this type of solutions, but raising awareness of the problem and its diagnosis 
constitute a step towards healing. Our mind mapping has to be redone with the help of 
technology. It is indeed an area of great and positive developments, since it allows large 
amounts of data to be organized in a visually accessible form. Changing the way of doing 
things implies both education and leadership. Hence the intelligence of states relies on the 
way we educate our youth. At this point we should be aware of who, in recent years, has 
achieved top positions in global education rankings, based on the Program for International 

Helena Rêgo 
220 
Student Assessment (PISA). These tests, which focused on reading, mathematics and science 
and had 15 years old students as targets, were won by China in its three criteria. In previous 
years, Finland had always been able to win one of the criteria. 
Change can only take place through the education system and has to be nurtured from an 
early age in school. Intelligence must help in this process, but school is the primary 
responsible for this. If intelligence can contribute to the articulation between theory and 
practice, it should help in this desideratum. We conclude that all this can only be achieved 
with a change of the educational paradigm crosscutting all the needs that have been listed. 
Globalization, with the rise of global interconnections generated by economic integration 
increases the contagion of risks of an event in the world. So, we need adequate tools, in order 
to be prepared for the so-called ―future global shocks‖, especially to get a better 
understanding of the extent of the impacts of these events. 
One of the common principles of risk management is to avoid the assumption that the 
future will be similar to the past, while being aware of the danger of mental models in the 
assessments. Computerized simulation models help to understand which conditions and 
variables turn the consequences of an event more prone to contagion. Meanwhile, maps or 
complex systems mapping is useful to identify the hubs that will promote the dissemination 
of the effects of disruptive events2. The visualization of the structure of a complex system and 
its interdependencies in just one page – that is, in one single map - is of paramount 
importance for policy makers, since it immediately allows to get their focus on the essential. 
The traditional notion of maps as simply geographical should be broadened in the minds of 
policy makers to improve understanding of complex systems. 
Whether we think of international think tanks, or in the national reflection done at several 
institutes and universities, we realize that there is an abundant and rich reflection, although 
dispersed and it rarely turns into a political mechanism (in some countries). It is imperative 
that it becomes an effective tool, so that the state can be prepared for constant challenges, or 
else it risks not fulfilling its mission, that is, the security of its citizens. This will only happen 
if the state itself promotes, supports and ensures continuity, validation and the permanent 
improvement of reflections and used tools, as well as the testing of these security 
mechanisms. States that are currently aware of the paradigm shift are already adjusting their 
fundamental guiding concepts. 
Adaptability is key to the survival of states, just as it is for the survival of the species. 
Both only survive when they adapt themselves to the changes of the environment. The 
importance of the holistic view of governance regarding the several characteristics of the 
different types of emergencies, disasters and global shocks is critical [19]. The strategy to 
manage events or future global shocks relies on strengthening the capacities of governance 
through international cooperation, partnerships and standards, while building a resilient 
society, able to adapt under adverse conditions and to restore a sense of normality after a 
shock. Intelligence analysis is fundamental in this context. 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
2 See OCDE [19] which discusses in detail different kinds of maps and their advantages. 

Globalization and Challenges for Intelligence Analysis 
 
221 
REFERENCES  
 
[1] 
Anderson, L. W.; Krathwohl, D. R (Eds.) (2001). A Taxonomy for Learning, Teaching, 
and Assessing — A Revision of Bloom's Taxonomy of Educational Objectives. 
Addison Wesley Longman, Inc. ISBN 9780801319037. 
[2] 
Arntz, William, Betsy Chasse, and Mark Vicente. (2008) Afinal o que Sabemos Nós? 
As Possibilidades Infinitas de Transformar a Nossa Realidade. Lisboa: Sinais de Fogo. 
[3] 
Betts, R. K. (2007). Enemies of Intelligence: Knowledge and Power in American 
National Security. New York: Columbia University Press 
[4] 
Carafano, J. J. (2009). Thinking the future. The Whitehead Journal of Diplomacy and 
International Relations, Summer/Fall, 27-38.  
[5] 
Cardoso, P. (2004). As informações em Portugal. Lisboa: IDN / Gradiva. 
[6] 
Cepik, M.A.C. & Cristiano C.A. (2012). Explaining governmental intelligence failures. 
Varia Historia, 28(47), Belo Horizonte (Jan./June 2012). Retrieved from 
http://www.scielo.br/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S0104-87752012000100005 
[7] 
Clark, R. M. (2004). Intelligence analysis, a target-centric approach. Washington DC: 
CQ Press. 
[8] 
Couto, A. C. (1988-89). Elementos de Estratégia – Apontamentos para um curso. 
Lisboa: Instituto de Altos Estudos Militares. 
[9] 
Diamond, J. (2005). Colapso. Ascensão e Queda das Sociedades Humanas. Lisboa: 
Gradiva. 
[10] Dougherty, J. E. & Pfaltzgraff, R. L. (1971). Contending Theories of International 
Relations: A comprehensive survey. New York: J.B. Lippincott Co.  
[11] Friedman, T. (2006). O Mundo é Plano. Uma história breve do século XXI. Lisboa: 
Actual.  
[12] Goodman, A. E. (1993). A Brief history of the future. Oxford: Westview Press. 
[13] Heuer, R. J. (1999). Psychology of Intelligence Analysis. Washington, DC: GPO.  
[14] Innerarity, D. (2009). A sociedade invisível: como observar e interpretar as 
transformações do mundo actual. Lisboa: Teorema  
[15] Johnson, N. (2009). Simply Complexity: a clear guide to complexity theory. Oxford: 
Oneworld publications.  
[16] Kurtz, C. F. & Snowden, D. J. (2003). The new dynamics of strategy: Sense-making in 
a complex and complicated world. IBM Systems Journal 42(3), 462-483. Retrieved 
from http://xenia.media.mit.edu/~brooks/storybiz/kurtz.pdf. 
[17] Moreira, A. (1996). Teoria das Relações Internacionais. Coimbra: Almedina.  
[18] Morin, E. (2001). Os Sete Saberes Necessários à Educação do Futuro. São Paulo e 
Brasília: Unesco. 
[19] OECD (2011). Future Global Shocks: Improving risk governance. Paris: OECD. 
Retrieved from http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/24/36/48256382.pdf  
[20] Rêgo, H. C. (1999). A Nova Rússia. Lisboa: ISCSP.  
[21] Rêgo, H. C. (2013). A Inteligência dos Estados. A Perspectiva do Analista de 
Informações. Lisboa: ISCSP.  
[22] Spear, A. (n.d.) ―Six Thinking Hats‖. Retrieved from https://www.pinterest.com. 
[23] Toffler, Alvin and Heidi Toffler (1993). War and Anti-war: survival and the dawn of 
the 21st century. Boston: Little, Brown and Company. 

Helena Rêgo 
222 
[24] Valle Jr., V. (2000). Chaos, complexity and deterrence. New York: National War 
College Core Course 5605. 
[25] Vision 2015: a globally networked and integrated intelligence enterprise. (2008) 
Washington DC: Director of National Intelligence. 
[26] Williams, G. P. (1997). Chaos Theory Tamed. Washington: Joseph Henry Press. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDEX 
 
 
# 
20th century, 20, 53, 100, 127, 132 
21st century, xviii, 20, 37, 41, 44, 46, 54, 111, 132, 
134, 147, 149, 163, 183, 186, 188, 189, 201, 212, 
215, 221 
9/11, 60, 69, 73, 74, 76, 139, 162, 198, 202, 206, 209 
9/11 Commission, 202, 209 
A 
abuse, 79 
access, xx, 5, 6, 7, 8, 25, 34, 36, 38, 42, 43, 44, 53, 
61, 79, 80, 86, 113, 128, 129, 137, 141, 149, 154, 
159, 170, 173, 184, 192, 193, 194, 199, 201, 202, 
203, 204, 205 
accessibility, 7 
accounting, 107, 116, 138 
activism, 172 
adaptability, 213 
adaptation, xxii, 44, 95, 96, 97, 99, 101, 103, 104, 
105, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 
117, 118, 119, 122, 123, 124, 125, 190 
adhesion, 69 
adjustment, 46, 109, 169 
adults, 37 
adverse conditions, 220 
adverse effects, 112, 114 
advocacy, 85 
Afghanistan, 3, 7, 8, 9, 11, 61, 188, 193 
Africa, x, xxii, 19, 21, 37, 43, 56, 100, 127, 128, 129, 
132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 139, 140, 142, 144, 146, 
156, 157, 160, 161, 201 
age, 20, 34, 35, 37, 39, 44, 45, 46, 52, 72, 128, 141, 
158, 212, 220 
Age of Information, xxiii 
ageing population, 20 
agencies, 41, 61, 69, 200, 205 
aggression, 53, 58, 59, 73 
agriculture, 8, 99, 101, 160 
Air Force, ix 
air quality, 216 
Al Qaeda, 139 
Alaska, 160 
Algeria, 135, 154, 155, 158, 161, 187, 199 
alienation, 70, 71, 72 
alters, 98 
ambivalence, 42 
ancestors, 52 
Angola, x, 130, 149, 150, 188 
annual rate, 70, 156 
anthrax, 203, 204 
Arab countries, 162 
Arab world, 152 
Arabian Peninsula, 164 
Argentina, 52, 155, 160 
Aristotle, 212 
armed conflict, xxiii, 42, 59, 60, 85, 87, 128, 129, 
145, 169, 176, 178, 179 
armed forces, 9, 36 
armed groups, 178 
Armenians, 52 
arms control, 204 
arrest, 79 
articulation, 41, 212, 220 
artificial intelligence, 215 
Asia, xxi, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 19, 29, 37, 56, 100, 132, 
133, 135, 136, 137, 138, 145, 156, 157, 159 
assault, 81 
assessment, 17, 68, 85, 86, 96, 98, 106, 120, 121 
assets, 4, 10, 61, 74, 116, 123, 134, 196, 201, 207 
assimilation, 67, 68, 73 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), 
xiii, 141 
asylum, 54, 55, 75 
atmosphere, 15, 98, 106, 136 
atrocities, 81, 82, 83, 87, 88, 89, 90 

Index 
224 
attacker, 173, 176, 177, 178, 179 
attitudes, 19, 20, 46, 62 
attribution, 58, 171, 177, 178 
Austria, 64, 69, 70 
authenticity, 171 
authority, 8, 10, 17, 26, 46, 58, 59, 61, 82, 84, 89, 91, 
177, 200, 204 
autonomy, 6, 22, 80, 190 
avoidance, 106 
awareness, xviii, xxii, 25, 37, 77, 80, 88, 198, 211, 
215, 216, 219 
Azerbaijan, 159 
B 
bacteria, 203 
Bahrain, 164 
balance sheet, 116 
Balkans, 61, 191 
ballistic missiles, 205, 206 
ban, 89 
bandwidth, 170 
bankruptcy, 8 
banks, 116 
barriers, 16, 42, 48, 70, 104, 110, 113, 184, 194, 207 
base, 6, 8, 134, 158 
basic needs, 44 
behaviors, 20, 44, 46, 62 
Beijing, 7, 206, 208 
Belgium, 8, 58, 64, 69, 70 
benchmarks, 113 
benefits, xxiii, 22, 79, 101, 102, 103, 104, 108, 118, 
124, 131, 137, 170, 172, 184, 197, 198, 218 
benign, 101 
bias, 98 
bilateral, 61 
biodiversity, 17, 44, 101, 117, 137, 142 
biological sciences, 203 
biological weapons, 202, 203, 204, 205 
biosciences, 203 
biotechnology, 203, 215 
births, 37 
Black Sea, 11 
bomb attack, 187 
bonds, 4, 26 
border control, 53, 61, 203 
border crossing, 61 
brain, 214, 218 
Brazil, ix, 21, 52, 54, 86, 91, 119, 128, 136, 150, 
155, 157, 160, 174 
breakdown, 7 
budget cuts, 9 
budget deficit, 9 
building code, 108 
bureaucracy, 219 
Burma, 206 
businesses, xxiii, 169, 194 
buyers, 201 
C 
Cameroon, 201 
capacity building, 85, 116 
capital goods, 95 
capital markets, 6, 116 
capitalism, xix, 6, 18, 28 
carbon, 106, 115, 116, 123, 152 
carbon dioxide, 106 
carbon emissions, 152 
Caribbean, 56, 157 
caricatures, 68, 71 
cartel, 150, 161, 163 
cascades, 201 
case study, 130, 175 
cash, 116 
Caspian Sea, 138, 141, 154, 159 
catalyst, 42, 198, 199 
catastrophes, 119 
catholics, 68 
cattle, 136 
caucasus, 5, 11 
CCA, 123 
ceasefire, 89 
cell phones, 71 
censorship, xx 
Central Asia, 5, 7, 8, 11, 138, 140, 145, 149, 159 
central bank, 4 
Central Europe, 58, 201 
challenges, xvii, xviii, xx, xxii, xxiii, 7, 9, 16, 17, 20, 
25, 26, 33, 34, 37, 41, 43, 44, 47, 62, 63, 77, 95, 
112, 135, 136, 137, 142, 147, 148, 149, 158, 163, 
175, 179, 183, 184, 185, 186, 189, 193, 194, 195, 
196, 197, 198, 202, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 
219,220 
chaos, xxiii, 172, 211, 213 
chaotic behavior, 213 
Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European 
Union, 80 
chemical, 106, 193, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 
204, 205, 206, 207, 209 
chemical industry, 203 
children, 19, 21, 35, 67, 69, 80 
China, xiii, xv, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 19, 21, 23, 
24, 25, 26, 28, 30, 54, 89, 104, 119, 123, 131, 
132, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 143, 145, 148, 

Index 
 
225 
149, 150, 153, 155, 156, 157, 158, 161, 163, 164, 
174, 175, 206, 210, 216, 220 
circulation, 6, 184, 193, 194 
CIS, 175 
cities, 44, 46, 47, 63, 68, 70, 71, 108, 121, 132, 133, 
162, 216 
citizens, 4, 21, 34, 66, 67, 71, 90, 179 
citizenship, 44, 65, 66, 67, 68, 70, 80, 214 
civil society, 33, 34, 41, 91, 110 
civil war, xxii, 54, 127, 130, 131, 137, 142, 143, 144, 
145 
civilization, 217 
classes, 189 
clean air, 80 
climate, ix, xvii, xviii, xxii, 4, 16, 38, 42, 45, 47, 95, 
96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 
108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 116, 117, 118, 
119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 131, 132, 133, 
134, 135, 142, 144, 162 
climate change, ix, xvii, xviii, xxii, 16, 38, 42, 95, 
96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 108, 
109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 117, 118, 119, 120, 
122, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 142, 144, 162 
cloning, 43 
closure, 139, 152 
CO2, 100, 112, 152 
coal, 148, 152, 155 
coercion, 79 
cognitive biases, 218 
cognitive process, 214 
cognitive science, 215 
cognitive system, 17 
Cold War, xviii, xix, xxii, xxiv, 5, 15, 22, 25, 36, 59, 
127, 129, 148, 162, 184, 185, 188, 194, 198 
collaboration, xviii, 10, 86 
collateral, 43, 86 
collateral damage, 86 
collective mobilization, xxiii, 211 
Colombia, 130, 136, 150 
colonial rule, 187 
colonization, 52 
coma, 123 
combined effect, 162 
commercial, 20, 80, 113, 141, 171, 187, 188, 199, 
200, 201, 203, 204, 207, 214, 216 
commodity, 41, 131, 154 
Common Foreign and Security Policy, 29 
Common Market, 28 
communication, 5, 8, 11, 53, 140, 170, 184, 190, 
191, 192, 194, 207 
communication technologies, 53, 192, 194, 207 
Communist Party, 8 
community, xxii, 19, 42, 44, 46, 51, 52, 53, 58, 60, 
62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 73, 95, 96, 
101, 102, 105, 106, 108, 110, 148, 149, 169, 170, 
187, 192, 193, 194, 198, 199, 200 
comparative analysis, 142 
compatibility, 170 
compensation, 104 
competing interests, 175 
competition, 3, 5, 11, 35, 134, 142, 148, 161, 164 
competitive advantage, 163, 172, 212 
competitiveness, 149 
competitors, 6 
complement, 110 
complementarity, xxi 
complexity, xxi, xxiii, 27, 33, 46, 68, 171, 211, 213, 
216, 217, 218, 221, 222 
compliance, 104, 205 
composition, 47, 98 
computer, 177 
conception, 58, 67, 72, 158, 212 
conditioning, 178 
conference, 118 
confidentiality, 80, 171 
configuration, xix 
conflict, xxi, xxii, xxiii, 9, 10, 33, 34, 35, 36, 42, 44, 
51, 53, 60, 65, 72, 83, 90, 92, 127, 128, 130, 131, 
135, 136, 137, 141, 142, 143, 144, 148, 173, 174, 
175, 178, 179, 189, 199 
conflict resolution, 90, 136 
confrontation, 11, 23, 175 
Congress, 186 
connectivity, 179 
consciousness, 170 
consensus, xxii, 22, 42, 54, 83, 88, 92, 95, 96, 99, 
100, 102, 187 
consent, 88 
conservation, 137, 142 
consolidation, 3, 8, 9, 36, 149 
constitution, 161 
construction, xx, 98, 159, 161, 171 
consumer markets, 157 
consumers, xxii, 147, 148, 156, 157, 161, 164 
consumption, 38, 42, 44, 99, 129, 132, 134, 137, 
152, 156, 157, 158, 160 
consumption patterns, 99, 158 
continental, 209 
controversial, 65, 79 
convention, 208 
convergence, xxiii, 20, 25, 26, 162, 169, 184, 193, 
194, 211 
conversion rate, 152 
cooling, 136 

Index 
226 
cooperation, xx, 16, 24, 25, 26, 27, 42, 43, 64, 84, 
86, 111, 112, 113, 123, 124, 134, 173, 180, 195, 
206, 211, 220 
coordination, 24, 161, 172, 192, 200 
correlation, 129, 135, 191 
corruption, 42, 200 
cost, 61, 98, 102, 161, 184, 192, 204, 216 
Côte d‘Ivoire, xv, 88, 89 
counterterrorism, 188 
country of origin, 60 
covering, 83, 111 
cracks, 64 
creativity, 64 
creditors, 20, 24 
crimes, 78, 83, 84, 85, 86, 88, 89, 90 
criminal activity, 193 
criminals, 171, 172, 187, 201 
crises, 28, 71, 83, 84, 85, 88, 153, 215 
critical infrastructure, 169, 171, 172, 178 
critical thinking, 212 
criticism, 59 
Croatia, 150 
crops, 44 
crude oil, 137, 138, 139, 140, 150, 158 
cruise missiles, 205 
cultural cohesion, xxi, 51, 53, 62, 63, 64, 65, 73 
cultural differences, 67, 68 
cultural heritage, 80, 149 
cultural tradition, 66 
cultural values, 65 
culture, 41, 64, 66, 67, 69, 71, 170, 185, 212, 218 
cure, 13 
currency, xx, 6, 8, 24 
current balance, 116 
cyber conflict, xxiii, 169, 173, 174, 177, 179 
cyber-attack, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 
177, 178, 179, 180 
cybersecurity, xx, xxii, 215 
cyberspace, xxiii, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 
176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 203 
cycles, 60, 104, 118, 214 
cyclones, 42, 100, 101 
Cyprus, 158, 159 
D 
damages, 99, 102, 178 
danger, 17, 18, 36, 65, 86, 177, 199, 220 
Darfur, 22, 87, 88, 143 
data mining, 175 
database, 76 
deaths, 54, 101, 129, 175 
debts, 162 
decision-making process, 213 
defense issues, xvii 
defense mechanisms, 18, 19 
deficit, 64, 65, 70, 73, 148, 191 
deforestation, 118 
degradation, 38, 42, 135, 137, 149 
delegates, 113, 118 
Delta, 144 
democracy, 17, 45, 67, 128, 137, 212 
Democratic Republic of Congo, xiii, 130 
democratization, 170 
demographic change, xxi, 33, 34, 35 
demographic characteristics, 34, 63 
demographic factors, 135 
demographic structure, 63 
demographic transition, 37, 44 
demography, xi, xii, xxi, 34, 35, 36, 46, 56, 60, 69 
denial, 18, 19, 172 
Denmark, 64, 71, 150, 160 
Department of Defense, 145, 170 
Department of Energy, 165 
Department of Homeland Security, 58 
deposits, 129, 151, 158, 159 
designers, 170 
destiny, 25 
destruction, 64, 73, 131, 172, 173, 175, 179, 188 
detectable, 201, 202 
detection, 199, 200, 202, 204, 206 
deterrence, 5, 7, 199, 222 
detonation, 202 
devaluation, xx 
developed countries, xxi, xxiii, 19, 37, 38, 51, 53, 55, 
56, 57, 61, 62, 63, 65, 72, 97, 99, 111, 112, 116, 
128, 152, 158, 169 
developed nations, 112, 115, 116, 118 
developing countries, 20, 21, 22, 23, 56, 62, 95, 97, 
100, 111, 112, 114, 115, 116, 118, 127, 149, 162, 
204 
developing nations, 22, 112, 113, 118 
development assistance, 44, 128 
development banks, 116 
diamonds, 129, 130, 134 
dichotomy, 34 
dietary habits, 69 
diffusion, 41, 111, 198 
digital technologies, 192 
dignity, 46 
diplomacy, 9, 86, 159, 161, 195 
diplomatic engagement, 9, 82 
disappointment, 191 
disaster, 137 
disbursement, 116 
discrimination, 25 

Index 
 
227 
diseases, 35, 43, 101, 117 
dismantlement, 207 
disorder, 22, 208 
displacement, 47, 131, 159 
dissidents, 60, 130 
distortions, 130 
distribution, xviii, 22, 26, 35, 37, 38, 42, 44, 56, 85, 
130, 132, 149, 150, 156 
divergence, 19, 20, 23 
diversification, 157 
diversity, xvii, xix, 21, 45, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 71, 
72, 73, 76, 140 
Doha, xx 
domestic labor, 67 
domestic markets, 38 
dominance, xx, 22, 161, 162 
donations, 43 
double counting, 107, 108 
draft, 123 
drinking water, 38, 42 
drought, 135 
drug smuggling, 193, 194 
drug trafficking, 160 
drugs, 136 
duality, 193 
E 
early warning, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 199 
earthquakes, 133, 215 
East Asia, 8, 12, 131, 141, 201 
Eastern Europe, x, 69 
ecology, 137, 142 
economic activity, 70 
economic boom, 26 
economic change, 22, 46 
economic competitiveness, 128, 170 
economic consequences, 156 
economic crisis, xviii, xix, xx, 21, 23, 106, 137, 217 
economic cycle, 26 
economic development, xxiii, 16, 21, 35, 36, 38, 46, 
80, 108, 118, 169 
economic downturn, 101, 128 
economic growth, 7, 9, 20, 21, 24, 25, 34, 41, 64, 80, 
101, 102, 107, 117, 128, 131, 132, 134, 152, 158, 
160, 179, 184 
economic indicator, 26, 41 
economic integration, 194, 215, 220 
economic losses, 177 
economic performance, 102 
economic policy, 157 
economic power, 22, 112 
economic relations, 138 
economic rent, 130 
economic resources, 56 
economic systems, 108 
economic well-being, 46 
economics, xi, xxi, 9, 99, 102, 119, 123, 137, 142, 
164 
economies in transition, 111 
ecosystem, 42, 101, 108, 117, 134 
editors, xix 
education, 35, 36, 44, 62, 66, 70, 79, 111, 211, 219, 
220 
educational attainment, 41 
Egypt, 11, 139, 143, 188, 199 
elaboration, 4, 12, 36, 43, 190 
elders, 46 
election, 89 
electricity, 161 
electronic surveillance, 175 
electronic systems, 80 
eligibility criteria, 176 
embargo, 128 
emergency, 5, 90 
emergency relief, 90 
emigration, 52, 56 
emission, 95, 97, 106, 107, 108, 112, 113, 116, 118, 
124 
emitters, 104, 118 
emotional state, 19 
empirical studies, 102 
employees, 171, 172 
employment, 25, 35, 70, 79, 128, 209 
empowerment, 41, 46 
encapsulation, 70 
end-users, 199, 201 
enemies, 161, 184, 187, 192 
energy, ix, xi, xxii, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 24, 41, 42, 60, 95, 
96, 106, 108, 113, 116, 118, 121, 122, 128, 129, 
134, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 145, 
147, 148, 149, 151, 152, 153, 154, 156, 157, 158, 
159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 186, 216 
energy consumption, 137, 149, 152, 153 
energy efficiency, 108, 113, 164, 216 
energy prices, 152 
energy security, ix, xxii, 128, 138, 140, 147, 148, 
149, 158, 162, 163, 164 
energy supply, 6, 128, 157, 161, 164 
enforcement, 22 
engineering, 137, 203 
England, 134 
environment, xxi, 5, 16, 33, 38, 45, 46, 80, 104, 109, 
110, 111, 122, 134, 149, 163, 175, 179, 180, 188, 
190, 195, 204, 214, 215, 220 
environmental change, 122, 137 

Index 
228 
environmental concerns, xx 
environmental conditions, 35 
environmental degradation, 142 
environmental effects, 134 
environmental factors, xxii, 127, 135 
environmental impact, 134 
environmental issues, 163 
Environmental Protection Agency, 106 
environmental resources, 103 
environmental stress, 34, 135 
environmental variables, 109, 130 
environments, 41, 73, 161 
EOG, 150 
epidemic, 101 
equality, 41, 67, 77, 79 
equilibrium, 59, 102 
equipment, 95, 111, 170, 188, 194, 198, 199, 200, 
201, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207 
equity, 41, 80, 97, 98, 104, 110, 114, 118 
erosion, 149, 162, 184, 212 
espionage, 172, 174, 177 
EST, xiii, 215 
Estonia, 172, 175, 176, 177, 178 
ethics, 211 
ethnic diversity, 64, 65, 66, 73 
ethnically heterogeneous societies, xxi, 51, 53 
ethnicity, 62, 69 
euphoria, 20 
Eurasia, 128, 137, 155, 156, 157 
Europe, ix, 5, 8, 9, 10, 19, 21, 23, 24, 27, 28, 30, 37, 
52, 56, 58, 61, 62, 63, 65, 66, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 
74, 75, 76, 100, 119, 127, 130, 132, 133, 135, 
136, 137, 139, 141, 152, 155, 156, 157, 159, 160, 
161, 163, 165, 195, 200, 203 
European Commission, ix, 119, 128 
European Investment Bank, 119 
European Parliament, 119 
European Union (EU), ix, x, xii, xiii, 8, 22, 23, 24, 
27, 28, 29, 37, 61, 74, 104, 116, 119, 121, 136, 
194, 196, 203, 205 
evidence, 62, 96, 202, 218 
evolution, xvii, 10, 17, 19, 22, 33, 34, 37, 128, 149, 
171, 188, 193, 212, 215 
exclusion, 21, 41, 45, 46, 66, 113 
execution, 172 
exercise, 23, 78, 81, 84, 161, 173, 176, 179, 217 
exhaustible natural resources, 145 
expenditures, 4 
expertise, xvii, 173, 202 
exploitation, 24, 80, 130, 131, 134, 156, 158, 174, 
180 
explosive activities, 205 
explosives, 189, 194, 202 
export control, 199, 200, 201, 204, 205, 207 
export market, 160, 161 
export routes, 159, 160 
exporters, 25, 142, 148, 157, 158 
exports, 3, 8, 139, 140, 209 
exposure, 191, 192, 200 
expulsion, 82 
external financing, 5, 6 
extinction, 101, 117, 162 
extraction, 116, 127, 154 
extreme weather events, 100, 101, 117, 134 
extremists, 68, 187, 192 
F 
Facebook, 171 
facilitators, 38 
factories, 215 
failed states, 61 
faith, 21, 23, 188 
families, 105 
family members, 52, 67 
family planning, 44 
famine, 42 
fatalism, 19 
fear(s), 7, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 33, 34, 159, 188 
feelings, 20, 64, 70, 72, 73 
fertility, 34, 36, 37, 56, 63, 70 
fertility rate, 37, 63, 70 
fertilizers, 204 
filters, 66 
financial, xviii, xix, xxi, xxii, 3, 5, 8, 9, 16, 20, 22, 
24, 33, 34, 42, 60, 95, 96, 103, 111, 114, 116, 
123, 124, 148, 151, 152, 161, 162, 164, 178, 188, 
193, 194, 200, 201, 202, 215 
financial crisis, xix, xxi, 3, 8, 9, 16, 20, 22, 24, 148, 
162 
financial instability, xxi, 33, 34, 42 
financial institutions, 111, 200 
financial markets, 151, 152, 164 
financial resources, 5, 114, 151, 188, 194 
financial sector, 178 
financial support, 193, 202 
financial system, 162, 201 
Finland, 64, 130, 220 
firearms, 194 
first generation, 77, 79, 80 
fish, 135 
fisheries, 101, 134 
fishing, 132, 141 
flexibility, 163, 190, 204, 218 
flights, 89 
flooding, 42, 133, 134 

Index 
 
229 
floods, 133, 136 
fluctuations, 217 
food, xxii, 7, 35, 41, 42, 44, 60, 99, 101, 117, 215 
food production, 44, 101, 117 
food security, 42, 99, 101, 117 
force, xxiii, 46, 60, 84, 86, 87, 129, 163, 164, 169, 
173, 176, 177, 178 
forced migrants, 54 
forced migration, 41, 42 
forecasting, 35, 217 
foreign affairs, 24 
foreign direct investment (FDI), xiii, 113 
foreign investment, 25 
foreign policy, xii, xix, 23, 25, 161 
formation, 52, 62, 64, 68 
formula, 214, 216 
forward presence, 141 
foundations, xviii, 180, 185 
framing, 170, 176 
France, 8, 21, 58, 64, 67, 69, 70, 74, 95, 150, 201 
free riders, 104 
free trade, xx 
freedom, xix, 3, 67, 79, 84, 191 
freedom of choice, 67 
freshwater, 42, 134 
Freud, 18 
Freud, Sigmund, 18 
friction, 136 
fuel prices, 25 
funding, 110, 113, 116, 123 
funds, 113, 200 
G 
genes, 101 
Geneva Convention, 176, 178 
genocide, 78, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 88, 90, 135, 209 
Geographic Information System, xiv 
geography, 38, 132, 138, 141, 149, 187, 191, 213 
geometry, 186 
geo-political, 6 
geopolitical challenges, xxii, 147 
Georgia, 136, 172, 175, 178 
Germany, xiii, 5, 6, 10, 11, 58, 66, 69, 74, 200, 201, 
209 
GHG, xiv, 95, 96, 97, 99, 102, 106, 107, 108, 110, 
111, 113, 118, 120 
GIS, xiv, 128, 129 
global climate change, 46, 110, 112 
global demand, 153, 162 
global economy, xx, 16, 20, 142, 162, 209 
global education, 219 
Global Environment Facility (GEF), xiv, 105, 111, 
113, 120 
global governance, xii, xx, xxi, 15, 16, 17, 18, 23, 
24, 25, 26, 27, 58 
global leaders, 22 
global scale, 4, 46, 99, 175, 193 
global security, xxii, 34, 215 
global trade, 161 
global village, 197 
global warming, 17, 38, 42, 96, 99, 117 
globalization, vii, xvii, xviii, xix, xx, xxi, xxiii, xxiv, 
3, 8, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 22, 25, 26, 27, 33, 35, 41, 
42, 43, 52, 53, 72, 128, 138, 148, 154, 162, 183, 
184, 185, 187, 191, 192, 193, 194, 197, 198, 199, 
201, 203, 204, 205, 207, 215 
goods and services, 95 
governance, xii, xvii, xx, xxi, xxii, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 
22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 42, 44, 46, 48, 58, 97, 103, 
108, 110, 113, 127, 128, 130, 137, 142, 169, 170, 
190, 220, 221 
government spending, 9 
governments, 16, 18, 44, 45, 53, 79, 83, 103, 105, 
111, 113, 128, 130, 134, 149, 153, 161, 187, 199, 
201 
grants, 115 
grass, 134 
gravity, 129 
Great Depression, 9 
Greece, 8, 64, 69, 158, 159 
Greeks, 24 
greenhouse, 114, 216 
greenhouse gas, 114, 216 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP), xiv, 20, 100, 102, 
103, 117, 152 
group identity, 65 
growth, 3, 6, 8, 9, 19, 20, 26, 37, 38, 41, 42, 44, 45, 
46, 54, 55, 56, 58, 62, 63, 70, 71, 100, 103, 128, 
130, 132, 134, 137, 140, 142, 145, 149, 152, 153, 
156, 158, 161, 162, 163, 169, 170, 193, 198 
growth dynamics, 37 
growth rate, 19, 44, 62, 63, 100, 103 
guidance, 201 
guidelines, xxii, 77, 122, 205 
guiding principles, 44 
Guinea, x, 142, 149, 154, 158 
Guinea, Gulf of, 142, 149, 154, 158 
Gulf of Mexico, 163 
H 
habitat(s), 101, 131 
hacking, 172 
happiness, 29 

Index 
230 
harmony, 80 
hazards, 97, 98, 99, 133 
healing, 219 
health, xii, 9, 35, 36, 41, 43, 44, 46, 60, 79, 99, 101, 
117 
health care, 36, 43, 79 
health services, 9 
health status, 35, 43 
heavy oil, 155 
hegemony, 5 
height, 20 
heterogeneity, 63, 64, 65, 73 
Hezbollah, 10 
highways, 170 
historical character, 71 
history, xvii, xx, 19, 38, 52, 63, 71, 72, 78, 109, 112, 
130, 132, 149, 188, 213, 215, 219, 221 
HIV, xiv, 44 
HIV/AIDS, xiv, 44 
homeland security, 128 
homogeneity, 66, 71 
Hong Kong, 4 
Hormuz, Strait of, 138, 139, 140, 141 
host, xxi, 44, 51, 53, 62, 69, 70, 73 
host societies, xxii, 44, 51, 53, 62, 73 
hostilities, 72, 130, 178, 179 
hostility, 72 
hot spots, 141 
house, 165 
housing, 35, 62, 66, 79 
hub, 200 
human, xvii, xx, xxi, 17, 27, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 
41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 49, 51, 56, 59, 60, 61, 
72, 78, 79, 80, 82, 83, 85, 97, 98, 101, 104, 106, 
109, 110, 111, 118, 128, 134, 144, 148, 173, 184, 
185, 191, 193, 202, 203, 215, 218 
human activity, 98, 134 
human brain, 27 
human development, 38, 43, 46, 56, 128, 184, 191 
Human Development Report, 48, 49 
human dignity, 79, 80 
human genome, 80 
human health, 44, 101 
human movements, 46 
human nature, 173 
human resources, 35, 203 
human right(s), 46, 85 
human security, xvii, 34, 36, 41, 59, 60, 72, 78, 184, 
185 
humanitarian crises, 81, 92 
humanitarian intervention, 22, 26, 81, 83, 87 
Hungary, 61, 150 
hurricanes, 149 
hybrid, 186 
hydrocarbons, 155, 159, 162 
hypothesis, 8, 202, 216 
I 
ideal(s), 66, 71, 79, 175, 193, 203 
identification, xxi, 15, 62, 71, 128, 129, 171, 176, 
218 
identity, xxi, 41, 42, 46, 51, 53, 62, 63, 64, 65, 67, 
69, 71, 72, 73, 162, 172, 173, 176, 178, 179, 201 
idiosyncratic, 193 
image(s), 65, 68, 73, 120, 145, 192, 212, 218 
imagination, 214 
imbalances, xx, xxi, 20, 33, 44 
immigrants, xxi, 37, 51, 53, 56, 57, 58, 60, 61, 62, 
63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74 
immigration, 52, 58, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 68, 69, 
71, 73 
imports, 4, 7, 140, 158, 161 
improvements, 204 
in transition, xxi, 15, 111 
income, 20, 37, 43, 56, 61, 62, 79, 133, 134, 162, 
205 
incompatibility, 129 
independence, 26, 187 
India, xiii, 5, 7, 8, 11, 21, 24, 25, 54, 104, 119, 131, 
132, 137, 140, 148, 149, 150, 153, 157, 158, 163, 
164, 174, 216 
individual action, 26 
individual rights, 65, 73 
individualization, 184 
individuals, xxiii, 18, 20, 37, 43, 54, 67, 77, 79, 87, 
99, 111, 147, 169, 179, 184, 187, 197, 198, 205, 
207 
Indonesia, 7, 54, 140, 141, 157, 161, 163 
industrial revolution, 79, 97 
industrialization, 7, 130, 152 
industrialized countries, 149 
industries, 25, 128, 200, 201, 203, 209 
industry, xix, xxi, 110, 152, 163, 203 
inefficiency, 130 
inequality, xxi, 20, 33, 44, 72, 128 
inertia, 35, 45, 96, 110 
inevitability, 38, 173 
information exchange, 205, 207 
information technology, 215 
infrastructure, 8, 59, 141, 157, 159, 160, 161, 171, 
202 
injuries, 101, 117, 175 
injury, 176, 179, 198 
insecurity, xviii, xx, xxi, 17, 21, 24, 33, 34, 35, 42, 
45, 46, 47, 59, 69, 72, 90, 101, 184, 188 

Index 
 
231 
institutions, ix, xx, 22, 24, 25, 26, 41, 44, 47, 58, 61, 
62, 68, 91, 99, 103, 105, 111, 128, 131, 142, 187, 
206, 219 
insurgency, 218 
integration, xx, xxii, 3, 7, 9, 16, 20, 51, 53, 66, 67, 
68, 70, 71, 73, 124, 152, 161, 171, 191, 192, 193, 
197 
integrity, xxi, 7, 51, 53, 58, 59, 60, 72, 171, 186, 214 
intellectual capital, 161 
intellectual property, 112, 113 
intellectual property rights, 113 
intelligence, x, xii, xvii, xx, xxiii, 10, 195, 199, 201, 
203, 204, 206, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 217, 
218, 219, 220, 221, 222 
interdependence, 6, 25, 41, 52, 171, 179, 213 
interference, 22, 77, 79, 87, 103, 104, 106, 118 
international affairs, 24, 195, 216 
International Atomic Energy Agency, xiv, 202 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 
79 
International Criminal Court, 89, 90 
international diplomacy, 58 
international economy, xx, xxiii, 197 
International Energy Agency (IEA), xiv, 104, 120, 
153, 165 
international law, 78, 84, 87, 91, 92, 108, 176, 177, 
206 
International Maritime Organization (IMO), xiv, 
105, 206, 209  
international migration, xxi, 44, 51, 52, 53, 54, 56, 
58, 60, 61, 62, 63, 71, 72, 73 
international migrations, xxi, 44, 51, 52, 53, 54, 56, 
58, 60, 61, 62, 63, 71, 72, 73 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), xiv, 8, 24 
international relations, xii, xviii, xix, 5, 22, 53, 59, 
173, 185 
international terrorism, 186, 188, 192, 193 
international trade, xix, 3, 113, 152, 200 
interoperability, 170 
intervention, xxii, 5, 8, 77, 78, 79, 82, 83, 87, 88, 90, 
91, 106, 161, 172 
invasions, 7 
inventions, 217 
investment(s), xix, 3, 4, 5, 8, 10, 20, 42, 43, 46, 114, 
116, 152, 153, 158, 159, 163, 161 
investment bank, 8 
investors, 4, 9, 116, 157, 161 
IP address, 170 
IPR, xiv 
Iran, 5, 10, 11, 128, 140, 141, 150, 154, 155, 156, 
158, 159, 162, 172, 174, 177, 200, 205 
Iraq, xiv, 3, 9, 11, 128, 140, 150, 154, 158, 162, 163, 
200, 205 
Iraq War, 128 
Ireland, 8, 57, 130, 187 
Irish Republican Army, xiv 
Islam, ix, xi, 10, 69, 71, 72, 74, 76 
Islamophobia, 72, 74 
islands, 100, 141 
isolation, 24, 46, 70, 111 
Israel, 10, 11, 56, 158, 162, 174, 176, 188 
issues, vii, x, xi, xvii, xix, xx, xxii, xxiii, 11, 26, 27, 
33, 34, 45, 95, 96, 97, 98, 104, 108, 113, 116, 
118, 121, 139, 140, 141, 147, 152, 163, 196, 197, 
211, 215 
Italy, 8, 52, 58, 61, 69, 200 
J 
Japan, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 19, 104, 133, 138, 140, 150, 
152, 156, 157, 158, 163 
Jews, 52 
joint ventures, 113 
Jordan, 11, 56, 121 
journalists, 58, 139, 203 
jurisdiction, 179 
K 
Kazakhstan, 138, 140, 159 
Kenya, 187 
Keynes, 20, 28 
kill, xxii, 77, 88 
Korea, 52 
Kosovo, 193 
Kurds, 60 
Kuwait, xiv, 56 
Kyoto Protocol, xiv, 96, 112, 114, 116, 121, 122, 
124 
L 
labor market(s), 36, 37, 61, 62, 74 
landscape, xxii, 132, 147, 156, 163 
languages, 80 
Latin America, 19, 56, 86, 128, 160 
law enforcement, 69, 176, 195, 203 
laws, 17, 61, 177, 204 
leadership, 8, 25, 211, 218, 219 
leaks, xx 
learning, 85, 111, 214 
Least Developed Countries, xiv, 113 
Lebanon, 158 
legality, 176 
legislation, 112, 169, 177, 200, 206 

Index 
232 
leishmaniasis, 101 
leisure, 35, 173 
lending, 141 
liberalization, 161, 162 
Liberia, 130 
life experiences, 66 
life quality, 38, 44 
life sciences, 203 
lifestyles, xxi, 51, 53, 63 
light, 23, 176 
liquefied natural gas, 139 
liquid fuels, 141 
liquidity, 8 
liquids, 6, 137 
living conditions, xxii, 45, 53, 72, 77 
loans, 115, 161 
local conditions, 111 
loneliness, 184, 192 
longevity, 20 
loyalty, 62 
LTC, x 
lying, 18, 100, 156 
M 
machinery, 95 
magnitude, 27, 52, 54, 63, 72, 98, 178 
majority, xxi, 51, 53, 54, 63, 67, 69, 112, 116, 131, 
134, 139, 140, 148, 178, 198, 201 
malaria, 43 
Malaysia, 4, 7, 140, 141, 150, 157, 201 
malnutrition, 42, 101, 117 
malware, 177 
man, 20, 43, 83, 173, 209 
management, xx, 5, 9, 16, 17, 22, 24, 38, 41, 46, 96, 
98, 103, 110, 121, 134, 151, 170, 171 
management committee, 24 
manipulation, 189 
manufacturing, 41, 201 
mapping, 219, 220 
marginalization, 128 
maritime security, 6 
market economy, 5, 162 
mass, 7, 52, 81, 82, 83, 84, 87, 88, 90, 192, 193, 216 
material resources, 22 
materials, 44, 134, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 
204, 205, 206, 207 
mathematics, 75, 220 
matrix, xix, 163, 216 
matter, 47, 62, 108, 118, 140, 158, 176 
media, xxi, 29, 48, 51, 85, 91, 110, 175, 178, 187, 
189, 192, 221 
median, 39 
mediation, 87 
Mediterranean, xii, 11, 61, 100, 135, 139, 157, 158, 
163 
Mekong River, 122 
melting, 22, 68 
membership, 207 
memorizing, 214 
MENA region, 139 
mental activity, 216 
mental model, 216, 220 
messages, 194 
metals, 131 
metaphor, 78, 171 
meter, 100 
methodology, 128, 218 
Mexico, 8, 44, 52, 61, 119, 121, 136, 150, 155, 157, 
160 
middle class, 20, 21, 26, 41 
Middle East, xi, xiv, xxi, 3, 5, 9, 10, 11, 19, 37, 61, 
127, 128, 135, 136, 137, 139, 140, 145, 154, 155, 
156, 157, 159, 161, 163, 171, 187, 191, 201, 208 
migrant population, 56 
migrants, xxi, 44, 46, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 
60, 61, 62, 66, 72, 135 
migration(s), xii, xvii, xxi, 36, 37, 41, 42, 44, 46, 51, 
52, 53, 54, 56, 58, 60, 61, 62, 63, 66, 68, 70, 72, 
73, 74, 131, 135 
militarization, xxiii, 11, 61, 169, 175 
military, ix, xxi, xxiii, 4, 6, 7, 9, 10, 22, 35, 42, 44, 
46, 51, 53, 58, 59, 73, 81, 82, 83, 88, 89, 90, 112, 
132, 138, 141, 148, 151, 164, 169, 173, 175, 176, 
178, 179, 180, 185, 186, 195, 206, 214, 215 
militias, 61 
mineral resources, 134, 141 
minorities, 65, 68, 73, 80 
mission(s), x, xxiii, 81, 85, 89, 175, 211, 214, 220 
misunderstanding, 214 
mobile device, 171 
models, 22, 23, 37, 66, 68, 73, 96, 102, 218, 220 
moderates, 109 
modernism, 22 
modernity, xx, 97 
Moldova, 201 
molecular biology, 43 
momentum, 36, 88, 110, 112, 113 
money laundering, 193 
monopoly, 24 
Moon, 78, 85 
morality, 78 
Morocco, 11, 135 
mortality, xii, 34, 36, 56 
mosaic, 10 
Moscow, 159 

Index 
 
233 
motivation, 131, 188, 190, 202 
mountain ranges, 7 
Mozambique, x 
MPI, 48 
multiculturalism, 67, 68 
multilateral, 117 
multilateralism, 16, 24 
multiplication, 17 
multiplier, 34, 42, 47 
multivariate analysis, 128 
murder, 89 
Muslim immigrants, xxi, 51, 53, 64, 65, 68, 70, 71 
Muslims, 10, 69, 70, 71, 72, 74 
mutation, 58 
Myanmar, 141 
N 
NAFTA, xiv, 194 
Namibia, 188 
nanotechnology, 215 
narcotics, 139, 186 
narratives, 91, 219 
nation states, 170, 171, 174 
national borders, 58, 61, 187, 193, 197 
national culture, 67 
national identity, xxi, 51, 53, 62, 65, 67, 68, 71 
national interests, 26, 60, 65, 88, 179 
national origin, 71 
national policy, 110 
national security, 34, 60, 176, 186, 215 
National Security Agency, xiv, 175 
national strategy, 206, 215 
nationalism, 65 
nationality, 66, 67 
native population, 56, 63, 68, 70 
natural disaster(s), 52, 54, 72, 88, 133 
natural gas, xxii, 130, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 147, 
148, 149, 151, 152, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 
161 
natural resources, ix, xvii, xx, xxii, 10, 35, 38, 44, 
45, 127, 128, 130, 131, 134, 135, 137, 142, 148, 
151, 161 
negative consequences, 17, 152 
negative effects, 177 
neglect, 45 
negotiating, 204 
negotiation, 98, 104, 105, 106 
nerve, 205, 209 
net migration, 63 
Netherlands, 57, 64, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 75, 200 
networking, 171 
neutral, 179 
New Zealand, 66, 133 
news coverage, 187 
NGOs, 111 
Nigeria, ix, xv, 131, 135, 142, 144, 145, 150, 154, 
158, 161 
non-OECD, 137, 150, 152, 153, 156 
non-polar, xviii 
North Africa, ix, xiv, 10, 11, 61, 127, 139, 145, 154, 
157, 161, 163 
North America, xiv, 6, 8, 19, 56, 57, 58, 62, 63, 66, 
132, 133, 139, 149, 156, 158, 159 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), x, xii, 
xiii, xiv, 10, 89, 177, 181, 196, 202, 209 
North Korea, 174, 200, 206 
North Sea, 130 
Northern Ireland, 101 
Norway, 130, 160, 219 
NPC, 151 
NPT, xiv, 204 
NSA, xiv, 175 
Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, xiv, 204, 207 
nuclear program, 10, 199 
nuclear weapons, xviii, 7, 10, 193, 202, 205 
nucleus, 64 
nutrition, 79 
O 
Obama, 23, 24 
Obama, Barack, 23, 24 
obstacles, xxii, 51, 53, 161, 163, 214, 216 
obstruction, 130 
Oceania, 52, 56, 63, 66, 132 
oceans, 6, 106 
OECD, xv, 105, 117, 118, 122, 134, 137, 144, 148, 
152, 153, 156, 221 
oil, xxii, 3, 5, 9, 25, 56, 128, 129, 130, 131, 134, 136, 
137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 147, 148, 149, 150, 
151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 
161, 162, 163, 164, 177 
oil production, 138, 140, 150, 159, 160, 163 
oil revenues, 159 
oil sands, 155, 156 
oil spill, 142 
open markets, 25 
operations, 69, 86, 163, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 
198, 199, 205 
opportunities, xxiv, 9, 24, 33, 34, 41, 43, 44, 52, 56, 
61, 62, 70, 72, 101, 109, 113, 142, 179, 184, 185, 
203, 216, 218 
oppression, 52, 72 
optimism, 19, 20, 71 
organism, 198 

Index 
234 
organize, xxiii, 105, 211, 213, 219 
organs, 176, 187 
outsourcing, 198 
overlap, 132 
overproduction, 162 
ownership, 27, 42, 160 
ozone, 101 
P 
Pacific, xxi, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, 138, 140, 141, 156, 
157, 163 
Pakistan, 7, 9, 11, 61, 155, 174 
Panama, 160 
paradigm shift, 58, 220 
parallel, 5, 10, 11, 16, 59, 60, 97, 198, 203, 214 
parents, 66, 70, 71 
parole, 208 
participants, 16, 26, 65 
pathogens, 203, 204 
pathways, 102, 113 
peace, x, xviii, 4, 8, 16, 18, 35, 45, 80, 81, 82, 88, 89, 
91, 173 
peacekeeping, 88, 89 
Pearl River Delta, 132 
peer review, 102, 106 
Pentagon, 10 
per capita income, 21 
permeability, 155, 184 
permission, 82, 87 
permit, 192 
Persian Gulf, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 11, 56, 128, 138, 139, 
140, 141, 149, 154, 155, 157, 158 
Persian Gulf War, 128 
pessimism, 19, 20 
pessimists, 128 
pesticide, 203 
petroleum, xiii, xiv, xv, 24, 129, 137, 138, 144, 152 
pharmaceutical, 203, 209 
Philippines, 141 
physical activity, 134 
physical environment, 171 
pipeline, 140, 159, 161 
piracy, 139, 149, 160 
PISA, xv, 220 
plants, 80 
platform, 160, 170 
playing, 161 
pluralism, 22 
plutonium, 201, 202 
Poland, 52, 61 
polarity, 25 
police, 214 
policy, xix, 8, 10, 35, 45, 47, 66, 85, 86, 91, 98, 102, 
103, 106, 109, 110, 112, 122, 123, 134, 160, 163, 
164, 180, 195, 198, 212, 213, 214, 217, 218, 220 
policy choice, 134 
policy instruments, 103 
policy makers, 45, 212, 213, 214, 220 
policy making, 109 
political change, xviii, 11 
political dynamic, xviii 
political instability, 42, 142 
political participation, 18, 79 
political parties, 11, 58, 62, 72, 110 
political power, 36, 183, 187, 191 
political system, 16, 17, 36, 173, 185 
politics, xviii, xxiii, 13, 141, 185, 186, 187, 197, 198 
pollution, 42, 131, 216 
pools, 113 
Popular Front, xv, 187 
population, xvii, xxi, 19, 20, 21, 26, 33, 34, 35, 36, 
37, 38, 39, 41, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 49, 52, 53, 54, 
55, 56, 57, 58, 63, 69, 71, 72, 76, 81, 83, 84, 88, 
89, 90, 100, 128, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 
142, 144, 152, 158, 162, 164, 178, 183, 215 
population density, 52 
population dynamics, xvii, xxi 
population growth, 35, 36, 44, 45, 130, 132, 134, 162 
population pyramid, 19 
population structure, 36 
porosity, 186, 193, 194 
portfolio, xi 
Portugal, ix, x, xi, xii, xvii, 3, 8, 33, 48, 77, 86, 127, 
147, 165, 169, 183, 197, 201, 211, 221 
positive relationship, 130 
post-hegemonic system, xxi 
poverty, xxi, 20, 21, 33, 41, 44, 46, 79, 128, 142, 190 
poverty reduction, 41 
poverty trap, 128 
power generation, 163 
power relations, 148 
precedents, 63 
precipitation, 102 
predictability, 15, 35 
prejudice, 72 
preparation, xxiii, 174, 211, 215 
preservation, 16, 80 
president, x, 21, 30, 86, 89, 135, 202, 208 
prevention, 10, 35, 44, 82, 84, 85, 86, 88 
price changes, 152 
principles, 22, 23, 26, 79, 80, 84, 86, 90, 113, 177, 
179, 220 
private enterprises, 198 
private firms, 103 
private investment, 161 

Index 
 
235 
private sector, 97, 111, 112, 113, 118 
privatization, 80 
probability, 17, 34, 42, 52, 59, 96, 98, 169, 172, 173, 
174, 178, 215 
procurement, 159, 199 
producers, xxii, 113, 128, 147, 148, 150, 154, 156, 
157, 158, 161, 163 
profit, 135, 194 
profitability, 41 
project, vii, xi, 10, 15, 16, 24, 29, 34, 116, 121, 128, 
180, 203 
proliferation, x, xviii, xix, xxii, xxiii, 10, 16, 17, 59, 
60, 186, 188, 193, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 
202, 205, 206, 207 
property rights, 103 
prophylaxis, 43 
proportionality, 84 
proposition, 96 
prosperity, 20, 26, 64, 80, 152, 173, 207 
protection, xxii, 6, 18, 34, 46, 59, 73, 77, 78, 79, 81, 
82, 83, 90, 91, 101, 108, 111, 148, 151, 178, 180, 
212 
protectionism, xx 
protestants, 68 
psychiatry, 18 
psychosocial conditions, 185 
public debt, 9 
public domain, 173 
public enterprises, 149 
public figures, 71 
public finance, 113 
public goods, 16, 103 
public health, 42, 62 
public opinion, 24, 175 
public policy, 53, 67 
public schools, 71 
punishment, 24 
purchasing power, 21 
Q 
quality of life, 35, 52 
questioning, 78, 90 
quotas, 66, 152 
R 
race, 66 
radiation, 198, 201 
radicalism, 7, 8, 34 
radicalization, 71 
rainfall, 100, 117, 133, 134 
ramp, 102 
rape, 82, 89 
rare earth elements, 131 
ratification, 200 
rationality, 16 
raw materials, 134, 135, 148, 160 
RDD, xv, 202 
reactions, 18, 20 
reactivity, 113 
reading, 75, 220 
real estate, xi 
reality, 16, 18, 19, 23, 37, 41, 45, 71, 108, 171, 180, 
185, 192, 198, 202, 216, 219 
reasoning, 18, 214 
recall, 88 
recession, xix, 20 
recognition, xviii, 78, 80, 110 
recommendations, 85 
reconciliation, 83 
reconstruction, 83 
recovery, 83, 152, 177 
recreational, 52 
recycling, 4, 44 
Red Sea, 11, 139 
redistribution, 41, 164, 200 
reform(s), 11, 48, 83, 145 
refugees, 54, 55, 60, 61 
regional integration, 149 
regional policy, 11 
regionalization, xxi, 15 
regions of the world, 56 
regulations, 163, 206 
rejection, 23, 69, 170 
relative size, 71 
relevance, 42, 45, 53, 59, 72 
reliability, 170 
religion, xxi, 18, 51, 53, 69, 71, 79, 81, 149, 188 
remittances, 56, 64 
remote sensing, 143 
renewable energy, 44, 113 
repression, 18, 54 
requirements, 97, 104, 117, 163, 204 
RES, 85, 87 
researchers, xvii, 35, 148, 173, 174, 216 
resentment, 190 
reserves, xxii, 11, 137, 138, 140, 146, 147, 149, 151, 
154, 155, 156, 158, 159, 160, 162, 163 
residential, 70 
resilience, 98, 104, 170, 218 
resistance, xx, 9, 16, 23 
resolution, 41, 82, 85, 88, 89, 152, 206 
resources, xxii, 5, 7, 8, 34, 35, 37, 38, 40, 41, 42, 44, 
45, 61, 79, 97, 111, 115, 116, 124, 127, 128, 129, 

Index 
236 
130, 131, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 141, 142, 147, 
148, 152, 154, 155, 157, 158, 159, 160, 164, 170, 
173, 176, 177, 178, 179, 192, 193, 194, 214, 216 
response, 16, 18, 19, 21, 22, 47, 78, 79, 80, 84, 86, 
89, 99, 108, 109, 110, 163, 174, 179, 195, 199, 
205 
restrictions, vii, 18, 26, 138, 164, 170 
retaliation, 136, 176, 178 
retaliatory action, 174 
retirement, 9 
retirement age, 9 
revenue, 115, 116, 130 
rhythm, 42, 159 
rights, 66, 67, 68, 73, 78, 79, 80, 83, 90, 177 
risk(s), xvii, xix, xxii, 7, 16, 17, 18, 26, 35, 36, 41, 
42, 46, 59, 60, 73, 81, 83, 86, 96, 97, 98, 99, 101, 
103, 109, 116, 117, 127, 129, 131, 132, 133, 134, 
135, 142, 170, 171, 172, 173, 184, 191, 192, 194, 
202, 203, 205, 215, 218, 220, 221 
risk assessment, 99, 117 
risk factors, 131, 135 
risk management, 16, 103, 172, 220 
risk perception, 218 
risk society, 41, 97 
river flows, 133 
Romania, 201 
root(s), 23, 82, 83, 141, 153, 195 
routes, 10, 135, 138, 139, 141, 157, 160, 200, 201, 
202 
royalty, 113 
rule of law, 193, 195 
rules, 17, 22, 24, 37, 63, 66, 91, 106, 107, 113, 213 
rural areas, 37 
rural population, 132 
Russia, xiii, 5, 7, 8, 11, 19, 23, 25, 69, 89, 104, 136, 
141, 145, 148, 149, 150, 154, 155, 156, 157, 159, 
160, 161, 163, 164, 174, 175, 176, 201, 206 
Rwanda, 81, 135, 144 
S 
sabotage, 174 
Saddam Hussein, 11, 162 
safe haven, 46 
safety, 46, 163, 204, 212 
sanctions, 83, 89, 205 
Saudi Arabia, 6, 11, 56, 140, 150, 154, 156, 159, 
162, 164, 177, 199 
savings, 4 
scarce resources, 129, 148 
scarcity, 37, 38, 42, 127, 129, 130, 131, 134, 135, 
137, 142, 143, 144, 145, 214 
schizophrenia, 71 
scholarship, xii, 120 
school, 65, 68, 78, 98, 173, 220 
school failure, 68 
science, xxiii, 97, 98, 117, 130, 197, 198, 211, 215, 
220 
scientific knowledge, 98, 109 
scientific method, 212 
scope, xvii, xxii, 77, 84, 87, 88, 90, 103, 183, 187, 
194 
sea level, 99, 100, 110, 117, 132, 133, 135 
sea-level rise, 99, 100, 117 
second generation, 68, 77 
Second World, 22 
security, vii, ix, x, xii, xvii, xviii, xix, xx, xxi, xxii, 
xxiii, xxiv, 5, 6, 10, 11, 30, 33, 34, 35, 36, 41, 44, 
45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 51, 53, 56, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 
71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 78, 79, 81, 82, 91, 101, 
128, 129, 130, 131, 134, 135, 139, 140, 142, 145, 
148, 151, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 163, 170, 171, 
173, 174, 175, 179, 180, 183, 184, 185, 186, 189, 
192, 193, 194, 196, 197, 198, 199, 201, 204, 205, 
206, 211, 213, 215, 216, 218, 219, 220 
security forces, 219 
security issues, vii, x, xvii, xxii, 11, 34, 147 
security services, 199, 204 
security threats, xx, xxii, 35, 60, 72 
segregation, 64, 70 
self-adaptation, 101 
self-destruction, 17 
self-interest, xx, 88 
self-organization, 213 
sensations, 59 
sensors, 171, 216 
September 11, 30, 58, 81, 139, 171, 184, 186, 188, 
190, 201 
services, xxiii, 6, 60, 101, 108, 151, 169, 170, 178, 
184, 194, 195, 199, 200, 201, 215 
settlements, 144 
sex, 35 
sexual violence, 87 
shape, xxii, 28, 66, 130, 147, 152, 162, 198 
shelter, 54 
shock, 5, 9, 137, 158, 159, 162, 187, 188, 220 
shortage, 42, 148 
Siberia, 7, 100, 160 
SIDS, xv, 113 
Sierra Leone, 130 
signs, 71, 86, 199 
simulation, 213, 220 
Singapore, 4, 56, 140 
skilled workers, 60 
slavery, 79 
small communities, 52 

Index 
 
237 
smuggling, 61, 201, 202 
social capital, 64, 65, 70, 73 
social change, xi, 185 
social class, 21 
social construct, 59, 98 
social context, 98 
social development, 34, 130, 170 
social distance, 64 
social environment, 184 
social exclusion, 45 
social fabric, 64 
social group, 21, 37, 42, 43 
social identity, 64, 73 
social integration, 69, 70 
social interactions, 64 
social life, 64 
social network, 171 
social organization, 148, 212 
social perception, 21 
social psychology, 76 
social reality, 47 
social relations, xxiii, 64, 169 
social security, 9, 35, 79 
social services, 190 
social structure, xi, 127 
social support, 37 
social values, xxi, 51, 53 
societal security, xxi, 51, 53, 59, 60, 62, 72, 73, 75 
society, xxi, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 25, 37, 41, 42, 43, 
46, 58, 59, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 70, 80, 97, 
99, 109, 111, 135, 173, 184, 185, 192, 194, 214, 
220 
socioeconomic status, 62 
sociology, xxiv 
software, 95, 177, 198 
solidarity, 16, 24, 42, 64, 80 
solution, 26, 89, 90, 149, 207 
Somalia, 193 
South Africa, xiii, 52, 83, 155, 200, 201 
South America, 100, 149, 156, 157, 160 
South Asia, 5, 37, 191 
South China Sea, 5, 139, 141, 143 
South Korea, 4, 5, 7, 140 
Southeast Asia, 128, 138, 139 
sovereign state, 175 
sovereignty, xix, xx, xxiii, 18, 22, 23, 26, 35, 61, 80, 
81, 87, 88, 90, 104, 169, 171, 177, 179 
Soviet Union, 5, 136, 149, 156, 159, 201 
Spain, xi, xii, xvii, 8, 15, 21, 51, 52, 58, 63, 69, 70, 
95, 121, 188, 200 
spare capacity, 149, 152, 159, 162 
special drawing rights, 116 
specialists, 54 
species, 96, 101, 102, 109, 117, 220 
speech, 21, 78, 79, 86 
spending, 4 
spot market, 151, 152 
Spring, 11, 76, 143, 163, 171 
stability, xxiii, 8, 34, 35, 45, 102, 158, 163, 173, 185, 
194, 197, 198, 199 
stabilization, 44, 95, 96, 102, 103, 110 
stakeholders, xviii, 25, 46, 85, 95, 96, 97, 109, 110, 
111, 112, 113, 118, 200 
state borders, 34, 87 
state control, 149 
state-owned banks, 200 
statistics, 110 
stimulus, 9 
stock, 54, 134 
storms, 136 
Strait of Hormuz, 138, 139, 140, 141 
strategic planning, 164, 192, 217 
strategic position, 7 
stress, 38, 46, 84, 88, 100, 101, 117, 134 
stressors, 111, 142 
structural changes, xxii, 147, 164 
structural characteristics, 37, 52 
structural transformations, xx 
structure, xviii, xix, 5, 22, 35, 36, 37, 44, 46, 103, 
113, 170, 186, 191, 193, 220 
structuring, 41, 45 
sub-Saharan Africa, 37, 135 
substitutes, 104, 111, 118 
Sudan, xv, 88, 89, 130 
suicide, 190 
suicide bombers, 190 
supervision, 61 
supplier(s), 147, 157, 159, 164, 203 
supply chain, 198 
supply disruption, 152 
surplus, 106, 107 
surveillance, 61, 69, 80, 216 
survival, 18, 21, 46, 148, 172, 212, 213, 220, 221 
sustainability, 16, 34, 38, 44, 45, 80, 128, 148, 152 
sustainable development, 33, 44, 47, 80, 110, 112, 
119, 120, 122, 134, 144 
sustainable growth, 9 
Sweden, 57, 64, 67, 69, 70, 130 
Switzerland, 58, 63, 69, 200 
symptoms, 53, 128 
synchronization, 172 
synthesis, 70, 123, 124 
Syria, 10, 11, 22, 24, 54, 78, 87, 88, 89, 90, 92, 158, 
164, 174, 205, 206, 209 

Index 
238 
T 
tactics, 10, 18, 190, 191, 193, 195, 200, 201, 202 
Taiwan, xi, 4, 5, 7 
Taliban, 9, 61 
target, 69, 107, 172, 174, 221 
taxation, 4 
taxes, 116 
taxonomy, 218 
taxpayers, 62 
technical assistance, 206 
technical change, 188 
techniques, 95, 176, 187, 192, 217 
technological advancement, xxiii, 211 
technological advances, 161, 184, 188, 216 
technology, xi, xxii, 17, 24, 25, 35, 43, 44, 95, 96, 
97, 103, 105, 111, 112, 113, 118, 121, 123, 137, 
152, 153, 154, 155, 159, 160, 173, 184, 190, 191, 
192, 194, 197, 198, 199, 205, 206, 212, 215, 216, 
218, 219 
technology transfer, xxii, 95, 96, 97, 105, 111, 112, 
113, 121, 123 
telecommunications, 170 
telecommunications services, 170 
temperature, xxii, 95, 96, 97, 99, 100, 101, 102, 104, 
106, 107, 111, 117, 118 
tenants, 216 
tension(s), 5, 10, 22, 26, 36, 37, 38, 41, 42, 45, 46, 
47, 61, 64, 68, 69, 71, 72, 73, 128, 131, 141, 142, 
159 
territorial, xxi, 7, 17, 51, 58, 60, 61, 139, 141, 142, 
160, 212, 215 
territory, 6, 7, 17, 44, 53, 59, 61, 66, 73, 87, 129, 
138, 141, 142, 179, 200 
terrorism, xvii, xviii, xx, xxi, xxii, xxiii, 33, 34, 46, 
51, 53, 60, 69, 139, 149, 172, 174, 183, 184, 185, 
186, 187, 188, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 195, 
196, 202, 203, 210, 218, 219 
terrorist activities, 71, 193, 194 
terrorist acts, 43, 191 
terrorist attack, xxiii, 81, 171, 183, 188, 189, 192, 
194, 202, 203, 207, 219 
terrorist groups, 188, 192, 193, 194, 198 
terrorist organization, 185, 187, 188, 191, 192, 193, 
201, 202 
terrorists, 171, 172, 183, 185, 188, 190, 191, 192, 
193, 194, 198, 199, 202, 203, 206, 207 
testing, 71, 220 
textbook, 128, 199 
Thailand, 4 
theft, 201, 202 
theoretical approaches, 130 
theoretical assumptions, 23 
Thomas Hobbes, 173 
thoughts, 78, 157, 212 
threats, xvii, xviii, xxi, xxiii, 10, 17, 19, 24, 27, 33, 
34, 36, 38, 42, 47, 59, 60, 62, 71, 80, 129, 131, 
134, 148, 149, 160, 164, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 
179, 180, 183, 184, 185, 186, 192, 193, 194, 195, 
197, 198, 199, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 218, 219 
Tibet, 7, 11 
time frame, xix 
time periods, 98 
tones, 163 
top-down, 98, 106 
tornadoes, 133 
torture, 79, 87 
total energy, 152 
trade, xx, 25, 42, 113, 125, 127, 134, 138, 139, 146, 
158, 160, 163, 184, 192, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 
203, 205, 207 
trade agreement, 192 
traditions, 65, 78 
trafficking, xxiii, 61, 139, 186, 193, 199, 200, 201, 
202, 206, 207, 210 
training, ix, x 
traits, 18, 20, 52, 71 
trajectory, 95, 96, 106 
transactions, 3, 184, 199, 200, 204, 207 
transformation(s), xxi, xxiii, 3, 9, 15, 16, 24, 25, 53, 
59, 72, 148, 188, 194, 197, 198, 211 
transmission, 170 
transnational terrorism, xxiii, 174, 183, 185, 186, 
187, 188, 191, 192, 193, 194, 195 
transparency, 212 
transport, 8, 95, 96, 108, 118, 138, 141, 157, 160, 
163, 204 
transportation, 52, 60, 62, 72, 129, 141, 161, 192, 
200, 206 
transportation infrastructure, 161 
transshipment, 200 
treaties, xi, 119, 204, 210 
treatment, xix, 43, 44, 79, 96, 132 
trial, 79, 209 
Trinidad, 157 
Trinidad and Tobago, 157 
Trust Fund, 113 
turbulence, 164, 186 
Turkey, 5, 11, 52, 159, 199, 200 
Turkmenistan, 154, 157, 159 
U 
Ukraine, 136, 141, 172, 175 
UNESCO, 92 
uniform, xxi, 15, 16, 19 

Index 
 
239 
unions, 79 
United Kingdom (UK), xv, 3, 57, 64, 67, 69, 121, 
122, 125, 145, 150, 205, 209 
United Nations (UN), xv, xxii, 19, 22, 23, 24, 28, 29, 
44, 46, 49, 54, 55, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 
84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 92, 115, 116, 121, 122, 
123, 124, 125, 133, 143, 145, 160, 176, 177, 206, 
210 
 
United Nations Development Program (UNDP), 38, 
48, 49, 110, 121, 122, 123 
United Nations Development Programme, 123 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC), xv, 96, 98, 105, 109, 110, 
111, 113, 115, 116, 118, 119, 120, 121, 123, 124 
United States (USA), xv, xxi, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 19, 
22, 23, 30, 52, 57, 58, 60, 61, 63, 64, 65, 66, 68, 
69, 71, 79, 130, 138, 139, 140, 141, 153, 158, 
165, 170, 176, 186, 202, 203, 209 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 79, 92 
universe, 46 
universities, 220 
uranium, 200, 203, 206 
urban, 37, 44, 46, 100, 117, 132, 133, 134, 137, 215, 
216 
urban areas, 100, 117, 132, 133, 215 
urban population, 44, 132, 134 
urban settlement, 132 
urbanization, 45, 131, 152, 215 
USGS, xv, 158 
USSR, xv, 5, 6, 7, 55, 59, 162, 185, 188 
V 
vacuum, 25, 27, 98, 188 
validation, 98, 220 
variables, 16, 19, 35, 36, 98, 217, 220 
variations, 68, 102 
vector, 35, 41, 169, 170, 173, 180 
vehicles, 205 
Venezuela, xv, 149, 150, 154, 155, 156, 158, 160, 
161, 163 
victims, 82, 187 
Vietnam, 141 
violence, xxi, xxii, 33, 34, 52, 54, 60, 71, 73, 89, 90, 
127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 133, 135, 136, 139, 142, 
144, 152, 173, 176, 183, 184, 186, 187, 188, 189, 
191 
viral diseases, 17 
virtualization, 170 
viscosity, 155 
vision, xix, xxiii, 21, 22, 103, 170, 173, 174, 180, 
211 
visions, 173 
visualization, 218, 220 
vitamins, 203 
vocabulary, 91 
volatility, 63, 149, 152, 162 
vote, 79, 89 
vulnerability, 6, 17, 18, 46, 60, 99, 109, 110, 117, 
132, 134, 140, 164, 199 
W 
wages, 79 
war, 5, 6, 9, 35, 54, 59, 78, 83, 84, 85, 86, 88, 90, 
130, 135, 137, 148, 162, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 
178, 184, 215, 221 
war crimes, 78, 83, 84, 85, 86, 88, 90 
Washington, xxiii, 9, 27, 29, 47, 76, 91, 121, 143, 
165, 180, 183, 186, 188, 195, 208, 221, 222 
waste, 42 
water, xxii, 7, 35, 38, 41, 42, 44, 80, 99, 100, 117, 
134, 135, 160 
water resources, 7, 134 
water supplies, 100 
waterways, 139 
weakness, 38, 59, 128 
wealth, xxii, 16, 20, 22, 26, 43, 46, 52, 56, 62, 97, 
127, 128, 130, 131, 144, 164 
wealth distribution, 97 
weapons, x, xxiii, 6, 7, 10, 59, 60, 136, 139, 186, 
188, 189, 190, 193, 194, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 
202, 203, 204, 205, 206, 215 
Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD), x, xv, xx, 
xxiii, 6, 43, 59, 60, 139, 186, 188, 189, 190, 193, 
194, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 
206, 207, 209, 210 
web, 136, 141 
websites, 172, 178 
welfare, 56, 62, 78, 79, 80, 87, 97 
welfare state, 79 
well-being, 33, 35, 38, 110, 213, 216 
West Africa, 127, 128, 157, 160 
Western countries, 21, 22, 26, 63 
Western Europe, 68, 69, 70, 71, 73, 75, 157 
White House, 30 
White Paper, 7 
Wilson, Woodrow, 47 
Wisconsin, 91 
withdrawal, xx, xxi, 3 
WMD trafficking, xxiii 
workers, 66, 73, 135 
workforce, 46 
working class, 79 
working groups, xii 

Index 
240 
World Bank, 49, 122 
World Health Organization (WHO), 43 
world order, xviii, 22 
World Trade Organization (WTO), xv, xx, 105, 125, 
134, 146 
World War I, 5, 6, 52, 141, 187, 188 
World Wide Web, 198 
worldwide, xxiii, 19, 20, 24, 25, 83, 138, 139, 140, 
141, 158, 159, 162, 169, 185, 187, 188, 189, 192, 
203 
worry, 21, 203 
Y 
Yale University, 28 
Yemen, xi, 88, 89, 164 
yield, 102, 190, 193 
young adults, 36 
young people, 20, 28, 46, 56 
 

