
Stefano Brusaporci
University of L’Aquila, Italy
Digital Innovations in 
Architectural Heritage 
Conservation:
Emerging Research and 
Opportunities
A volume in the Advances in 
Media, Entertainment, and 
the Arts (AMEA) Book Series 

Published in the United States of America by
IGI Global
Engineering Science Reference (an imprint of IGI Global)
701 E. Chocolate Avenue
Hershey PA 17033
Tel: 717-533-8845
Fax:  717-533-8661 
E-mail: cust@igi-global.com
Web site: http://www.igi-global.com
Copyright © 2017 by IGI Global.  All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be 
reproduced, stored or distributed in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopying, without written permission from the publisher.
Product or company names used in this set are for identification purposes only. Inclusion of the 
names of the products or companies does not indicate a claim of ownership by IGI Global of the 
trademark or registered trademark.
	
	
	
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
British Cataloguing in Publication Data
A Cataloguing in Publication record for this book is available from the British Library.
All work contributed to this book is new, previously-unpublished material. The views expressed in 
this book are those of the authors, but not necessarily of the publisher.
Names: Brusaporci, Stefano, author.
Title: Digital innovations in architectural heritage conservation : emerging  
   research and opportunities / by Stefano Brusaporci. 
Description: Hershey : Engineering Science Reference, 2017. | Includes  
   bibliographical references. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2017002391| ISBN 9781522524342 (hardcover) | ISBN  
   9781522524359 (ebook) 
Subjects: LCSH: Historic buildings--Conservation and restoration--Data  
   processing--Technological innovations. | Historic preservation--Data  
   processing--Technological innovations. | Cultural  
   property--Protection--Data processing--Technological innovations. |  
   Architecture and technology. 
Classification: LCC NA105 .B77 2017 | DDC 720/.47--dc23 LC record available at https://lccn.loc.
gov/2017002391 
 
 
 
This book is published in the IGI Global book series Advances in Media, Entertainment, and the 
Arts (AMEA) (ISSN: 2475-6814; eISSN: 2475-6830)

Advances in Media, 
Entertainment, and the Arts 
(AMEA) Book Series
Editor-in-Chief: Giuseppe Amoruso, Politecnico di Milano, Italy
Mission
ISSN:2475-6814 
 EISSN:2475-6830
Throughout time, technical and artistic cultures have integrated creative expression and in-
novation into industrial and craft processes. Art, entertainment and the media have provided 
means for societal self-expression and for economic and technical growth through creative 
processes.
The Advances in Media, Entertainment, and the Arts (AMEA) book series aims to 
explore current academic research in the field of artistic and design methodologies, applied 
arts, music, film, television, and news industries, as well as popular culture. Encompassing 
titles which focus on the latest research surrounding different design areas, services and 
strategies for communication and social innovation, cultural heritage, digital and print media, 
journalism, data visualization, gaming, design representation, television and film, as well 
as both the fine applied and performing arts, the AMEA book series is ideally suited for 
researchers, students, cultural theorists, and media professionals. 
•	Digital Heritage
•	Products, Strategies and Services
•	Sports & Entertainment
•	Arts & Design
•	Cultural Heritage
•	Blogging & Journalism
•	Cross-Media Studies
•	Traditional Arts
•	Fine Arts
•	Film & Television
Coverage
IGI Global is currently accepting 
manuscripts for publication within this 
series. To submit a proposal for a volume in 
this series, please contact our Acquisition 
Editors at Acquisitions@igi-global.com or 
visit: http://www.igi-global.com/publish/.
The Advances in Media, Entertainment, and the Arts  (AMEA) Book Series (ISSN 2475-6814) is published by IGI 
Global, 701 E. Chocolate Avenue, Hershey, PA 17033-1240, USA, www.igi-global.com. This series is composed of titles 
available for purchase individually; each title is edited to be contextually exclusive from any other title within the series. 
For pricing and ordering information please visit http://www.igi-global.com/book-series/advances-media-entertainment-
arts/102257. Postmaster: Send all address changes to above address. ©© 2017 IGI Global. All rights, including translation 
in other languages reserved by the publisher. No part of this series may be reproduced or used in any form or by any means 
– graphics, electronic, or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, taping, or information and retrieval systems – 
without written permission from the publisher, except for non commercial, educational use, including classroom teaching 
purposes. The views expressed in this series are those of the authors, but not necessarily of IGI Global.

701 East Chocolate Avenue, Hershey, PA 17033, USA
Tel: 717-533-8845 x100 • Fax: 717-533-8661
E-Mail: cust@igi-global.com • www.igi-global.com
Media Law, Ethics, and Policy in the Digtal Age
Nhamo A. Mhiripiri (Midlands State University, Zimbabwe & St. Augustine University, 
Tanzania) and Tendai Chari (University of Venda, South Africa) 
Information Science Reference • ©2017 • 330pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781522520955) • US $195.00
Handbook of Research on the Facilitation of Civic Engagement through Commuity Art
Leigh Nanney Hersey (U. of Louisiana Monroe, USA) and Bryna Bobick (U. of Memphis, USA) 
Information Science Reference • ©2017 • 672pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781522517276) • US $275.00
Convergence of Contemporary Art, Visual Culture, and Global Civic Engagement
Ryan Shin (University of Arizona, USA) 
Information Science Reference • ©2017 • 390pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781522516651) • US $195.00
Cultural Influences on Architecture
Gülşah Koç (Yıldız Technical University, Turkey) Marie-Therese Claes (Louvain School of 
Management, Belgium) and Bryan Christiansen (PryMarke, LLC, USA) 
Information Science Reference • ©2017 • 352pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781522517443) • US $180.00
Design Innovations for Contemporary Interiors and Civic Art
Luciano Crespi (Politecnico di Milano, Scuola del Design, Italy) 
Information Science Reference • ©2017 • 427pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781522506669) • US $205.00
Applying the Actor-Network Theory in Media Studies
Markus Spöhrer (University of Konstanz, Germany) and Beate Ochsner (University of 
Konstanz, Germany) 
Information Science Reference • ©2017 • 315pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781522506164) • US $175.00
Projective Processes and Neuroscience in Art and Design
Rachel Zuanon (Anhembi Morumbi University, Brazil) 
Information Science Reference • ©2017 • 290pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781522505105) • US $185.00
For an enitre list of titles in this series, please visit:
http://www.igi-global.com/book-series/advances-media-entertainment-arts/102257
Titles in this Series
For a list of additional titles in this series, please visit: 
http://www.igi-global.com/book-series/advances-media-entertainment-arts/102257

Foreword;...............................................................................................................vi;
Preface;.................................................................................................................viii;
Chapter 1;
Dr. Who’s Police Box: The Multiple Dimensions of Conservation;........................1;
Chapter 2;
Between Cuvier and Darwin: Issues in a Changing Heritage;...............................31;
Chapter 3;
“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”: The New Relationship With Digital Heritage;..............50;
Chapter 4;
Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation: Models in 
Architectural Heritage Conservation;....................................................................76;
Conclusion;.........................................................................................................119;
Glossary;.............................................................................................................124;
Related Readings;...............................................................................................133;
About the Author;..............................................................................................150;
Index;...................................................................................................................151;
Table of Contents

Foreword
vi  
This book is a timely contribution to the emerging opportunities presented 
to us at the height of our development of digital technologies for conserva-
tion. Well defined and specific, the chapters delve into a multiplicity of of-
ficial sources, presenting viewpoints oriented to the conservation of archi-
tectural heritage at the crossroads of culture and technology in the present 
day.
In the 21st century, the connectedness of our society has seen an exchange 
of cultures across the globe. As J. J. Arnett described in The Psychology of 
Globalization, most people today have a bicultural identity that combines 
their local identity with an identity linked to a global culture. Whilst this phe-
nomenon is not necessarily an issue, quite often, the media portrayal of the 
global culture is an enhanced, glorified version of it. As such, the allurements 
of the physically distant yet accessible global culture is especially attractive 
to vulnerable younger generations in their local settings. This tendency to-
wards a global culture can be a concern when the cultural traditions are being 
overshadowed, even though the shallow and materiality of the global culture 
is a stark contrast to the deeper, more profound local intangible heritage un-
der threat. Whilst the notion that intangible cultural heritage faces a greater 
challenge of conservation as compared to tangible heritage may be true, the 
conservation of architectural heritage is no less easy, for architectural heritage 
encompasses, and is intertwined with the intangibility of memory, history, 
processes, transformation, spirituality, and use of the object and not merely 
the materiality of it. As Prof. Stefano Brusaporci pointed out in this book, 
that any project of conservation is rooted on knowledge and understanding of 
historical and aesthetic value, in particular, architectural heritage is defined 
through “continuous processes of modification and transformation over 
time”. Monuments and sites do not stand by themselves, they are intrinsi-
cally rooted in the culture which defines their physicality. The greater threat 
is increasing population growth in urban areas where the concentration of 
architectural heritage is. The urban population of the world was at 3.9 billion 

  vii
in 2014 at 54%, growing from a mere 746 million in 1950 and is projected to 
reach 64% by 2050. Managing conservation of heritage will incontrovertibly 
become the most important activity in the heritage community in inexorable 
population growth and economic development. Perhaps the equally impres-
sive exponential growth of digital technology can be a safeguard for heritage 
conservation, guided by the reflection on concepts of “conservation” and the 
opportunities given us in the relationship between virtual heritage, digital 
heritage, participative approaches and the connected nature of social media 
presented in this volume.
Many challenges in heritage conservation lies ahead. Yet, I believe that 
the agora of multidisciplinary members of the heritage community and their 
fervency for preserving and conserving heritage will collectively resolve and 
surpass the issues which are before us. I hope that you will reflect upon the 
concepts and emerging opportunities presented in this book in your scholarly 
investigation and practical conservation work as much as I did.
Eugene Ch’ng
University of Nottingham, China
Eugene Ch’ng is the Director of the NVIDIA Joint-Lab on Mixed Reality, based at the University of 
Nottingham’s China campus in the international city of Ningbo with an ancient past of 7,000 years, 
also one of the original stops on the maritime Silk Road in the 5th century. Dr Ch’ng has authored 
many scholarly articles in his pioneering digital heritage research, notably Springer’s Cultural Com-
puting Series’ Visual Heritage in the Digital Age. Other articles which he has authored are From 
Product to Process: New Directions in Digital Heritage, The Mirror Between Two Worlds: 3D Surface 
Computing Interaction for Digital Objects and Environments, Stigmergy in Comparative Settlement 
Choice and Palaeoenvironment Simulation, Crowd Behavior Mining with Virtual Environments, 
and MIT Press PRESENCE’s Special Issue on Virtual Heritage: Cultural Agents, Environments and 
Objects among others. He is involved in, and has won numerous research grants as PI and Co-PI 
such as The Leverhulme Trust’s ‘Cuneiform Virtual Reconstruction’ project, ERC Advanced Grant’s 
‘Lost Frontiers’, AHRC’s ‘Curious Travellers’, Zhejiang China’s provincial ‘VR Maritime Silk Road’ 
and Etc. Dr Ch’ng is an Associate Editor for MIT Press’ PRESENCE. He was awarded the Ningbo 
Municipal Individual 3315 talent in 2015.

viii  
Preface
INTRODUCTION
The book deals with “conservation” and with the opportunities offered by 
digital technologies: Conservation is a general concept involving the strategies 
for heritage safeguarding and enhancement, and digital tools and applica-
tions – such as database, virtual reality, augmented reality, digital museums, 
social networks, etc. – can define useful participative processes for heritage 
conservation. In particular, the book focuses on architectural heritage.
Any project of conservation roots on knowledge and understanding of 
historical and aesthetic values.
The architectural field presents important differences compared to other 
ones: Architectural heritage shapes from a relationship between “built” and 
“void”, masses and details, as synthesis of materials, constructive systems, 
aesthetic characteristics, and spaces able to accommodate human activities. 
Moreover, continuous processes of modification and transformation over time 
defines it. The role of the cultural, historical and built context is inescapable. 
Documents are composed by a vast and heterogeneous quantity of histori-
cal and recent data, often scattered in different archives, such as drawings, 
writings, paintings, photos, previous studies and surveys, etc. related to the 
building, to the designer, to the builders, to the yard, etc.
Digital technologies for surveying, modeling and representation have 
produced important methodological changes. In particular, laser scanning, 
photogrammetry, advanced software for modeling and data analysis, and 
computer-based visualization have moved the process of historical and critical 
knowledge toward the use of complex 3D models. They favor the collection, 
analysis, computing, and communication of the huge quantity of data and 
information. It is important to go beyond the conceptual and operative di-
chotomy between 3-D model and database model, toward integrated models, 
at the same time made by spatial objects and referenced information.

  ix
From complex models rises new methodological issues: The heuristic 
role of digital modeling; The relation between interpretative models and 
reality, virtual reality, and augmented reality; “Transparency” as scientific 
practice and a way to interrelate and conserve physical and digital heritage; 
Interdisciplinary as critical reflection and opportunity; New participative 
applications as chance to enhance heritage, and the related reflection on the 
concepts of interpretation, of “memory”, of “history”, of authoritative and 
participative aspects.
Key matter of the book is the opportunities offered by digital technologies 
for conservation and, consequently, for knowledge, interpretation, presenta-
tion, participation, sustainability, management. With specific attention to 
architectural heritage.
Consequently, the main topics of the book are not limited to historic build-
ings, but they start from general issues to develop a reflection that come to 
architectural heritage. Therefore key words are:
•	
Cultural Heritage, Tangible Heritage, Intangible Heritage, Built 
Heritage, Urban Heritage, Landscape, Memory, Integrity, Authenticity.
•	
Conservation, Interpretation, Presentation, Sustainability, Participation, 
Interdisciplinarity, Management.
•	
Digital Heritage, Virtual Heritage, Digitalization, 3-D Modeling, 
Computer Based Visualization, Social Media.
•	
Architectural Heritage, Architectural History, Documentation, 
Surveying, Representation, Virtual Reality, Augmented Reality, BIM, 
Transparency, Paradata, Communication, Gaming, Edutainment, 
e-Tourism.
WHERE TOPICS FIT IN THE WORD TODAY
The ICT growth, the decreasing cost and the ease of use of digital tools have 
made the most advanced technologies available to a larger number of scholars 
and to common people, thus favoring their practice and experimentation.
From the very beginning of the Seventies, the archeology has immedi-
ately looked carefully to the possibilities offered by computer modeling. In 
addition, Digital Humanities has focused on digital heritage. In the “built 
heritage” field, computer based visualization has become a line where visual 
computing is an effective methodology for scientific research. Hence, it has 
resulted in the need to define appropriate procedural protocols.

x  
In 1999, on UNESCO’s “World Heritage Magazine”, Stone defined Virtual 
Heritage as: “the utilization of technology for interpretation, conservation 
and preservation of Natural, Cultural and World Heritage” (Stone 1999). 
Later, many pages have been written about the concept of “Digital Heritage”, 
especially from the publication of the “Charter on the Preservation of the 
Digital Heritage” by UNESCO in 2003. Here “Digital Heritage” is defined 
as: “cultural, educational, scientific and administrative resources, as well as 
technical, medical and other kinds of information created digitally, or con-
verted into digital form from existing analogue resources including different 
kinds of products such as texts, databases, images, audio, graphics, software 
and web pages.”
It is evident how digital technologies – intended both as tools and as meth-
odologies – are a common shared substrate across disciplines. A deep reflection 
on digital heritage concept is essential. In 2009, The London Charter aimed 
“to establish principles for the use of computer based visualization methods 
and outcomes in the research and communication of cultural heritage” (p. 4).
Today a new and unveiled relationship between physical heritage and 
digital heritage is growing, where “digitality” currently accompanies “real-
ity” and enhance it; but also the opposite: The real artifact improves digital 
heritage, according to a virtuous circle. Because advanced technologies make 
the physical and digital heritage two sides of the same interrelated subject.
This book presents to the international community a critical reflection on 
the characteristics that architectural heritage has taken today and consequently 
on the related aspects and strategies for its conservation. The writing devel-
ops the discussion according to subsequent steps, moving from the general 
to the particular, keeping an eye on tangible heritage and, in particular, on 
architectural heritage. The book starts from the concept of conservation, then 
it describes the evolution of the idea of heritage; consequently, the role and 
matters posed by digital tools are studies. In conclusion, it analyzes all these 
topics in the architectural field.
TARGET AUDIENCE
The book aims to present an advanced reflection and a specific point of 
view: The one oriented to the conservation of architectural heritage, with its 
indissoluble match between digital and physical heritage, favored by new 
advanced technologies.
The book defines the state of the art and the results achieved in key areas. 
The argument is multifaceted and multidisciplinary. In fact, even if tradition-

  xi
ally the disciplines related to historical architecture are well defined, however 
digital technologies open up numerous issues and methodological aspects.
This does not mean that the book addresses only to scholars of architec-
ture; it has a broader cultural and social interest, first because the topics are 
interdisciplinary. The book highlights how cultural heritage conservation 
rises from interdisciplinary processes concerning all the people involved in 
the conservation, from different scientific fields. According to this point of 
view, the book would be a source for different kind of researchers, also favor-
ing the definition of a shared background and a common thesaurus. Finally 
yet importantly, the presented issues have an economic importance (tourism, 
e-tourism, social networks and apps economy, etc.).
Therefore, the potential impact of the book could be of considerable 
importance, evoking the interest of all those that are involved in the study, 
management, design and preservation of historical buildings, in educational 
or business activities related to architectural heritage.
References are on heritage conservation, heritage studies, digital culture, 
new trends in philosophy, information technologies, social media, architectural 
and urban definition and conservation, architectural surveying, modeling, 
and computer based visualization.
The book first presents the main issues related to cultural heritage, and 
then it focuses on architectural heritage. Therefore, the book should be inter-
esting for several kind of scholars, but in particular to everybody interested 
in historic buildings and urban heritage conservation. According to the in-
terdisciplinarity characteristics of heritage studies and of digital studies, the 
target audience could be wide and heterogeneous:
•	
Scholars of architecture, history, urbanism, humanities, museum stud-
ies, etc.
•	
Scholars of conservation, preservation, restoration, sustainability, 
management, etc.
•	
Scholars of digital culture, social media, communication, etc.
•	
Scholars of ICT, 3D modeling, computer graphics, etc.
•	
Professionals interested in heritage conservation, preservation, presen-
tation, interpretation, tourism, e-tourism, management, etc.
•	
Software houses;
•	
Government bureaus;
•	
Amateurs of technology;
•	
Common people that everyday lives the architectural heritage.

xii  
ORGANIZATION OF THE BOOK
The book moves from a reflection on the concepts of “conservation” and on 
the ever evolving idea of “heritage”. Then it points out the importance of 
built heritage as reference for the study of tangible and intangible heritage. 
It analyses the ineludible relationship between digital heritage from physical 
content and the related real heritage. From hence, it underlines the relation-
ship that participative approaches, social media, digital models, and virtual 
visualization establish between all the people involved in heritage conserva-
tion. In particular, digital heritage does not threaten the essence of physical 
heritage but it accompanies it, without its substitution. From the “marriage” 
of physical heritage and related digital heritage derives advanced opportuni-
ties for heritage conservation.
•	
The first chapter describes what is “conservation” and it highlights 
the main matters: Documentation and knowledge, interpretation and 
presentation, interdisciplinarity, sustainability, participation, manage-
ment, and politics. At the same time, it focuses on questions posed by 
digital culture and the growing of digital tools.
•	
The second chapter deals with the concept of “cultural heritage”, 
describing how it has developed from the twentieth century, and the 
actual advanced ideas and matters in its definition, pointing out that 
heritage is a cultural changing concept, and on the related conceptual 
consequences. Finally yet importantly, it analyses the relationship be-
tween tangible and intangible heritage.
•	
The third chapter focuses on the role of digitality and on how digital 
technologies can be useful instruments for heritage conservation. In 
particular, it deals with built heritage and issues related to digital heri-
tage born from physical contents. The ubiquity of digital tools defines 
a new relationship with built heritage, favoring its conservation.
•	
The fourth chapter is specifically dedicated to architectural heritage. 
Here the main topics of the book are presented and analyzed with par-
ticular attention to historical buildings, urban heritage, and historicized 
landscape. This chapter defines what is architectural heritage and the 
differences with other kind of heritage, and the methodological dis-
similarities with other cultural fields. Then, the characteristics of digi-
tal medium for architectural heritage are presented, and in conclusion 
the main strategies offered by digital models and tools are underlined.

  xiii
The book highlights how conservation is a participative open-ended cul-
tural process, and how digital technologies well fit with conservation issues 
and how they favor advanced procedures for heritage safeguarding.
REFERENCES
Stone, R. J. (1999, November). Virtual heritage. UNESCO World Heritage 
Magazine, 18-20.
The London Charter. (2009). Retrieved November 15, 2016 from http://www.
londoncharter.org/
UNESCO. (2003). Charter on the Preservation of the Digital Heritage. 
Retrieved November 15, 2016, from http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-
URL_ID=17721&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-2434-2.ch001
Chapter 1
1 
Dr. Who’s Police Box:
The Multiple Dimensions 
of Conservation
ABSTRACT
According to the recommendations of international charters and docu-
ments—UNESCO, ICOMOS, Council of Europe, etc.—, the aim of the 
chapter is to present the concept of conservation and related matters. It is a 
general notion, a multifaceted and complex interdisciplinary process based 
on critical problems of knowledge, understanding, interpretation, presenta-
tion, sustainability, participation, and management. It reflects the evolution 
and complexification of the idea of heritage, where open-ended practices of 
involvement are aspects that are ever more important. In this context, the 
diffusion of digital technologies and methodologies, with the opportunities 
offered by ICT, favors the development of new advanced approaches for 
cultural heritage conservation.
INTRODUCTION
“Conservation” is usually intended as a strategy for the safeguarding, i.e. it 
is a constant attention over time. Instead, “Preservation” and “Restoration” 
prefigure an exceptional action on the materiality of the work of art1.
There are several definitions of “conservation”2. The concept has become 
ever more inclusive and complex over time, in parallel with the evolution 
of the idea of heritage, i.e. it is becoming quite all-encompassing, involving 
tangible and intangible properties, cultural, natural and environmental features.

Dr. Who’s Police Box
2
As evident in the UNESCO publication Managing Cultural World Heri-
tage (2013), conservation has extended to include sustainability, engagement, 
participation, and politics. Therefore, heritage management has become a 
substantial aspect.
Follows that knowledge, interpretation, presentation, and consequent is-
sues related to digital tools, methodologies, and ICT – and therefore to digital 
surveying and scanning, modeling, virtual reality, advanced reality and their 
relation with heritage – pose essential questions for heritage conservation.
BACKGROUND: THE CONCEPT OF CONSERVATION
The ICOMOS International charter for the conservation and restoration of 
monuments and sites (aka The Venice Charter, 1964) distinguishes between 
“Conservation” (art. 4-8) and “Restoration” (art. 9-13): Conservation relates 
to the systematic maintenance and to the use, without – important – modifica-
tions of the heritage and with respect of its values. Conservation also implies 
an attention for the environment, because heritage cannot be separated from 
its context. For example, sculptures, paintings and decorations are an essential 
part of a building. In the same way, the notion of “monument” is extended 
from the building to the whole historical center and to rural sites: “The concept 
of a historic monument embraces not only the single architectural work but 
also the urban or rural setting in which is found the evidence of a particular 
civilization, a significant development or a historic event. This applies not 
only to great works of art but also to more modest works of the past which 
have acquired cultural significance with the passing of time” (Art. 1).
On the contrary, “Restoration” concerns the actions aiming to maintain 
formal and historical values of the monument, respecting the manifestations 
of all the ages. It must remain exceptional in nature.
The Charter conceptually roots on the “Theory or Restoration” by Brandi 
(1963), explicitly highlighting how conservation and restoration aim to the 
safeguard of monuments intended in their double aspects of work of art and 
historical evidence.
The Nara Document on Authenticity (UNESCO, 1994) defines conserva-
tion as “all operations designed to understand a property, know its history 
and meaning, ensure its material safeguard, and, if required, its restoration 
and enhancement”. Therefore, the concept of Conservation is more general 
and possibly comprehensive of Restoration. In the art.9, it is underlined that 
“Conservation of cultural heritage in all its forms and historical periods is 
rooted in the values attributed to the heritage. Our ability to understand these 

Dr. Who’s Police Box
3
values depends, in part, on the degree to which information sources about 
these values may be understood as credible or truthful”. Follows that a criti-
cal and wise knowledge is a fundamental prerequisite. Indeed, the art.9 adds 
“Knowledge and understanding of these sources of information, in relation 
to original and subsequent characteristics of the cultural heritage, and their 
meaning, is a requisite basis for assessing all aspects of authenticity”.
Therefore documentation is an essential prerequisite for conservation, on 
which to build understanding and knowledge, and – moreover – on which to 
root any project of conservation, preservation, maintenance, and management.
The Australia ICOMOS Charter for Places of Cultural Significance (aka 
The Burra Charter, 1999-2013), is a periodically updated document reflecting 
the development of the theory and practice on cultural heritage management. 
Its first article presents the following definitions:
1.4	 Conservation means all the processes of looking after a place so as to 
retain its cultural significance. 
1.5	 Maintenance means the continuous protective care of a place, and its 
setting. Maintenance is to be distinguished from repair, which involves 
restoration or reconstruction. 
1.6	 Preservation means maintaining a place in its existing state and retard-
ing deterioration. 
1.7	 Restoration means returning a place to a known earlier state by re-
moving accretions or by reassembling existing elements without the 
introduction of new material. 
1.8	 Reconstruction means returning a place to a known earlier state and 
is distinguished from restoration by the introduction of new material. 
1.9	 Adaptation means changing a place to suit the existing use or a pro-
posed use. 
1.10	 Use means the functions of a place, including the activities and tra-
ditional and customary practices that may occur at the place or are 
dependent on the place (p. 2). 
While presenting a glossary, the definitions – according to their order – 
seem to trace a strategic architecture of safeguarding: From all-comprehensive 
to particular, from planning to interventions, from policies to materiality, 
from “light” to “hard”.
Then, developing the concept of Conservation, the Charter suggests some 
“Conservation Principles”, “Conservation Processes” and “Conservation 
Practice”.

Dr. Who’s Police Box
4
About the “Conservation Principles”, it recommends the importance of 
management for conservation; It underlines a cautious approach, based in a 
deep knowledge and on the recourse to critical skills and techniques, with the 
aim of safeguarding any cultural and natural value; it highlights the respect of 
fabrics and cautious on the approaches and uses; it points out the importance 
of the context and environment – physical, cultural, natural, historical – and 
of people participation in conservation, interpretation, and management.
On the “Conservation Processes”, the Charter focuses on the threat deriving 
from changes, and it states that maintenance is fundamental for conservation. 
Then it suggest when preservation, restoration, reconstruction and adaptation 
are appropriate; it highlights that consequences must be carefully evaluated. 
In fact, when new works are required, the well-known principles of recogniz-
ability, reversibility, minimum intervention are fundamental.
“Conservation Practice” bases on studying and surveying, on participa-
tive managing and decision policies, on responsibility of any involved in 
conservation.
The Burra Charter is accompanied by seven “Practice Notes”, that are 
useful documents for heritage conservation: “Practice Note_Understanding 
and assessing cultural significance”; “Practice Note_Developing Policy”; 
“Practice Note_Preparing studies and reports – contractual and ethical issues”; 
“Practice Note_The Burra Charter and Archaeological Practice”; “Practice 
Note_The Burra Charter and Indigenous Cultural Heritage Management”; 
“Practice Note_Interpretation; Practice Note_Burra Charter Article 22-New 
Work”.
In conclusion, Conservation configures as a complex continuous process that 
includes not only preservation and maintenance, but also – more extensively 
– surveying, knowledge, research, understanding, interpretation, presentation, 
management. In addition, it reflects the evolution and complexification of 
the concept of heritage, where open-ended processes and participation are 
aspects that are ever more important .
CRITICAL TOPICS IN CONSERVATION
Knowledge and Understanding
Conservation bases on a critical knowledge. First because conservation is a 
cultural act of historical-critical understanding – even more than a technical 
process.

Dr. Who’s Police Box
5
According to the Theory of Brandi (1963), the first step – or better, the 
first act – of conservation is knowledge: Planning arises from knowledge 
and between knowledge and planning there is a so strict relationship that 
knowledge is the first act of conservation. Brandi – although speaking of 
restoration but we can extend his considerations also to conservation – says 
that it is the methodological moment of the acknowledgement of the work 
of art in its physics consistency and in its dual aesthetic and historical po-
larity, for its transmission to the future. Therefore, knowledge relates to the 
critical understanding of its materiality and of its values. And conservation 
design (restoration, protection, maintenance, etc.) follows from heritage 
characteristics.
Therefore, knowledge roots on documentation and surveying. Neverthe-
less, documentation and surveying are not mere technical procedures – for 
example of measurement – but critical and complex processes, that requires 
a deep study and understanding of the work of art. Speaking of architectural 
surveying, Docci and Maestri (2009) explain that survey consists in the 
comprehension of work’s values – included material characteristics – and in 
Figure 1. Rome. Church of St. Agnese (XVII century) in Navona Square
Study sketches

Dr. Who’s Police Box
6
their communication through graphical representation. Surveying requires 
the awareness of the cultural and constructive significance of the building, 
a proper designing of the research, a wise and critical measurement, a care-
ful graphical transcription. In conclusion, surveying includes the analysis, 
the selection of significant elements and characteristics, the synthesis, and 
their representation. Thereby, surveying reflects the strict relationship – the 
“dialogue” – between the scholar and the work of art.
Knowledge is an open-ended process, evolving according to new findings, 
to new technologies, to new interpretations, to new methodologies, to our 
ever-changing culture.
In knowledge, the first step is the heritage inventory. The Guidelines on 
Cultural Heritage: Technical Tools for Heritage Conservation and Manage-
ment (Council of Europe, 2012) points out the attention on the inventories of 
different categories of cultural heritage assets: Immovable cultural heritage 
assets; Movable cultural heritage assets (objects/materials); Spiritual cultural 
heritage assets (elements). In addition, it highlights “As an integral part of the 
cultural heritage protection system, inventories of different categories of cul-
tural heritage assets provide harmonized, comparable and usable information 
on heritage. The compilation of the inventories, i.e. recording of information, 
is based on: 1. Principles of transparency, objectivity, interdisciplinary work, 
competence and obligations; 2. The category/type of heritage, the national/
local official recognition system and the specific type of inventory; 3. Inter-
national inventorying standards regarding classification and dating.” (p.15).
Cataloging favors the ordered collection of information, the comparison 
and critical analysis of data and information of different heritages, the con-
servation and communication of information. At the base of information col-
lection there is the design of adequate sheets, properly developed according 
to heritage characteristics.
Heritage has different kind of values. Definitions of aesthetic, historic, 
scientific, social and spiritual values are presented in The Burra Charter – 
Practice Note on “Understanding and assessing cultural significance” (2013).
Considering built heritage, the following aspects are pivotal:
•	
Historical Values: They bases on the fact that any heritage arises from 
the past and comes to present through transformations. Thereby, it is a 
witness of the events and cultures occurred over time. By the very fact 
of having been created and of being existing, any heritage has an – high 
or low – historical value: Per se, every event of the past has a historical 
value, regardless of other aesthetic and cultural aspects. Merely from 
a historical point of view, every manifestation of the past has equal 

Dr. Who’s Police Box
7
dignity notwithstanding the age of realization. Considering the cur-
rent participative processes of creation and modification of “memory” 
and “identity”, the historical study should embrace the analysis these 
cultural processes.
•	
Aesthetical Values: They are referred to the formal aspect of the heri-
tage, according to a perceptive and sensorial approach. They should be 
extended also to non-visual expressions, such as sounds and smells. 
Their acknowledgement is strictly related to culture, therefore the rec-
ommendations made by The NARA Charter (1994) are very important: 
They are about the relationship between cultural values and authentic-
ity, and about an aware study of heritage in relation to its own historical 
and cultural context.
•	
Cultural Values: They have to be understood in the broader sense. 
They are both tangible and intangible. In general, they could be in-
tended as the meaning that people give to heritage, to sites, to works, 
etc. We could include also the social ones.
•	
Use Values: Considering architectural heritage, urban heritage, sites 
and landscapes, they have been used in the past and they are lived and 
used every day by people – first of all inhabitants but also visitors, etc. 
–. For these kinds of heritage, use is an intrinsic and ineludible qual-
ity. We remember The Athens Charter for the Restoration of Historic 
Monuments (1931) that recommends to do not abandon monuments 
because this favors their preservation. However, the use must comply 
with the characteristics of the heritage, harmonizing with maintenance 
and management.
Interpretation and Presentation
Interpretation and presentation are a fundamental part of the overall process 
of cultural heritage conservation. The ICOMOS Charter for the Interpretation 
and Presentation of Cultural Heritage Sites (2008) arises from the concept 
that “stress the importance of public communication as an essential part of 
the larger conservation process (variously describing it as “dissemination,” 
“popularization,” “presentation,” and “interpretation”). They implicitly ac-
knowledge that every act of heritage conservation – within all the world’s 
cultural traditions – is by its nature a communicative act” (p.2).
Therefore, the Charter presents the following definitions:
•	
Interpretation: “refers to the full range of potential activities intended 
to heighten public awareness and enhance understanding of cultural 

Dr. Who’s Police Box
8
heritage site. These can include print and electronic publications, pub-
lic lectures, on-site and directly related off-site installations, education-
al programmes, community activities, and ongoing research, training, 
and evaluation of the interpretation process itself.” (p.4).
•	
Presentation: “more specifically denotes the carefully planned com-
munication of interpretive content through the arrangement of inter-
pretive information, physical access, and interpretive infrastructure at a 
cultural heritage site. It can be conveyed through a variety of technical 
means, including, yet not requiring, such elements as informational 
panels, museum-type displays, formalized walking tours, lectures and 
guided tours, and multimedia applications and websites.” (p.4).
A very important role is played by “Interpretive infrastructures”: They 
“refer to physical installations, facilities, and areas at, or connected with a 
cultural heritage site that may be specifically utilised for the purposes of 
interpretation and presentation including those supporting interpretation via 
new and existing technologies” (p.4).
Figure 2. Rome. Church of St. Maria della Traspontina (XVI century) and Oratory 
(XVIII century) 
Study sketches

Dr. Who’s Police Box
9
The Charter offers seven cardinal principles on which Interpretation and 
Presentation should be based:
Principle 1–Access and Understanding: Interpretation and presentation 
programmes should facilitate physical and intellectual access by the 
public to cultural heritage sites.
Principle 2–Information Sources: Interpretation and presentation should 
be based on evidence gathered through accepted scientific and cholarly 
methods as well as from living cultural traditions.
Principle 3–Attention to Setting and Context: The Interpretation and Pre-
sentation of cultural heritage sites should relate to their wider social, 
cultural, historical, and natural contexts and settings.
Principle 4–Preservation of Authenticity: The Interpretation and presenta-
tion of cultural heritage sites must respect the basic tenets of authenticity 
in the spirit of the Nara Document (1994).
Principle 5–Planning for Sustainability: The interpretation plan for a cul-
tural heritage site must be sensitive to its natural and cultural environ-
ment, with social, financial, and environmental sustainability among 
its central goals.
Principle 6–Concern for Inclusiveness: The Interpretation and Presentation 
of cultural heritage sites must be the result of meaningful collaboration 
between heritage professionals, host and associated communities, and 
other stakeholders.
Principle 7–Importance of Research, Training, and Evaluation: Continu-
ing research, training, and evaluation are essential components of the 
interpretation of a cultural heritage site.
The Australia ICOMOS Charter for Places of Cultural Significance (The 
Burra Charter, 2013), says: “1.17 Interpretation means all the ways of pre-
senting the cultural significance of a Place” (p.3). In addition, it explains: 
“Interpretation may be a combination of the treatment of the fabric (e.g. 
maintenance, restoration, reconstruction); the use of and activities at the 
place; and the use of introduced explanatory material”.
The “Practice Note_Interpretation” of The Burra Charter is expressly 
dedicate to interpretation. It underlines the importance of: Making Inven-
tories, Defining the audience; Developing interpretation policy; Defining 
key interpretive themes and stories; Establish interpretation methods and 
techniques; Systematic implementation (p.4-6).
The presented “Key principles” are noteworthy:

Dr. Who’s Police Box
10
1. Facilitate understanding and appreciation of cultural heritage sites and 
foster public awareness and engagement in the need for their protection and 
conservation. 2. Communicate the meaning of cultural heritage sites to a range 
of audiences through careful, documented recognition of significance, through 
accepted scientific and scholarly methods as well as from living cultural tra-
ditions. 3. Safeguard the tangible and intangible values of cultural heritage 
sites in their natural and cultural settings and social contexts. 4. Respect the 
authenticity of cultural heritage sites, by communicating the significance of 
their historic fabric and cultural values and protecting them from the adverse 
impact of intrusive interpretive infrastructure, visitor pressure, inaccurate or 
inappropriate interpretation. 5. Contribute to the sustainable conservation 
of cultural heritage sites, through promoting public understanding of, and 
participation in, ongoing conservation efforts, ensuring long-term mainte-
nance of the interpretive infrastructure and regular review of its interpretive 
contents. 6. Encourage inclusiveness in the interpretation of cultural heritage 
sites, by facilitating the involvement of stakeholders and associated commu-
nities in the development and implementation of interpretive programs. 7. 
Develop technical and professional guidelines for heritage interpretation and 
presentation, including technologies, research, and training. Such guidelines 
must be appropriate and sustainable in their social contexts. (p.2)
Interpretation is strictly related to knowledge and understanding. Therefore, 
conservation – and consequently presentation, communication, engagement, 
maintenance and enhancement – is founded on interpretation.
Reflections on Interpretation and Presentation have a long tradition. One 
of the more important reference is Tielden (1957). In his Interpreting Our 
Heritage starts from a dictionary definition: It’s “An educational activity 
which aims to reveal meanings and relationship through the use of original 
objects, by firsthand experience, and by illustrative media, rather than simply 
to communicate factual information” (p.8).
Nevertheless, Tielden offers two brief concepts of Interpretation, useful 
for the interpreter, for his private use and his contact with the public (p. 8):
•	
Interpretation is the revelation of a larger truth that lies behind any 
statement of fact;
•	
Interpretation should capitalize mere curiosity for the enrichment of 
the human mind and spirit.
From hence, Tielden proposes six principles:

Dr. Who’s Police Box
11
1. 	 Any interpretation that does not somehow relate what is being displayed 
or described to something within the personality or experience of the 
visitor will be sterile. 
2. 	 Information, as such, is not Interpretation. Interpretation is revelation 
based upon information. But they are entirely different things. However, 
all interpretation includes information. 
3. 	 Interpretation is an art, which combines many arts, whether the material 
presented are scientific, historical or architectural. Any art is in some 
degree teachable. 
4. 	 The chief aim of Interpretation is not instruction, but provocation. 
5. 	 Interpretation should aim to present a whole rather than a part, and 
must address itself to the whole man rather than any phase. 
6. 	 Interpretation addressed to children (say, up to the age of twelve) should 
not be a dilution of the presentation to adults, but should follow a fun-
damentally different approach. To be at its best it will require a separate 
program (p. 9). 
Interpretation and Presentation are not issues to be faced after the overall 
process of knowledge, but they are strategies for conservation and for knowl-
edge and understanding.
Moreover, when we recur to participative approaches, where the authori-
tative role of the scholar collaborate with the one of inhabitants – i.e. with 
people who constitute, build, transform, and give meaning to the heritage 
itself –. Interpretation and Presentation acquire a wider meaning and purpose: 
From an educational to a cultural function oriented to everybody involved in 
the heritage conservation, both for knowledge and planning.
Sustainability, Participation, Politics, and Co.
Sustainability, Participation, Engagement, Politics are different terms, but 
they are related. In fact, according to a comprehensive view for heritage 
conservation, it’s difficult to design strategies that don’t consider them simul-
taneously. Because the nature of heritage – both tangible and intangible – is 
very complex and because conservation strategies requires the engagement 
of population, associations, experts of various fields, stakeholders, scholars, 
government, national and international agencies, etc. with “top-down” and 
“bottom-up” iterative and integrated processes.
The “English Heritage Guidance on Conservation Plans” presented in 
UNESCO Managing World Cultural Heritage (2013) recommends the 
following workflow: Understanding the site; Assessment of significance, 

Dr. Who’s Police Box
12
of issues and vulnerability; Definition of conservation policies; Constant 
implementation and review of the process and policies (p.26).
Sustainability is a progress that match the needs of the present with the 
future ones, without compromising the ability of future generations to meet 
their needs. Sustainability in conservation means strategies and actions fi-
nalized to conserve heritage according to its enhancement. Usually, it aims 
to relate conservation to politics of development, i.e. to economy. The Getty 
Conservation Institute Conservation Management Planning: Putting Theory 
into Practice (2009) explains: “Use of an area within its capacity to sustain 
its cultural or natural significance, and ensure that the benefits of the use 
to present generations do not diminish the potential to meet the needs and 
aspirations of future generations”.
The Faro Convention (Council of Europe 2005) underlines the importance 
of: The responsibility (public and private) and rights relating to cultural 
heritage; The importance of dialogue, co-operation, sustainable use and 
management of heritage; The inter-links between environment, heritage and 
quality of life; The relationship between heritage and economic activities.
Participation is useful for Sustainability: An active cooperation with people 
favors the diffusion of heritage acknowledgment, and consequently a proper 
and successful management of heritage.
Participation in decision-making requires a negotiation of choices and poli-
cies, involving who contributes with experience and skills and who benefits 
economically and culturally (Albert, et alii 2012).
Figure 3. L’Aquila. Archaeological excavations of Amiternum: Amphitheatre and 
Theater (I century)

Dr. Who’s Police Box
13
An integrated approach is necessary: “For the practice of conservation and 
management of heritage, which conventionally follows a sectoral approach, 
it is working beyond professional boundaries with all groups that have an 
impact on heritage in order to achieve the best results. The process can vary 
from a simple effort to integrate scientific methods and tools for better under-
standing of the behavior of materials and the processes of decay, to working 
with legislative bodies, agencies, and communities on the management of 
a historic city. It also involves working in an integrated fashion within an 
organization” (Wijesuriya, 2008, p.8).
The development of adequate policies is very important. The “Practice 
Note_Developing Policy” of The Burra Charter (2013) points out that “Policy 
can address: use; change; interpretation; governance; day-to-day manage-
ment; decision-making roles; conservation work; development or new work; 
maintenance; recordkeeping; security, etc. It should address all topics relevant 
to retaining the cultural significance of a place and its management into the 
future” (p.1). Then, it defines some “Policy principles”: “Policy is directed 
towards retaining the cultural significance of the place, first and foremost; 
Policy arises from understanding cultural significance and taking account of 
all the factors affecting the future of the place; Policy explains how places of 
cultural significance will be conserved; Policy integrates conservation pro-
cesses in to all the activities of place management; Policy is only as good as 
the information and analysis that underpins it; There is often more than one 
possible policy response to any set of circumstances; Even the best policy 
won’t last forever. Policies need to be regularly reviewed or in response to 
major changes” (p.3). Follows the main steps in developing policy: Identify the 
obligations arising from significance; Identify opportunities and constraints 
including future needs, resources and condition; Participation; Writing the 
policy; Seeking alternative ways to achieve an effective policy; Reviewing, 
revising and updating policy; Moving from policy to implementation (p. 3-6). 
It is a complex process that need the contribution of experts from different 
disciplines.
Moreover, The Practice Note highlights also the types of constraints and 
opportunities that should be studied: “The owner’s needs – the aspirations 
and requirements of the owners and/or managers should be presented, and this 
may include operational or management requirements; Legal and statutory 
obligations; Availability of resources - expertise, finance, other resources; 
Operational and management requirements; The physical condition of the 
place - the condition of the fabric of the place and its elements; The uses, 
activities or practices essential to significance; External constraints - known 
issues arising from location, environmental conditions, political and social 

Dr. Who’s Police Box
14
circumstances; Proposed changes, new development or potential threats; Is-
sues and concerns held by others, such as external stakeholders or people with 
associations with the place; Other factors or future needs - the existing use/s, 
feasible and compatible uses, setting, location, contents, related places and 
objects” (p.4). In Policy developing, an essential role is played by National 
and International Agencies and it should be related to sustainability prin-
ciples and to a management plans. Therefore, management should be based 
on Engagement; Sustainability should rise from Engagement; Sustainability 
should to be reached by planning Management; Enhancement should result 
from Participation and Management; Politics should be based on Engage-
ment, be conducted by Management and should aim to Sustainability and 
Enhancement.
Interdisciplinarity
Both the complexity of heritage issues and of conservation strategies require 
the involvement of interdisciplinary teams, made by scholars of different 
fields: Historians, humanities, museographers, archeologists, architects, en-
gineers, experts of ICT, etc. In addition, the issues posed by sustainability, 
and the relationship between heritage and development, experts in commu-
nity engagement, in regional planning, and economists should be included. 
Undoubtedly, interdisciplinarity is an important aspect, which can promote 
results of particular value and high levels of innovation. However, the ever 
more strict collaboration between different scholars requires the definition 
of ontologies, thesauri, and glossary useful to allow their collaboration.
Figure 4. Bominaco. Church of St. Maria Assunta (XIV century)

Dr. Who’s Police Box
15
Additionally, new matters arises from digital heritage. The common use 
of the same digital instruments and applications promotes the intersection of 
disciplines. Therefore, according to digital heritage characteristics of inter-
disciplinarity and/or trans-disciplinarity, the digital heritage has become 
the subject of dissimilar categories of researchers, for unlike purposes, with 
diverse levels of engagement. At the same time, scholars work together on 
the same object. Conferences and journals on digital heritage grow up.
Perry (2003) underlines how the diffusion of digital tools poses disciplin-
ary, cultural, methodological, and operative issues to the academics. In fact 
“[...] disciplines typically preserve their own canon of key works, their own 
common grammar of research questions, as well as core sets of methodolo-
gies and even shared protocols of publishing. Offering identity, community 
and intellectual equipment to their members, scholars, academic disciplines 
remain, in effect, the tribes of scholarship”. But, at the same time, “There 
are, after all, no core sets of methodologies at the center of digital heritage, 
no routine forms of evidence or data”. Moreover “Instead of a ‘discipline’ 
digital heritage is, rather, an ‘agora’”. That is digital heritage is a field where 
academics, scholars, intellectuals, etc. meet each other, collaborate together, 
learn something from each other mutually, steal ideas, create intuitions, and 
where they get in and get out with the greatest freedom: “[…] ebbing and 
flowing of the particular expertise dawn into its domain; rather than being 
permanently resident, experts might only pass through the agora of digital 
heritage, as and when expertise becomes relevant” (pp. v-vi).
The Internet favors the meeting between disciplines. For example, web 
sites like Academia.edu e ResearchGate consent a constant and instantaneous 
knowledge sharing among scholars. What happens on the Web is explained 
by Weinberger (2011), when he describes the “Echo Chambers”: “Knowledge 
has always needed communities to flourish. Communities need walls so that 
they can let in the right amount of diversity, even if too frequently they err 
on the side of homogeneity. Now the Net has made community walls semi-
permeable. The transparency of the Net lets outsiders look in and insiders 
look out” (p. 85).
Often the hazardous trespassing in other fields tempts the scholars. Some-
times scholars seem to have taken a sort of “liquidity”, but at the same time, 
consequently to the digital melting – or blurring – also the disciplines seem 
to become “liquid”. Nevertheless, the crossing of the walls is useful – rather 
necessary – for a cultural updating and enrichment, but scholars have to operate 
this intrusion guided by the maximum critical awareness (Brusaporci, 2016).
Mutatis Mutandis, Ramsay (2013), arguing on Digital Humanities, high-
lights something true for the whole Digital Heritage field: “Digital Humanities 

Dr. Who’s Police Box
16
is not some airy Lyceum. It is a series of concrete instantiations involving 
money, students, funding agencies, big schools, little schools, programs, cur-
ricula, old guards, new guards, gatekeepers, and prestige. It might be more 
than these things, but it cannot not be these things” (p. 240).
Transparency
Since 1992 Mitchell underlined the aesthetic and cultural matters of “visual 
truth” raising from the power of digital visualization. In fact with the sprawl 
of digital 3-D representation, in particular dedicated to archaeological and 
built heritage, the scientific community has posed questions of Transparency, 
i.e. of philological description of their degree of reliability with reference to 
primary sources (written documents, findings, etc.), to declare the level of 
interpretation and the choices made by modelers in digital representations. 
Archaeology first payed particular attention to the question for Transparency, 
probably according to a fundamental methodological issue in archaeology: 
Findings are partial traces of a past that needs to be interpreted and recon-
structed.
On Transparency, cornerstones are The London Charter (2009) and the 
Principles of Seville (2012), that deal with issues related to “Research Sources”, 
“Documentation”, “Authenticity”, and “Historical Rigor” of computer-based 
visualization of cultural and archaeological heritage.
The London Charter (2009) defines “Intellectual transparency” as “The 
provision of information, presented in any medium or format, to allow users 
Figure 5. San Vittorino. Church of St. Michele Arcangelo (VIII, XII, and XVIII 
centuries). Plan and point clouds of the church and of the underlying catacombs.

Dr. Who’s Police Box
17
to understand the nature and scope of “knowledge claim” made by a com-
puter-based visualisation outcome” (p.12). In fact, between the aims of the 
Charter there are the promotion of intellectual and technical rigour in digital 
heritage visualization and the guarantee that computer-based visualisation 
processes and outcomes can be properly understood and evaluated by users 
(p.4). An essential role is played by Paradata, ie: “Information about human 
processes of understanding and interpretation of data objects. Examples of 
paradata include descriptions stored within a structured database of how 
evidence was used to interpret an artefact, or a comment on methodological 
premises within a research publication. It is closely related, but somewhat 
different in emphasis, to ‘contextual metadata’, which tend to communicate 
interpretations of an artefact or collection, rather than the process through 
which one or more artefacts were processed or interpreted” (p. 13). Paradata 
configures as a sort of metadata useful to the philological reconstruction of 
the modeling process (Denard, 2012). The concept of paradata accompanies 
the one of “scientific transparency”, following the ambition to shun the se-
duction of some photorealistic computer based visualizations, and to declare 
the scientific fundaments, reasons, and reflections from which the digital 
representation derives.
The Principles of Seville (2012) are an implementation of The London 
Charter dedicated to archaeology. The Principles says “All computer-based 
visualization must be essentially transparent, i.e. testable by other researchers 
or professionals, since the validity, and therefore the scope, of the conclu-
sions produced by such visualization will depend largely on the ability of 
others to confirm or refute the results obtained” (p.8). In fact, the principle of 
Transparency has been widely developed in the archaeological field, where 
the digital reconstruction of artifacts (in their ancient configuration) is largely 
based on indirect information, comparative analysis, interpretative hypothesis.
In 2012 a publication titled Paradata and Trasparency in Virtual Heritage 
renovates the debate on transparency (Bentkowska-Kafel, Denard & Baker 
2012). This is a necessary requisite because: “Digital technologies offer 
flexible analytical tools, both sensory and semantic, for the study and repre-
sentation of the past, but the digital techniques – it is argued here – are only 
useful and valid if interpretative frameworks and processes are published”, 
therefore the need to “emphasize the importance of reliably, documenting 
the process of interpretation of historical materials and hypotheses that arise 
in the course of the research”. From here descend the use of paradata: “[…] 
the term borrowed from other disciplines that rely on recording information 
processes. Paradata document the process of interpretation so that the aims, 
contexts and reliability of visualization methods and their outcomes can be 

Dr. Who’s Police Box
18
properly understood” (p.1). And “Paradata may be seen as a digital equivalent 
to “scholia”, as well as an addition to the traditional critical apparatus for 
describing the process of reasoning in scholarly research” (p.2).
In this way paradata is a sort of “comments” and “explanations” that refer 
the choices made in visualizing raw-data and describe the critical interpreta-
tions. According to this use, we remember the archaeologist’s consciousness 
that The Past is a Foreign Country – citing the title of a famous book of 
Lowenthal (1985) –. Therefore, “Virtual reconstruction allows comparison 
between “what is possible” according to the reconstructed model and the 
“facts”. A possible discrepancy requires re-evaluation both of the model and 
the archeological data” (Hermon, 2012, p.19).
There are several proposals to define the degree of reliability of reconstruc-
tions. For example, Hermon & Nicolucci (2006) suggest assigning a numeric 
value of reliability to archaeological different hypothesis of reconstruction, 
defined through a fuzzy logic. However, this methodology does not seem so 
easy to be used because practically the circumstances are very complex and 
there are too many degrees of uncertainty that cannot be simply expressed 
with an equation. Nicolucci (2012) recommends the representing of the 
modeling process as a decision tree, a graph where “terminal nodes represent 
final (alternative) stages, that is alternative reconstructions” (p.30).
The archaeological lesson is very important for the built heritage studies. 
The analysis, surveying, modeling, and visualization of architectural heritage 
highlight new issues related to the whole process of surveying and critical 
historical analysis, to the visualization of past configurations, to the re-con-
struction of constructive systems, also with the aim to declare the degree of 
reliability. Transparency allows the scholars to retrace critical decisions and 
test conclusions on colleagues’ work of and on own research (Brusaporci, 
2017). Transparency is very important for virtual reconstruction of buildings 
that no longer exist or have been only designed: All these studies are based 
on the critique interpretation of heterogeneous archival materials (old draw-
ings, historical photographs, descriptions, yard or competition documents, 
etc.). Similarly occurs in the definition of past configurations of existing 
buildings where, however, the archival apparatus have to be reflected on the 
reality, i.e. on the physical architectural document. Thus, transparency should 
be a reference in any interpretation: In documentation, surveying, modeling, 
visualization, communication, and education.
In conclusion, transparency is important not only for a subjective ethic 
need of the scholar or for a scientific rigor for its own sake (and this may 
already be enough), but moreover it’s ever more important for the two follow-

Dr. Who’s Police Box
19
ing reasons: As methodological tool for communication; As methodology of 
research, to aspire to wise documentation, Information Quality, knowledge, 
interpretation and presentation.
Transparency is a fundamental issue for heritage conservation. In fact 
transparency favors the going back over research’s steps and the validation 
of results; at the same time transparency could be the compass for scholars to 
reflect on their own paradigms, procedures, and outcomes. In this way, trans-
parency could be intended as the architecture of the research’s workflow, and 
therefore transparency could be interpreted as a core for a scientific approach.
Last but not least transparency is important in a participative system where 
interpretation works in a multi-directional way: In this interrelation between 
interpreters (both people and experts), it should be useful the explanation and 
comparison of different points of view and cultural backgrounds. Because 
the complex visualization and navigation requires a sharp approach by the 
user – i.e. by us –. In fact there are several risks: Audience should be more 
interested by the interface than by heritage contents (Ch’ng, 2015), and the 
power of digital images – endlessly and ubiquitously repeated – should define 
“post-truth” reading of cultural heritage (Keynes, 2004).
RECOMMENDATIONS: MANAGING HERITAGE
The UNESCO Resource Manual Managing Cultural World Heritage (2013) 
defines management as a “system”, made by a “series of processes which 
together deliver a set of results, some of which feed back into the system to 
create an upward spiral of continuous improvement of the system, its actions 
and its achievements” (p.25). These systems are local and regional, related 
to culture and tradition. The Manual underlines how management is based 
Figure 6. San Vittorino. Church of St. Michele Arcangelo (VIII, XII, and XVIII 
centuries). Longitudinal section and view of the laser-scanning of the catacombs.

Dr. Who’s Police Box
20
on planning, implementation, and monitoring. The main outcomes are: The 
promotion of cultural diversity; The protection of natural environment (par-
ticular ecosystems in and around sites); The protection of tangible assets 
within properties (communities, cultures and knowledge); The providing of 
vitality to communities; The allowing of compatible land uses and economic 
activities (p.23). Fundamental is the role of stakeholders, their consensus and 
their understanding of values: “Management objectives at a property level 
must be rooted in an understanding of the values of the property. The values 
of cultural properties and conservation options should be assessed with all 
possible stakeholders participating to ensure a shared understanding of the 
property and their direct involvement. An adequate range of professionals 
needs to contribute to all phases of the planning process. Only an interdisci-
plinary approach to planning will ensure that needs are anticipated and met 
effectively as they arise. An inclusive approach, when successful, leads to 
plans embraced by all parties in reconciling the needs and expectations of 
those linked to the property with the need to sustain its heritage values” (p.83).
However, Zan (2015) highlights how, in everyday practice, professionals 
and stakeholders seems to follow lines only partially attributable to recom-
mendations from international documents. But heritage management looks 
to derive from a compromise between marketplace context, neo-liberalist 
conceptions, and privatization policies. Therefore, economic developments 
do not seem to be planned according to programs for heritage enhancement 
and sustainability, but initiatives of heritage conservation and protection 
appear to chase economic processes governed by own rules. In this way, we 
run the risk to assimilate heritage sites to leisure or entertainment places.
In conclusion, Management requires the integration of conservation, pro-
tection, use, economy, policies. Its planning should arise from identification, 
interpretation, presentation, and heritage transmission to future generations. 
It is related to participation and sustainable development, and it needs a co-
ordination between communities, experts, and institutional agencies. From 
this point of view, management is a process that may vary over time, rooted 
on complex networks between people, sites, data and information.
RESEARCH DIRECTIONS: THE DIGITAL SPHERE
The growing of computing capabilities, the development of Information and 
Communication Technologies, the “affordances” (Gibson, 1979) of digital 
heritage for different purposes, and the diffusion of non-expensive – often free 
– software and apps of easy use has made digital tools ever more affordable 

Dr. Who’s Police Box
21
for everyone and used indifferently and simultaneously in dissimilar research 
fields. Consequently, there is a constant ever rising of digital products, and 
a wide overlapping and mixing of tools, methodologies, and research object 
and aims made by different kind of scholars, such as computer scientists, 
topographers, surveyors, archaeologists, architects, engineers.
Follows the diffusion of digital contents and reflections on the concept of 
Digital Heritage: It is often intended as a cornerstone on which academic fields 
are making an ‘ecosystem’ growing. Commenting papers presented at the two 
congresses on “Digital Heritage” of 2013 and 2015, Pescarin (2016) writes 
“Although the accepted UNESCO definition of Digital Heritage concerns 
any digital material referred to our heritage that has a value and needs to be 
preserved (UNESCO, 2003), Digital Heritage is used today by the scientific 
community in a wider sense, referring to ICT applications and technological 
approaches to our cultural and natural heritage, or, better, to the use of digital 
media in the service of heritage (Cameron & Kenderdine, 2007). Digital 
Heritage is a domain that comprehends several different research fields and 
disciplines, from museography to computer graphics, from archaeology to 
design, from art history to engineering, from archives to statistics, etc. It 
is therefore a general term, which includes many ICT topics and heritage 
themes, and in most cases most of nowadays research lays in the overlapping 
and interconnection among them” (p.1).
Today there is the awareness that technologies cannot be seen as mere 
aid instruments for surveying or visualization, but they favor a development 
of research methodologies for knowledge, understanding, interpretation, 
presentation, and conservation. Computer-based visualization takes ever 
more importance, according to the line of visual computing, i.e. the analysis 
technique based on the visual representation of data. It favors the study of 
large amount of data, and of complex systems of heterogeneous data (textual, 
Figure 7. San Vittorino. Catacombs (VIII century). Particular of a room: Point 
cloud model and internal elevation.

Dr. Who’s Police Box
22
visual, audio, etc.). Those data can derive from various kinds or phenomena, 
also from non-visual ones. In fact, visual computing consists in the represen-
tation of three-dimensional digital environments, where there is a complex 
interaction of an elevated number of agents simulating different kinds of 
data and information. The images of data provide information and through 
the manipulation of the images, we can observe, interact with, compute 
and control the data and the information, and create new knowledge (Card, 
Mackinlay, & Shneiderman, 1999).
Consequently to the diffusion of digital visualization, derives the inter-
est in this subject by many disciplines, in particular ones interested in built 
heritage: Humanities – especially ones involved in museography (Parry, 
2010. Cameron & Kenderdine, 2010) –, archaeologists (Frischer, 2008; 
Lake, 2014), architects (Docci, 2005. Gaiani, 2006), and in general scholars 
of history (Weller, 2012) have begun to work and reflect on digital heritage 
derived from tangible artifacts.
Focusing on built heritage, the communicative flow offered by the iconic 
text of the 3-D digital model, associated with the easy manipulability and 
the ability to be questioned, makes it a powerful and smart interface for 
information accessing and analysis. Unlike the textual structures, the model 
presents a simultaneously way of communication. It can work according 
through frames, operated with zooming, intersections, transparency, spatial 
and temporal skips. This flow finds in the three-dimensional architecture of 
the model its own structuring logic. It renews the relationship between per-
ceiver and perceived. The digital model provides other methods, timing, and 
spatial characteristics of visualization: The observer can freely navigate the 
model, and zoom it; he can proceed in a continuous way or skipping; he can 
enter into the model, measuring, questioning, and dissecting it. In addition the 
more innovative aspect is, perhaps, that the same model can be experienced 
at the same time in different ways (to the limit in infinite ways). Not only 
because it can be projected and sectioned as you desire, but also because it 
can be graphically represented in many ways (wireframe, shaded, textured, 
etc.) in parallel views from multiple points of view (Brusaporci, 2015b).
Properly Migliari (2008) has spoken of “interactive three-dimensional 
perspective”: The potentialities are very important and open to new statutes 
of communication, according to a revolution that, in some ways, seems to 
exceed the one made by the modern conception of space (Panofsky, 1927). 
New technologies bring into question not only the traditional perception of 
the physical space of the architectural heritage and its relation with the mental 
space of the observer, but they disarticulate this relationship, with multiple 

Dr. Who’s Police Box
23
interactive and simultaneous visualizations of different nature, accompanied 
by the moving and transformation of the “significant”.
Data, metadata, paradata, and information are the core of the model: 3-D 
models and databases are two sides, and the modeling process has to involve 
both of them. The 3-D model’s semantization and the “granulosity” of its 
components are important aspects for the correlation with the informative 
model (Murray, 2012. Apollonio, 2012. Gaiani, 2012). This complex in-
formative model offers new non-linear narratives, favoring the knowledge, 
communication and design (Brusaporci, 2015a).
Expressions like “Virtual Reality” (VR) – first used by Sutherland in 
1965 – has become common. The VR is based on a total-body immersion in 
a computer-generated environment: User’s perceptions are produced from 
digital information. Although the synthetic environment often follows laws 
different from the real word ones, the user has a psychological involvement 
and lives it like a real experience.
Another wording is “Augmented Reality” (AR) – or also “Enhanced Re-
ality” or “Enriched Reality” –. It consists on the superimposition of digital 
information on user’s perceptions. It is ever more diffused thanks by ICT 
because onerous computational digital visualization are not entrusted to 
the device (tablet and smartphone – the last one also used as new kind of 
head mounted displays –) but data (video, audio, windows, text) are only 
transmitted in real time (Clini et alii, 2017). In VR external perceptions are 
limited as much as possible, while in AR they are fundamental, because the 
communication roots on them.
Analyzing the interfaces for visualization, Milgram and Kishino (1994) 
coin the expression “Mixed Reality” (MR): It describes the “virtual con-
tinuum” between only-real and completely virtual environment perception, 
identifying six classes of hybrid states, with the aim to define a taxonomy 
to distinguish between different technological requirements. Of particular 
interest are the observations on the relationship between real and virtual, 
according to visualization modalities and image quality (p.6-7). In particular, 
the definition of “direct viewing” and “non-direct viewing” is interesting, 
because it is not referred to a distinction between real objects and virtual ob-
jects, but to what “looks real” (derived from reality or synthetized or both of 
them). In this way, recalling the concept of AR, these two aspects integrates, 
because a digital image (also non-photorealistic) is correlated to images from 
reality. Therefore, the device mediates the perception of reality. In the MR, 
another interesting idea is the “Extent of Presence Methapor”, related to the 
perception quality, that is to the level of “presence feeling” of the user in the 
represented environment.

Dr. Who’s Police Box
24
Gaiani (2006), focusing on the methods and technologies for virtual reality, 
points out that there is VR when we have: Real-time rendering; 3-D interactions 
in real-time; simulation in real-time; input intuitive devices able to operate 
in a 3-D space; stimulation of the greatest number senses; immersion into 
the virtual scene or presence of it (p.45). These clarifications are useful also 
for other kinds of mixed reality, also involving reality images in the process.
The ICT development has made the new ways of media communica-
tion ubiquitous: VR, AR etc. are no more available only in technological 
laboratories or on home console, but on our smart devices, always with us. 
Moreover, The Internet and Social Media has allowed participative multidi-
rectional approaches. Consequently, in the current “Participatory Culture” 
(Jenkins 2009, also Jenkins 2006), the distributed knowledge and the col-
lective intelligence processes favor the collecting, scanning, and mixing of 
data and information, and the comparison between different points of view 
to achieve a common goal. This opens to advanced strategies and processes 
for heritage understanding, interpretation, presentation, and conservation.
CONCLUSION: WHO, WHAT, WHY, HOW
The all-encompassing questions on “Who” and “How” Conserve “What”, 
from “What” has no immediate and easy answer. It require a deep reflection.
Figure 8. L’Aquila. Urban landscape with the numerous yards to repair the build-
ings damaged by the earthquake of 2009. Internal view of St. Maria del Suffragio 
Church (XVIII century) with shoring.

Dr. Who’s Police Box
25
•	
“Who” incudes not only specialists and agencies, but all people in-
volved in heritage living, use, and government.
•	
“How” is a process, really complex and integrated, with different ap-
proach levels (from strategies to active physical interventions).
•	
“What” is heritage, but it is not a less multifaceted and multilayered 
issue and we will deal with in the next chapter.
•	
“From What” conserve heritage is not a separate issue from other ques-
tions. “What” threatens heritage influences the choices on “how”.
The UNESCO Reflection on the trends of the state of conservation (2010) 
focuses on development, infrastructure, management, legal issues, and hu-
man activities. The Art. 179 “Criteria for the inscription of properties on 
the List of World Heritage in Danger” of the Operational Guidelines for 
the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention (UNESCO, 2015) 
distinguishes between “Ascertained Danger” and “Potential Danger”. The 
first one includes: Serious deterioration of materials; serious deterioration 
of structure and/or ornamental features; serious deterioration of architectural 
or town-planning coherence; serious deterioration of urban or rural space, or 
the natural environment; significant loss of historical authenticity; important 
loss of cultural significance. The second lists: modification of juridical status 
of the property diminishing; the degree of its protection; lack of conservation 
policy; threatening effects of regional planning projects; threatening effects 
of town planning; outbreak or threat of armed conflict; gradual changes due 
to geological, climatic or other environmental factors. Unfortunately, many 
of these issues have a dramatic relevance even today.
Interesting are The Guidelines on Cultural Heritage: Technical Tools for 
Heritage Conservation and Management (Council of Europe, 2012), devel-
oped to support Cultural Heritage Law in Kosovo and the conservation and 
protection of its heritage. These guidelines are of general value, and they 
main contents are: “Guidelines for inventories of cultural heritage assets”; 
“Guidelines for archaeological research”; “Guidelines for licensing of ar-
chaeological research”; “Guidelines on criteria and conditions for evaluation 
of cultural heritage assets”; “Guidelines on design of conservation basis for 
cultural heritage within the planning process”; “Guidelines on cultural heri-
tage conservation and restoration activities - conservation project design”; 
“Guidelines on preservation of movable cultural heritage”.
In conclusion, the starting point are Research and Knowledge. Although, 
many times restoration interventions are necessary, the protection should be 

Dr. Who’s Police Box
26
ever combined with processes and strategies for conservation, i.e. with man-
agement, sustainability, participation, planning, etc. Because Conservation 
must not be an exceptional occurrence, but a constant work, that requires a 
continuous verification and implementation.
There is another question: “Why conserve heritage”. But this answer is 
“only” cultural.
REFERENCES
Albert, M. T., Richon, M., Viňals, M. J., & Witcomb, A. (Eds.). (2012). 
Community Development through World Heritage. UNESCO World Heri-
tage Papers, 31. Retrieved on November 15, 2016 from http://whc.unesco.
org/en/series/31/
Apollonio, F. I. (2012). Architettura in 3D. Milano: Bruno Mondadori.
Brandi, C. (1963). Teoria del restauro di Cesare Brandi. Lezioni raccolte 
da L. Vlad Borrelli, J. Raspi Serra e G. Urbani. Roma: Edizioni di Storia e 
Letteratura.
Brusaporci, S. (Ed.). (2015a). Handbook of Research on Emerging Digital 
Tools for Architectural Surveying, Modeling, and Representation. Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8379-2
Brusaporci, S. (2015b). On Visual Computing for Architectural Heritage. 
In S. Brusaporci (Ed.), Handbook of Research on Emerging Digital Tools 
for Architectural Surveying, Modeling, and Representation (pp. 94–123). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8379-2.ch003
Brusaporci, S. (2016). Swimming in the Liquid Age: A Disciplinarily Re-
flection on Computer-Based Visualization of Architectural Heritage. In G. 
Amoruso (Ed.), Handbook of Research on Visual Computing and Emerging 
Geometrical Design Tools. IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0029-2.ch001
Brusaporci, S. (2017). The Importance of Being Honest: Issues of Transpar-
ency in Digital Visualization of Architectural Heritage. In A. Ippolito (Ed.), 
Handbook of Research on Emerging Technologies for Architectural and Ar-
chaeological Heritage (pp. 66–93). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-5225-0675-1.ch003

Dr. Who’s Police Box
27
Cameron, F., & Kenderdine, S. (Eds.). (2010). Theorizing digital cultural 
heritage: a critical discourse. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Card, S. K., Mackinlay, J., & Shneiderman, B. (Eds.). (1999). Readings in 
Information Visualization: using Vision to Think. San Francisco, CA: Morgan 
Kaufmann.
Ch’ng, E. (2015). Virtual Heritage: Cultural Agents, Environments and Ob-
jects. Presence (Cambridge, Mass.), 24(3).
Clini, P., Quattrini, R., Frontoni, E., Pierdicca, R., & Nespeca, R. (2017). 
Real/Not Real: Pseudo-Holography and Augmented Reality Applications for 
Cultural Heritage. In A. Ippolito & M. Cigola (Eds.), Handbook of Research 
on Emerging Technologies for Digital Preservation and Information Model-
ing (pp. 201-227). IGI Global.
Council of Europe. (2005). Framework Convention on the Value of Cultural 
Heritage for Society. Retrieved on November, 15, 2016 from http://www.coe.
int/t/dg4/cultureheritage/heritage/Identities/default_en.asp
Council of Europe. (2012). Guidelines on Cultural Heritage: Technical Tools 
for Heritage Conservation and Management. Retrieved on November, 15, 
2016 from https://www.coe.int/t/dg4/cultureheritage/cooperation/Kosovo/
Publications/Guidelines-ENG.pdf
Denard, H. (2012). A New Introduction to The London Charter. In Para-
data and Transparency in Virtual Heritage (pp. 57–72). Farnham: Ashgate 
Publishing.
Docci, M. (Ed.). (2005). Metodologie innovative integrate per il rilievo 
dell’architettura e dell’ambiente. Roma: Gangemi.
Docci, M., & Maestri, D. (2009). Manuale di rilevamento architettonico e 
urbano. Rome: Laterza.
Frischer, B. (2008). From digital illustration to digital heuristic. In B. D. 
Frischer (Ed.), Beyond illustration: 2d and 3d Digital Technologies As Tool 
for Discovery in Archaeology. Oxford, UK: British Archaeological Reports.
Gaiani, M. (2006). Un viaggio attraverso gli strumenti e i metodi di produzi-
one del progetto di disegno industriale nell’epoca della progettazione digitale 
totale. In M. Gaiani (Ed.), La rappresentazione riconfigurata (pp. 23–57). 
Milano: Poli.Design.

Dr. Who’s Police Box
28
Gaiani, M. (2012). Towards a critical rethinking of the theory of surveying 
following the advent of digital media. In L. Carlevaris & M. Filippa (Eds.), 
In Praise of Theory. The fundamentals of the disciplines of representation 
and survey (pp. 375–381). Roma: Gangemi.
Getty Conservation Institute. (2009). Conservation Management Planning: 
Putting Theory into Practice. Retrieved on November 15, 2016 from http://
www.getty.edu/conservation/publications_resources/pdf_publications/
cons_mgt_planning.html#
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Boston, 
MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Hermon, S. (2012). Scientific Method, chaîne opératoire and Visualization: 
3D Modelling as a Research Tool in Archaeology. In Paradata and Transpar-
ency in Virtual Heritage (pp. 13–22). Farnham: Ashgate Publishing.
Hermon, S., & Nicolucci, F. (2006). A Fuzzy Logic Approach to Realiabil-
ity in Archaeological Virtual Reconstruction. In S. Hermon & F. Nicolucci 
(Eds.), Beyond the Artefact. Digital Interpretation of the Past (pp. 28–35). 
Budapest: Archaeolingua.
ICOMOS. (1964). International charter for the conservation and restora-
tion of monuments and sites. Accessed on November, 15 from http://www.
icomos.org/charters/venice_e.pdf
ICOMOS. (2008). Charter for the Interpretation and Presentation of Cultural 
Heritage Sites. Retrieved on November, 15, 2016 from http://icip.icomos.org/
downloads/ICOMOS_Interpretation_Charter_ENG_04_10_08.pdf
ICOMOS. (2013). Charter for Places of Cultural Significance. Retrieved on 
November, 15 from http://australia.icomos.org/publications/charters/
Jenkins, H. (2006). Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Col-
lide. New York: NY University Press.
Jenkins, H. (2009). Confronting the Challenges of Participatory Culture: 
Media Education for the 21st Century. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Keyes, R. (2004). The Post-Truth Era: Dishonesty and Deception in Con-
temporary Life. New York: St. Martin Press.
Lake, M. W. (2014). Trends in Archaeological Simulation. Journal of Archaeo-
logical Method and Theory, 21(2), 258–287. doi:10.1007/s10816-013-9188-1

Dr. Who’s Police Box
29
Lowenthal, D. (1985). The Past is a Foreign Country. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press.
Migliari, R. (Ed.). (2008). Prospettiva dinamica interattiva. Roma: Kappa.
Milgram, P., & Kishino, F. (1994). A taxonomy of mixed reality visual displays. 
IEICE Transactions on Information and Systems, E77-D(12), 1321–1329.
Mitchell, W. (1992). The Reconfigured Eye: Visual Truth in the Post-Photo-
graphic Era. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Murray, J. H. (2012). Inventing the Medium. Principles of Interaction Design 
as a Cultural Practice. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Nicolucci, F. (2012). Setting Standards for 3D Visualization of Cultural 
Heritage. In Paradata and Transparency in Virtual Heritage (pp. 23–36). 
Farnham: Ashgate Publishing.
Panofsky, E. (1927). Die Perspektive als “symbolische Form”. Vorträge der 
Bibliothek Warburg. Lipsia-Berlino.
Parry, R. (Ed.). (2010). Museums in a Digital Age. Abingdon, UK: Routledge.
Perry, R. (2003). Foreword. Digital Heritage: Agora and Agility. In E. Ch’ng, 
V. Gaffney, & H. Chapman (Eds.), Visual Heritage in the Digital Age (pp. 
v–vii). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Pescarin, S. (2016). Digital Heritage into Practice. SCIRES-IT, 6(1), 1–4.
Principles of Seville. (2012). Retrieved November 15, 2016, from http://
www.arqueologiavirtual.com/carta/?page_id=12
Ramsay, S. (2013). Who’s In and Who’s Out. In M. Terras, M. Nyhan, & 
E. Vanhoutte (Eds.), Defining Digital Humanities (pp. 239–241). Farnham: 
Ashgate.
Sutherland, I. (1965). The Ultimate Display.Proceeding of the IFIP Congress, 
2, 506-508.
The Athens Charter for the Restoration of Historic Monuments. (1931). 
Retrieved on November 15, 2016 from http://www.icomos.org/en/charters-
and-texts/179-articles-en-francais/ressources/charters-and-standards/167-
the-athens-charter-for-the-restoration-of-historic-monuments
The London Charter. (2009). Retrieved November 15, 2016 from http://www.
londoncharter.org/

Dr. Who’s Police Box
30
Tielden, F. (1957). Interpreting Our Heritage. Chapel Hill, NC: University 
of North Carolina Press.
UNESCO. (1994). The Nara Document on Authenticity. Retrieved November, 
15, 2016, from whc.unesco.org/document/9379
UNESCO. (2003). Charter on the Preservation of the Digital Heritage. 
Retrieved November 15, 2016, from http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-
URL_ID=17721&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html
UNESCO. (2010). Reflection on the trends of the state of conservation. Re-
trieved on November, 15, 2016, from http://whc.unesco.org/archive/2010/
whc10-34com-7Ce.pdf
UNESCO. (2013). Managing Cultural World Heritage. Paris: UNESCO. 
Retrieved November 15, 2016, from http://whc.unesco.org/en/managing-
cultural-world-heritage/
UNESCO. (2015). Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the 
World Heritage Convention. Retrieved on November, 15, 2016, from http://
whc.unesco.org/en/guidelines/
Weinberger, D. (2011). Too Big To Know. New York: Basic Book.
Weller, T. (2012). History in the Digital Age. Abington: Routledge.
Wijesuriya, G. (2008). An Integrated Approach to Conservation and Manage-
ment of Heritage. ICCROM Newsletter, 34, 8.
Zan, L., Bonini Baraldi, S., Lusiani, M., Shoup, D., Ferri, P., & Onofri, F. 
(2015). Managing Cultural Heritage: An International Research Perspective. 
Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
ENDNOTES
1	
 “Preservation” is often used as synonymous of “Conservation”, because 
the US wording “historic preservation” often coincides with British 
“conservation”. Here we use the word Conservation, because it is more 
diffused in the international documents.
2	
 François LeBlanc offers an interesting glossary on conservation at the 
ICOMOS web page: http://ip51.icomos.org/~fleblanc/curriculum_e.
html (Retrieved 1 September 2016).

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-2434-2.ch002
Chapter 2
31 
Between Cuvier 
and Darwin:
Issues in a Changing Heritage
ABSTRACT
The chapter presents a reflection on the evolution of cultural heritage concept, 
from the second half of the 20th century until now, moving the attention from the 
distinction between natural and anthropic heritage to tangible and intangible 
matters. According to the line from postmodernism to new materialism, the 
idea of heritage reflects an evolving and inclusive cultural approach, where 
the notions of place and landscape combine tangible/intangible issues and 
participative involvement in heritage definition, keeping in mind problems 
of memory, integrity and authenticity.
INTRODUCTION
UNESCO defines Cultural Heritage as “the legacy of physical artifacts and 
intangible attributes of a group or society that are inherited from past gen-
erations, maintained in the present and bestowed for the benefit of future 
generations”1. It ratifies the inescapable importance and interconnection of 
tangible and intangible characteristics of cultural heritage.
The Burra Charter (ICOMOS, 2013) puts together tangible and intangible 
aspects in “Place” defining: “Place means a geographically defined area. It 
may include elements, objects, spaces and views. Place may have tangible 
and intangible dimensions” (p.2). About “Places”, Silberman (2016) asks the 

Between Cuvier and Darwin
32
following question: “How can such sweeping, all-inclusive definitions – at-
tempting to cover all material, immaterial, objective, and subjective aspects 
of heritage places – possibly capture their irreducible essence? How can we 
identity the distinctive characteristic of heritage places without endlessly 
extending the list of specific material forms and subjective associations a 
heritage place may possess? At a time when officially recognized heritage 
types are splinteting into distinct regional, ethnic, and religious variants […], 
when the UNESCO World Heritage list has exceeded a thousand inscribed 
properties all said to possess Outstanding Universal Value […], when the 
possession and control of cultural heritage resources have become symbols 
of political legitimacy, no single physical definition of a heritage place seems 
capable of capturing the thoroughly fragmented reality of cultural heritage 
in the twenty-first century. Thus focusing on process, rather than object, may 
be a more useful approach” (p.30).
Silberman highlights the difficulty in heritage definition, and the complex-
ity in heritage identification. Elsewhere he comments different characteristic 
from which the investiture as heritage has derived: Official monuments with 
outstanding historical or artistic significance; Religious places; Places of civic 
manifestation, symbol of resistance or freedom, or on the opposite (or in par-
allel) of state power; Heritage places as entertainment venue; heritage places 
as reaction to change, related to self-perception and memory of communities. 
(Silberman, 2016, pp.29-40). Therefore, the lesson is that it is important to 
reflect on the process of heritage defining, rather than on authored outlining.
The UNESCO World Heritage Cultural Landscape (2009) fixes the 
concept of culture as cornerstone for “Landscape” definition, according to 
an interpretative line, which tends to integrate both tangible and intangible 
values into the landscape idea. What pointed out by the Convention for the 
Safeguarding of Intangible Cultural Heritage (UNESCO, 2003b), recurs in 
all its relevance: Heritage is constantly recreated by communities. Not only 
intangible heritage, but also tangible heritage because it is the outcome of the 
secular and continuous interaction of anthropic action and use with nature. 
It suggests a bottom-up process to merge the traditional authoritative role of 
experts with participative approaches. This method could be useful to point 
out the cultural changing dynamics.
In conclusion, cultural issues are nodal characteristics of the present era of 
globalization, mass communication and content production (Schafer 2014).

Between Cuvier and Darwin
33
BACKGROUND: WHAT IS HERITAGE?
A deep reflection on heritage conservation and protection moved from the 
rise of a critical consciousness of the past. At the beginning, it originated 
from the archaeological findings of XVIII century, and it has grown espe-
cially from the XIX century – let us remember the works of Viollet Le-Duc 
in France e John Ruskin in England –, with important consequences in the 
culture, documents and laws of different countries. Without retracing the 
well-known history of conservation and protection, it is useful to develop the 
discourse from the consideration made in the second half of the XX century.
The Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of 
Armed Conflict (1954), adopted soon after the WWII, is the first interna-
tional treaty on heritage safeguarding with a worldwide vocation. It focuses 
on the protection of cultural heritage in the event of armed conflict and “It 
covers ammovable and movable cultural heritage, including monuments of 
architecture, art or history, archaeological sites, works of art, manuscripts, 
books and other objects of artistic, historical or archaeological interest, as 
well as scientific collections of all kinds regardless of their origin or owner-
ship”. Heritage is intended as a material artifact with evidence of culture. The 
wording “Cultural Property”, to define heritage, has a “legal” suggestion, 
influenced by the French concept of “bien culturel”. “Bien” recalls the idea 
of “value”, here not in an economic sense, but referred to historical, formal 
and cultural characteristics of the work of art. Somehow, “property” evokes 
the idea of belonging, affiliation and identity, namely the “historical value”. 
Similarly, the Anglo-Saxon “heritage” remembers that artifacts are a legacy, 
embodying the story and witnessing the past cultures.
The UNESCO Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural 
and Natural Heritage (1972, aka World Heritage Convention) distinguishes 
between “cultural heritage” and “natural heritage”:
Art. 1 For the purpose of this Convention, the following shall be consid-
ered as ‘cultural heritage’:
• 	
Monuments: Architectural works, work s of monumental sculpture and 
painting, elements or structures of an archaeological nature, inscriptions, 
cave dwellings and combinations of features, which are of out standing 
universal value from the point of view of history, art or science;
• 	
Groups of Buildings: Groups of separate or connected buildings which, 
because of their architecture, their homogeneity or their place in the 

Between Cuvier and Darwin
34
landscape, are of outstanding universal value from the point of view of 
history, art or science;
• 	
Sites: Works of man or the combined works of nature and man, and areas 
including archaeological sites which are of outstanding universal value 
from the historical, aesthetic, ethnological or anthropological point of 
view.
Art. 2 For the purposes of this Convention, the following shall be consid-
ered as ‘natural heritage’:
•	
Natural features consisting of physical and biological formations or 
groups of such formations, which are of outstanding universal value 
from the aesthetic or scientific point of view;
•	
Geological and physiographical formations and precisely delineated 
areas which constitute the habitat of threatened species of animals and 
plants of outstanding universal value from the point of view of science 
or conservation;
•	
Natural sites or precisely delineated natural areas of outstanding uni-
versal value from the point of view of science, conservation or natural 
beauty.”
They are all tangible heritage, and the definition of “site” puts together 
the work of nature and man. With regard to this, the Operational Guidelines 
for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention (UNESCO, 2015) 
offers the definition of “Mixed Cultural and Natural Heritage” (Art 46).
However, the concept of Heritage has extended more and more over time. 
In particular consequently to the Convention for the Safeguarding of Intan-
gible Cultural Heritage (UNESCO, 2003b), the distinction between kinds 
of heritage, has moved from “natural”/”cultural”/”work of art” to the dual-
ism between “tangible” and “intangible” heritage. The intangible heritage 
“means the practices, representations, expressions, knowledge, skills”. For 
example: oral traditions and expressions, including language as a vehicle of 
the intangible cultural heritage; performing arts; social practices, rituals and 
festive events; knowledge and practices concerning nature and the universe; 
traditional craftsmanship (Art.2).
As ratified by the The Venice Charter (ICOMOS, 1964) for the architectural 
field, the consciousness that buildings and sites are not isolated but intrinsi-
cally related to the “context” – word referred not only to the physical but 

Between Cuvier and Darwin
35
also cultural surroundings – has suggested to study them in physical, social, 
cultural, economic and environmental terms. This led to a new way of think-
ing and to new conservation strategies based on the idea that a site cannot 
be simply identified with a border, but – at the same time – it is necessary 
to bear in mind of people that live the site and of activities that takes place.
Over the years, two lines of heritage concept have developed in the direc-
tion of a substantial convergence: On one hand, there has been the expansion 
of the heritage concept from monuments, to their context, to the landscape; 
On the other hand, there has been the widening of the concept of site to the 
environment, intended as a whole. Similarly, in the ecological filed, there 
has been the extension of the idea of safeguarding from the biotype or en-
dangered species, to the whole ecosystem. This process is evident examin-
ing the documents on landscape, where the idea changes from an aesthetic 
perception to the current one given by the European Landscape Convention 
(Council of Europe, 2000).
With reference to international documents on heritage, four related phe-
nomena can be highlighted:
•	
The extension of the concept of heritage to involve intangible aspects;
•	
The shift of the focus from the idea of “property” – as object individu-
ally identifiable and definable – to the more general one of “culture” 
(that suggest different ways of heritage definition);
•	
The rise of processes for heritage definition ever more based on partici-
pation, and less and less on authoritative approaches;
•	
The diffusion of the concept of Landscape (cultural landscape, urban 
landscape, etc.) to include the complexity of the phenomena and to 
engage and gather the subjects involved.
Finally yet importantly, the Digital Heritage rises: the Charter for the 
preservation of the Digital Heritage (UNESCO, 2003a) defines it as a cultural 
expression of human work. Therefore, it creates new legacy. In particular, 
digital works from physical heritage could be significant ways for heritage 
interpretation, communication, and protection.
In conclusion, the concept of heritage is ever and ever wider and more 
complex. The definition of heritage is a cultural matter, where the relation-
ship between tangible, intangible, and digital is an open issue.

Between Cuvier and Darwin
36
THE COMPLEXITY OF HERITAGE (KEEPING AN EYE ON 
INTERNATIONAL DOCUMENTS)
The Cultural Approach
The Convention for the Safeguarding of Intangible Cultural Heritage 
(UNESCO, 2003b) expands the concepts of heritage – and therefore of con-
servation – from material manifestations, such as monuments and objects, to 
living expressions and to traditions transmitted during centuries. In practice, 
the distinction between tangible and intangible heritage replaces the one be-
tween cultural and natural heritage. Because the dualism tangible/intangible 
involves natural and cultural without any division. “The “intangible cultural 
heritage” means the practices, representations, expressions, knowledge, skills 
– as well as the instruments, objects, artefacts and cultural spaces associated 
therewith – that communities, groups and, in some cases, individuals recog-
Figure 1. L’Aquila. Church of St. Maria of Collemaggio (XIII, XVII-XVIII, XX cen-
tury). The typical two-color façade.

Between Cuvier and Darwin
37
nize as part of their cultural heritage” (Art.2). It highlights the importance of 
“individuals”, and not only of “people” or of “inhabitants”, narrowing even 
more the “circle” of heritage making. Tangible elements (objects, spaces) 
are included in this kind of heritage. The text of the Convention on Intan-
gible Heritage specifies that “This intangible cultural heritage, transmitted 
from generation to generation, is constantly recreated by communities and 
groups in response to their environment, their interaction with nature and 
their history, and provides them with a sense of identity and continuity, thus 
promoting respect for cultural diversity and human creativity”. It undermines 
the traditional concept of heritage as monolithic object, and it suggests that 
we have to take into account that heritage is something changing.
The Nara Document on Authenticity (UNESCO, 1994) focuses on protec-
tion and enhancement of “Cultural Diversity” and “Heritage Diversity”. It 
says “All cultures and societies are rooted in the particular forms and means 
of tangible and intangible expression which constitute their heritage, and 
these should be respected” (Art.7). This call for the ‘intangible’ was made 
to include non-European cultures, but today it is renewed by participative 
culture challenges.
The Faro Convention (Council of Europe, 2005) puts at the center the 
“community”: It says that Cultural heritage is “a group of resources inherited 
from the past which people identify, independently of ownership, as a reflec-
tion and expression of their constantly evolving values, beliefs, knowledge 
and traditions. It includes all aspects of the environment resulting from the 
interaction between people and places through time”; and define ‘Heritage 
Community’ as “people who value specific aspects of cultural heritage which 
they wish, within the framework of public action, to sustain and transmit to 
future generations” (p.2).
Therefore, the focus shift from heritage definition to the process of heritage 
making. Silberman and Purser (2012) say: “This whole hearted acceptance 
of re-creation and adoption as essential part of heritage significance places 
a new emphasis on process rather than product”. It is a new idea of people 
centered heritage, “distinct from older, static conceptions of heritage as un-
ambiguous, expert-defined and needing protection from the forces of change” 
(p.13). This approach gives to people an active and ineludible role in making 
sense of heritage and of sites. They are the main actors of interpretation. 
Heritage making becomes a social activity of interpretation, and according to 
a postmodern line, the discourse on interpretation defines the content. From 
this point of view, heritage looks like a “performance”.

Between Cuvier and Darwin
38
Landscape as Inclusiveness
The Landscape Convention (Council of Europe, 2000) defines Landscape 
as “an area, as perceived by people, whose character is the result of the ac-
tion and interaction of natural and/or human factors” (p.9). Interesting is the 
wording “as perceived by people”, that puts the focus on cultural aspects. 
At the same time, it is constituted both by human elements integrated to the 
landscape, and natural anthropic object.
The expression Cultural Landscape rises in all its importance from the 
UNESCO World Heritage Cultural Landscapes (2009). The concept of Cul-
tural Landscape was originally diffused by the geographer Carl Sauer with 
his work Morphology of Landscape (1925), where he correlated physical and 
cultural phenomena. The Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of 
the World Heritage Convention (2015) says: “Cultural landscapes are cultural 
properties and represent the ‘combined works of nature and of man’ […]. 
They are illustrative of the evolution of human society and settlement over 
time, under the influence of the physical constraints and/or opportunities 
Figure 2. Peltuinum. Church of St. Paolo (XIII-XVI century). View of the church 
and of its environment. On the background Calascio Stronghold (XI, XV centuries).

Between Cuvier and Darwin
39
presented by their natural environment and of successive social, economic 
and cultural forces, both external and internal” (Art 47).
The World Heritage Cultural Landscape (UNESCO, 2009) specifies: “The 
very notion of landscape is highly cultural”, where the “term “cultural” has 
been added to express the human interaction with the environment and the 
presence of tangible and intangible cultural values in the landscape” (p.17). 
Moreover, “Landscape interpretation and cultural landscape go together, for 
both are about ideas and meanings, concepts and interpretations, dynamics 
and dialogues” (p.22). The Landscape is a complex and integrated system, 
resulting from processes of modification and transformation occurred – and 
currently occurring – over time. Tangible and intangible correlate, sometime 
they blurs. Furthermore, the idea of ever changing heritage – rising from the 
definition of intangible heritage – is appropriate also for tangible heritage. 
Because its matter is in continuous changing. This changing can be related 
to natural events but to people’s life, how it is understood and used, and 
consequently how men action upon it. Shortly, how people moved by culture 
changes the Landscape. Intangible shapes the tangible, and tangible inspire 
the intangible. Tangible and intangible are related, mirroring each other.
The role of Memory is very important: “Landscapes also exist in people’s 
memories and imaginations and are linked to place names, myths, rituals 
and folklore. In people’s minds there is rarely a clear distinction between 
the visible and invisible – or tangible and intangible – components of the 
landscapes. Stories and myths endow landscapes with meanings transcending 
the directly observable and thereby help to create people’s ‘mental maps’, 
or awareness of place”. Therefore, “Cultural landscapes can be seen as the 
repository of collective memory” (UNESCO, 2009, p.22).
The Concept of Place
In the past, the idea of Place was related to the idea of “monument”, at least 
intended according to its perceptive relation with the surrounding context. 
Also remembering the Recommendation concerning the Safeguard and 
Contemporary Role of Historic Areas (UNESCO, 1976), environments are 
intended as defined places, circumscribed, through an authoritative decision, 
made by experts.
The concept of Place was usual in the Seventies and Eighties. The works of 
Christian Norberg-Schulz (1979) are well known, and well-known is his use 
of the Latin expression “genius loci”. He focuses on the study of the environ-
ment perception and symbolization as essential component of architecture. 
Key is the “meaning of place”, made according to a phenomenological and 

Between Cuvier and Darwin
40
qualitative reading of architectures and environments. The Place is described 
as the sum of “space” and “character”: the “space” – the perception field – is 
given by the three-dimensional place’s elements, while “character” is defined 
by the general atmosphere.
The Burra Charter (ICOMOS, 2013), speaking on Place, puts together 
tangible characteristics (a place is “a geographically defined area” that 
“may include elements, objects, spaces and views”) with intangible ones (a 
place “may have tangible and intangible dimensions)” (p.2). Defining the 
expression “Cultural significance”, it says that it “means aesthetic, historic, 
scientific, social or spiritual value for past, present or future generations. 
Cultural significance is embodied in the place itself, its fabric, setting, use, 
associations, meanings, records, related places and related objects” (p.2). It 
roots the intangible upon the tangible. Moreover, a Place “may have a range 
of values for different individuals or groups” (p.2) that is the interpretation, 
values, and meaning of a place can vary for different groups of people and 
cultures.
The merging of natural and anthropic, and of tangible and intangible, 
is definitive in the notion of “Urban Landscape”. The Recommendation on 
the Historic Urban Landscape (UNESCO, 2011) defines it as: “the urban 
area understood as the result of a historic layering of cultural and natural 
values and attributes, extending beyond the notion of “historic centre” or 
“ensemble” to include the broader urban context and its geographical setting” 
(Art.8). In particular, the Art.9 says: “This wider context includes notably the 
Figure 3. Collepietro. View of the medieval village and of the gate tower.

Between Cuvier and Darwin
41
site’s topography, geomorphology, hydrology and natural features, its built 
environment, both historic and contemporary, its infrastructures above and 
below ground, its open spaces and gardens, its land use patterns and spatial 
organization, perceptions and visual relationships, as well as all other ele-
ments of the urban structure”. The urban area is intended as the result of an 
historical stratification of values and both cultural and natural characteristics 
that extends beyond the notion of historical center to include a wider spatial, 
historical, and cultural background”. The Art. 9 adds: “It also includes social 
and cultural practices and values, economic processes and the intangible 
dimensions of heritage as related to diversity and identity”. Tangible and 
Intangible are both considered, where tangible is the physical expression of 
intangible; it is the outcome and witness of a complexity of relationships, 
and intangible is a fundamental aspect.
According to the definition of Urban Landscape, here there are not natural 
or anthropic aspect, although mixed, but the Anthropic becomes Natural, and 
vice versa the Natural definitely Anthropic. Natural merges with Historical. 
Nevertheless, we should consider another translation of concepts: Natural 
and Anthropic blur, and the everyday life comes into play.
Participative Heritage
The line of Cultural Heritage naturally inserts in the most recent reflections 
on participative heritage. The World Heritage Cultural Landscape says: 
“The intangible cultural heritage is traditional and living at the same time. 
It is constantly recreated and mainly transmitted orally. It is difficult to use 
the term authenticity in relation to intangible cultural heritage; some experts 
advise against its use in relation to living heritage” (UNESCO 2009, p.27). 
This in line with the Convention for the Safeguarding of Intangible Cultural 
Heritage (UNESCO, 2003b) that underlines that intangible heritage is “rec-
reated by people”.
The Internet, ICT, web application, and smartphone – that allow us to be 
in a constant on-line state – favors an open access discourse on heritage and 
on its values. At the same time, the open-ended flux between people influ-
ences the process of heritage memory, identity, and authenticity definition.
Therefore, the concept of “collective memory” underlies the one of par-
ticipative heritage (Silberman & Puser, 2012). Collective memory is the 
formation of a shared identity, defined by the continuous interactions, in 
particular made possible by social networks.
Giaccardi (2012) highlights that heritage meaning is “the result of repeated 
and ongoing interactions in the lived world of ordinary people” (p.2). Accord-

Between Cuvier and Darwin
42
ing to the idea of heritage making related the cultural “public sphere”, – i.e. 
to the interactions of people that create, maintain, or transform heritage – the 
role of digital technologies is ever and ever important: “Today mobile and 
ubiquitous technologies are accelerating these changes by enabling users to 
participate, spontaneously and continuously, in activities of collection, pres-
ervation and interpretation of digitized heritage content and new digitally 
mediated forms of heritage practice” (Giaccardi, 2012, p.2). The Internet and 
Social Media allow the interactive and continuous practice of remembering 
and of memory sharing and definition.
RECOMMENDATION: THE TANGIBLE IS BACK
The philosophic line of the “New Realism” (Ferraris, 2011), is based on 
the acknowledgement of the presence of reality, more than on the absolute 
knowledge of the physical phenomenon. With the consciousness that we are 
coming from a long period of antirealism, the fundamental features of the 
New Realism cannot be referred to an absolute opposition to post-modernism, 
but they aim to conserve its emancipative aspects, avoiding apodictic defini-
tion such as “there are no facts but only interpretations”. The New Realism 
maintain the critical approach of post-modernism, with interpretation as 
way for truth research (De Carlo & Ferraris, 2012). Putnam (2012) speaks 
Figure 4. Castelvecchio Calvisio and Carapelle Calvisio villages. Sketch of a me-
dieval street.

Between Cuvier and Darwin
43
of “common sense realism”, i.e. the principle that what exist is independent 
from its knowledge and that there should be many correct descriptions of 
the same reality.
Campbell and Smith (2016) explain: “[The New Materialism emerges] 
in part from trends in French philosophy in the 1970’s that explicitly sought 
to move away from the post-structuralist emphasis on language, discourse, 
signification and text. In its place they stress an ontological questioning of 
the ‘real’ and a focus on the material and the concrete, together with issues of 
wordliness and shared bodily existence and sensible-intelligible experience. 
There is also a strong stress on immanence, and a turn in French thought to a 
non-reductive naturalism, which stresses the life sciences and mathematics” 
(p.2). Be critical doesn’t mean lost in the language, but using a critical ap-
proach – according to a legacy of postmodernism – toward of a presence (the 
reality) hardly recognizable, but non avoidable, and of which we cannot forget.
This approach induces consequences also in the cultural heritage field. 
Campbell and Smith (2016) add: “By invoking the putative ‘agency’ of 
the material world we reinvest in the mindset of unreconstructed heritage 
practice, the expert stewardship of things and places and sites, which have 
intrinsic value and ‘speak’ to us. Integral to this theoretical borrowing is the 
anti-humanist assumption that people are far less important than ‘old’ hu-
manist theories allow, and that human agency is neither unique or really that 
important” (p.5). Moreover: “We see strange neologisms such as ‘tangible 
value’ and ‘intangible values’ being used, as people struggle with the idea 
that what people actually do can be a form of heritage, and that conversely 
‘things’ have no innate value” (p.11).
This philosophical line suggest how culture is moving its point of view 
from a postmodern nihilism to a new line interested in reality, therefore a new 
attention to sites, places, and works of art arises. At the same time, remember-
ing the lesson of postmodernism, we do not have to lose the critical sense of 
culture and society. The two points of view – the cultural approach and the 
material one – are only apparently in contrast: The role of the individual is 
central in the revealing act for heritage interpretation, but this action is ex-
pressed according to something real, however tangible or intangible it may be.
Although tangible and intangible are not the same, the gap between them 
is “sewn”. Tangible and intangible heritage are only different categories but 
manifestation of the same culture.
In last years, the researches on Built Heritage are ever more diffused in 
the international scientific community. For example, this does not mean that 
scholars of archeology and architecture are not interested in intangible aspects 

Between Cuvier and Darwin
44
(leaving it to Humanities), but only that their disciplines roots on physical 
contents. The tangible is the physical manifestation of the intangible; it is 
the aggregator of data and information, mirror of memories.
RESEARCH DIRECTIONS: THE “MIA” QUESTION 
(MEMORY, INTEGRITY, AUTHENTICITY)
Since the first versions of the Operational Guidelines for the Implementa-
tion of the World Heritage Convention (UNESCO, 2015), the concepts of 
“Authenticity” and “Integrity” are fundamental in heritage definition.
The Nara Document on Authenticity (ICOMOS, 1993) focuses on the top-
ics of “Cultural Diversity” and “Heritage Diversity”. Authenticity is related 
to the critical understanding of ‘information sources’, that is to a knowledge 
rooted on local culture: “Conservation of cultural heritage in all its forms and 
historical periods is rooted in the Values attributed to the heritage. Our ability 
to understand these values depends, in part, on the Degree to which informa-
tion sources about these values may be understood as credible or truthful. 
Knowledge and understanding of these sources of information, in relation 
to original and subsequent characteristics of the cultural heritage, and their 
meaning, is a requisite basis for assessing all aspects of authenticity” (Art.9).
Therefore, “Authenticity” is the quality of being genuine and original. While 
‘Identity’ is the quest for the determination of the original existing features 
and materials of a historic heritage. Obviously, according to the Operational 
Guidelines (UNESCO, 2015) “authenticity does not limit consideration to 
original form and structure but includes all subsequent modifications and 
additions, over the course of time, which in themselves possess Artistic or 
Figure 5. Bominaco. Church of St. Pellegrino (XIV century). Main elevation and 
internal point cloud.

Between Cuvier and Darwin
45
historical values”. Integrity and Authenticity are criteria for the assessment of 
outstanding universal value. On “Authenticity”, the Art.82 says: “Depending 
on the type of cultural heritage, and its cultural context, properties may be 
understood to meet the conditions of authenticity if their cultural values (as 
recognized in the nomination criteria proposed) are truthfully and credibly 
expressed through a variety of attributes including:
•	
Form and design;
•	
Materials and substance;
•	
Use and function;
•	
Traditions, techniques and management systems;
•	
Location and setting;
•	
Language, and other forms of intangible heritage;
•	
Spirit and feeling; and
•	
Other internal and external factors.
On “Integrity”, the Art.88 explains: “Integrity is a measure of the whole-
ness and intactness of the natural and/or cultural heritage and its attributes. 
Examining the conditions of integrity, therefore requires assessing the extent 
to which the property:
1. 	 Includes all elements necessary to express its Outstanding Universal 
Value;
2. 	 Is of adequate size to ensure the complete representation of the features 
and processes which convey the property’s significance;
3. 	 Suffers from adverse effects of development and/or neglect.
This should be presented in a statement of integrity.
However, according to participative characteristics of an evolving heri-
tage, an approach based on collective memory could improve these consid-
erations. Giaccardi (2012) explains: “Heritage is today about far more than 
museum artifacts and historic buildings and how they are to be preserved and 
communicated. It is about making sense of our memories and developing a 
sense of identity through shared and repeated interactions with the tangible 
remains and lived traces of a common past. We socially construct heritage in 
the context of our own lives and imaginations to interact meaningfully with 
our past and shape our vision of the future” (p.2).
Therefore, the study of identity and integrity characteristics should be 
related to the analysis of people shared memories on heritage. For example 

Between Cuvier and Darwin
46
we remember the rebuilding of a destroyed building, such as the bell tower 
of St. Mark’s Square in Venice ruined in 1902.
Focusing on “memory” and ‘historical association”, Silberman, (2016) 
writes: “It is the evocative relationship of present to the past that makes heritage 
place significant, not anything inherent to the type or date of the site itself. 
Thus there are countless inaccessible and unpromoted medieval structures, 
archaeological ruins, and celebrity homes that offer no emotional connection 
in the public psyche, and, despite their typological potential to be considered 
worthy of commemoration, are accordingly not considered heritage places 
except in the most general and most abstract sense”. And, although he seems 
to think that values are not so inherent to the physical components of places 
– while we are convinced that matter calls for existence and interest – he 
makes clear that “Heritages places can thus be defined - without reference 
to their specific components - as focal points of reflection, commemoration, 
and debate about the values of the past in contemporary society” (p.30).
This point of view should suggest new methodological issues, about Integ-
rity and Authenticity as defined before. On this argument, another reflection 
is suggested by the role of The Internet and digital tools in current society. 
In particular, the speed and dynamics of participative on line processes 
should modify, create and diffuse new-shared memories, often of short life. 
Nevertheless, we believe that the concept of Memory is not threatened by 
social network, because the world that surround us – intended as physical and 
immanent representation of history and intangible characteristics – works as 
a stable reference that anchors us to the past. It is like Proust’s madeleine: 
The biscuit activates memory.
Figure 6. Bominaco. Church of St. Pellegrino (XIV century). View of the nave and 
3-D scanning with a proportional analysis.

Between Cuvier and Darwin
47
CONCLUSION: CHALLENGES IN HERITAGE-MAKING
The visual approach to cultural heritage, and in particular to tangible heritage 
and to the landscape is finally overcomed by the cultural approach. It places 
side by side the aesthetic reading with an historical, social, and participative 
one.
The World Heritage Cultural Landscape (UNESCO, 2009) fixes the concept 
of Culture as fundament of the idea of Landscape, according to an interpre-
tative line that unify into this concept both tangible and intangible values.
The idea that heritage is constantly recreated by communities is a no-
tion shared between scholars. Follows an approach that tends to replace the 
traditional authoritative role played by scholars in defining the values with 
participatory and dynamic processes. It highlights important cultural dynamics, 
only apparently contrasting approaches based on New Realisistic positions.
Remembering that also the Convention on intangible heritage (UNESCO, 
2003) does not forget the importance of tangible features (“instruments, 
objects, artefacts and cultural spaces associated therewith”), we’d like to 
point out a consideration. Buildings and cities – in general, also sites – are 
used: They have been used in the past and they are used every day, i.e. they 
are lived. Vitruvius spoke of “Utilitas”: They are useful for people activi-
ties, their work, relax, leisure, cooking, etc. They have a practical value. We 
should say that they are the “box” for and are shaped by intangible human 
activities. From this point of view, the Use could be a fil rouge to connect 
tangible and intangible aspects.
Use in architecture is a characteristic that last for centuries and, therefore, 
stratifies memories. Follows that use can transmit memories from the past, 
and it favor the definition of identities. Through Use, the intangible dimen-
sions are ontologically related to heritage matter.
REFERENCES
Campbell, G., & Smith, L. (2016). Keeping Critical Heritage Studies Criti-
cal: Why “post-Humanism” and the “New Materialism” Are Not So Critical. 
Retrieved on Novembrer 15, 2016 from https://www.academia.edu/26027979/
Keeping_Critical_Heritage_Studies_Critical_Why_Post-Humanism_and_
the_New_Materialism_Are_Not_So_Critical

Between Cuvier and Darwin
48
Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed 
Conflict. (1954). Retrieved on November 15, 2016 from http://portal.unesco.
org/en/ev.php-URL_ID=13637&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SEC-
TION=201.html
Council of Europe. (2000). European Landscape Convention. Retrieved on 
November, 15, 2016 from http://www.coe.int/en/web/landscape/home
Council of Europe. (2005). Framework Convention on the Value of Cultural 
Heritage for Society. Retrieved on November, 15, 2016 from http://www.coe.
int/t/dg4/cultureheritage/heritage/Identities/default_en.asp
De Carlo, M., & Ferraris, M. (2012). Nuovo realismo e vecchia realtà. In M. 
De Carlo & M. Ferraris (Eds.), Bentornata realtà. Torino: Einaudi.
Ferraris, M. (2011). Manifesto of New Realism. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Giaccardi, E. (2012). Introduction: reframing Heritage in a participatory 
culture. In E. Giaccardi (Ed.), Heritage and Social Media: Undestanding 
heritage in a Participatory Culture (pp. 1–10). Abingdon: Routledge.
ICOMOS. (1964). International charter for the conservation and restoration 
of monuments and sites. Retrieved on November, 15, 2016 from http://www.
icomos.org/charters/venice_e.pdf
ICOMOS. (2013). Charter for Places of Cultural Significance. Retrieved on 
November, 15, 2016 from http://australia.icomos.org/publications/charters/
Norberg-Schulz, C. (1979). Genius Loci. Milano: Electa.
Putnam, H. (2012). Realismo e senso comune. In M. De Carlo & M. Ferraris 
(Eds.), Bentornata realtà (pp. 5–20). Torino: Einaudi.
Sauer, C. (1925). Morphology of Landscape. Retrieved on November 15, 2016 
from http://geog.uoregon.edu/amarcus/geog620/readings/sauer_1925_mor-
phology_of_landscape.pdf
Schafer, D. P. (2014). The Age of Culture. Rock’s Mills Press.
Silberman, N. (2016). Heritage places: Evolving conceptions and changing 
forms. In W. Logan, M. N. Craith & U. Kockel (Eds.), A Companion to 
Heritage Studies. London: Wiley-Blackwell.

Between Cuvier and Darwin
49
Silberman, N., & Puser, M. (2012). Collective memory as affirmation: People-
centered cultural heritage in a digital age. In E. Giaccardi (Ed.), Heritage 
and Social Media: Undestanding heritage in a Participatory Culture (pp. 
13–29). Abingdon: Routledge.
UNESCO. (1972). Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cul-
tural and Natural Heritage. Retrieved on November, 15, 2016, from http://
whc.unesco.org/en/conventiontext/
UNESCO. (1976). Recommendation concerning the Safeguard and Con-
temporary Role of Historic Areas. Retrieved on November, 15, 2016, from 
http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-URL_ID=13133&URL_DO=DO_
TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html
UNESCO. (1994). The Nara Document on Authenticity. Retrieved on No-
vember, 15, 2016, from whc.unesco.org/document/9379
UNESCO. (2003a). Charter on the Preservation of the Digital Heritage. 
Retrieved November 15, 2016, from http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-
URL_ID=17721&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html
UNESCO. (2003b). Convention for the Safeguarding of Intangible Cultural 
Heritage. Retrieved on November, 15, 2016, from http://www.unesco.org/
culture/ich/en/convention
UNESCO. (2009). World Heritage Cultural Landscape. Retrieved on No-
vember, 15, 2016, from http://whc.unesco.org/en/culturallandscape/
UNESCO. (2011). Recommendation on the Historic Urban Landscape. Re-
trieved on November, 15, 2016, from http://whc.unesco.org/en/activities/638
UNESCO. (2015). Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the 
World Heritage Convention. Retrieved on November, 15, 2016, from http://
whc.unesco.org/en/guidelines/
ENDNOTE
1	
 Retrieved on November 15, 2016 from http://www.unesco.org/new/en/
cairo/culture/tangible-cultural-heritage/

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-2434-2.ch003
Chapter 3
50 
“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”:
The New Relationship 
With Digital Heritage
ABSTRACT
The chapter focuses on the relationship between cultural heritage and digital 
heritage, and in particular on the peculiar characteristics of digital heritage 
derived from physical heritage. This kind of heritage poses technological 
and methodological knowledge and representation matters: It has own 
documental, historical, and aesthetic values, but it depends from tangible 
and intangible reality. Digital heritage cannot substitute physical heritage 
but keep and represent its values. Follows issues related to heritage digita-
lization, visualization, and transparency. In addition, the relationship with 
people has changed: They experience digital heritage with an aware cultural 
participation, and from the “marriage” between real heritage and its digital 
expression, new important potentialities rises.
INTRODUCTION
In 1999, in the UNESCO’s World Heritage Magazine, Stone described “Virtual 
Heritage” as “the utilization of technology for interpretation, conservation 
and preservation of Natural, Cultural and World Heritage” (Stone 1999). Ac-
cording to this definition, ‘virtual heritage’ is not in opposition to traditional 
one – it does not substitutes cultural heritage in a virtual dimension – but it 
is a tool for heritage interpretation, presentation and conservation. Virtual 
heritage and cultural heritage live together. 

“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”
51
Afterwards, from the publication of the Charter on the Preservation 
of the Digital Heritage (UNESCO, 2003) many pages have been written 
on the concept of “Digital Heritage”. The Charter explains: “The digital 
heritage consists of unique resources of human knowledge and expression. 
It embraces cultural, educational, scientific and administrative resources, 
as well as technical, legal, medical and other kinds of information created 
digitally, or converted into digital form from existing analogue resources. 
Where resources are “born digital”, there is no other format but the digital 
object. Digital materials include texts, databases, still and moving images, 
audio, graphics, software and web pages, among a wide and growing range 
of formats” (Art.1).
The rise of Digital Heritage is favored by ICT growth, the decreasing 
cost and the ease of use of digital tools. They have made the most advanced 
technologies available to an increasingly wide number of users, thus favor-
ing their practice and experimentation. Scholars are prepared to test and 
decline tools and applications; academics work with digital awareness and 
consciousness, according to a “meta-medium” logic – using the word coined 
by Manovich (2013). 
This context favors a new relationship between cultural heritage and 
digital heritage. Digital heritage from built heritage maintains a conceptual 
relationship with the original physical datum, it does not substitute the reality 
but it helps its knowledge, understanding, communication, and management.
BACKGROUND: THE INTERNATIONAL CONTEXT
Digital heritage studies found place in many international conferences, and 
they are the subject of interdisciplinary publications. We remember the “Digital 
Libraries Initiative” of the “Digital Agenda for Europe of European Commis-
sion”. Topics related to cultural heritage recur in numerous conferences and 
publications in the international arena. We cite initiatives of “CIPA – The 
International Committee for Documentation of Cultural Heritage” and the 
papers presented by the “IJHDE - International Journal of Heritage in the 
Digital Era”, the Proceedings of “International Conferences on 3D Imaging, 
Modeling, Processing, Visualization” published by “IEEEXPLORE - Digital 
Library” in 2011. More interested in built heritage: “Euromed - International 
Conference on Cultural Heritage and Digital Libraries” (2010, 2012, 2014, 
and 2016); the conferences promoted by “ISPRS – International Society for 
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing” and published by the “Journal of 
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing” (in particular the conferences in 2011, 

“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”
52
2013, and 2015 titled “3D-ARCH – Virtual Reconstruction and Visualization 
of Complex Architectures”). Last but not least the “International Congresses 
on Digital Heritage” (2013 in Marseilles and 2015 in Granada). This list is 
not exhaustive but it merely provides references and examples.
Moreover, paper’s repositories and scientific social networks like Academia.
edu (www.academia.edu) and ResearchGate (www.researchgate.net) favor 
the diffusion of knowledge inside and outside fields, the meeting between 
scholars, and their updating. Ever more research books are dedicated to built 
heritage (Brusaporci, 2015; Ippolito, 2017; Ippolito & Cigola, 2017)
Pescarin (2016) analyzes the wording “Digital” + “Heritage” in the light 
of “Digital Heritage Congresses” experiences. She points out a double ap-
proach based on ‘tracks’ and ‘themes’. The “digital” approach includes the 
following ‘tracks’: 1) Digitization and Acquisition, 2) Computer Graphics 
and Interaction, 3) Analysis and Interpretation, 4) Theory, Methodologies, 
Preservation and Standards, 5) Digital Heritage Projects and Applications. 
While the “heritage” approach includes five ‘themes’ according to UNESCO 
classification: a) Built Heritage from monuments to archaeological sites, 
cities, and landscapes, b) Culture & Traditions from folklife to languages, 
crafts, song and dance, c) Museums & Collections from movable objects to 
the museums, d) Libraries & Archives documentary heritage from books to 
audiovisual and e) Art & Creativity from digital / new media art to creative 
digital and online culture (p.1-2). Interesting are her conclusions: She high-
lights the role of the ‘human dimension’ and the importance of “narrativity”, 
realized with different kind of outputs: “Which trends can be recognized, 
looking at this overlapping area, which is Digital Heritage, through presented 
projects and demonstrations? One of the first element to appear is the posi-
tion of the ‘human dimension’, considered more and more a key element. 
Heritage professionals necessities are better taken into consideration, from 
digital projects early stages; end users, such as visitors of museums, tends 
to be involved in some cases during the planning phase. The ‘wow’ effect of 
ICT technologies for heritage researchers, practitioners and curators is now 
diminishing, while the sustainability of digital projects and their effectiveness 
as referred to a specific goal, in constantly increasing. The role of design and 
co-creation is emerging […], filling the gap among audience, developer and 
heritage curator. The role of ‘narrativity’ is also considered as important as the 
coding, for the success of a digital heritage project […]. Mixed digital outputs 
(i.e. serious games including short movies, VR immersive applications that 
includes passive and active moments, etc.) are experimenting different levels 
of user interaction and involvement, while trying at the same time to find 
and define new communication styles and approaches, since the traditional 

“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”
53
proved to be unsatisfactory […]. Finally, most of the projects have demon-
strated a high interest toward the quality of user involvement, a topic currently 
under investigation from different perspectives” (p.3). The lesson are two: 
Designers and users are the heart of the process and the most important role 
is not played by amazing and photorealistic images but by “narrativity”, that 
is photorealism could be important but the cultural involvement is essential. 
THE DIGITAL BRIDE
Hyperreality Makes Room to Reality
In computer graphics, a false challenge is between the special effects of film 
companies and video games, and the applications for heritage conservation. 
Certainly, technological applications developed by Entertainment Company 
can be instruments for communication and education. We must admit that, 
in particular in the field of architecture and historic city – that are living 
environments, where the physical space has a preeminent characteristic – 
visualizations and real time applications with a high level of photorealism 
should be more important if compared to other fields.
Anyway, the photorealism and the terrifying and amazing visualizations 
cannot prevail on the aims of conservation. However, the inherent aesthetic 
quality of each medium is inescapable (book, radio, tv, etc.): “A stirring 
Figure 1. Bazzano. Church of St. Giusta (XIII century). Façade and photogram-
metric survey of the portal.

“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”
54
narrative in any medium can be experienced as a virtual reality because 
our brains are programmed to tune into stories with an intensity that can 
obliterate the world around us” (Murray 1997, 98). In synthetic images, the 
greatest temptation is the aesthetic for its own sake, and the real question 
is on the point of balance between “quantity” (of details, of information, of 
photorealism) vs “quality”. That is how complete must be a simulation of 
the real, i.e. how much information (and what kind) the visualization has to 
contain to be a tool for knowledge, interpretation, and presentation. At the 
same time the seduction can also be intellectual, losing into a universe of 
concatenated information. 
At the dawn of the digital age, Baudrillard (1979) said that reality was 
under the threat of simulations: They could be more convincing of the real 
and consequently the viewers could be no longer able to distinguish the replica 
from the reality”. The end of the real would have generated a paradoxical: 
The rise of the “Hyperreality”, i.e. the more real than reality. 
In the Eighties Baudrillard underlined that the instantaneous proximity of 
the things would have caused the world’s transparency for excessive visibil-
ity. Hence his idea of “Obscenity”: When everything becomes immediately 
visible, transparent, and then coded and transmitted, the illusion ceases to 
exist. The Baudrillard’s cry of alarm is that we are no longer in the drama of 
alienation, but we are in the ecstasy of communication (Baudrillard, 1987).
The idea of Obscenity may be used to evoke the new approach of the 
scholar towards the digital model and its visualization: No more an aesthetic 
perspective to synthetic images, but an “anatomical” attitude, rather addressed 
to the complexity of modeling – ‘modeling’ interpreted in the broadest 
sense –, i.e. to the articulation and interaction of data. Largely, in the cur-
rent participative and interactive culture, the enchantment for the computer 
graphics ended: Now the attention of the researcher – but often also of the 
user – moves from the observation of synthesis renders – eventually printed 
on photographic paper – to the interactive working interface, where models 
are processed. This is the place where visual computing is an “obscene” inter-
relation and interpretation of data and where there is a live interaction with 
and between them. In this place, data becomes information, and information 
becomes knowledge. An important consequence follows: The focus shifts 
from model to modeling. 
Therefore, the digital “master model” – that is the one on which the mod-
eler works in the graphical interface of modeling software and from which 
derivers the representations – gets a particular importance. The approach of 
“New Realism” (Ferraris, 2011), can be also referred to digital built heritage: 

“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”
55
Consciously, virtuality is observed in its essence, it is unveiled: Not a hoax 
but a mechanism for multiple simulations/visualizations of reality. The model 
is a “sign” that, at the same time, plays as “signifier” or “meaning”. Reality 
re-acquires more and more importance: The Modeling of reality should be 
an iterative process of hypothesis and validation, i.e. of representation and 
comparison of the visualization with the perception of the world. “In a sense, 
the function of perception is comparable to Popper’s falsification, but here 
it plays an ontological role and not epistemological, as in Popper” (Ferraris, 
2012, p. 154). The view becomes a critical tool for analysis, validation, and 
falsification of cultural heritage represented by the model. Therefore, a double 
iterative process of validation triggers in the relationship between Idea <> 
Reality <> Model: The control of the scholar’s mental representation, and 
the checking of the digital model. If the surveyor/modeler does not validate 
her work on the real reference, she may lose sight of the cultural significant, 
blurred into the computational pipeline.
Ware (2000) says: “Until recently, the term visualization meant ‘construct-
ing a visual image in the mind’ [...] But now it has come to mean something 
more like a graphical representation of data or concepts. Thus, from being 
an internal construct of the mind, visualization has become an external arti-
fact supporting decision making” (p.1) He highlights that visualization can 
promote understanding: It provides the comprehension of large amounts of 
data and of emergent properties; it makes evident problems with collected 
data; it relates large and small-scale data features; it favors the elaboration 
of interpretative hypotheses (p.2). About data visualization, Ware identifies 
four basic stages: “The collection and storage of data itself; the preprocessing 
designed to transform the data into something we can understand; the display 
hardware and the graphics algorithms that produce an image on the screen; 
the human perceptual and cognitive system” (p.3). 3-D modeling can have 
a great importance, not only for outcomes presentation, but also as tool for 
“visual computing” according to the heuristic role that modeling can play in 
heritage understanding. 
Digital Built Heritage 
The Charter on the Preservation of the Digital Heritage (UNESCO, 2003), 
points out that the Digital Heritage is not something special, out of the or-
dinary, but it is a ‘Common Heritage’. It can be constituted by: “cultural, 
educational, scientific and administrative resources, as well as technical, 
medical and other kinds of information created digitally, or converted into 

“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”
56
digital form from existing analogue resources. It includes different kinds of 
products such as texts, databases, images, audio, graphies, software and web 
pages”. In particular, the Charter claims for maintenance, management, and 
access. 
Unlike Stone’s (1999) definition of Virtual Heritage, in the Charter the 
Digital Heritage tends to assume an independent connotation and value. This 
qualification of digital heritage is favored by the diffusion of digital products 
and by the growth of tools, technologies, and methodologies that today are 
ineludible and pervasive for each field.
The digital objects assume a new meaning of “real”, but conceptually 
this meaning derives from the active relationship with the physical content, 
from which it derives. In this kind of digital heritage, there is not visualiza-
tion without a prior reality and, in a philological study of a digital model, we 
cannot forget its real reference from whom it is born. Therefore, the issues 
related to data and information grow to include the relationship with history 
and materiality.
A double condition of the digital model of built heritage descends: On one 
side the ‘relation with the reality’, on the other side its ‘digital nature’. The 
Figure 2. L’Aquila. Church of St. Caterina (XVIII century). Plan, transversal sec-
tion and point cloud.

“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”
57
wording “heritage” implies that the digital resources presents own values, 
but indirectly related to the physical content. 
As pointed out by Digital Heritage Charter (UNESCO, 2003), we can see 
the digital historical objects independently by human creativity, according 
to a status of object in its own right. Being a critical product of a creative-
interpretative act, the model is a knowledge contribution and, therefore, it 
becomes a new document: Centofanti (2010) writes “The representative and 
restitutive model of an architectural heritage is an integral part of historical 
knowledge and an autonomous text that can be subjected to further analysis 
and interpretations. Indeed the model provides a series of useful informa-
tion on the architectural significant [...]. In turn, the model lends itself to be 
historicized and studied no more, and not only for its relationship with the 
presented object, but as a document itself in relation to the historical and 
cultural context that produced it” (p.47). Moreover, being equipped with 
values, digital heritage has to be safeguarded. Therefore, we remember the 
recommendations of the Charter on Digital Heritage (UNESCO, 2003) about 
the guarding against loss of heritage, the need for action, in particular related 
to the lifecycle of information, and the development of strategies and policies.
The matters related to digital surveying are essential. They are about: The 
measurements tools, methodologies and data (point clouds); the modeling 
process (noise reduction, uniforming, smoothing, decimating point clouds, 
interpolating meshes, filling holes, texturing, CSG / B-Rep / Mesh / Image 
Based representations, the semantization of the model, LODs, etc.); the kind 
of software; the database organization; the visualization tools, etc. In addi-
tion, we cannot forget: The historical research; the metrological, proportional, 
comparative and typological studies; the analysis of the constructive compo-
nents, etc. Because the surveying process is a critical, iterative, and articulate 
workflow, where the aim is the wise representation of built characteristics. 
Therefore, a first consideration on transparency follows: the digitalizing and 
computing processes and tools have to be declared, in relation to the real 
heritage and its documents.
Focusing on the architectural filed, when we deal with models of never 
built buildings or not more existing ones (but existed in the past), we have 
to consider the relation with documents. All these studies are based on the 
critique interpretation of heterogeneous archival materials (old drawings, 
historical photographs, descriptions, yard or competition documents, but also 
other historical publications and studies). Finally yet importantly, we have not 
to fail to remember the constructive system: Often, in an historic building, it 
is not visible and only critically deducible from indirect analysis, historical 

“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”
58
documents, and comparative studies. In conclusion, the whole historical criti-
cal process of surveying, analysis, and representation requires transparency. 
Digitalizing Heritage
Currently, the architectural heritage knowledge process is based on remote 
sensing, where instruments play a leading role. They can offer measures in 
number, density and accuracy unthinkable until some time ago. However, the 
reality that they present is, in some ways, less complete than the one that we 
can know directly: The information provided by the tools is more accurate on 
what they say (metrical data), but it is less rich for what they cannot tell us. 
Figure 3. L’Aquila. Carli Palace (XVI-XVIII centuries). Images after the ruins by 
the earthquake of 2009, digital surveying, and 3-D model.

“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”
59
The problems of measurement and topography are fundamental (Andrews, 
2009), but they are not sufficient in the analysis of complex historicized 
organisms, like the architectural heritage. Point clouds are raw data, per se 
they are not a critic interpretation; not differently, the textured mesh surfaces 
automatically derived by structure from motion applications. “The existing 
reference articles are not a critical review of the chain of ‘measure, drawing 
and visualization’ [...] but a series of a-critical and dogmatic models that 
define a series of requisites defined ‘a priori’ certainly commensurable with 
each other, but they are difficult to be applied in different contexts. Moreover, 
they do not usually refer to the qualities of the real object, but they refer to the 
capacity of a certain instrument or a certain technology” (Gaiani, Benedetti 
& Apollonio, 2011).
In the traditional drawing, the ongoing relation between mind and hand 
produces directly the message, while nowadays the technology operates a 
filtering, requiring a double transliteration. In architectural surveying, the 
relationship between the real and the model is more articulated than in the 
traditional process, because the partial inversion of the traditional procedure: 
The phase of measurements is anticipated, producing a digital cast of the 
whole building, and translating the critical contribution of the surveyor in 
the post-processing. In the practice of digital survey, the referent is only to be 
ideally represented by the existing building, in fact replaced by the point cloud 
or mesh data. The process of transliteration becomes even more complex: 
Reality <> Bit <> Raster <> Mind <> Bit <> Raster. The modeler has to 
play in the jungle of the measures, critically reconstructing the underlying 
architectural concept (i.e. the real reference). Cameron (2010) reflects on 
the theme of cultural heritage digitization, highlighting the different nature, 
origin, and content of digital heritage: Deciding what to digitize, modeling, 
and visualize means to take an active action of decoding and interpretation 
of the work, i.e. to choose what is meaningful, according to a “process of 
selective canonization” (p.57). Last but not least the fourth dimension of 
built heritage: how it modified and transformed during its life. It requires 
the realization of reconstructive models of past configurations. Not only to 
understand past characteristics and values, but to know how it arrived to 
actuality, and because currently it has its actual characteristics.
In built heritage, there is not visualization without a prior reality (Ch’ng 
& Gaffney, 2013) and in a philological study of the model we cannot for-
get its real reference from whom it was born. According to this aspect, the 
architectural model’s “aura”, “materiality”, and “genius loci” are related to 
(and gain strength from) the ones of the real building. Therefore, a digital 
object, built from material heritage (real thing, drawings, historical descrip-

“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”
60
tions, etc.), and finalized to re-present a reality, has an inalienable conceptual 
characteristic: It cannot be completely intended separately from its reference 
(physical, historical, cultural, etc.), unless it loses its sense and it is trans-
formed into something else.
In the age of industrialization and mechanical serial production, Benjamin 
(1936) expressed its concern with regard to the technological reproducibility 
of the work of art, dangerous for the concepts of centrality, aura, material 
and historical authenticity of the artifact. 
Nowadays, the problem has taken a critical aspect: There is not a problem 
of model’s mimesis of the reality, but the question of the capability of the 
digital model to describe the reality raises. Because the digital reproduction 
is not a replacement. 
However, the consideration and the principles placed by Benjamin are 
still useful: The “hic et nunc” refers to a gnosiological problem of relation-
ship between digital representation and reality, while the “aura” addresses 
the problems of re-production of the aesthetical and historical values of the 
heritage and of his context. It is simple to image how the model can re-present 
the aesthetical values through the simulation of the perceptible image. But, if 
the model is built through a stratification of 3D diachronic sections, therefore 
the model can also “contain” the historic values, ever with the foresight to 
declare, for each one, the critical degree of the hypothesis and the sources – 
documental or derived from surveying – (Brusaporci, Centofanti, Continenza 
& Trizio, 2012; De Luca, Bussayarat, Stefani, Véron & Florenzano, 2011).
Cameron (2010) argues that the digital object, interpreted according to a 
post-modernist epistemology, becomes a sign, and it resurrects the effectual 
and physical reality of the object. Rather, it is not only a sign of the reality 
but also an instrument for the reality. Like the reality, the digital work has its 
own historical and aesthetical qualities, being the result of a human activity. 
The digital object does not aim to “appropriate” of the aura of the reality, 
but to interpret it: “The real object is not under threat but acts as an alibi for 
the virtual” (p.58).
Much more than the traditional spatial drawings, the digital model, with 
its three-dimensional qualities, it is a suitable instrument for built heritage 
representation. It is worth mentioning what Moles explained in his Infor-
mational Theory of the Scheme (1972): The relative amount of information 
increases dramatically using descriptive forms with a lower level of iconicity 
compared to the original, so that for what is intrinsically three-dimensional, 
the representation with 3D models helps to improve not only the visualization, 
or the conservation of information, but especially their definition, organiza-
tion, representation and understanding.

“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”
61
The role of the model is not that of a mimesis of reality, but it permits 
a simulation of reality: “enriching our experience, rather providing us with 
more experience than what we could have without the mediation of the 
visualization, in an empirical relationship with the reality” (Maldonado, 
1992, p.57). Therefore, the digital model of an historical building has to be 
able to give a series of useful information on the architectural significant, at 
a given historical moment: The 3D model aims to simulate the geometries, 
spaces, materials, the architectural characteristics, etc. Being an interpretative 
model, it has to be able to facilitate the analysis of the historical, aesthetic, 
and cultural values of the building and of its context.
Centofanti (2010) states: “While the schematic representation made by the 
model moves away from the real, on the other hand it facilitates the process 
of abstraction that is the basis of every possible interpretive and / or design 
process” (p. 52).
Figure 4. Rocca di Mezzo. School (first half of the XX century). Ground floor, eleva-
tions, and transversal section.

“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”
62
Visualizing Heritage
Since the advent of computer graphic, “modeling” and “rendering” are the 
subsequent steps that bring the digital model to his epiphany. The model is 
constitutively made by an orderly succession of bits that uniquely describe 
data, information, i.e. the characteristics and relationships of virtual elements: 
The model can be written and read, in a text format – but not in its true form 
of machine language –. Although in the process of raster transcription the 
model manifests itself, in all its characteristics. Therefore, the model has a 
dual nature: It is a “signans”, which has to be conducted to the true icon of the 
“signatum”, through a “materialization of the conventionalization processes, 
on which the synthetic icon bases to come to exist” (Colombo 1995, 105).
The diffusion of economic and increasingly powerful CPU and memories, 
coupled with ICT and Real Time Rendering and Interactive applications have 
made different kinds of mixed realities an active instrument of information 
processing for knowledge, interpretation, presentation, and conservation. In 
particular, they allow the collecting of information in the same way in which 
the mind accumulates them, i.e. preferring a spatial knowledge rather than 
an intellectual one, differently than the traditional alphabetical organization. 
Because the shaded and textured visualization of the 3-D model in real time 
rendering and the model’s manipulation favor the simultaneity of ideation 
and elaboration. It is a working knowledge, and according to De Kerckove 
(1991), it allows a “sensory remapping”.
Therefore, in visual computing, it may be preferred the idiomatic expression 
“Visual Heritage” than the traditional “Virtual Heritage”, that could evoke a 
sensory mimesis. We have a new intellectual and experiential dimension of 
the digital referred to the real, where photorealism could be very important 
but not essential, and where the trickery of the senses made by the “too real” 
is often misleading. The role of visualization in heritage has changed during 
last years: Visualization is no more a mere product but it is an interpretation 
research and exploration learning process pf data acquisition and process-
ing, interpretation, modeling, simulation, and visualization of different kind 
of products, according to a so called “secondary digital product revolution” 
(Ch’ng, Gaffney, & Chapman, 2014).
According to the current disenchanted approach of scholars and users to 
digital visualization, we have new communication strategies and new relation-
ships with the medium. Considering the reflection on “Mediation” made by 
Bolter and Grusin (1999), let us consider the double logic of “Immediacy” 
and of “Hypermediacy” of media in our culture: On one hand, virtual reality, 
3-D graphics, and graphical interfaces favor the logic of transparent imme-

“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”
63
diacy, that is “[…] the user is no longer aware of confronting a medium, but 
instead stands in an immediate relationship to the contents of that medium” 
(p. 24). On the other hand, media multiplies itself and “The multiple repre-
sentations inside the windows (text, graphies, video) create a heterogeneous 
space, as they compete for the view’s attention. Icons, menus, and toolbars 
add further layers of visual and verbal meaning. […] Unlike a perspective 
painting or three-dimensional computer graphic, this windowed interface 
does not attempt to unify the space around any one point of view. Instead, 
each text window defines its own verbal, each graphic window its own visual, 
point of view […] The multiplicity of windows and the heterogeneity of their 
contents mean that the user is repeatedly brought back into contact with the 
interface, which she learns to read just as she would read any hypertext. She 
oscillates between manipulating the windows and examining their contents, 
just as she oscillates between looking at a hypertext as a texture of links and 
looking through the links to the textual units as language” (p. 32-33).
The digital representation of an architectural model requires the visualiza-
tion of 3-D elements and data together. The first – according to their built 
nature – can be experienced by spatial images, while the second by multiple 
media windows. They are not alternative but integrated, aiming to a critical 
and efficient communication. Windows re-mediates the model and “Where 
immediacy suggests a unified visual model space, contemporary hyperme-
diacy offers a heterogeneous space, in which representation is conceived of 
not as window on to the world, but rather as ‘windowed’ itself – with win-
dows that open on to other representations or other media” (Bolter & Grusin, 
1999, 34). This is the visualization environment offered by “complex master 
models”: The medium is not only – and no more – a pretty and charming 
photorealistic representation of a synthetized reality, but an “obscene” (be-
cause absolutely transparent) decomposition of the “system choreography” 
and of information. The model is not any more hidden behind the interface 
but it shows itself – and in the case of augmented reality, it is related to reality 
–. Therefore, 3-D-model and database-model are the two side of the same 
model (Murray, 2012).
RECOMMENDATION: THE ON LINE STATE AND 
PARTICIPATORY CULTURES
The initiative of the European Commission The Onlife Manifesto – Be-
ing Human in a Hyperconnected Era (2015), focuses on new ICT-related 
challenges and how they modify our relationship with the pervasiveness 

“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”
64
of the on-line state. Central is the concept of perception, in relation to the 
interrelation between real and virtual, and to the ever-increasing quantity of 
information. Follow questions on consequent collective behavior but also on 
new participative challenges. 
In fact, day-by-day digital tools, devices, and apps have changed – and are 
still changing – media, according to a dimension of pervasive and continuous 
interrelation with “digitality” (wording by Negroponte in 1995). In our cur-
rent on-line life, the concepts of “digital natives” and “digital immigrants” 
(Prensky, 2001) blurs (Jenkins, 2007). “Hyperreality” (Baudrillard, 1976) 
has grown, becoming simply a component of reality, but people have become 
shrewder in their relation with the sort of state of “augmented reality” that 
involves us. The relationship with technology re-news: Its outcomes are con-
stitutive of reality and of our culture, and therefore they requires knowledge, 
understanding, and assessment. The claim for digital heritage preservation 
(UNESCO, 2003) and the statement of digital heritage as common heritage 
ratifie the value and cultural importance of this new kind of contents, and 
consequently their significance in our post-postmodern condition. The philo-
sophical line of New Realism (Ferraris, 2011) relates to this context: New 
realism roots on the postmodern lesson and hermeneutics, but at the same 
time reckon with reality and perception; the characteristic of perception of 
being opaque, requires the need to be represented, i.e. interpreted. 
The participatory approaches (Jenkins, 2009) are based on interactive and 
bidirectional media, where sharing and individual collaboration enable and 
strengthen the diffusion and adhesion to participatory cultures. The result 
is a strong creative tension, with an interpretative cooperation, rooted on 
an open-ended process of updating and on skill development for sources, 
accessing, creative reworking and distribution. The phenomena of “collec-
Figure 5. Rocca di Mezzo. School (first half of the XX century). Point clouds with 
and without rendered colors. 

“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”
65
tive intelligence” rises (Levy, 1994): It is based on a multitasking cognitive 
approach that is on continuous experiences and successive approximations. 
Follows that the culture-making configures no more like a linear process but 
as a complex evolving discourse. In the networked society, consumers have 
become active content producers, and the distinction between scholar(s), 
modeler(s) and user(s) blends, according to new kind of media.
Jenkins (2009) says that participative culture is at least a “cultural mat-
ter” and not only a “technological problem”: “The importance of culture’s 
complex relationship with technology is why we focus […] on the concept 
of participatory cultures rather than on interactive technologies, inter-activity 
is a property of the technology, while participation is a property of culture. 
Participatory culture is emerging as the culture adsorbs and responds to 
the explosion of new media technologies that make it possible for average 
consumers to archive, annotate, appropriate, and recirculate media content 
in powerful new ways” (p.8). Jenkins defines “participatory culture” as “a 
culture with relatively low barriers to artistic expression and civic engage-
ment, strong support for creating and sharing creations, and some type of 
informal mentorship whereby experienced participants pass along knowledge 
to novices. In a participatory culture, members also believe their contribu-
tions matter and feel some degree of social connection with one another” 
(p. xi). In particular, the following skills underlies the participative culture: 
Affiliation, Expression, Collaborative problem solving, Circulation. New 
skills follow: Play, Performance, Simulation, Appropriation, Multitasking, 
Distributed cognition, Collective intelligence, Judgment, Transmedia naviga-
tion, Networking, Negotiation. 
Murray, in her famous book Hamlet on the Holodeck (1997), points out 
four essential proprieties of digital environments: They are Procedural, Par-
ticipatory, Spatial and Encyclopedic. And focusing on the aesthetics of the 
medium, she highlights the importance of immersion, agency, and transfor-
mation. Manovich in The Language of New Media (2001) states five basic 
principles of new media: Numerical representation, Modularity, Automation, 
Variability, Transcoding. 
All these aspects have repercussions on the cultural heritage field: On 
the ways of access and fruition, on heritage meaning and value making, on 
heritage interpretation and presentation, etc.
In addition, the public space for participatory culture changes: The Inter-
net and Social media favor the meeting and discussion, in particular within 
dedicated groups of discussion – the so-called “eco chambers” – populated 
by people with similar interests. These are “spaces of affinity” where shared 
ideas and cultures grow and diffuse. They are not cultural laissez faire spaces, 

“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”
66
but they are ruled by complex balances: The “Posts”, the “I Like”, the an-
swers and comments, not least the authoritative role of group managers. The 
control is complex and based on group admins, on senior followers opinions, 
on member reactions.
Participation could also be a research methodology. For example there 
are many experiences based on Agent-based Modeling (Wurzel, Kowarik, 
& Reschreiter, 2015), such as the “Lost Frontiers” Project Web Site (https://
lostfrontiers.teamapp.com/).
How digital simulation brings to new methodologies is evident in the 
work of Forte: In particular he proposed an eco-systemic approach for the 
archaeological research, called “Cyber-Archeology” (Forte, 2000), based 
on a knowledge model realized through the interaction and feedback in a 
virtual reality environment: It is an informative model with non-linear learn-
ing and communication processes, and, at the same time, a methodological 
instrument for scientific and cultural contents validation. In this way, the 
VR has an epistemological computational role, according to a cybernetic 
model with a progressive information growth, where the observer and the 
observed contemporaneously interact in the same world. “Information” and 
“Relations” guide and enrich the model in a dynamic way. Forte highlights 
how the cybernetic model is a real informative model instead the informat-
ics ones that only develops techniques of data computing (Forte, 2008 p.4).
RESEARCH DIRECTION: TRANSPARENCY AND 
PARADATA
The Venice Charter (ICOMOS, 1964) says about “Publication”: “In all works 
of preservation, restoration or excavation, there should always be precise 
Figure 6. Rocca di Mezzo. School (first half of the XX century). External views and 
transversal section through the stairs of the 3-D cloud model.

“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”
67
documentation in the form of analytical and critical reports, illustrated with 
drawings and photographs. Every stage of the work of clearing, consolidation, 
rearrangement and integration, as well as technical and formal features identi-
fied during the course of the work, should be included. This record should be 
placed in the archives of a public institution and made available to research 
workers. It is recommended that the report should be published” (Art.16)
The quest for “Transparency” as philological declaration of research’s 
sources, methodologies, and tools has ever been very important bur they has 
become an emerging trend in the last years, in particular since computer-
based representation has grown as ineludible, way of communication and as 
visual computing approach. 
In the book The Virtual Representation of the Past (Greengrass & Hughes, 
2008), transparency is one of the fundamental issues, and in the different 
chapters the problem related to the representation of “when”, “where”, and 
“what” recurs. In particular, Beacham (2008) focuses on transparency and 
paradata, as crucial topic “if 3D visualization is to ‘mature’ as a research 
method and acquire widespread acceptance within subject communities” 
(p. 172). From these research lines grows a methodological reflection, in 
particular focused on the philological transparency of digital visualization 
(Huvila, 2013). 
The London Charter (2009) grounds on six principles: Implementation, 
Aims and Methods, Research Sources, Documentation, Sustainability, and 
Access. In particular the ‘Principle 3: Research Sources’ says: “In order to 
ensure the intellectual integrity of computer-based visualisation methods and 
outcomes, relevant research sources should be identified and evaluated in 
a structured and documented way”, and it adds “Particular attention should 
be given to the way in which visual sources may be affected by ideological, 
historical, social, religious and aesthetic and other such factors” (p. 7). It 
recalls the issues of interpretation by The Nara Charter (UNESCO, 1994). 
The “Principle 4: Documentation” recommends “Sufficient information 
should be documented and disseminated to allow computer-based visualisa-
tion methods and outcomes to be understood and evaluated in relation to the 
contexts and purposes for which they are deployed. In order to ensure the 
intellectual integrity of computer-based visualisation methods and outcomes, 
relevant research sources should be identified and evaluated in a structured 
and documented way” (p.8), and this principle highlights the importance of: 
Enhancing Practice, Documentation of Knowledge Claims, Documentation 
of Research Sources, Documentation of Process (Paradata), Documentation 
of Methods, Documentation of Dependency Relationships, Documentation 
Formats and Standards (p.8-9). 

“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”
68
In particular “Paradata” plays a role of primary importance, because the 
“Documentation of the evaluative, analytical, deductive, interpretative and 
creative decisions made in the course of computer-based visualisation should 
be disseminated in such a way that the relationship between research sources, 
implicit knowledge, explicit reasoning, and visualisation-based outcomes can 
be understood” (The London Charter, 2009, p.8-9) and it can be interpreted 
as “Information about human processes of understanding and interpretation 
of data objects” (The London Charter, 2009, p. 13). Therefore, they are a 
sort of metadata useful for the philological reconstruction of the modeling 
process (Denard, 2012). 
The concept of paradata accompanies the one of “scientific transparency”. 
Also remembering The Principles of Seville (2012), transparency has been 
widely developed in the archaeological field, where the digital reconstruc-
tion of artifacts (in their ancient configuration) is largely based on indirect 
information, comparative analysis, interpretative hypothesis. It is also im-
portant to define the degree of reliability of the reconstructions (Hermon & 
Nicolucci, 2006). 
Until now, paradata are used to describe a defined model that is the outcome 
of an interpretative process that, at the end, produces computer visualization. 
Although this representation could be navigated and interrogated, it is referred 
to a “static” architecture. In this way, paradata are about the procedure by 
which data and information are collected, computed and showed. It is a wit-
nesses of how a model is built. Because the scholar(s) is well defined, and 
the user(s) plays a well-defined role. 
Nevertheless, paradata is used not only to describe static systems, because 
“paradata involves ‘action’ and traditional metadata involves ‘classification’” 
(US Department of Education, 2011, 1): Paradata is the tool to describe meta-
data usage and transformation. This issue is fundamental in open-ended and 
participatory systems. And a wise use of paradata is important also recalling 
the claim for measures against the loss of heritage, advocated by the Charter 
for the Preservation of the Digital Heritage. 
In web systems transparency’s protocols are important to declare the fol-
lowing items: The role of scholar(s) in computing data; The architecture of 
the model; The transformations made by agent-based modeling; The trans-
formations realized by networked users.
There are many digital system that simulates geographic and spatial phe-
nomena, and open web GIS should suggest this new paradigms, that are the 
ones of participatory culture. 
More generally, the principle of transparency and the use of paradata 
can also be applied in the historical-critical process of reconstruction of 

“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”
69
past buildings but in knowledge of existing architectural heritage. Firstly, 
the architectural surveying process requires many critical decisions, also in 
the (objective) phase of measurement. Secondly, the interpretative models 
are the result of a understanding process, based on the architectural artifact 
study, and on historical documents (more or less ancient) interpretation, on 
direct and indirect analysis of building’s materials (assays, endoscopies, 
thermographs, geo-radar, chemical and physical analysis, etc.).
Last but not least, we consider the processes – and algorithms – of data 
processing (also referred to the software), but also the choices made by the 
worker in the modeling and texturing pipeline, particularly with regard to 
geometric modeling: From point clouds and surveying data, to mesh surfaces, 
CSG (Constructive Solid Geometry), B-Rep (Boundary Representation) 
models.
The principle of transparency allows the scholars to retrace practitioner’s 
decisions and to test the validity of their deductions. Therefore, transparency 
is important not only in virtual reconstructions but also in general for data 
and information computing. In conclusion, Transparency should be a meth-
odology, or rather an ethics scientific principle, on which base the research.
CONCLUSION: A NEW POINT OF VIEW
With the explosive growth and diffusion of digital technologies, the status of 
novelty – aroused by modeling and visualizing advanced tool – exceed, and 
their application in cultural heritage field has become common and daily. In 
particular, the spread of digital media, based on non-alphabetical forms of 
Figure 7. Rocca di Mezzo. School (first half of the XX century). Comparison between 
the discrete point cloud and the continuous 3-D model.

“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”
70
communication, has made “natural” the image-based and non-linear approach 
of visual computing techniques. In the field of built heritage, the 3-D mod-
els – intended as a spatial medium – have proved to be suitable for cultural 
contents, i.e. to study an inherently three-dimensional reality.
At the same, the nihilistic postmodern approach has left the room for a 
new neo-realist perspective, where the perceivable data is back to be a use-
ful tool for a critical knowledge of reality, and for models analysis, design 
and validation. From this point of view, the contrast between physical reality 
and digital reality ceases to exist: They are two different kinds of real that 
collaborates for the study, conservation, and exploitation of heritage.
Meanwhile, another phenomenon has taken hold: The risk of aestheticiza-
tion for its own sake – a “Dionysian impetus” of “absolute appear” to quote 
Purini (2003, p.95) – gives way to the disenchanted sight of the observer/
practitioner. Transparency of digital phenomena means also coolness, objectiv-
ity, and therefore analysis. The “obscene” sight of the scholar combines with 
new forms of simultaneous intelligence: Mutatis mutandis a sort of “savage 
mind” (Lévi Strauss, 1962), with the researcher/bricoleur who works with 
computerized visual information, and where visual data – from both physical 
and digital related realities – are used according to their ability to produce a 
continuous network of knowledge. 
In the everyday life, the role of digital devices, apps, and tools is not avoid-
able, and digital heritage is pervasive in our everyday life. The distinction 
between tangible and intangible heritage is often difficult to trace, and the 
relation with digital heritage renews. In particular digital heritage supports 
and cooperates with cultural heritage. It marries tangible and intangible 
heritage: It doesn’t substitute them but live together. 
The Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage 
Convention (2015) speaks of “Mixed Cultural and Natural Heritage”, that 
is “Properties shall be considered as ‘mixed cultural and natural heritage’ if 
they satisfy a part or the whole of the definitions of both cultural and natural 
heritage” (p. 11). Today people are experiencing new frontiers of mixed heri-
tage: An Advanced Cultural Heritage, that is not a new kind of heritage but it 
is the result of the synergy between tangible, intangible and digital heritage. 
Again we cite Giaccardi (2012): “there is now the possibility of attach-
ing digital data to artifacts in the real world through social media suites for 
augmented reality, the tagging of uniquely identifiable objects, or the sensing 
of patners of activity and specific behaviors around artifacts […] thus the 
fabric of participation and conversation offered by social media is not simply 
made of online interactions and virtual experiences; it is also interwoven with 

“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”
71
physical objects, places and activities that are augmented and enhanced with 
social data and connectivity” (p.4).
ICT and digital instruments well fit for heritage participatory cultural 
matters: Heritage as “cultural practice”; public heritage-making processes; 
authoritative vs participative approaches, etc. Because also the relationship of 
people – included scholars – with digital technologies has changed: The user 
is less and less passive, but she collaborate in content building and sharing. 
The consequence is that tangible, intangible, and digital heritage merge, with 
the consciousness of the difference between real and digital. 
REFERENCES
Andrews, D. (Ed.). (2009). Metric Survey Specification for Cultural Heritage. 
Swindow: English Heritage.
Baudrillard, J. (1976). L’echange symbolique et la mort. Paris: Gallimard.
Baudrillard, J. (1987). L’autre par lui-même: Habilitation. Paris: Editions 
Galilée.
Beacham, R. (2008). ‘Oh, to Make Boards to Speak! There is a Task!’ Toward 
a Poetics of Paradata. In M. Greengrass & L. Hughes (Eds.), The Virtual 
Representation of the Past (pp. 171-178). Farnham: Ashgate.
Benjamin, W. (1936). Das Kunstwerk im Zeitalter seiner technischen Repro-
duzierbarkeit. Zeitschrift für Sozialforschung.
Bolter, J. D., & Grusin, R. (1999). Remediation – Understanding New Media. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Brusaporci, S. (Ed.). (2015). Handbook of Research on Emerging Digital 
Tools for Architectural Surveying, Modeling, and Representation. Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8379-2
Brusaporci, S., Centofanti, M., Continenza, R., & Trizio, I. (2012). Sistemi 
Informativi Architettonici per la gestione, tutela e fruizione dell’edilizia 
storica. In ATTI 16ª Conferenza Nazionale ASITA 2012 (pp. 315–322). Vi-
cenza: ASITA.
Cameron, F. (2010). Beyond the Cult of the Replicant. In F. Cameron & S. 
Kenderdine (Eds.), Theorizing digital cultural heritage: a critical discourse 
(pp. 49-76). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”
72
Centofanti, M. (2010). Della natura del modello architettonico. In S. Bru-
saporci (Ed.), Sistemi informativi integrati per la tutela, la conservazione e 
la valorizzazione del patrimonio architettonico e urbano (pp. 43–54). Rome: 
Gangemi.
Ch’ng, E., & Gaffney, V. L. (2013). Seeing Things: Heritage Computing, 
Visualization and the Arts and Humanities. In E, Ch’ng, V. Gaffney & H. 
Chapman (Eds.), Visual Heritage in the Digital Age (pp. 1-14). London: 
Springer.
Ch’ng, E., Gaffney, V. L., & Chapman, H. P. (2014). From Product to Process: 
New Directions in Digital Heritage. In H. Din & S. Wu (Eds.), Digital Heri-
tage and Culture: Strategy and Implementation (pp. 219–243). Singapore: 
World Scientific. doi:10.1142/9789814522984_0015
Colombo, F. (1990). Ombre sintetiche. Napoli: Liguori.
De Kerckove, D. (1991). Brainframes. Technology, Mind and Business. 
Utrecht: Bosh & Keuning.
De Luca, L., Bussayarat, C., Stefani, C., Véron, P., & Florenzano, M. (2011). 
A semantic-based platform for the digital analysis of architectural heritage. 
Computers & Graphics, 2(35), 227–241. doi:10.1016/j.cag.2010.11.009
Denard, H. (2012). A New Introduction to The London Charter. In Para-
data and Transparency in Virtual Heritage (pp. 57–72). Farnham: Ashgate 
Publishing.
Ferraris, M. (2011). Manifesto of New Realism. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Ferraris, M. (2012). Esistere è resistere. In M. De Caro & M. Ferraris (Eds.), 
Bentornata realtà (pp. 139–166). Milano: Einaudi.
Forte, M. (2000). About Virtual Archaeology: Disorders, Cognitive Interac-
tions and Virtuality. In Virtual Reality in Archaeology (pp. 247-263). Oxford, 
UK: BAR International Series S843 (Archaeopress).
Forte, M. (2008). Introduzione. in M. Forte (Ed.), La Villa di Livia. Un per-
corso di realtà virtuale (pp.1-36). Roma: “L’Erma” di Bretschneider.
Gaiani, M., Benedetti, B., & Apollonio, F. I. (2011). Teorie per rappresentare 
e comunicare i siti archeologici attraverso modelli critici. SCIRES-IT, 1(2), 
33–70.

“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”
73
Giaccardi, E. (2012). Introduction: reframing Heritage in a participatory 
culture. In E. Giaccardi (Ed.), Heritage and Social Media: Understanding 
heritage in a Participatory Culture (pp. 1–10). Abingdon: Routledge.
Greengrass, M., & Hughes, L. (Eds.). (2008). The Virtual Representation of 
the Past. Farnham: Ashgate.
Hermon, S., & Nicolucci, F. (2006). A Fuzzy Logic Approach to Realiabil-
ity in Archaeological Virtual Reconstruction. In S. Hermon & F. Nicolucci 
(Eds.), Beyond the Artefact. Digital Interpretation of the Past (pp. 28–35). 
Budapest: Archaeolingua.
Huvila, I. (2013). The Unbearable Complexity of Documenting Intellectual 
Processes: Paradata and Virtual Cultural Heritage Visualisation. Human IT, 
12(1), 97–110.
ICOMOS. (1964). International charter for the conservation and restoration 
of monuments and sites. Retrieved on November, 15, 2016 from http://www.
icomos.org/charters/venice_e.pdf
Ippolito, A. (Ed.). (2017). Handbook of Research on Emerging Technologies 
for Architectural and Archaeological Heritage. IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-5225-0675-1
Ippolito, A., & Cigola, M. (Eds.). (2017). Handbook of Research on Emerg-
ing Technologies for Digital Preservation and Information Modeling. IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0680-5
Jenkins, H. (2007). Reconsidering Digital Immigrants. Retrieved November 
15, 2016, from www.henryjenkins.org/2007/12/reconsidering_digital_im-
migran.html
Jenkins, H. (2009). Confronting the Challenges of Participatory Culture: 
Media Education for the 21st Century. Cambridge, MA: MIT.
Lévi Strauss, C. (1962). La pensée sauvage. Paris: Plon.
Levy, P. (1994). L’intelligence collective: Pour une anthropologie du cyber-
space. Paris: La Découverte.
Maldonado, T. (1992). Reale e virtuale. Milan: Feltrinelli.
Manovich, L. (2001). The Language of New Media. Cambridge, MA: The 
MIT Press.

“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”
74
Manovich, L. (2013). Software Takes Command. New York: Bloomsbury 
Academic.
Moles, A. (1972). Teoria informazionale dello schema. Versus, 2, 29–37.
Murray, J. (1997). Hamlet on the Holodeck. The Future of Narrative in Cy-
berspace. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Murray, J. H. (2012). Inventing the Medium. Principles of Interaction Design 
as a Cultural Practice. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Negroponte, N. (1995). Being Digital. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Pescarin, S. (2016). Digital Heritage into Practice. SCIRES-IT, 6(1), 1–4.
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital Natives, Digital Immigrants Part 1. On the Ho-
rizon, 9(5), 1–6. doi:10.1108/10748120110424816
Principles of Seville. (2012). Retrieved November 15, 2016, from http://
www.arqueologiavirtual.com/carta/?page_id=12
Purini, F. (2003). Digital divide. In L. Sacchi & M. Unali (Eds.), Architettura 
e cultura digitale (pp. 87–96). Milano: Skira.
Stone, R. J. (1999, November). Virtual heritage. UNESCO World Heritage 
Magazine, 18-20.
The London Charter. (2009). Retrieved November 15, 2016 from http://www.
londoncharter.org/
The Onlife Manifesto. (2015). Retrieved November 15, 2016 from https://
ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/onlife-manifesto
UNESCO. (1994). The Nara Document on Authenticity. Retrieved on No-
vember, 15, 2016, from whc.unesco.org/document/9379
UNESCO. (2003). Charter on the Preservation of the Digital Heritage. 
Retrieved November 15, 2016, from http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-
URL_ID=17721&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html
UNESCO. (2015). Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the 
World Heritage Convention. Retrieved on November, 15, 2016, from http://
whc.unesco.org/en/guidelines/
US Department of Education. (2011). Paradata in 20 Minutes or Less. Re-
trieved November 15, 2016, from https://docs.google.com/document/d/1QG
0lAmJ0ztHJq5DbiTGQj9DnQ8hP0Co0x0fB1QmoBco/edit?pli=1

“Warp Drive, Mr. Sulu”
75
Ware, C. (2000). Information Visualization: Perception for Design. San 
Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann.
Wurzel, G., Kowarik, K., & Reschreiter, H. (Eds.). (2015). Agent-based 
Modeling and Simulation in Archeology. Cham: Springer.

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-2434-2.ch004
Chapter 4
76 
Καλλιόπη or On 
Interpretation, 
Presentation, and 
Participation:
Models in Architectural 
Heritage Conservation
ABSTRACT
The chapter underlines the peculiarities of architectural, and it focuses on 
specific methodological aspects, in particular related to historical studies 
and their aims. Advanced digital models for historical buildings are based 
on the synergy of 3D-modeling and database-modeling. In particular, docu-
mentation, surveying, computer based-visualization, virtual reconstructions, 
digital archives, and digital museums, as well as gaming, edutainment, and 
e-tourism approaches favor the development and diffusion of non-linear, 
multi-directional, and media complex storytelling for heritage study, inter-
pretation, presentation, and conservation.
INTRODUCTION
A building is a complex organism, synthesis of spaces, surfaces, volumes, 
and materials, made by constructive systems. It is the result of processes 
of transformation and modification, expression of interventions and of ar-
chitectural cultures that have occurred since its construction to the present 
day. Each building has its own quality of “individual”, therefore the term 

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
77
“handmade” (or “artifact”) is often used to highlight how a historic building 
is a product of human activity.
Architectural heritage has specific historical and aesthetic values (Brandi, 
1963). It should be noted that historical values also includes the construction 
techniques of the past, now no longer in use – often not repeatable because 
the loss of the ancient material culture –: These techniques are the witnesses 
of cultures of a specific historical age, useful timelines to reconstruct the life 
of the building, and static reason of existence.
Therefore the issue of an architectural scientific representation conceptually 
cannot be limited to the one of its surface – as far as conducted at the high-
est level of photorealism – or to the metric accuracy of measures – as far as 
necessary –, but inevitably it must aim to the understanding, representation, 
interpretation, and presentation of historical and aesthetic characteristics.
Consequently the contents of architectural heritage representation are 
influenced by: Building characteristics (for example a ruin of classical age, a 
medieval castle, a renaissance palace, a baroque church); Specific representa-
tion aims (such as geometrical-dimensional surveying, degradation analysis, 
communication addressed to non-expert users, etc.); Last but not least, levels 
of definition (scale or, for a 3D model, the Levels of Details).
Digital technologies favor the representation of architectural heritage by 
3-D complex models. In particular models represent dimensional and geo-
metrical building’s aspects, architectural and constructive characteristics, and 
transformations. Moreover they can be a core for the aggregation, organiza-
tion, analysis and management of the vast and heterogeneous information 
associated to architectural heritage, such as surveying and design drawings, 
historical documents, scientific data (Centofanti & Brusaporci, 2012).
The spread of digital tools has brought the research on architectural heri-
tage to pay attention on some lines, in particular: The ways to move from 
the physical content to the 3D model; The design of datasets; The study of 
the potentialities given by software and instruments, often born for different 
applications – mechanical design, forensic surveying, architectural design 
of new buildings, etc. – (Chiavoni & Filippa, 2011).
The representation is the first and more important tool for architectural 
heritage’s study and communication, because visualization allows the scholars 
to “see” their ideas, make them experienceable, verify them, and – conse-
quently – representation aims to change, improve, and share concepts.
3-D modeling favors an heuristic process, because the modeler is required 
to check and modify the results of the modeling procedures according to an 
iterative process of reading / understanding / communication of the architec-
tural artifact’s characteristics and values. In particular architectural survey-

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
78
ing is based on a historical-critical process, where data and information are 
summarized through graphical models (Docci & Maestri, 2009). Digital tools 
move the representation in a three-dimensional space that is in a space similar 
to the architectural one. In addition, the 3-D model is a smart interface for 
the gathering, computing, sharing, and communication of the huge mass of 
information accompanying the architecture.
At the beginning, the studies on 3-D architectural visualization focused 
on problems of computer graphics – we remember the example of the Cluny 
abbey model made by IBM France in 1992 –. Than the progress of 3-D 
modeling and of real-time rendering technologies – always faster and more 
efficient – have favored the development of Virtual Reality and Virtual Heri-
tage. In relation to the study of architectural heritage, a strand of literature 
has focused on the analysis and validation of instruments and software, born 
and developed in other fields of research (Fiorucci, 2005. Chiavoni & Paolini, 
2007). Today digital models, defining structured systems of information, 
pursuit the collection and the visualization of large amounts of data, in ways 
that facilitate analysis and interpretation (Docci, Chiavoni & Filippa, 2011. 
Brusaporci 2013. Brusaporci, 2015c).
BACKGROUND: ARCHITECTURAL HERITAGE IN THE 
DIGITAL AGE
The growth of digital technologies has affected all the disciplines involved 
in cultural heritage study. In particular the ease of use, the flexibility, and 
the potentialities of digital application favors the diffusion of digital tools in 
Figure 1. L’Aquila. Convent of St. Basilio (XVIII century). Images of the main façade 
and of the cloister.

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
79
dissimilar research fields. Today there is the awareness that these technolo-
gies are not mere instruments for surveying or visualizing, but they favor the 
research methodologies development.
Laser scanning, digital photogrammetry, and photo-modeling have brought 
a partial inversion of the traditional architectural surveying process (Bianchini, 
2014). Architectural survey aims to the understanding and communication 
of the values of the building, through the analysis, selection, synthesis, and 
graphitization of the real work (Docci & Maestri, 2009). Traditionally, the 
process was articulated according to the following steps: 1) the preliminary 
documental research; 2) the drafting of sketches to analyze the building, to 
understand its characteristics, and to design the surveying project; 3) the 
measuring; 4) the restitution, i.e. the realization of drawings. The sketches 
are a graphical tool for the “reading” of the architectural document and they 
aim to the discretization of the architectural continuum with the individu-
alization and selection of the significant elements of the building. This is a 
first critical act made by the surveyor.
On the contrary, digital sensing instruments operate in an uncritical way, 
“shooting” measures in an area of the space – according to a pre-defined 
grid – and getting data not related to the buildings geometry or to its spatial, 
formal, historical, and constructive characteristics. Although the surveyor 
has a preliminary role in defining the views and density of remote sensing, 
fundamentally the act of critical analysis is transposed in the post-processing 
step. Simplifying, in the digital age, the surveying process can be summa-
rized into two actions: “measure” and “drawing” – or rather “modeling” – 
(Gaiani, 2012a), according to the well-known process of reverse modeling. 
Therefore, architectural heritage surveying is conceptually correlated with 
digital modeling.
Follows another aspect that breaks with the tradition: The restitutions 
are no more made by two-dimensional drawings but by a 3-D models, from 
which – eventually but not necessarily – derive 2-D illustrations.
Thanks to their characteristics of geo-referencing, interactivity and extended 
media experiencing, 3-D models favor new epistemological approaches to 
architectural disciplines. At the same time models are vectors for heritage’s 
communication and exploitation. Moreover, digital models offer the pos-
sibility to be the aggregator and ordering core of documentary information, 
i.e. the platform to build Architectural Information Systems (Brusaporci & 
Trizio, 2010).
Historically, the field of architecture has a close relationship with visual-
ization. In fact, the practice of drawing has always played an essential role, 
as much as for knowledge – i.e. surveying (Docci & Maestri, 1993) –, or 

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
80
for design (Cigola & Fiorucci, 1993). This question has been the subject of 
eminent studies (Ackerman, 2002). Docci (1989) arguing on the concept of 
“model” as way to identify and express the relationships between the elements 
and characteristics of a building says: “We use the graphic medium to create 
understanding models of the architectural work and of urban spatiality, in 
order to be able to comprehend and analyze them, as well as a scientist who 
reproduces, in his laboratory, artificially a phenomenon. The drawing, thus 
interpreted, is identified with the concept of the model, or better of graphi-
cal model of understanding. It should be noted, in this regard, that such a 
model is really a model when it is composed of a set of elements linked 
together by the same rules that link together the constitutive elements of the 
space described by the model; therefore, it doesn’t represent the work like it 
appears, but it establish an analogy with the purpose of underling laws that 
regulates the organization of the work itself. Then it is a process of com-
plexity reduction of the architectural reality, aiming to point out significant 
aspects, highlighting them in a schema” (38-39). This process is the so-called 
“graphical analysis”: According to a visual computing approach, models are 
tools for building analysis, understanding, interpretation and presentation. 
The methodology of the graphical analysis has found in 3-D modeling a line 
for developing, giving rise to a field of study where the virtual reconstruction 
of existing buildings or disappeared ones takes the function of instrument 
for the historical-critical study (Albisinni & De Carlo, 2011; Centofanti, 
Brusaporci & Lucchese, 2014; Brusaporci, 2016a).
Figure 2. L’Aquila. Convent of St. Basilio (XVIII century). Ground floor, façade, 
and transversal section with the constructive system.

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
81
ONTOLOGIES FOR ARCHITECTURAL HERITAGE
On the Nature of the Architectural Heritage
The architectural field presents own peculiarities. Architectural heritage 
shapes from a relationship between “built” and “voids”, masses and details. 
It’s the synthesis of materials, surfaces, constructive systems, spaces able to 
accommodate human activities, last but not least aesthetic characteristics. 
They are all defined through continuous processes of modification and 
transformation over time. Surveying, comprehension, and ‘re-construction’ 
of the building’s system require a critical reflection, in particular because 
usually it is not directly visible and not totally experienceable – except in 
the case of ruin –: It has to be studied and represented according to direct 
and indirect analysis.
In architecture, constructive and aesthetic characteristics sustain the 
building’s ability to satisfy the necessity to be used – both from a spatial 
and environmental point of view –. The use implies continuous processes 
of transformation and adaptation. Very important are the interventions for 
maintenance, i.e. modifications almost seamless.
Considering the topic of “documentality”, scholars of architecture have 
various kinds of archival documents – ancient and recent – often scattered in 
several archives: Graphical and textual archival data on the yard, the build-
ing, and its transformations, on the different players (designers, builders, 
contractors, etc.); Bibliographies and biographies; Different kinds of draw-
ings, such as previous surveys, paintings, etc.; Photographs; Surveying data 
(preliminary surveying sketches, field notebooks, measures, point clouds, 
etc.); 2-D and 3-D interpretative models; comparative, metrological, pro-
portional, historical, structural, energetic analysis, and on degradation and 
materials analysis; Reports, calculations, and project elaborations. Moreover 
the architectural analysis requires the study of other works of the same author 
and of the same workers, and of buildings of the same age and of the same 
architectural culture. Data, information, and considerations arising from the 
critical interpretation made by surveyors and scholars may be added to this 
information core.
The virtual re-construction of non-more existing buildings or of past 
configurations, or of projects not realized – critically made according to the 
historical documents and/or to the traces still existing – favor the historical-
critical analysis of the architectural and cultural events. The historical di-
mension of the building requires its study also considering the architectural 

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
82
theories of the past – preserved by treatises and manuals –, original writings 
and drawings, and recent and past critical studies (Brusaporci, 2015a).
A very important issue is the study of the spatial context, because it is an 
essential element of each specific building. In particular, recalling the con-
cept that an historical center can be intended as a “sylloge” of architectures 
(Benedetti, 1981), each building has both own historical and aesthetic values 
and urban ones – also constantly changing –: The last ones arise from mutual 
spatial and figurative relationships between architectures. The representa-
tion of the facades wings and of the building’s volumes, and the realization 
of historical philological synchronic and diachronic maps are useful for the 
study of the values and characteristics of historical cities (Spagnesi, 1979).
What Kind of History for Architectural Heritage?
An historic building is the physical and cultural synthesis of modifications 
and interventions occurred since its construction to the present day.
The ever changing state of architectural heritage – influenced by the pas-
sage of time, by its use, by the changes of its urban context, by restorations, 
by maintenances, etc. – configures a dynamic nature. It requires an open-
ended interpretative model able to describe and include phases, analysis, 
projects, and changes.
The critical role of the scholar is essential: Every model of an architec-
tural heritage moves from a interpretative act, and the model origins from a 
Figure 3. L’Aquila. Convent of St. Basilio (XIV-XVIII century). Virtual reconstruc-
tion of the square at the XVII century.

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
83
comprehension of building’s values and then from a wise documentation. It 
requires the understanding of the cultural and constructive characteristics, 
the study of the context, and a correct project of the research. We should 
say that the interpretative model rises from the careful and constant meeting 
between the building and the surveyor.
In 1983 the “XXI Congress of History of Architecture” was held in Rome, 
organized by the “Centro di Studi per la Storia dell’Architettura” [Center for 
the Study of the History of Architecture] and by the “Istituto dell’Enciclopedia 
Italiana” [Institute of the Italian Encyclopedia] (Spagnesi, 1984a). Between 
the essays we remember the one titled Problemi e metodi di ricerca storico-
critica sull’architettura [Issues and Methods for the Historical-Critical Re-
search on Architecture] for the accurate definition of the “historical-critical 
methodology” (Bruschi 1984) and the paper titled Autonomia della Storia 
dell’Architettura [Autonomy of the History of Architecture] by Spagnesi 
(1984b) that present useful suggestions.
The fact is that an architectural heritage bases its ontology precisely 
on the fact of being equipped with a story. Therefore, its total study, and 
then its visualization, cannot evade its historicity and therefore the study of 
its history. However, Spagnesi starts from a disciplinary reflection on the 
study of history in the architectural field: “we must reaffirm the autonomy 
of architectural history […] especially the identification of a own field of 
investigation, studied with own tools, that cannot be confused with ones of 
other historical disciplines”. Then “If history is always equivalent to know, 
the History of Architecture has to be the knowledge of the physical built 
space made by men, i.e. the current reality” (p.7). The first important aspect 
is the subject of knowledge: the “physical built space”. The wording “physical 
space” recalls the study of the space according to its geometries, functions, 
but also to architectural elements, materials, illumination and perception. The 
adjective “built” points out that an artifact have to be studied – first of all – 
as a tangible heritage, made by specific constructive techniques, witnesses 
of the protagonists and architectural cultures occurred over time. Therefore, 
the study of designers, technologies, yards, workers assumes particular im-
portance. This does not exclude other kinds of related studies – on intangible 
heritage – that can favorably accompany the study of the “built”.
The second aspect to note is the emphasis on the concept of “current 
reality”: the study of the history of an architectural artifact aims to analyze 
the existent building. Compared to archaeology, the viewpoint is reversed: 
Not the re-construction of no more existing artifacts (usually from existing 
remains), but the analysis of a temporal sequence of events that led to the 
current state. In fact Spagnesi highlights: “only the “current reality” can 

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
84
be known, the contemporary one, through the analysis of the causes that 
determined it” (p.7).
Spagnesi concludes: “The knowledge of reality is the critical synthesis 
of the judgments of values referred to the singles historical moments” that 
conduced to the current situation (p.10). That is the study of the past con-
figurations aims to the understanding of the values of the current artifact.
In parallel, it’s interesting a definition of heritage given by Silberman 
(2008), and his consideration on the concept of past: “Heritage is an ever-
changing array of objects and symbols, a complex mosaic of artifacts, im-
ages, monuments, and customs that demand our attention and demand that 
we give some meaning to them”. While “The Past – in contrast to heritage 
– is one of the most virtual of the realities we have to content with. It is an 
untouchable phantom: a once lived reality that survives only in fragments 
and can be experienced only in retrospect” (p.18).
In particular, this last remark recalls the archaeological experiences 
primarily aimed at the re-construction of a no longer existing past from the 
findings. Compared with archaeological remains, in the architectural field, 
heritage has a different quality of immanence and physicality. There also is 
another difference with archaeology: Architects have not only findings or 
narrative documents, but also other kinds of documents: drawings, paintings, 
projects, reports, images, etc.
Figure 4. L’Aquila. Convent of St. Basilio (XIV-XVIII century). Virtual reconstruc-
tion of the square at the XVIII century.

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
85
Aim of the historical representations of a building is the study of actual 
values: Compared to archaeology, the critical perspective of the historical 
reconstruction is inverted. Therefore in archaeology the study of history is a 
path toward our past; in architecture it is a way to the present, and therefore 
to the project: A project of conservation that involves the image of the build-
ing, its systems, its use, etc. (Brusaporci, 2014).
Dealing with architectural history, we remember the tradition of typological 
studies founded by Muratori (1960) – diffused in the last decades of the XX 
century. It presents a point of view that can be referred to structuralism, but 
although the positivistic approach to the buildings, anyway they have focused 
attention on the whole urban fabric, intended as an overall system where 
buildings conjugate with monuments. Otherwise, considering each building 
as an individual, typologies can be seen as witnesses of the historical values. 
In this way the typology isn’t a model that can be repeated exactly identical 
in several copies, but it is a concept, a practice, where each architectural ar-
tifact acquires individual characters, becoming unlike from others and also 
different from the “type”. Therefore, the results derived from the study of 
the “type” – i.e. comparing the individual characteristics of each building – 
cannot substitute the direct knowledge of the single architecture. Rather the 
study of the “type” implies the surveying of each artifact. In this way, the 
acknowledgment of the complementarities between general and typological 
knowledge of each building is a prerequisite for the use of the type with a 
knowledge function (Progetti e ricerche della città di Pesaro 1980).
Similarly, Spagnesi (1979) writes that we haven’t to intend the typo-
logical analysis as a tool for the classification of urban and building fabric 
modalities of transformation, but it is one of the elements that contribute to 
the knowledge of the architectures, ever considered in the actuality of their 
consistency (p. 14). The type should be seen as an adjective that points out 
the characteristics of the current building. Therefore, the typology describes 
the synthesis of the transformation processes, in the actual definition of the 
architectural characteristics. In this way, the typological analysis helps to 
define the historical values. Moreover, the study of the current types favor 
the historical-critical analysis of the buildings and, at the same time, the 
highlighting of the relationships between buildings of the urban context.
The shape of urban heritage is produced by the synthesis of historical 
and architectural events, made immanent by the buildings and urban spaces. 
Benedetti (1981) moves from Brandi’s consideration on the different kind 
of “unity” of the work of art: The historical center has the same quality of 
the work of art, but unlike it where “unity” derives from its “wholeness”, the 
unity of a urban center image originates from the “sylloge” given by the single 

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
86
architectural works. That is, the urban heritage has a “relational value” that 
moves from the characteristics of the buildings that compose it. The study 
of urban heritage requires a particular attention to building’s types and to the 
urban wings of streets and squares, i.e. to the facades and to the relational 
systems, such as entrance halls, courtyards, stairs, etc.
Reflecting on urban heritage restoration, in addition to the traditional his-
torical and aesthetic values, Bonelli (1963) proposes another kind of value: 
The “use value”, according to the fact that a city it cannot be experienced 
only in an aesthetical way but it is the space for the everyday life.
COMPLEX INFORMATION MODELS
The Master Model
According to its nature, the 3-D model is made by geo-referenced data en-
tities, related to geometry, topology, materials, etc. At the same time, the 
technologies of digital archiving, analysis and management of information 
have found in the three-dimensional model the frame on which develop their 
potentialities. Therefore, the model become the interface between two systems 
of information: The 3-D Model and the Database Model. This recalls the 
consideration of Manovich (2001) on new media forms that follow the two 
logics of the “database” and of the “navigable space”.
Figure 5. L’Aquila. Convent of St. Basilio (XIV-XVIII century). Virtual reconstruc-
tion of the square at the XX century.

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
87
The correlation between the spatial structure of the model – communica-
tively iconic and with not sequential access mode – and data matrixes gives 
rise to new kinds of informative systems, where geo-spatial and temporal 
referencing are attributes of the information. Therefore, the model is an 
“aggregator core” for information (Gaiani 2012b), favoring new ways of ac-
cessing, collecting, correlating, systematization and analysis of the vast and 
diverse amount of data, deriving from architectural surveying and archival 
studies. The model becomes a vector for the information: In this sense, it 
configures as an “Informative Model”.
About Information Systems for architecture, the GIS software-houses are 
developing their applications to consent elementary operations of solid model-
ing. We cite a experimentation where 3-D CAD models have been imported 
into a GIS environment (Centofanti, Continenza, Brusaporci & Trizio, 2011). 
However, the Building Information Modelling (BIM) offers a privileged struc-
ture to establish a correlation between the model’s components and informa-
tion: In particular, BIM is studied specifically for the architecture, in order to 
provide tools for the design, management and maintenance of new buildings, 
realized according to industrialized procedures. Their intrinsic structure is 
based on the use of libraries of constructive elements, and it requires a serial 
typing of building’s components. This approach difficulty combines with the 
problems of historic buildings, profoundly modified and made with artisan 
procedures. Numerous experiments are underway for evaluating the potential 
of their application to architectural heritage (Garagnani 2013; Centofanti, 
Brusaporci & Maiezza, 2016).
With regard to the Informative Model construction, primary issue is the 
modeling of the database and the definition of appropriate metadata for 
archival architectural heritage. They are important to allow an opportune 
correlation between them and the architectural model. Even in relation to 
the fact that the main metadata schemas (Dublin Core MES, MODS, VRA, 
CDWA) can be scarcely applied to architectural heritage.
In any case, we have to take into account that the purpose is the critical 
knowledge of architectural heritage. Murray (2012) points out the importance 
of a wise critical design: “When we are labeling a segment for browsing we 
should remember that the goal is to provide intellectual access-retrieval by 
subject labels. It is much more useful to know that a particular artifact refers 
to the Szechuan region of China, than to know whether it is a video segment, 
a jpg map, or a text file” (p. 225). The semantic metadata have to be designed 
in relation to the characteristics of the model – in this case dedicated to ar-
chitectural heritage – and to the aims of the knowledge process.
Thanks to its structure, the architectural complex model configures as:

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
88
1. 	 A non-linear system of accumulation and analysis of data;
2. 	 A spatial multimedia system of communication.
Operationally raises two issues, but practically related as sides of the same 
coin: The semantization of the model and the semantization of the database.
A first issue is about an appropriate semantic segmentation of information, 
according to the principle to preserve it. A multiple semantization is useful 
both in database modeling and in historical building modeling. A question 
follows: Is it appropriate to take into account different semantic interpreta-
tions? Murray suggests: “In the digital medium we do not have to choose a 
single method of segmentation. We can employ multiple methods and use them 
separately or together” (Murray 2012, p. 223). The same for the architectural 
heritage, where a good semantization allows multiple interpretations: The 
constructive system seems the most useful way to ensure model’s interoper-
ability between different kinds of software, but a semantization based on 
room-spaces is already important for the architectural study.
Another matter is the “granularity” of information segmentation, because 
it provides access to information. Once again, with references to both the 
database and the model, multiples granularities favor an efficient and smart 
management of information.
Obviously, the smaller is the granularity, the more precise is the control 
over information and it also provides the operator to doesn’t get lost in 
random-visited pieces. In this way, the 3-D model itself could be the map 
for the navigation between the information, i.e. a guide in the spatial flux 
of geo-referenced data and information. Therefore, it is important the struc-
turing of the model (of both database and building), according to a layered 
system of elements, organized in tree structures. In conclusion, an Informa-
tive Complex Model could be a Master Model that allows the collection of 
heterogeneous data and information, their elaboration, and multiple heritage 
interpretations, presentations, and visualizations, according to different kind 
of users (Brusaporci, 2013).
H-Building Information Modeling
In the last years, Building Information Modeling (BIM) has become the pro-
tagonist in the architectural design field, for its potentialities in computing 
and management of information covering the entire building life cycle – from 
conception, realization, maintenance, management, and dismantlement –. The 
BIM focuses on the building of 3-D models as shareable and interoperable 
tools between different professionals: It is a three-dimensional interface to 

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
89
develop the whole project (realize drawings, structural or energetic analysis, 
calculations and economic estimations, etc.), in all its steps and from differ-
ent point of views. The aim is to optimize timing / costs/benefits of a design 
process based on industrialization, prefabrication, and typing of commercial 
constructive components.
The concept of Information is central and related to model’s components 
made by objects semantically defined as elements of the constructive system. 
Therefore, they represent both geometrical features, materials aspects, and 
structural, energetic, economic characteristics. Differently from CAD objects, 
they are not general volumes, but they are walls, floors, windows, doors, etc. 
Consequently, they are pre-defined by libraries, i.e. these components are 
standardized.
Recently, numerous studies have focused on the application of BIM to ar-
chitectural heritage. However, numerous problems are matter of investigation.
A first reflection concerns the modeling of historical buildings. The cur-
rent surveying technologies based on 3-D laser-scanning and digital photo-
grammetry permit the acquisition of significant amount of metric data, in 
Figure 6. Workflow for the 3-D Informative Modeling of architectural heritage

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
90
very short times. Once you get the point clouds, three essential questions 
are posed: First, the issues related to procedures for the derivation of 3-D 
models from point clouds; Secondly, the problems of 3-D definition not only 
according to external shape but also to internal and intrinsic material and 
constructive aspects; Thirdly – perhaps the more complex problem from a 
conceptual point of view –, the BIM model is made by parametrized and 
standardized objects, uploaded from libraries, while every historic building 
is the synthesis of processes of modification and stratification during time, 
and its components are realized – in most cases – with craft practices. That 
is the matters is how reconcile the unique character of historical architecture, 
with parametric 3D objects from typed libraries.
One possible way is to bring the architectural elements of the building to 
typed objects, partially losing the peculiarities and differences of the real. 
In practice, the survey accuracy is in part set aside, in favor of standardized 
parametric families. Another way, according to a historicist approach that 
implies the greater adherence to the real, is to realize architectural element 
modelling peculiarities, anomalies and degradation. But this approach brings 
should bring to a reduction of BIM potentialities.
In particular, the most recent researches on BIM for architectural heritage 
focus on the relationship between measurement and modeling, and on model’s 
semantization (Apollonio, Gaiani & Zheng, 2012).
Current BIM software is quite deficient in managing large amounts of 
data resulting from measurement campaign. A substantial problem is related 
Figure 7. Giulianova. “Acquaviva” School (1923-1948). HBIM model.

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
91
to the controlling of point clouds in BIM environment. For example, the 
plug-in “GreenSpider” (Garagnani, 2015) consents the selection of points of 
the cloud, thus favoring a faithful modeling.
Considering the Historic Building Information Modelling (HBIM) ap-
proach, the architectural elements are parametrized according to historical 
manuals and treatises. This semi-automatic procedure is founded on plug-in 
that uses libraries of historic architectural building components and algo-
rithms – based on the classic proportions and on architectural rules – that 
combine automatically the library items. Subsequently, the operator alters 
the parameters and refines the model by matching with surveying data (Dore 
& Murphy, 2015). It is also possible the importation of complex geometric 
shapes – for example NURBS – trying to overcome the deficiencies of BIM 
software in surface modeling (Oreni et alii 2014).
In parallel with the problem of modeling, a second important reflection 
arises, on the implementation and management of information related to the 
model. The BIM database, as designed for new buildings realization, does 
not fully support the vastness and heterogeneity of information necessary 
for the documentation and computing of architectural heritage. The speci-
ficity, heterogeneity and multiplicity of information requires the creation of 
appropriate databases, able to record, manage, analyze, and correlate more 
complex information than one traditionally offered by BIM on the market 
(for example archival data and documents, such as historical and recent draw-
ings, reports, photos, etc., but also various kinds of studies, investigations 
and diagnostics). A solution is offered by the use of a Relational Database 
Management System that is a more extensive database in which insert the 
BIM model and its information. This research line is the so-called Built Heri-
tage Information Modelling (B(H)IM) aiming to integrate 3-D BIM models 
with a knowledge system based on ontologies (Simeone et al., 2014): Every 
architectural element, modelled in BIM environment, has a set of properties 
specifically implemented and it is connected to a dedicated database, richer 
than the standard ones. In fact, the knowledge on the work, the author, the 
laborers, the yard, not least the cultural context are essential for the documenta-
tion and the historical-critical study. Moreover, any conservation, restoration, 
maintenance, management, and exploitation project roots on knowledge. The 
historical data and information are ineludible: To extend the BIM approach 
to architectural heritage; to realize a BIM process inclusive of all the kind 
of studies, phases, and interdisciplinary contributions; to define a useful 3-D 
interface interoperable between all the interested scholars and professionals 
(including authorities designated to heritage conservation).

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
92
Provocatively, someone suggests that BIM should favor the end of drawing 
and the end of the role of the Architect, substituted by a team of architects, 
engineers, builders, producers, and stakeholders (Scheer 2014; Sacchi, 2015). 
From a conceptual point of view, it may be true, but when the BIM is applied 
to architectural heritage, the role of historical scholar is unavoidable, not only 
in modeling architectural artifacts (that are not simply up-loadable from a 
library) but in choosing solutions compatible with building’s characteristics 
and values.
RECOMMENDATION: INTERDISCIPLINARITY
Digital surveying, modeling, and representation have produced important 
methodological changes in those disciplines that concerns the study, analysis, 
protection, and exploitation of architectural heritage. The technologies and 
digital instruments – intended both as tools and as methodologies – are a 
common shared substrate across disciplines.
Computer scientists, engineers, architects, archaeologists, surveyors, 
scholars of arts and humanities work together, they participate at the same 
conferences, and they publish books together on topics of interest for differ-
ent types of scholars. Moreover, social groups and scientific networks like 
Figure 8. Relational system of the BIM database exported from the BIM model in 
Access, with information displayed in table format.

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
93
Academia.edu (www.academia.edu), ResearchGate (www.researchgate.
net), and Mendeleley (www.mendelay.com) –based on repositories – favor 
the diffusion of knowledge inside and outside fields, the meeting between 
scholars, and their updating. Undoubtedly, interdisciplinarity can promote 
results of particular value and high levels of innovation.
The London Charter (2009), and The Principles of Seville (2011) could 
be a useful reference point for the architectural field. In fact, considering 
the international and interdisciplinary context, the sharing of principles of 
general validity can be advantageous in heterogeneous groups and favor the 
conversation between scholars.
The London Charter (2009) aims “to establish principles for the use of 
computer based visualization methods and outcomes in the research and 
communication of cultural heritage” (p.4). It arises from the consideration 
that “While computer-based visualisation methods are now employed in a 
wide range of contexts to assist in the research, communication and preser-
vation of cultural heritage, a set of principles is needed that will ensure that 
digital heritage visualisation is, and is seen to be, at least as intellectually 
and technically rigorous as longer established cultural heritage research and 
communication methods. At the same time, such principles must reflect 
the distinctive properties of computer-based visualisation technologies and 
methods” (p.2).
The document is addressed to different academic, educational, curato-
rial and commercial domains, and it has the purpose to define principles of 
general validity in the use of digital visualization.
Focusing on the concept of disciplinarity / interdisciplinarity, it is worth 
dwelling on the first principle of “Implementation”. Assuming that “The 
principles of the London Charter are valid wherever computer-based visu-
alisation is applied to the research or dissemination of cultural heritage”, it is 
enunciated that “Each community of practice, whether academic, educational, 
curatorial or commercial, should develop London Charter Implementation 
Guidelines that cohere with its own aims, objectives and methods” (p. 5). This 
is of particular importance because this is a document with an interdisciplin-
ary perspective, and the first principle refers to a disciplinary specifications.
The general principles are interdisciplinary: “for the use of computer-
based visualisation methods in relation to intellectual integrity, reliability, 
documentation, sustainability and access” (p.2). However, disciplinary are 
the specifications. In fact, the principle of Implementation also says: “Every 
computer-based visualisation heritage activity should develop, and monitor 
the application of, a London Charter Implementation Strategy” (p. 5). And 

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
94
the concept of “implementation” specifics relations that should exist between 
scholars of different fields when collaborate together “And in collaborative 
activities, all participants whose role involves either directly or indirectly 
contributing to the visualisation process should be made aware of the prin-
ciples of the London Charter, together with relevant Charter Implementation 
Guidelines, and to assess their implications for the planning, documentation 
and dissemination of the project as a whole.” (p.5). Therefore, the Charter 
calls for all fields of research to provide guidelines as strict scientific meth-
odological reference, also to favor the correlation between different scholars.
The Principles of Seville (2011), dedicated to the archaeological field, 
recognize the recommendations of The London Charter and, at the same 
time, propose new and specific disciplinary purposes. Referring to the ar-
chaeological heritage, the document enunciates the following eight principles: 
1. Interdisciplinarity; 2. Purpose; 3. Complementarity; 4. Authenticity; 5. 
Historical rigour; 6. Efficiency; 7. Scientific transparency; 8. Training and 
evaluation. These principles reflect the ones of The London Charter. We 
point out how in The London Charter the first principle calls for a disciplin-
ary reflection and specification (top-down), while now the first principle of 
Seville focuses on interdisciplinarity (bottom-up): “Any project involving 
the use of new technologies, linked to computer-based visualisation in the 
field of archaeological heritage, whether for research, documentation, con-
servation or dissemination, must be supported by a team of professionals 
from different branches of knowledge”. And going on: “Given the complex 
nature of computer-based visualization of archaeological heritage, it cannot 
be addressed only by a single type of expert but needs the cooperation of a 
large number of specialists (archaeologists, computer scientists, historians, 
architects, engineers etc.)”. And: “A truly interdisciplinary work involves 
the regular and fluid exchange of ideas and views among specialists from 
different fields. Work divided into watertight compartments can never be 
considered interdisciplinary even with the participation of experts from dif-
ferent disciplines” (p. 5).
The study of architectural heritage has a vocation for interdisciplinary, 
because surveying and representation are complex activities, and an ancient 
building is a multifaceted artifact. The field of architecture is long time using 
digital technologies, and today it has reached a maturity. Obviously, it is ever 
useful a systematization of the results obtained in the architectural heritage 
field, because the digital technologies have changed and are still changing 
the modus operandi of surveying, visualization, data archiving, analysis, and 
communication (Brusaporci, 2015b; Brusaporci, 2016b).

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
95
For example, architectural representation, architectural surveying, and 
architectural history are sometimes interpreted as different disciplines, al-
though they are interrelated.
A definition of disciplinary ontologies in the digital dimension of archi-
tectural field should be useful. Similarly the drafting of a glossary – already 
proposed in The London Charter and in the Seville Principles –: It should 
offer a disciplinarily vocabulary useful in the interdisciplinary arena.
At the same time, many research lines – mainly carried on by scholars 
involved in interdisciplinary studies – are focused on the definition of Pro-
cedures for built heritage surveying, modeling, and visualization. They are 
guidelines, based on methodologies and workflows, to define a scientific, 
critical and verifiable process, and allow the collaboration of scholars of 
different fields (Benedetti, Gaiani, & Remondino, 2010).
In conclusion, we cite the interesting debate on digital technologies by 
Humanities (Gold, 2012; Terras, Nyhan, Vanhoutte, 2013), on how “digi-
tality” should have influenced the scientific field. We would like to mention 
Ramsay (2013): “[…] no discipline can survive without actively engaging 
with disciplinary questions. Not because there are definitive answers. Least 
Figure 9. Vasto. Politeama Ruzzi (1934-1973). Architectural surveying: Study 
sketches, laser-scanning, photographic and photogrammetric surveying.

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
96
of all because it’s important to alienate people. But simply because without 
those questions, we cede the answer to institutions eager to oblige people 
who are paying attention. Personally, I think Digital Humanities is about 
building things.” (pp. 240-241).
Embraceable is the claim for a deep cultural debate, instead of a recur-
rent interest restricted on tools and computing. Koh (2015) highlights: “[…] 
champion the new wave of digital humanities: one which has humanistic 
questions at its core”. In architecture, digital heritage moves from a physical 
content, therefore the technological issues on measurement, modeling, and 
rendering are substantial, but the critical core cannot be forgotten.
RESEARCH DIRECTION: DIGITAL CONSERVING 
STRATEGIES
Documentation
Historical building documentation is a basic instrument of knowledge, whose 
aim is the architectural heritage identification and description. Documenta-
Figure 10. Vasto. Politeama Ruzzi (1934-1973). Historical, comparative, typologi-
cal, and figurative analysis.

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
97
tion should be conducted by scholars or with a participative and inclusive 
approaches extended to people. For example, a project based on big data 
and crowdsourcing to reconstruct sites, monuments, and heritage at risk is 
“Visualizing Heritage” (http://www.visualisingheritage.org/).
From a scientific point of view, cataloging plays an essential role in 
conservation and protection through data collecting and systemization. The 
definition of precise and predefined criteria is necessary, and the use of 
surveying cards – designed according to heritage characteristics – assumes 
particular importance: Because cards guide the surveyor in data collecting, 
favors data analysis, synthesis and comparison – included data from differ-
ent buildings –, helps information understanding and communication. For 
example, the “Istituto Centrale per il Catalogo e la Documentazione” (ICCD) 
[Central Institute for the Cathalogation and Documentation] of the Italian 
Ministry for Cultural Heritage is in charge for the definition of cataloguing 
standards1. It proposes and periodically updates archiving cards for archaeo-
logical, architectural-landscape, demo-ethnic-anthropologic, photographical, 
musical, naturalistic heritage. More than 760.000 cultural heritage are col-
lected. The “SIGECweb” GIS manages the whole process of documentation 
and heritage georeferenced presentation.
On modern architecture, the cars proposed by the Do.Co.Mo.Mo. (Inter-
national Organization for Documentation and Conservation of building, sites 
and neighborhoods of the Modern Movement) are an important reference for 
architectural heritage. These cards are organized in two levels: “minimum 
fiche” e “full fiche”, with geographical and historical information and criti-
cal valuations.
Digital archives favor the diffusion of data, the comparison between dis-
tant objects, and the preservation of the original documents. Topics are the 
acquisition and digitization of archival documents, data sharing, database 
modeling, and the definition of appropriate metadata to correlate and consult 
information. We remember the “Guides to Good Practice”2 resulting from 
the collaboration between the English “Archeology Data Service”3 and the 
American “Digital Antiquity”4. The “Good Practices” focuses on digital issues 
in heritage digital archiving, from archiving design to management, and from 
digital objects collection to their analysis, visualization, and preservation.
Focusing on Architectural Digital Archives (Audisio, 2011), the archi-
tectural heritage cataloguing deals with two kinds of tangible objects: The 
immovable historic buildings and the archival documents, composed by 
extremely heterogeneous materials (drawings, maquettes, etc.).
With the sprawl of digital tools and applications, “metadata” and “para-
data” have become very important in model’s design, use, management, 

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
98
diffusion, and archiving. Last but not least for model’s transparency. As well 
known, from a literal point of view, “metadata” means “data about data”. 
Metadata are data that gives meaning to the raw content of data. “Until the 
mid-1990s, metadata was a term used primarily by communities involved 
with the management and interoperability of geospatial data and with data 
management and systems design and maintenance in general. […] Perhaps a 
more useful, “big picture” way of thinking about metadata is as the sum total 
of what one can say about any information object at any level of aggregation. 
In this context, an information object is anything that can be addressed and 
manipulated as a discrete entity by a human being or an information system. 
The object may comprise a single item, it may be an aggregate of many items, 
or it may be the entire database or record-keeping system” (Gilliland, 2008, 
1-2). In short, we could say that a metadata is useful to describe, manage, 
preserve, and use data, its content, its context, and its structure. There is a 
lot of interest in the topic of metadata for cultural heritage, and many are 
metadata schemas: Dublin Core Metadata Element Set (DCMES), Metadata 
Object Description Schema (MODS), etc. (Gul, Tramboo, Ahangar, 2015).
Related to metadata is the concept of paradata that can be generically 
referred to the process by which the survey data are collected – for example 
like in a statistic survey – (Kreuter, 2013).
In particular, paradata is a kind of metadata focused on the use of data, 
“but the big difference to keep in mind is that paradata involves “action” and 
traditional metadata involves “classification”“ (US Department of Education, 
2011, 1). Therefore, for example, metadata of a book describes the title, the 
author, the language and so on; while paradata indicates how people used the 
book and its sources. Thus paradata records: The “actor” (and its description) 
that use metadata; The “action” (and its description and “measure”) that the 
actor does; The “object” (and its description) that is acted.
In 2010, The “National Science Digital Library” (NSDL), developing an 
initiative called “STEM Exchange” on Learning Objects, has given an interest-
ing operational definition of paradata: “[…] we needed to distinguish between 
traditional, relatively static metadata that describes a digital learning object 
and the dynamic information about digital learning objects that is generated as 
they are used, reused, adapted, contextualized, favorited, tweeted, retweeted, 
shared, and all the other social media style ways in which educational users 
interact with resources. In this context, paradata captures the user activity 
related to the resource that helps to elucidate its potential educational utility. 
We first presented paradata at a March 3, 2010 presentation as:

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
99
• 	
Paradata: A complement to metadata, not a replacement; - separate 
layer of information from metadata; - a means to automate information 
generation about resource use by using social networking tools; - a means 
to create an open source and open access data space around resources; 
- emphasizes dissemination rather than description; - accommodates 
expert and user-generated knowledge.
• 	
Paradata Opens Opportunities To: Visualize a resource at the center 
of its own social-style network of activity; - explicates usage patterns 
and inferred utility of resources; - map network connections as teacher 
communities add multidirectional flows of information; - create per-
sistent, short references to resources; - aggregate activity around the 
resource through user-friendly practices, such as hashtagging; - power 
feedback loops with teacher communities”5. In this way, paradata is not 
only about the use of metadata, but also describes and documents the 
transformation of data during their use and inter-use in participatory 
systems. At the same time, paradata could be a useful way to portray 
the whole cultural context.
Figure 11. Vasto. Politeama Ruzzi (1934-1973). Drawing of the main elevation and 
construction of the BIM model.

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
100
Virtual Reconstruction
Although focused on archeology, the Seville Principles (2011) provides use-
ful definitions of some key concepts. In particular “Virtual Reconstruction” 
concerns the using of “a virtual model to visually recover a building or ob-
ject made by humans at a given moment in the past from available physical 
evidence of these buildings or objects, scientifically-reasonable comparative 
inferences and in general all studies carried out by archaeologists and other 
experts in relation to archaeological and historical science”.
It adds other interesting definitions. Virtual Restoration “involves using 
a virtual model to reorder available material remains in order to visually 
recreate something that existed in the past. Thus, virtual restoration includes 
virtual anastylosis”; Virtual Anastylosis “involves restructuring existing but 
dismembered parts in a virtual model”; Virtual Recreation “involves using 
a virtual model to visually recover an archaeological site at a given moment 
in the past, including material culture (movable and immovable heritage), 
environment, landscape, customs, and general cultural significance”. These 
definitions rises from archaeological experiences, where findings are usually 
constituted by ruins or artifacts that have partially or totally lost their ancient 
completeness or aesthetic characteristics.
In the architectural field we deal with living buildings and the study of 
the past aims to understand current values and not only to unveil disappeared 
characteristics, the virtual reconstruction of non-more existing configurations 
is essential in historical, constructive, functional, and aesthetic study. In 
this way, the virtual reconstruction involves the present building (and urban 
places) and their past states.
In architectural heritage, the procedure of model construction has par-
ticular importance, because the synthesis and critical integration between 
architectural survey and historical documents.
The use of remote sensing only apparently seems to have deleted the 
direct perception of the heritage, but the human sensorial data comes back 
to acquire a leading role, according to a neo realist instance (Austin, 1962. 
Ferraris, 2011), because the model requires an iterative process of validation, 
conducted according to the reality.
The sensitive perception has the task of recognizing the reality as synthe-
sis of values – that is how the artifact embodies historical events, aesthetical 
qualities, cultural values, architectural characteristics –: It is not the work 
of artifact duplication but it is its intellectual screening. The representation 
favors the perception and understanding of the reality, because it helps the 
observation and examination of the reality. The modeler makes a compari-

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
101
son between the digital model and the reality using the sensitive perception. 
Therefore, the visualization takes a central role, as interpretative tool, useful 
both to the understanding of the reality – the sensitive experience – and to 
the understanding of the quality of the interpretation, achieved by the scholar, 
with the realization of the model.
In this way, the prototyping becomes a knowledge project, for the reason 
that “the models are different from schema because they allow the represen-
tation of defined theoretical relations as if they are ‘inside’ the illustrated 
objects” (Moles, 1987): Thus, modeling means understanding.
Another line is related to the reconstruction of buildings no more exist-
ing or past configurations. A first classification is based on the difference 
between studies on ancient architectures and on modern buildings. The last 
ones are realized with industrialized technologies (with also pre-industrialized 
or mixed technologies) and usually project and yard drawings and relations 
are available (Brusaporci, 2012). A second classification is between studies 
on existing buildings and studies on no more existing woks, disappeared old 
configurations, and architectures never built, philologically reconstructed 
(Maggio & Villa, 2008; Mangione, Ribichini, & Terragni, 2015; Spallone, 
2015).
On the use of 3-D models for historical-critical analysis, we cite the study 
coordinated by Docci about the reconstruction of the never built project of 
the Vatican Basilica by Sangallo (Docci, 2007. Bianchini, 2007). The digital 
model was made according to the drawings realized for the Pope Paul III in 
1537-1538 and on the reverse modeling of the original wooden maquette 
(scale 1:30). The criticisms made by Michelangelo and reported by Vasari 
are well known: He said that Sangallo’s church should be too dark, composed 
with exaggerated decorations and too much column’s levels, overall ill 
suited to the classical language. The digital model allows us to verify the 
values of Sangallo’s project, to study the geometry of the dome, to deepen 
the proportional analysis, and re-built the concept of the author.
With the growing of computer-based reconstructions in the architectural 
heritage field, many studies involve transparency, temporality and reliability. 
The aim is to declare the confidence level of geometric 3D modeling – espe-
cially for ancient temporal states – and the type of uncertainly, in particular 
related to surveying data, archival documents, and scholar’s interpretations 
(Brusaporci, 2017)
Recalling the archaeological studies, Borra (2004) reflects on the “Truth 
of the 3D model”: He suggests four levels of coherence of the model’s shape: 
The reliability according to objective data (also derived from documental 

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
102
information); The reliability according constructive analysis; The coherence 
to architectural styles; Interpretative hypothesis.
De Luca, Busayarat, Stefani, Véron and Florenzano (2011) propose a 
platform for architectural heritage analysis, where geometric entities have 
attributes concerning spatial uncertainly (shape or position) and temporal 
uncertainly (dating). They are visualized using color tones. About building 
transformations, authors describe changes with graphic notations (creation, 
destruction, alteration, union, division, reconstruction), related to historical 
visualizations. About geometric restitutions, four degree levels of reconstruc-
tion are defined: 1) based on surveying data; 2) based on images in conic or 
cylindrical projection; 3) based on images in pseudo-perspective, pseudo-
axonometry or sketches; 4) without iconographic support or survey data.
Apollonio, Gaiani and Sun (2013), developing the theme of Uncertainly 
of 3-D models of non-more existing or never realized building, moves from 
archival data and 2-D drawings implemented with the corresponding text 
metadata (catalog, commentary and bibliography) that allow transparency, 
Figure 12. Vasto. Politeama Ruzzi (1934-1973). 2-D transversal section with the 
constructive system and BIM model with the building elements.

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
103
using both textual and visual indications. They define an uncertainty gradi-
ent color code, referred to the kind of information source: Original drawing, 
original sketch, coeval design reference, architect’s treaties or books, treaties 
references, architectural styles, construction system, failing references.
Apollonio and Giovannini (2015) describes reliability through a gradient 
color scale related to the different kind of sources: Laser scanning survey, 
original drawings, original sketches and uncomplete survey drawings, coeval 
design reference (same architect and way of representation), data deducted 
from previous levels, failing references. Authors decide to privilege not tex-
tual paradata but visual communication to document paradata management: 
They define a “conceptual model” to “create a simplified representation of 
relationship between references and virtual reconstruction of architectural 
elements at different Level of Detail” (p.11).
Geremia (2014) presents some virtual reconstructions of urban environ-
ments of Rome at different ages. She declares the level of authenticity of 
3D models of old buildings with different colors: Complete (reconstruction 
of elevations from archival drawings and historical photos; Partial (recon-
struction from archival planimetries and current elevations); Typological 
(reconstruction according to a typological analysis). It is interesting the last 
one, that suggest a useful (if when declared) approach to fill lacunas in virtual 
urban reconstruction.
Ippolito (2015) highlights that “one has to tackle them form the cultural 
point of view rather than for the technical one in such a way that operations 
and choices undertaken with the view to achieving the level of knowledge – 
more profound and structured – of the object of study will always be guided 
by scientific rigor” (p.73).
In conclusion, we remember The Venice Charter (aka ICOMOS, 1964). 
The art. 9 on Restoration says: “The process of restoration is a highly spe-
cialized operation. Its aim is to preserve and reveal the aesthetic and historic 
value of the monument and is based on respect for original material and 
authentic documents. It must stop at the point where conjecture begins, and 
in this case moreover any extra work which is indispensable must be distinct 
from the architectural composition and must bear a contemporary stamp. The 
restoration in any case must be preceded and followed by an archaeological 
and historical study of the monument”. According to this recommendation, 
virtual reconstruction assists conservation and restoration, because it enhances 
heritage multiple and critical interpretations and presentations, respecting 
cultural and material authenticity.

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
104
Communication
With reference to the Charter for the Interpretation and Presentation of 
Cultural Heritage Sites (ICOMOS, 2008), communication takes a pivotal 
importance in conservation. In fact communication spreads the knowledge 
and awareness of the heritage’s values, i.e. memory, cultural importance, 
and the reasons why it is worth to conserve it. Moreover, a multi-directional 
and participative communication favors the rise and diffusion of a critical 
conscience on heritage between people.
Traditionally, museums and park institutions played an important role for 
interpretation and presentation. Nevertheless, the traditional authoritative 
role of museums and of curators has changed in the current communication 
society, where social media have disrupted the traditional unidirectional ways 
of communication. Therefore, museums are trying to change their role and 
their languages – according to ones that pervade our media – to reach a new 
evocative, narrative, and experiential dimension. They are systems for multiple 
and complex storytelling, aiming to the participative interpretation, presenta-
tion, and conservation of heritage: They are new ways of heritage-making. 
Consequently, museums are taking a virtual dimension, both in collections 
presentation and in people and places interconnection (Souhami, 2014).
A well-known example is the “Google Art Project”6. A different line is 
the one offered by the “After Dark” experience7, based on the roaming with 
a robot in the Tate Britain Museum of London during the night. Conceptu-
ally it reverse the usual idea offered by virtual museums: We have not digital 
Figure 13. Vasto. Politeama Ruzzi (1934-1973). The building and the 3-D model.

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
105
artifacts but cyber-visitors between real contents. The museum maintains its 
physical spaces and the “genius loci” raising from the museological relation-
ship between the place and the works of art. There isn’t a dematerialization 
of reality, but a new remote and on-line approaches to reality, i.e. a new form 
of telepresence applied to heritage and museums.
Remembering the learning aim of museums and the conservation and 
study purpose of repositories, the digital dimension of database favors the 
renewing of their role: No more only warehouses of data, but informative 
systems able to present and interrelate documents, archival data, and informa-
tion, thus favoring the study, comparison and presentation of distant, fragile 
or hard to consult works. In particular, thanks to dedicated metadata, digital 
archives could become virtual museums, i.e. they move from scholars study-
ing to people learning. The bulk is the design of multiple and multimedia 
storytelling for content communication. For example archives of architecture 
are: “AAA Association of Architectural Archives”8, the “National Archival 
System”9, the “Architecture Archives Centre” at Maxxi Museum10, the “The 
Archives of Contemporary Architecture”11.
There are several examples of museums dedicated to the history of a 
city: The Museum of Liverpool12, the Museum of London13, the Amsterdam 
Historisch Museum14, the Museo Torino15. An important project aiming to 
the enhancing and communication of urban history is “Visualizing Venice”16 
(Calabi, 2013). Moving from this experience, some interesting reflections 
have been developed on how ICT could be used for the interpretation and 
presentation of the history of a city (Tamborrino, 2014). In particular, an issue 
of the scientific Journal DISEGNARE CON is dedicated to virtual museums 
for architectural heritage (Albisinni, & Ippoliti, 2016).
Reflecting on the characteristics of architectural museums, a digital museum 
for architectural heritage could be a virtual journey through buildings, places, 
and people. In fact, architectural museums should deal with urban spaces 
and buildings, but also with documents of the edifices and designers, for an 
historical narration of transformations. Therefore, an architectural museum 
should configure as a system for the correlation of information with buildings 
that is it should present a historical narrative and a present day documentary. 
The storytelling of a museum of architecture (or of places) should favor the 
navigation through building’s internal and external spaces, and the link of 
the building with other architectures (of the same designer, of the same age, 
with similar stylistic characteristics, attributable to the same historical culture, 
etc.), and with documents (writings, drawings, maquettes, etc.) distributed 
in different archives. In addition, the museum of architecture should allow 
interaction with the visualized information and between people, also with 

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
106
customized applications. This last thing is very important considering that 
an architecture (or a place) is a “living being”, that is something used day by 
day, by people that use it, and not only people that visit it as tourists.
The concepts of “Gaming” and “Edutainment” could be useful for con-
servation. In particular, ICT has favored their development with application 
of virtual reality and augmented reality.
The game has ever had the power to give life to any sort of virtual experi-
ences, allowing learning processes, in an instinctive and emotive way. Recently, 
the strategy of Gaming re-news from the opportunities given by digital ludic 
methodologies (such as score collection, virtual goods acquisition, level 
progression) to enhance the participation to marketing processes. The user 
involved in gaming is more interested, awake, and attentive; Consequently 
gaming could be a useful strategy for message transmission (Romeo, 2012).
The term “Edutainment” was coined in 1973 by Bob Heyman, a documen-
tarist of National Geographic. It derives from the two words “education” and 
“entertainment”, and it puts together learning and amusement. In particular, 
thanks to ICT, Edutainment can be an useful tool for heritage presentation 
in a smart and amusing way (Cervellini & Rossi 2011;Valentino & Delli 
Quadri, 2004).
A bit different, and more complex, is the discourse on “e-Tourism”: It 
involves all the processes of digitalization and e-commerce in the industry 
of travel, tourism, hospitality, organization, etc (Buhalis, 2003). If we think 
Figure 14. L’Aquila. Design of a digital museum of the historical center, with dif-
ferent levels for diverse kind of users.

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
107
to ‘e-Tourism’ in the form of virtual tour technologies, it can be traced back 
to cultural tourism – although in a virtual way – and to learning and/or rec-
reation purposes. The International Cultural Tourism: Charter Managing 
Tourism at Places of Heritage Significance (ICOMOS, 1999) underlines 
the relationship between heritage and tourism and how cultural tourism can 
enhance heritage conservation: It is a dynamic interrelation that involves 
sustainability and social politics.
The strategies underlining virtual museums, gaming, edutainment, and e-
Tourism could be merged. If the idea of museum is often related to “learning”, 
while “game” to “leisure”, these concepts blur, because heritage-making and 
conservation are processes related to ‘memory’, and memory could derive 
from activities that include learning and gaming. And, at the same time, 
culture could have leisure aspects.
Gaming, Edutainment, and e-Tourism well fit the current on-line state 
and reflect the characteristics of digital participatory culture. Jenkins (2009) 
highlights the new kind of skills in using new media: Play, Performance, 
Simulation, Appropriation, Multitasking, Distributed cognition, Collective 
intelligence, Judgment, Transmedia navigation, Networking, Negotiation. We 
cite some of them because of particular interest for our discourse (p. xiv):
•	
 Performance: The ability to adopt alternative identities for the purpose 
of improvisation and discovery;
• 	
Simulation: The ability to interpret and construct dynamic models of 
real-world processes;
• 	
Negotiation: The ability to travel across diverse communities, discern-
ing and respecting multiple perspectives, and grasping and following 
alternative norms;
• 	
Collective Intelligence: The ability to pool knowledge and compare 
notes with others toward a common goal;
• 	
Judgment: The ability to evaluate the reliability and credibility of dif-
ferent information sources;
• 	
Transmedia Navigation: The ability to follow the flow of stories and 
information across multiple modalities.
These skills of media users, are important resources for people engagement 
in heritage understanding and in its safeguard. We remember the contents of 
The Nara Charter Document on Authenticity (UNESCO, 1994) and of the 
Charter for the Interpretation and Presentation of Cultural Heritage Sites 
(ICOMOS, 2008) – in particular the recommendations on “The design of a 
heritage interpretation programme should respect the traditional social func-

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
108
tions of the site and the cultural practices and dignity of local residents and 
associated communities” (p10) –. These aspects could be enhanced by social 
media and participatory applications: If the user identifies herself, join to 
the game rules, understands the environment (i.e. the tangible and intangible 
heritage), therefore takes an active part in the interpretation and in heritage 
storytelling. In particular when the narration is experienced in a public way 
by multi agents, embodied not only by tourists but also by people that live 
and use the buildings and the city.
Last but not least, the skills are really important to permit a critic role in the 
participative system, because software, contents, and tools are projected and 
defined by designers and curators, that is in an authoritative way. Maldonado 
wrote that in the navigation of a computer-generated space the observer de-
ceives himself thinking to be an active actor, without realizing that the space 
has limited degrees of freedom, i.e. a space where she can act in probation, 
in a conditioned freedom (Maldonado, 1992). Therefore, people should be 
able to use virtuality in a wise and critical way, with consciousness, also 
implementing and customizing it, conceptually – and pragmatically – in line 
with Manovich’s recommendations on “Software Culture” (2013). Because 
the role of the scholar is essential to design the narrative architecture of the 
medium (3D stages, multiple and thematic contents, informative and com-
puting system, etc.), but its communicative and social function for a shared 
public memory making – i.e. for heritage conservation – is really effective 
only if people makes it work according to Jenkins’ skills.
CONCLUSION: NEW MODELS FOR ARCHITECTURAL 
HERITAGE
The “actuality” of architecture moves from an immanent materiality and 
figurativeness. From here comes the challenge for a scientific use of 3-D 
digital surveying, modeling, and computer-based visualization: They cuold 
be privileged instruments for the analysis, critical interpretation, and commu-
nication of the architectural data. 3-D architectural heritage models favor the 
development of historical-critical analysis, realized in the three-dimensional 
digital space (for example metrological, proportional, constructive analysis). 
In the 3-D reconstructions of architectural shape, a special consideration 
should be given to the critical comprehension, interpretation, and definition 
of the designer’s willingness and cultural background, with particular atten-
tion to the formal and geometrical principles, according to the historical and 
technological context of the building.

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
109
Current digital technologies offer extraordinary opportunities for multi-
disciplinary and multi-scalar knowledge, interpretation, and presentation, 
and for realizing dynamic tools, suitable for information computing and 
conservation design.
One of the fundamental problems is related to the complexity of the ar-
chitecture as a four-dimensional reality (space + time), characterized by a 
high density of information, accompanied by a considerable heterogeneity of 
knowledge elements. Therefore, it is necessary a restitutive model as inter-
mediary between the perceivable phenomenon and the cognitive categories, 
that is a model that can contain all the information on historical, geometric-
dimensional, morphological, figurative, technical, constructive characteristics 
of architecture. At the same time, this model should allow its representation, 
computing, and modification according to different user’s profiles (experts, 
professionals, scholars, users, and people).
Figure 15. L’Aquila. Augmented reality app for a digital museum of the historical 
center. 

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
110
Therefore, digital models should not be only an aesthetic simulation of 
reality – i.e. a representative image of a visual perception – but they could 
become “complex model”: i.e. interactive three-dimensional database models, 
manipulable, interrogable, and navigable. They allow new ways of visual-
ization and new modalities to data and information access. In this way, the 
digital model can be a sort of “master model” that shows in an “anatomical” 
mode – i.e. with an “obscene” representation of its absolute media “transpar-
ency” – data and information, and from which derive multiple, multiscale, 
and multidirectional systems of knowledge and communication. This com-
plex informative model offers new non-linear narrative ways, collecting the 
whole understanding, networking and design process (Brusaporci, 2015b).
As critical product of a creative/interpretative act, the model is a contribu-
tion to knowledge and design. In this sense, it is a new documental text, with 
its own historical-critical value. Nevertheless, its interpretation conceptually 
roots on the physical original content. Therefore, the model constitutes a new 
objectivity – although of other nature – that accompanies the architectural 
reality, as new cultural product.
In conclusion, it is limitative to consider modeling only a virtual construc-
tion of the geometric and spatial characteristic of the building: The modeling 
act also involves the numerous and heterogeneous information about the 
building, the way to compute them, and its representation. The 3-D Models 
and Datasets are two sides, and we must realize the project of both of them 
simultaneously.
REFERENCES
Ackerman, J. S. (2002). Origins, Imitation, Conventions. Cambridge, MA: 
The MIT Press.
Albisinni, P., & De Carlo, L. (Eds.). (2011). Architettura. Disegno. Modello. 
Roma: Gangemi.
Albisinni, P., & Ippoliti, E. (Eds.). (2016). Virtual Museums for Architecture 
and City. Disegnarecon, 9(17).
Apollonio, F. I., Gaiani, M., & Sun, Z. (2013). Characterization of Uncertainty 
and Approximation in Digital Reconstruction of CH Artifacts. In Proceed-
ing of Le Vie dei Mercanti XI Forum Internazionale di Studi (pp. 860-869). 
Napoli: La Scuola di Pitagora.

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
111
Apollonio, F.I., Gaiani, M., & Zheng, S. (2012). BIM-based modeling and 
data enrichment of classical architectural buildings. SCIRES-IT, 2(2).
Apollonio, F. I., & Giovannini, E. C. (2015). A paradata documentation 
methodology for the Uncertainty Visualization in digital reconstruction of 
CH artifacts. SCIRES-IT, 5(1), 1–24.
Audisio, L. (2011). La catalogazione del disegno di architettura nell’era 
digitale. Disegnare Con, 4(8), 116–123.
Austin, J. L. (1962). Sense and Sensibilia. Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press.
Beacham, R. (2008). ‘Oh, to Make Boards to Speak! There is a Task!’ Toward 
a Poetics of Paradata. In M. Greengrass & L. Hughes (Eds.), The Virtual 
Representation of the Past (pp. 171-178). Farnham: Ashgate.
Benedetti, B., Gaiani, M., & Remondino, F. (2010). Modelli digitali 3D in 
archeologia: il caso di Pompei. Pisa: Scuola Normale Superiore Pisa.
Benedetti, S. (1981). La cultura del restauro negli interventi sui centri storici. 
In Il recupero dei vecchi centri, gli aspetti teorici – i modi d’intervento. Atti 
del Convegno internazionale di studi (pp. 15-20). Udine: Università degli 
Studi di Udine.
Bianchini, C. (2007). From reality to virtualità (and back): The wooden model 
by Antonio da Sangallo for the new St. Peter’s in the Vatican. Disegnare idee 
immagini, 34, 36-49.
Bianchini, C. (2014). Survey 2.0: new technologies, new equipment, new 
surveyors? In P. Giandebiaggi & C. Vernizzi (Eds.), Italian Survey & Inter-
national Experiences (pp. 763–768). Roma: Gangemi.
Bonelli, R. (1963). Restauro. In Enciclopedia Universale dell’Arte (vol. 10, 
pp. 344-351). Roma: Academic Press.
Brandi, C. (1963). Teoria del restauro di Cesare Brandi. Lezioni raccolte 
da L. Vlad Borrelli, J. Raspi Serra e G.Urbani. Roma: Edizioni di Storia e 
Letteratura.
Brusaporci, S. (2012). Architetture per il sociale negli anni trenta e Quaranta 
del Novecento. Rome: Gangemi.

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
112
Brusaporci, S. (2013). Modellazione e rappresentazione digitale per i beni 
architettonici. In S. Brusaporci (Ed.), Modelli complessi per il patrimonio 
architettonico-urbano (pp. 18–24). Roma: Gangemi Editore.
Brusaporci, S. (2014). Issues of Historic Town Surveying: Visualizing Urban 
Values. SCIRES.it, 4(2), 63-80.
Brusaporci, S. (2015a). The Representation of Architectural Heritage in the 
Digital Age. In M. Khosrow-Pour (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Information Science 
and Technology, Third Edition (pp. 4195-4205). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-5888-2.ch412
Brusaporci, S. (Ed.). (2015b). Handbook of Research on Emerging Digital 
Tools for Architectural Surveying, Modeling, and Representation. Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8379-2
Brusaporci, S. (2015c). On Visual Computing for Architectural Heritage. 
In S. Brusaporci (Ed.), Handbook of Research on Emerging Digital Tools 
for Architectural Surveying, Modeling, and Representation (pp. 94–123). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8379-2.ch003
Brusaporci, S. (2016a). Graphical Analysis 2.0: Digital Representation for 
Understanding and Communication of Architecture. In Universitad de Alcala. 
El Arquitecto, de la Tradicion al Siglo XXI (Vol. 1). Madrid: Universitad de 
Alcala.
Brusaporci, S. (2016b). Swimming in the Liquid Age: A Disciplinarily 
Reflection on Computer-Based Visualization of Architectural Heritage. 
In G. Amoruso (Ed.), Handbook of Research on Visual Computing and 
Emerging Geometrical Design Tools (pp. 1–24). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0029-2.ch001
Brusaporci, S. (2017). The Importance of Being Honest: Issues of Transpar-
ency in Digital Visualization of Architectural Heritage. In A. Ippolito (Ed.), 
Handbook of Research on Emerging Technologies for Architectural and Ar-
chaeological Heritage (pp. 66–93). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-5225-0675-1.ch003
Brusaporci, S., & Trizio, I. (2010). Dal rilevamento integrato al SiArch-3D: 
il caso di studio della chiesa di S. Paolo a Peltuinum (AQ). In S. Brusaporci 
(Ed.), Sistemi Informativi Integrati per la tutela la conservazione e la valoriz-
zazione del patrimonio architettonico e urbano (pp. 39–42). Roma: Gangemi.

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
113
Bruschi, A. (1984). Problemi e metodi di ricerca storico-critica sulla architet-
tura. In G. Spagnesi (Ed.), Storia e restauro dell’architettura (pp. 15–34). 
Roma: Istituto della Enciclopedia Treccani.
Buhalis, D. (2003). eTourism: Information Technology for Strategic Tourism 
Management. Harlow: Financial Times/Prentice Hall.
Calabi, D. (Ed.). (2013). Built city, Designed city, Virtual city, The museum 
of the city. Roma: CROMA.
Centofanti, M., & Brusaporci, S. (2012). Interpretative 3D digital models in 
architectural surveying of historical buildings. In P. Di Giamberardino, D. 
Iacoviello, A. M. Natal Jorge, & J. M. Tavares (Eds.), Computational Model-
ling of Objects Represented in Images (pp. 433–438). London: CRC Press.
Centofanti, M., Brusaporci, S., & Lucchese, V. (2012). Architectural heritage 
and 3D models. In Computational Modeling of Objects Presented in Images 
(pp. 31–49). Geneva: Springer.
Centofanti, M., Brusaporci, S., & Maiezza, P. (2016). Tra “Historical BIM” 
ed “Heritage BIM: Building Information Modeling per la documentazione 
dei beni architettonici. In S. Parrinello & D. Besana (Eds.), ReUSO 2016 
(pp. 42-51). Firenze: Edifir.
Centofanti, M., Continenza, R., Brusaporci, S., & Trizio I. (2011). The Archi-
tectural Information System SIArch3D-Univaq for analysis and preservation 
of architectural heritage. The International Archives of the Photogrammetry 
Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, XXXVIII-5/W16.
Cervellini, F., & Rossi, D. (2011). Comunicare emozionando. L’edutainment 
per la comunicazione intorno al patrimonio culturale. Disegnarecon, 4(8), 
48–55.
Chiavoni, E., & Filippa, M. (Eds.). (2011). Metodologie integrate per il rilievo, 
il disegno, la modellazione dell’architettura e della città. Rome: Gangemi.
Chiavoni, E., & Paolini, P. (Eds.). (2007). Metodi e tecniche integrate di 
rilievo per la realizzazione di modelli virtuali dell’architettura della città. 
Roma: Gangemi.
Cigola, M., & Fiorucci, T. (Eds.). (1993). Il disegno di progetto dalle origini 
al XVIII secolo. Roma: Gangemi.

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
114
De Luca, L., Bussayarat, C., Stefani, C., Véron, P., & Florenzano, M. (2011). 
A semantic-based platform for the digital analysis of architectural heritage. 
Computers & Graphics, 2(35), 227–241. doi:10.1016/j.cag.2010.11.009
Docci, M. (1989). Disegno e rilievo: Quale didattica? Disegnare Idee Im-
magini, 0, 37–54.
Docci, M. (2007). The unbuilt Vatican Basilica. The project by Antonio da 
Sangallo. Disegnare idee immagini, 34, 24-35.
Docci, M., & Maestri, D. (1993). Storia del rilevamento architettonico e 
urbano. Roma: Laterza.
Docci, M., & Maestri, D. (2009). Manuale di rilevamento architettonico e 
urbano. Rome: Laterza.
Dore, C., & Murphy, M. (2015). Historic Building Information Model-
ling (HBIM). In S. Brusaporci (Ed.), Handbook of Research on Emerging 
Digital Tools for Architectural Surveying, Modeling, and Representation (pp. 
233–273). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8379-2.ch007
Ferraris, M. (2011). Manifesto of New Realism. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Filippa, M., Docci, M., & Chiavoni, E. (Eds.). (2011). Metodologie integrate 
per il rilievo, il disegno, la modellazione dell’architettura e della città. Rome: 
Gangemi.
Fiorucci, T. (Ed.). (2005). Metodologie innovative integrate per il rilievo 
dell’architetturaa e dell’ambiente. Roma: Gangemi.
Gaiani, M. (2012a). Towards a critical rethinking of the theory of surveying 
following the advent of digital media. In L. Carlevaris & M. Filippa (Eds.), 
In Praise of Theory. The fundamentals of the disciplines of representation 
and survey (pp. 375–381). Roma: Gangemi.
Gaiani, M. (2012b). Trattamento, tutela e comunicazione dei giacimenti 
documentali dell’architettura antica. In P. Clini (Ed.), Vitruvio e il disegno 
di architettura (pp. 177–219). Venezia: Marsilio.
Garagnani, S. (2013). Building Information Modeling and real world knowl-
edge: a methodological approach to accurate semantic documentation for 
the built environment. In Proceedings of Digital Heritage 2013 (vol. 1, 
pp.489,496). Marseille: IEEE. doi:10.1109/DigitalHeritage.2013.6743788

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
115
Garagnani, S. (2015). Semantic Representation of Accurate Surveys for the 
Cultural Heritage: BIM Applied on the Existing Domain. In S. Brusaporci 
(Ed.), Handbook of Research on Emerging Digital Tools for Architec-
tural Surveying, Modeling, and Representation. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8379-2.ch009
Geremia, F. (2014). Building on our losses: Principles and methodologies 
of virtual restoration applied to Rome’s historic centre. Città & Storia, 9(1), 
33–60.
Gilliland, A. J. (2008). Setting the Stage. In M. Baca (Ed.), Introduction to 
Metadata (pp. 1–19). Los Angeles, CA: Getty Research Institute.
Gold, M. K. (Ed.). (2012). Debates in the Digital Humanities. University of 
Minnesota Press. doi:10.5749/minnesota/9780816677948.001.0001
Greengrass, M., & Hughes, L. (Eds.). (2008). The Virtual Representation of 
the Past. Farnham: Ashgate.
Gul, S., Tramboo, S. R., & Ahangar, H. (2015). Metadata Diversity in the 
Cultural Heritage Repositories. In M. Khosrow-Pour (Ed.), Encyclopedia of 
Information Science and Technology (3rd ed.; pp. 1843–1854). Hershey, PA. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-5888-2.ch178
ICOMOS. (1964). International charter for the conservation and restora-
tion of monuments and sites. Retrieved on November, 15, 2016 from http://
www.icomos.org
ICOMOS. (1999). International Cultural Tourism Charter Managing Tourism 
at Places of Heritage Significance. Retrieved on November 15, 2016 from 
http://www.icomos.org/charters/tourism_e.pdf
ICOMOS. (2008). Charter for the Interpretation and Presentation of Cultural 
Heritage Sites. Retrieved on November, 15, 2016 from http://icip.icomos.org/
downloads/ICOMOS_Interpretation_Charter_ENG_04_10_08.pdf
Ippolito, A. (2015). Digital documentation for archaeology. Case studies on 
etruscan and roman heritage. SCIRES-IT, 5(2), 71–90.
Jenkins, H. (2009). Confronting the Challenges of Participatory Culture: 
Media Education for the 21st Century. Cambridge, MA: MIT.
Koh, A. (2015, April 19). A Letter to Humanities: DH Will Not Save You. 
Hybridpedagogy.

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
116
Kreuter, F. (Ed.). (2013). Improving Surveys with Paradata. Hoboken, NJ: 
Wiley. doi:10.1002/9781118596869
Maggio, F., & Villa, M. (2008). Architettura demolita. Palermo: Edizioni 
Caracol.
Maldonado, T. (1992). Reale e virtuale. Milan: Feltrinelli.
Mangione, F., Ribichini, L., & Terragni, A. (2015). Giuseppe Terragni a 
Roma. Roma: Prospettive Edizioni.
Manovich, L. (2001). The Language of New Media. Cambridge, MA: The 
MIT Press.
Manovich, L. (2013). Software Takes Command. New York: Bloomsbury 
Academic.
Moles, A. (1972). Teoria informazionale dello schema. Versus, 2, 29–37.
Moles, A. (1987). La visualisation thématique du monde. Cahiers Interna-
tionaux de Sociologie, 82, 162.
Muratori, S. (1960). Studi per una operante storia urbana di Venezia. Roma: 
Istituto poligrafico dello Stato.
Murray, J. H. (2012). Inventing the Medium. Principles of Interaction Design 
as a Cultural Practice. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
National Science Digital Library. (2010). Paradata. Retrieved on November 
15, 2016 from https://wiki.ucar.edu/display/nsdldocs/Paradata
Oreni, D., Brumana, R., Della Torre, S., Banfi, F., Barazzetti, L., & Previtali, M. 
(2014). Survey turned into HBIM: The restoration and the work involvedcon-
cerning the Basilica di Collemaggio after the earthquake (L’Aquila). ISPRS 
Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remore Sensing and Spatial Information 
Sciences, 2, 267–273.
Principles of Seville. (2012). Retrieved November 15, 2016, from http://
www.arqueologiavirtual.com/carta/?page_id=12
Progetti e ricerche della città di Pesaro. (1980). Pesaro. 10 supplemento. 
Pesaro: Amministrazione Comunale di Pesaro.
Ramsay, S. (2013). Who’s In and Who’s Out. In M. Terras, M. Nyhan, & 
E. Vanhoutte (Eds.), Defining Digital Humanities (pp. 239–241). Farnham: 
Ashgate.

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
117
Romeo, G. M. A. (2012). Rappresentazione video-ludica e Modelli tridi-
mensionali interattivi (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of 
Reggio Calabria.
Sacchi, L. (2015). La fine del disegno? Op. Cit., 123, 5–15.
Scheer, D. R. (2014). The Death of Drawing: Architecture in the Age of 
Simulation. Abington: Routledge.
Silberman, N. (2008). Chasing the Unicorn? The Quest for Essence in Digi-
tal Heritage. In Y. E. Kalay, T. Kvan, & J. Affleck (Eds.), New Heritage. 
Abington: Routledge.
Simeone, D., Cursi, S., Toldo, I., & Carrara, G. (2014). B(H)IM – Built Heri-
tage Information Modelling. Extending BIM to historical and archeological 
heritage representation. In Fusion,Proceedings of the 32nd International 
Conference on Education and research in Computer Aided Architectural 
Design in Europe (vol. 1, pp. 613-622). Newcastle upon Tyne, UK: Nor-
thumbria University.
Souhami, R. (2014). Manifesto for the Future of Museums. Retrieved on De-
cember 30, 2016 from https://museumsshowoff.files.wordpress.com/2013/10/
manifesto-for-the-future-of-museums1.pdf
Spagnesi, G. (1979). Il centro storico di Roma. Roma: Multigrafica editrice.
Spagnesi, G. (Ed.). (1984a). Storia e restauro dell’architettura. Roma: Istituto 
della Enciclopedia Italiana Treccani.
Spagnesi, G. (1984b). Autonomia della Storia dell’architettura. In G. Spag-
nesi (Ed.), Storia e restauro dell’architettura (pp. 7–10). Roma: Istituto della 
Enciclopedia Italiana Treccani.
Spallone, R. (2015). Digital Reconstruction of Demolished Architectural 
Masterpieces, 3D Modeling and Animation: The Case Study of Turin Horse-
Racing by Mollino. In S. Brusaporci (Ed.), Handbook of Research on Emerging 
Digital Tools for Architectural Surveying, Modeling, and Representation (pp. 
476–509). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8379-2.ch017
Tamborrino, R. (Ed.). (2014). Digital Urban History. Telling the History of 
the City in the Age of ICT Revolution. Roma: Croma.
Terras, M., Nyhan, J., & Vanhoutte, E. (Eds.). (2013). Defining Digital Hu-
manities: A Reader. Farnham: Ashgate.

Καλλιόπη or On Interpretation, Presentation, and Participation
118
The London Charter. (2009). Retrieved November 15, 2016 from http://www.
londoncharter.org/
UNESCO. (1976). Recommendation concerning the Safeguard and Con-
temporary Role of Historic Areas. Retrieved on November, 15, 2016, from 
http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-URL_ID=13133&URL_DO=DO_
TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html
UNESCO. (1994). The Nara Document on Authenticity. Retrieved on No-
vember, 15, 2016, from whc.unesco.org/document/9379
Valentino, P. A., & Delli Quadri, M. R. (Eds.). (2004). Cultura in gioco. 
Firenze, Milano: Giunti.
ENDNOTES
1	
 http://www.iccd.beniculturali.it/index.php?it/473/standard-catalografici 
2	
 http://guides.archaeologydataservice.ac.uk/g2gp/Main 
3	
 http://archaeologydataservice.ac.uk/ 
4	
 http://www.digitalantiquity.org/ 
5	
 https://wiki.ucar.edu/display/nsdldocs/Paradata retrieved on June, 15 
2015
6	
 https://www.google.com/culturalinstitute/beta/?hl=it , and for example 
http://www.museicapitolini.org/museo_digitale/google_art_project
7	
 http://www.afterdark.io/ 
8	
 www.aaa-italia.org 
9	
 http://www.architetti.san.beniculturali.it/web/architetti/ 
10	
 http://www.fondazionemaxxi.it/en/centro-archivi/ 
11	
 http://siusa.archivi.beniculturali.it/cgi-bin/pagina.pl?RicProgetto=arc
hitetti&RicLin=en 
12	
 http://www.liverpoolmuseums.org.uk/mol/ 
13	
 http://www.museumoflondon.org.uk/museum-london 
14	
 https://www.amsterdammuseum.nl/en 
15	
 http://www.museotorino.it/ 
16	
 http://www.visualizingvenice.org/visu/ 

Conclusion
AN OPEN-ENDED CONCLUSION: WHAT STORYTELLING 
FOR ARCHITECTURAL CONSERVATION? 
In 1926, Dvořák highlighted the main anthropic dangers threatening monu-
ments: Ignorance or indolence, greed or fraud, misguided ideas of progress or 
for alleged modern age needs, mania for false beautification. Recently, after 
more than fifty years from the WWII, the problem of protection from war 
come back, with related cultural matters: We remember the Palmira damages 
in 2015, the destruction of Bamiyan Buddha in 2001 and of ancient tombs 
in Mali in 2012 with the consequent process by the International Criminal 
Court for heritage damage in 2016. Other consequences of human actions 
menace heritage, such as pollution or climate changes. Moreover, we recall 
damages derived from natural events, like earthquakes and seaquakes, and 
floods. Examples are the recent Italian seismic events (2009, 2012, and 2016) 
that ruined many historical buildings and churches, or the flood of Florence 
in 1966 that injured many works of art. Nevertheless, the passing of time and 
the daily use are non-exceptional actions that continuously modifies heritage. 
If the first – with the “patina” – should be seen as something “natural”, the 
second one is particular important for architectural heritage: According to the 
restoration charters’ recommendations, the abandonment favors degradation, 
while the use safeguards the building. Although the use is an innate aspect 
of architectural and urban heritage, however the ever-changing needs could 
induce important modifications. Finally yet importantly, there is another cul-
tural matter: The point of view of scholars and people move during centuries, 
because culture has multifaceted aspects and heritage is an ever-changing 
concept. In addition, in the public discourse, sometimes the role of memory 
and of people’s relationship with heritage seem to blur within contingent 
events, where media play an essential role.
The Faro Convention (Council of Europe, 2005) points out the impor-
tance of heritage for humanity. It defines heritage as: “a group of resources 
inherited from the past which people identify, independently of ownership, 
as a reflection and expression of their constantly evolving values, beliefs, 
  119

knowledge and traditions. It includes all aspects of the environment resulting 
from the interaction between people and places through time”. Moreover: “a 
heritage community consists of people who value specific aspects of cultural 
heritage which they wish, within the framework of public action, to sustain 
and transmit to future generations” (Art. 2). Architectural and urban heritage 
require a specific reflection, because they are complex systems made by the 
stratification of transformations during time. They are living expressions of past 
events and cultures, and of the present contingences. All these considerations 
bring in the foreground the well-known issues of memory, identity, integrity, 
and authenticity. Not under the auspices to freeze heritage, sites, landscape, 
or people, but with the hope to share a diffused critical consciousness on 
heritage complexity, matters and values to preserve. Because conservation 
is based on – and contributes to – knowledge, understanding, and education. 
Therefore, participation politics for a sustainable development of heritage and 
of society – the two terms are interrelated – are necessary. It is not simple 
to plan these policies, also because each place – with its own history and 
habitants – requires a dedicated design. Fundamentally, conservation may 
be intended as an ethical matters. In brief, conservation is a general process, 
which includes preservation, interpretation, communication, management 
and design.
A question follows: How does digital technologies enhance heritage con-
servation? Does they simply favor it, or they also influence it?
The first answer is that documentation and surveying are the cornerstones 
on which conservation roots, and 3-D models and databases are important 
tools for data and information collecting. But it is not enough, because they 
induce new methodological approaches.
In our post-digital culture (Berry & Dieter, 2015. Openshaw, 2015) people 
relationship with technology re-news: digital tools and apps are ubiquitous, 
according to a constant on-line state. This condition of the “knowledge 
society” is underlined by the European Charter of Rights of Citizens in the 
Knowledge Society – aka “The Charter of eRights” – (EUROCITIES, 2005), 
that focuses on the access to technology, and on the on-line information, 
education, and participation.
In the current participatory culture, the scholar has the responsibility 
to realize cultural and technological models and systems for interpretation 
and presentation, to allow the public interaction between people, scholars, 
and designers. Silberman and Puser (2012) highlights: “the task of heritage 
professionals will be rather to enable contemporary communities to digitally 
(re) produce historical environments, collective narratives and geographi-
cal visualizations that cluster individual perspectives into shared forms and 
  120

processes or remembering” (p.14). The experts have a responsibility in the 
definition of interpretation and communication systems, declaring their work, 
favoring transparent processes of knowledge, supporting memory making 
and sharing between people that lives, uses, modifies and give significance 
to architectural and urban heritage. From this point of view, conservation 
does not involve only heritage preservation, but also the idea of heritage. 
The cultural meaning is continuously re-negotiate and re-constitute with a 
continuous flux of information that involve individuals, according to a rela-
tionship between present reality and memory.
Sometimes digitality give the impression to merge with reality (in both 
its experiencing and its production), but at the same time, scholar and user’s 
approach looks less enchanted and more active. This favors a rational relation 
with heritage and the exploiting of digital potentialities. With interactive, 
multi-scalar, and multi-dimensional applications, digital technology aids 
reality and history knowledge and it participates to tangible and intangible 
values study, interpretation, presentation, and conservation.
As any tool and methodology, digitality drives the research and the under-
standing, and it directs memory processes, but like any historical and cultural 
aspect, it needs a critical and conscientious approach. Follows that advanced 
technologies enhance heritage conservation, interrelating within a complex 
but all-embracing process knowledge, learning, participation, collaboration, 
awareness, sustainability, and management. This increases the responsibility 
of those who are involved in conservation.
Often the interests of scholars melt in the ocean of professional’s matters. 
There are many overlapping topics and interests: Scholars have to inter-act 
and inter-face each other and with advanced tools, and interdisciplinarity is 
taking ever and ever more importance. Scholars use the same instruments 
and applications – laser scanning, digital photogrammetry, GIS, Virtual 
Reality, Augmented Reality, etc. –; However the purposes and critical ap-
proaches of different fields are often dissimilar. Consequently, it is convenient 
a reflection on the concepts of multi-disciplinarity and trans-disciplinarity: 
It is necessary to work with an aware interdisciplinary approach, but distin-
guishing between specialization and erudition, and paying attention to the 
temptation of “morphing” into other fields. The ability to get involved and 
converse with other scholars is fundamental. Therefore follows the necessity 
to be practiced to translate concepts and applications, without losing sight 
of peculiarities. In the architectural field, many subjects have interdisciplin-
ary characteristics, such as issues related to digital heritage, laser scanning, 
digital photogrammetry, photo-modeling, 3D modeling and visualization, 
  121

virtual reconstructions, digital computing, Information Systems, Building 
Information Modeling, communication, conservation and exploitation, etc.
Digitality, interpretation, presentation transparency, interdisciplarity, 
sustainability, participation, etc. should make conservators nervous. Many 
questions remain open: The relationship between “Memory” and “History”; 
the danger that technology (instead of heritage) should become the priority; 
the threat that the user should lose in the ocean of linked information – and 
of own memory – losing the route. However – like an anchor – the material 
reality of physical heritage helps to witness, remember, and conserve values. 
Because the physicality – despite the problems in order to know it – embodies 
tangible and intangible expressions, from the present and the past. Therefore, 
the conservation of built heritage (historical architectures, urban centers, etc.) 
could protect our identity and memories.
If conservation is based on a critical and shared system for a discourse on 
values and memory, what is the kind of storytelling for architectural heritage 
conservation? Digital models and devices allow multiple, multi-scalar, multi-
directional and customizable narrations, presenting values and interpretations 
of the current state and of past configurations – declaring levels of reliability 
–, enriched with bibliographical and archival documents – interconnected 
to elements and spaces – and with participative contents. The protagonists 
are not only users in a virtual reality, but heritage and people that interact 
each other in the current reality of buildings and urban centers. In conclu-
sion, conservation is a social, cultural, and historical open-ended process, 
where technology “simply” has the ineludible and powerful role that it daily 
presents in our post-digital age, and where built heritage acts according to 
its immanent materiality. Because conservation roots on knowledge, inter-
pretation, and presentation, where any storytelling plays with memory and 
any history anchors on facts.
REFERENCES
Berry, D. M., & Dieder, M. (Eds.). (2015). Postdigital Aesthetics: Art, Compu-
tation and Design. London: Palgrave Macmillan. doi:10.1057/9781137437204
Council of Europe. (2005). Framework Convention on the Value of Cultural 
Heritage for Society. Retrieved on November, 15, 2016 from http://www.coe.
int/t/dg4/cultureheritage/heritage/Identities/default_en.asp
Dvořák, M. (1916). Katechismus der Denkmalpflege. Wien: Anton Schroll.
  122

EUROCITIES. (2005). European Charter of Rights of Citizens in the Knowl-
edge Society. Retrieved on November 15, 2016 from http://www.praha.eu/
public/e7/ba/5/574198_62687_bem_charter_bar.pdf
Openshaw, J. (2015). Postdigital Artisans: Craftsmanship with a New Aesthetic 
in Fashion, Art, Design and Architecture. Amsterdam: Frame Publishers.
Silberman, N., & Puser, M. (2012). Collective memory as affirmation: People-
centered cultural heritage in a digital age. In E. Giaccardi (Ed.), Heritage 
and Social Media: Undestanding heritage in a Participatory Culture (pp. 
13–29). Abingdon: Routledge.
  123

Glossary
3-D Modeling: Realization of a model in the virtual 3-D space, made by digital 
solids and/or surfaces, able to simulate the characteristics of an object. The 3D 
model can be based or include photographic images, often taken from reality. The 
final effect of simulation can derive from both 3-D shapes and texture mapping. 
The 3-D model can be realized from physical objects (according to a “reverse mod-
eling” process) or directly assembling 3-D digital forms. 3-D modeling includes 
the modeling of the scene, lights, cameras, textures, using both 2-D (for example 
background images or the so called “impostor billboards”) and 3D elements. The 
characteristics of the 3-D are related to the ones of the object and to the aims of the 
representation. A model could present a photorealistic image or both iconic and 
symbolic representations.
Architectural Artifact: This definition, referred to an architectural heritage, is 
used to highlight how a historic building can be seen as a product of human activity. 
This becomes even more important for an historic building, realized with artisan 
technologies and stratified during of its life. Therefore, its aesthetical and material 
consistency takes on a specific testimonial value of the cultures and transformations 
that have generated and modified it over time.
Architectural Heritage: The UNESCO 1972 World Heritage Convention, 
indicates as cultural heritage monuments, group of buildings and sites, outstand-
ing universal value from the point of view of history, art or science. In the modern 
theory by Brandi, the qualities of a cultural heritage are the historical and the 
aesthetic values. An historical building is a complex system of spaces, volumes, 
materials, surfaces, constructive aspects, actual and past functions and configura-
tions, degradation, etc. The whole is the result of a continuous historical process 
of modification and transformation. An architectural heritage can be interpreted as 
an “artifact”, where its elements are witnesses of the cultures, actors, and of events 
occurred during the life of the building. In the study of architectural heritage is 
fundamental the archival analysis.
  124

Architectural Survey: Process of understanding of building’s characteristics and 
their appropriate graphical and visual documentation, through the analysis, selection, 
synthesis and representation of the architectural characteristics. Traditionally, the 
surveying is characterized by the succession of the following steps: a preliminary 
study and acquisition of documents; the surveying design; the measurement; the 
restitution with models for the interpretation and presentation of architectural heri-
tage. Only the measurement phase is “objective”, while the others are “subjective” 
because influenced by the skills, culture and experience of the surveyor. Advanced 
digital tools, such as laser-scanners and digital photogrammetry, partially inverted 
the process, anticipating the measurement phase.
Augmented Reality: Superimposition of digital information on observer’s 
perceptions of reality. In VR external perceptions are limited as much as possible, 
in AR they are fundamental, because the computer generated images roots on the 
vision of the real world.
Authenticity: “Authenticity” is the quality of being genuine and original. While 
‘Identity’ is the quest for the determination of the original existing features and ma-
terials of a historic heritage. According to the Operational Guidelines (UNESCO, 
2015) “authenticity does not limit consideration to original form and structure but 
includes all subsequent modifications and additions, over the course of time, which 
in themselves possess Artistic or historical values”. “Integrity” and “Authenticity” 
are criteria for the assessment of outstanding universal value. On ‘Authenticity’, the 
Art.82 says: “Depending on the type of cultural heritage, and its cultural context, 
properties may be understood to meet the conditions of authenticity if their cultural 
values (as recognized in the nomination criteria proposed) are truthfully and cred-
ibly expressed through a variety of attributes including: form and design; materials 
and substance; use and function; traditions, techniques and management systems; 
location and setting; language, and other forms of intangible heritage; spirit and 
feeling; other internal and external factors”.
BIM: Building Information Modeling is a process about the whole life-cycle of 
a building, from project, to construction, maintenance, management and dismantle-
ment. BIM is based on the realization of the 3-D models, where the digital elements 
are constructive objects (walls, floors, windows, etc.) uploaded from predefined 
parametrized libraries. The objects relate to a database with the design information 
that allow structural, energetic, economic, timing, computing. BIM involves the 
architectural, civil engineering, and plant aspects, and it favors the interoperability 
between professionals that work on the same model. BIM rises for new building 
design, but its application to historic architectures (the so called HBIM) presents 
  125

numerous matters, because it is difficult to reconcile the unique character of his-
torical architecture made with artisan procedures, with parametric 3D objects from 
standardized libraries and typed databases.
Conservation: The Nara Document on Authenticity (UNESCO, 1994) defines 
conservation as “all operations designed to understand a property, know its history 
and meaning, ensure its material safeguard, and, if required, its restoration and en-
hancement”. Therefore, the concept of Conservation is more general and possibly 
comprehensive of Restoration. In the art.9, it is underlined that “Conservation of 
cultural heritage in all its forms and historical periods is rooted in the values at-
tributed to the heritage. Our ability to understand these values depends, in part, on 
the degree to which information sources about these values may be understood as 
credible or truthful”. Follows that a critical and wise knowledge is a fundamental 
prerequisite. The Australia ICOMOS Charter for Places of Cultural Significance 
(aka The Burra Charter, 2013) presents the following definitions: “1.4 Conservation 
means all the processes of looking after a place so as to retain its cultural signifi-
cance. 1.5 Maintenance means the continuous protective care of a place, and its 
setting. Maintenance is to be distinguished from repair, which involves restoration 
or reconstruction. 1.6 Preservation means maintaining a place in its existing state 
and retarding deterioration. 1.7 Restoration means returning a place to a known 
earlier state by removing accretions or by reassembling existing elements without 
the introduction of new material. 1.8 Reconstruction means returning a place to a 
known earlier state and is distinguished from restoration by the introduction of new 
material. 1.9 Adaptation means changing a place to suit the existing use or a proposed 
use. 1.10 Use means the functions of a place, including the activities and traditional 
and customary practices that may occur at the place or are dependent on the place”.
Cultural Heritage: UNESCO defines “Cultural Heritage” as “the legacy of 
physical artifacts and intangible attributes of a group or society that are inherited 
from past generations, maintained in the present and bestowed for the benefit of 
future generations”.
Database Modeling: Modeling of a structured archive of data. The articulation 
is according to a pre-defined logical organization, related to the information char-
acteristics and aims. This segmentation made by semantic units is very important 
for database management and correlation to other systems such as 3-D models.
Digital Archive: It is a virtual space in which data, services and users are 
articulated in order to the preservation, use and sharing of information. Digital 
archives for the architecture collect written / graphics documents, usually dispersed 
  126

in different collections, according to a strategy as of conservation – for the fragility 
of the original documents – as of smart access. In particular, digital archives favor 
historical research and comparative analysis. 3D models can be used working along-
side traditional metadata, as an aid to historical-critical analysis of the works – both 
realized as only planned – and assisting the study of the authors and of architectures 
in relation to the historical context.
Digital Heritage: The Charter on the Preservation of the Digital Heritage pub-
lished by UNESCO in 2003 indicates the “Digital Heritage” as “Common Heritage”, 
made by: “cultural, educational, scientific and administrative resources, as well as 
technical, medical and other kinds of information created digitally, or converted 
into digital form from existing analogue resources. It includes different kinds of 
products such as texts, databases, images, audio, graphies, software and web pages”.
Digital Model of Architecture: Complex Model made by the synthesis of geo-
referenced architectural 3-D elements and correlated databases. It is made by two kinds 
of digital models: the 3-D Model able to simulate the architectural characteristics 
of a building (geometries, spaces, materials, historical and aesthetical values, etc.); 
the Database Model collecting documents, studies, and analysis on the historical 
building. It is an Informative Model that allows the interpretation, presentation and 
computation of architectural information.
Edutainment: The term derives from the two words “Education” and “Entertain-
ment”. It aims to put together learning and amusement. This idea can be extended 
to the fields dedicated to knowledge acquisition. In particular, thanks to ICT, the 
purpose is heritage presentation in a smart and amusing way.
E-Tourism: It involves all the processes of digitalization and e-commerce in the 
industry of travel, tourism, hospitality, organization, etc. If we think to it as virtual 
tour technologies, it can be traced back to cultural tourism – although in a virtual 
way – and to learning and/or recreation purposes. The International Cultural Tour-
ism: Charter Managing Tourism at Places of Heritage Significance (ICOMOS, 
1999) underlines the relationship between heritage and tourism and how cultural 
tourism – and therefore e-Tourism – can enhance heritage conservation: It is a dy-
namic interrelation that involves sustainability and social politics.
Gaming: It is based on the strategies deriving from digital ludic methodologies 
(such as score collection, virtual goods acquisition, level progression) to enhance 
the participation to marketing processes. The user involved in gaming is more in-
  127

terested, awake, and attentive. Consequently gaming could be a useful approach for 
message transmission and, therefore, for heritage interpretation and presentation.
Graphical Analysis for Architectural Heritage: starting from the Fifties, the 
use of drawing has been coded for the graphical analysis: Referring to the struc-
turalism lesson, drawing is regarded as a meta-language, i.e. a graphical language 
able to analyze another language: The architecture’s one. Similarly, complex 3D 
models, thanks to their characteristics of interaction, browsing, and querying are 
useful instruments to study and represent structural, figurative and functional aspects 
of architectural heritage.
Intangible Heritage: according to UNESCO Convention for the Safeguarding 
of Intangible Cultural Heritage (2003), it “means the practices, representations, 
expressions, knowledge, skills”. For example: oral traditions and expressions, includ-
ing language as a vehicle of the intangible cultural heritage; performing arts; social 
practices, rituals and festive events; knowledge and practices concerning nature and 
the universe; traditional craftsmanship
Integrity: The Art.88 of the Operational Guidelines (UNESCO, 2015) defines: 
“Integrity is a measure of the wholeness and intactness of the natural and/or cul-
tural heritage and its attributes. Examining the conditions of integrity, therefore 
requires assessing the extent to which the property: a) includes all elements neces-
sary to express its Outstanding Universal Value; b) is of adequate size to ensure the 
complete representation of the features and processes which convey the property’s 
significance; c) suffers from adverse effects of development and/or neglect. This 
should be presented in a statement of integrity”.
Interpretation: The ICOMOS Charter for the Interpretation and Presentation 
of Cultural Heritage Sites (2008) says that interpretation: “refers to the full range of 
potential activities intended to heighten public awareness and enhance understanding 
of cultural heritage site. These can include print and electronic publications, public 
lectures, on-site and directly related off-site installations, educational programmes, 
community activities, and ongoing research, training, and evaluation of the inter-
pretation process itself”.
Interpretative Architectural Model: It is a mediator between intellect and tan-
gible reality, and it takes the form of a digital replica of the observable phenomenal 
reality. It’s an interpretable document, but also a genuine critical-historical text. 
3-D models allow the expression through the complex and non-linear language of 
  128

the virtual dimension. Presupposition of this methodology for historical analysis, 
it is a careful architectural surveying, a wise modeling project and a critical use of 
the digital model.
Landscape: The Landscape Convention (Council of Europe, 2000) defines 
Landscape as “an area, as perceived by people, whose character is the result of the 
action and interaction of natural and/or human factors”.
Management (of Heritage): The UNESCO Resource Manual Managing Cul-
tural World Heritage (2013) defines management as a system, made by a “series 
of processes which together deliver a set of results, some of which feed back into 
the system to create an upward spiral of continuous improvement of the system, its 
actions and its achievements” (p.25). These systems are local and regional, related 
to culture and tradition. The Manual underlines that management is based on Plan-
ning, Implementation, and Monitoring, and the main outcomes are: The promotion 
of cultural diversity; The protection of natural environment (particular ecosystems in 
and around sites); The protection of tangible assets within properties (communities, 
cultures and knowledge); The providing of vitality to communities; The allowing 
of compatible land uses and economic activities (p.23). Fundamental is the role of 
stakeholders, their consensus and their understanding of values.
Mixed Reality: In 1994 Milgram and Kishino coined the expression “Mixed 
Reality” (MR) to describe the “virtual continuum” between only-real and com-
pletely virtual environment perception. Analyzing the interfaces for visualization, 
they identifies six classes of hybrid states. Their aim is to define a taxonomy to 
distinguish between different technological requirements.
Paradata: It can be generically referred to the process by which the survey data 
are collected. In particular, paradata is a kind of metadata focused on the use of 
data, and moreover it describes the transformation of data during their “inter-use” 
in participatory systems. According to the definition presented by The London 
Charter (2009) – focused on its use in 3D computer based visualizations – paradata 
is: “Information about human processes of understanding and interpretation of data 
objects. Examples of paradata include descriptions stored within a structured dataset 
of how evidence was used to interpret an artefact, or a comment on methodological 
premises within a research publication. It is closely related, but somewhat different 
in emphasis, to “contextual metadata”, which tend to communicate interpretations of 
an artefact or collection, rather than the process through which one or more artefacts 
were processed or interpreted”.
  129

Participatory Culture: It is “a culture with relatively low barriers to artistic 
expression and civic engagement, strong support for creating and sharing creations, 
and some type of informal mentorship whereby experienced participants pass 
along knowledge to novices. In a participatory culture, members also believe their 
contributions matter and feel some degree of social connection with one another”. 
In particular, the following skills underlies the participative culture: Affiliation, 
Expression, Collaborative problem solving, Circulation. New skills follow: Play, 
Performance, Simulation, Appropriation, Multitasking, Distributed cognition, Col-
lective intelligence, Judgment, Transmedia navigation, Networking, Negotiation. 
(Jenkins, 2009)
Place: The Burra Charter (ICOMOS, 2013) says: “Place means a geographically 
defined area. It may include elements, objects, spaces and views. Place may have 
tangible and intangible dimensions”.
Presentation: The ICOMOS Charter for the Interpretation and Presentation of 
Cultural Heritage Sites (2008) defines explains that presentation: “more specifically 
denotes the carefully planned communication of interpretive content through the ar-
rangement of interpretive information, physical access, and interpretive infrastructure 
at a cultural heritage site. It can be conveyed through a variety of technical means, 
including, yet not requiring, such elements as informational panels, museum-type 
displays, formalized walking tours, lectures and guided tours, and multimedia ap-
plications and websites”.
Semantization: Logical division of digital model’s components according to 
their meaning. In architectural heritage models, the semantization can be realized 
“a-posteriori” (reverse modeling processes) or “a-priori” (for example Constructive 
Solid Geometry processes).
Sustainability: It aims to match the needs of the present with the future ones, 
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their needs. Sustain-
ability in conservation means strategies and actions finalized to conserve heritage 
according to a sustainable development. Usually, it aims to relate conservation to 
politics of development, i.e. to economy.
Tangible Heritage: UNESCO says that it “includes buildings and historic places, 
monuments, artifacts, etc., which are considered worthy of preservation for the 
future. These include objects significant to the archaeology, architecture, science 
or technology of a specific culture. Objects are important to the study of human 
history because they provide a concrete basis for ideas, and can validate them. Their 
  130

preservation demonstrates recognition of the necessity of the past and of the things 
that tell its story. Preserved objects also validate memories; and the actuality of the 
object, as opposed to a reproduction or surrogate, draws people in and gives them 
a literal way of touching the past. This unfortunately poses a danger as places and 
things are damaged by the hands of tourists, the light required to display them, and 
other risks of making an object known and available”.
Transparency: In computer-based visualization, it consists in the statement 
of sources and of the degree of reliability of the virtual re-constructions. From a 
methodological point of view, it makes the digital model testable by other profes-
sionals. In the built heritage field, the concept has been developed in archaeology 
where 3D models are realized to reconstruct ancient configurations. In The London 
Charter’s Glossary (2009), there is a definition of “Intellectual transparency”: It is 
“The provision of information, presented in any medium or format, to allow users to 
understand the nature and scope of “knowledge claim” made by a computer-based 
visualization outcome”.
Urban Heritage: It roots on a “relational” value that moves from the character-
istics of the buildings that compose it. According to the European Union Research 
Report n°16 titled “SUIT Sustainable development of Urban historical areas 
through an active Integration within Towns” (2004): “Urban heritage comprises 
three main categories: (a) Monumental heritage of exceptional cultural value; (b) 
Non-exceptional heritage elements but present in a coherent way with a relative 
abundance; (c) New urban elements to be considered (for instance): The urban built 
form; The open space: streets, public open spaces; Urban infrastructures: material 
networks and equipments” (p.11). The ICOMOS Charter for the Conservation of 
Historic Towns and Urban Areas (Washington, 1987) puts together tangible and 
intangible aspects: “Qualities to be preserved include the historic character of the 
town or urban area and all those material and spiritual elements that express this 
character, especially: a) Urban patterns as defined by lots and streets; b) Relationships 
between buildings and green and open spaces; c) The formal appearance, interior 
and exterior, of buildings as defined by scale, size, style, construction, materials, 
colour and decoration; d) The relationship between the town or urban area and its 
surrounding setting, both natural and man-made; and e) The various functions that 
the town or urban area has acquired over time. Any threat to these qualities would 
compromise the authenticity of the historic town or urban area”.
Virtual Heritage: In 1999, on UNESCO’s “World Heritage Magazine”, Stone 
defined Virtual Heritage as: “the utilization of technology for interpretation, con-
servation and preservation of Natural, Cultural and World Heritage”.
  131

Virtual Museum of Architecture: A digital museum for architectural heritage 
could be a virtual journey through buildings, places, and people. An architectural 
museums cannot deal only with buildings, but also with documents of the edifices 
and designers. Therefore, an architectural museum configurs as a system for the 
correlation of information, that is it should present a historical narrative and a pres-
ent day documentary. The storytelling of a museum of architecture (or of places) 
should favor the navigation through building’s internal and external spaces, and 
the link of the building with other architectures (of the same designer, of the same 
age, with similar stylistic characteristics, attributable to the same historical culture, 
etc.), and with documents (writings, drawings, maquettes, etc.). also distributed in 
different archives.
Virtual Museum: In the current communication society, the traditional au-
thoritative role of museums and of curators is changing, according to new ways of 
communication: Their language presents new evocative, narrative, and experiential 
dimension. They are systems for multiple and complex storytelling, aiming to the 
participative interpretation, presentation of heritage. Therefore, they are new ways 
for “heritage-making”. Consequently, museums are taking a virtual dimension, 
both in collections presentation and in people and places interconnection. No more 
only warehouses of objects and data, but informative systems able to present and 
interrelate documents, archival data, and information, thus favoring the study, com-
parison and presentation of distant, fragile or hard to consult works. Their learning 
role is ever important.
Virtual Reality: it bases on a total-body immersion in a computer-generated 
environment. Perceptions derives from digital information and, although the syn-
thetic environment often follows laws different from real word ones, the user has a 
psychological involvement and lives it like a real experience.
Visual Computing: Technique of analysis based on the visual representation 
of large amount of data. Those data can derive from various kinds or phenomena, 
also from non-visual ones. Visual computing consists in the representation of 
three-dimensional digital environments, where there is a complex interaction of an 
elevated number of agents simulating different kinds of data and information. The 
images provide information and through images, the user can observe, interact with, 
compute and control data and information, and create new knowledge.
  132

133
Related Readings
Aalberg, T., Papatheodorou, C., Dobreva, M., Tsakonas, G., & Farrugia, C. 
J. (Eds.). (2013). Research and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries. 
Berlin: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-40501-3
Ackerman, J. S. (2002). Origins, Imitation, Conventions. Cambridge, MA: 
The MIT Press.
Albert, M. T., Richon, M., Viňals, M. J., & Witcomb, A. (Eds.). (2012). 
Community Development through World Heritage. UNESCO World Heri-
tage Papers, 31. Retrieved on Novembrer 15, 2016 from http://whc.unesco.
org/en/series/31/
Albisinni, P., & De Carlo, L. (Eds.). (2011). Architettura. Disegno. Modello. 
Roma: Gangemi.
Albisinni, P., & Ippoliti, E. (Eds.). (2016). Virtual Museums for Architecture 
and City. Disegnarecon, 9(17).
Andrews, D. (Ed.). (2009). Metric Survey Specification for Cultural Heritage. 
Swindow: English Heritage.
Apollonio, F. I. (2012). Architettura in 3D. Milano: Bruno Mondadori.
Apollonio, F. I., Gaiani, M., & Sun, Z. (2013). Characterization of Uncertainty 
and Approximation in Digital Reconstruction of CH Artifacts. In Proceed-
ing of Le Vie dei Mercanti XI Forum Internazionale di Studi (pp.860-869). 
Napoli: La Scuola di Pitagora.
Apollonio, F.I., Gaiani, M., & Zheng, S. (2012). BIM-based modeling and 
data enrichment of classical architectural buildings. SCIRES-IT, 2(2).

Related Readings
134
Apollonio, F. I., & Giovannini, E. C. (2015). A paradata documentation 
methodology for the Uncertainty Visualization in digital reconstruction of 
CH artifacts. SCIRES-IT, 5(1), 1–24.
Audisio, L. (2011). La catalogazione del disegno di architettura nell’era 
digitale. Disegnare Con, 4(8), 116–123.
Austin, J. L. (1962). Sense and Sensibilia. Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press.
Bailey, C., & Gardiner, H. (Eds.). (2010). Revisualizing Visual Culture. 
Farnham: Ashgate.
Baudrillard, J. (1976). L’echange symbolique et la mort. Paris: Gallimard.
Baudrillard, J. (1987). L’autre par lui-même: Habilitation. Paris: Editions 
Galilée.
Beacham, R. (2008). ‘Oh, to Make Boards to Speak! There is a Task!’ Toward 
a Poetics of Paradata. In M. Greengrass & L. Hughes (Eds.), The Virtual 
Representation of the Past (pp. 171-178). Farnham: Ashgate.
Benedetti, B., Gaiani, M., & Remondino, F. (2010). Modelli digitali 3D in 
archeologia: il caso di Pompei. Pisa: Scuola Normale Superiore Pisa.
Benedetti, S. (1981). La cultura del restauro negli interventi sui centri storici. 
In Il recupero dei vecchi centri, gli aspetti teorici – i modi d’intervento. Atti 
del Convegno internazionale di studi (pp. 15-20). Udine: Università degli 
Studi di Udine.
Benjamin, W. (1936). Das Kunstwerk im Zeitalter seiner technischen Repro-
duzierbarkeit. Zeitschrift für Sozialforschung.
Berry, D. M., & Dieder, M. (Eds.). (2015). Postdigital Aesthetics: Art, Compu-
tation and Design. London: Palgrave Macmillan. doi:10.1057/9781137437204
Bianchini, C. (2007). From reality to virtualità (and back): the wooden model 
by Antonio da Sangallo for the new St. Peter’s in the Vatican. Disegnare idee 
immagini, 34, 36-49.
Bianchini, C. (2014). Survey 2.0: new technologies, new equipment, new 
surveyors? In P. Giandebiaggi & C. Vernizzi (Eds.), Italian Survey & Inter-
national Experiences (pp. 763–768). Roma: Gangemi.

Related Readings
135
Bianchini, C., Ippolito, A., & Bartolomei, C. (2015). The surveying and 
representation process applied to architecture: non contact-methods for the 
documentation of Cultural Heritage. In S. Brusaporci (Ed.), Handbook of 
Research on Emerging Digital Tools for Architectural Surveying, Modeling, 
and Representation (pp. 45–93). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-8379-2.ch002
Bock, H. G., Jäger, W., & Winckler, M. (Eds.). (2013). Scientific Computing 
and Cultural Heritage. Berlin: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-28021-4
Boehm, J., Remondino, F., Verste, T., Fuse, T., & Gonzalez-Aguilera, D. 
(Eds.). (2013). 3D-ARCH 2013 – 3D Virtual reconstruction and visualiza-
tion of complex architectures. International Society for Photogrammetry and 
Remote Sensing, 40(5/W1).
Bolter, J. D., & Grusin, R. (1999). Remediation – Understanding New Media. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bonelli, R. (1963). Restauro. In Enciclopedia Universale dell’Arte (vol. 10, 
pp. 344-351). Roma: Academic Press.
Bowen, J., Keene, S., & Ng, K. (Eds.). (2013). Electronic Visualization in 
Arts and Culture. Berlin: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-1-4471-5406-8
Brandi, C. (1963). Teoria del restauro di Cesare Brandi. Lezioni raccolte 
da L. Vlad Borrelli, J. Raspi Serra e G. Urbani. Roma: Edizioni di Storia e 
Letteratura.
Brusaporci, S. (2012). Architetture per il sociale negli anni trenta e Quaranta 
del Novecento. Rome: Gangemi.
Brusaporci, S. (2013). Modellazione e rappresentazione digitale per i beni 
architettonici. In S. Brusaporci (Ed.), Modelli complessi per il patrimonio 
architettonico-urbano (pp. 18–24). Roma: Gangemi Editore.
Brusaporci, S. (2014). Issues of Historic Town Surveying: Visualizing Urban 
Values. SCIRES.it,4(2), 63-80.
Brusaporci, S. (Ed.). (2015). Handbook of Research on Emerging Digital 
Tools for Architectural Surveying, Modeling, and Representation. Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8379-2

Related Readings
136
Brusaporci, S. (2015). The Representation of Architectural Heritage in the 
Digital Age. In M. Khosrow-Pour (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Information Science 
and Technology, Third Edition (pp. 4195-4205). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-5888-2.ch412
Brusaporci, S. (2015). On Visual Computing for Architectural Heritage. In 
S. Brusaporci (Ed.), Handbook of Research on Emerging Digital Tools for 
Architectural Surveying, Modeling, and Representation (pp. 94–123). Her-
shey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8379-2.ch003
Brusaporci, S. (2016). Graphical Analysis 2.0: Digital Representation for 
Understanding and Communication of Architecture. In Universitad de Alcala. 
El Arquitecto, de la Tradicion al Siglo XXI (Vol. I). Madrid: Universitad de 
Alcala.
Brusaporci, S. (2016). Swimming in the Liquid Age: A Disciplinarily Re-
flection on Computer-Based Visualization of Architectural Heritage. In G. 
Amoruso (Ed.), Handbook of Research on Visual Computing and Emerging 
Geometrical Design Tools. IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0029-2.ch001
Brusaporci, S. (2017). The Importance of Being Honest: Issues of Transpar-
ency in Digital Visualization of Architectural Heritage. In A. Ippolito (Ed.), 
Handbook of Research on Emerging Technologies for Architectural and Ar-
chaeological Heritage (pp. 66–93). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-5225-0675-1.ch003
Brusaporci, S., Centofanti, M., Continenza, R., & Trizio, I. (2012). Sistemi 
Informativi Architettonici per la gestione, tutela e fruizione dell’edilizia 
storica. In ATTI 16ª Conferenza Nazionale ASITA 2012 (pp. 315–322). Vi-
cenza: ASITA.
Brusaporci, S., & Trizio, I. (2010). Dal rilevamento integrato al SiArch-3D: 
il caso di studio della chiesa di S. Paolo a Peltuinum (AQ). In S. Brusaporci 
(Ed.), Sistemi Informativi Integrati per la tutela la conservazione e la valoriz-
zazione del patrimonio architettonico e urbano (pp. 39–42). Roma: Gangemi.
Bruschi, A. (1984). Problemi e metodi di ricerca storico-critica sulla architet-
tura. In G. Spagnesi (Ed.), Storia e restauro dell’architettura (pp. 15–34). 
Roma: Istituto della Enciclopedia Treccani.
Buhalis, D. (2003). eTourism: Information Technology for Strategic Tourism 
Management. Harlow: Financial Times/Prentice Hall.

Related Readings
137
Calabi, D. (Ed.). (2013). Built city, Designed city, Virtual city, The museum 
of the city. Roma: CROMA.
Cameron, F. (2010). Beyond the Cult of the Replicant. In F. Cameron & S. 
Kenderdine (Ed.), Theorizing digital cultural heritage: A critical discourse 
(pp. 49-76). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cameron, F., & Kenderdine, S. (Eds.). (2010). Theorizing digital cultural 
heritage: a critical discourse. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Campbell, G., & Smith, L. (2016). Keeping Critical Heritage Studies Criti-
cal: Why “post-Humanism” and the “New Materialism” Are Not So Critical. 
Retrieved on November 15, 2016 from https://www.academia.edu/26027979/
Keeping_Critical_Heritage_Studies_Critical_Why_Post-Humanism_and_
the_New_Materialism_Are_Not_So_Critical
Card, S. K., Mackinlay, J., & Shneiderman, B. (Eds.). (1999). Readings in 
Information Visualization: using Vision to Think. San Francisco, CA: Morgan 
Kaufmann.
Centofanti, M. (2010). Della natura del modello architettonico. In S. Bru-
saporci (Ed.), Sistemi informativi integrati per la tutela, la conservazione e 
la valorizzazione del patrimonio architettonico e urbano (pp. 43–54). Rome: 
Gangemi.
Centofanti, M., & Brusaporci, S. (2012). Interpretative 3D digital models in 
architectural surveying of historical buildings. In P. Di Giamberardino, D. 
Iacoviello, A. M. Natal Jorge, & J. M. Tavares (Eds.), Computational Model-
ling of Objects Represented in Images (pp. 433–438). London: CRC Press.
Centofanti, M., Brusaporci, S., & Lucchese, V. (2012). Architectural heritage 
and 3D models. In Computational Modeling of Objects Presented in Images 
(pp. 31–49). Geneva: Springer.
Centofanti, M., Brusaporci, S., & Maiezza, P. (2016). Tra “Historical BIM” 
ed “Heritage BIM: Building Information Modeling per la documentazione 
dei beni architettonici. In S. Parrinello & D. Besana (Eds.), ReUSO 2016 
(pp. 42-51). Firenze: Edifir.
Centofanti, M., Continenza, R., Brusaporci, S., & Trizio I. (2011). The Archi-
tectural Information System SIArch3D-Univaq for analysis and preservation 
of architectural heritage. The International Archives of the Photogrammetry 
Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, 38-5/W16.

Related Readings
138
Cervellini, F., & Rossi, D. (2011). Comunicare emozionando. L’edutainment 
per la comunicazione intorno al patrimonio culturale. Disegnarecon, 4(8), 
48–55.
Ch’ng, E. (2015). Virtual Heritage: Cultural Agents, Environments and Ob-
jects. Presence (Cambridge, Mass.), 24(3).
Ch’ng, E., Gaffney, V., & Chapman, H. (Eds.). (2013). Visual Heritage in the 
Digital Age. New York: Springer-Verlag. doi:10.1007/978-1-4471-5535-5
Ch’ng, E., & Gaffney, V. L. (2013). Seeing Things: Heritage Computing, 
Visualization and the Arts and Humanities. In E. Ch’ng, V. Gaffney & H. 
Chapman (Eds.), Visual Heritage in the Digital Age (pp. 1-14). London: 
Springer.
Ch’ng, E., Gaffney, V. L., & Chapman, H. P. (2014). From Product to Process: 
New Directions in Digital Heritage. In H. Din & S. Wu (Eds.), Digital Heri-
tage and Culture: Strategy and Implementation (pp. 219–243). Singapore: 
World Scientific. doi:10.1142/9789814522984_0015
Chiavoni, E., & Filippa, M. (Eds.). (2011). Metodologie integrate per il rilievo, 
il disegno, la modellazione dell’architettura e della città. Rome: Gangemi.
Chiavoni, E., & Paolini, P. (Eds.). (2007). Metodi e tecniche integrate di 
rilievo per la realizzazione di modelli virtuali dell’architettura della città. 
Roma: Gangemi.
Cicaló, E., & Solci, M. (Eds.). (2016). Rinnovare la tutela. Modelli grafici e 
matematici per una ridefinizione delle prospettive. Roma: Gangemi.
Cigola, M. (2012). Technologies applied to cultural heritage. A robot applica-
tion in architectural survey. Journal of Civil Engineering and Architecture, 
6(9), 1109–1116.
Cigola, M., & Fiorucci, T. (Eds.). (1993). Il disegno di progetto dalle origini 
al XVIII secolo. Roma: Gangemi.
Clini, P., Quattrini, R., Frontoni, E., Pierdicca, R., & Nespeca, R. (2017). 
Real/Not Real: Pseudo-Holography and Augmented Reality Applications for 
Cultural Heritage. In A. Ippolito & M. Cigola (Eds.), Handbook of Research 
on Emerging Technologies for Digital Preservation and Information Model-
ing (pp. 201-227). IGI Global.
Colombo, F. (1995). Ombre sintetiche. Napoli: Liguori.

Related Readings
139
Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed 
Conflict. (1954). Retrieved on November 15, 2016 from http://portal.unesco.
org/en/ev.php-URL_ID=13637&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SEC-
TION=201.html
Council of Europe. (2000). European Landscape Convention. Retrieved on 
November, 15, 2016 from http://www.coe.int/en/web/landscape/home
Council of Europe. (2005). Framework Convention on the Value of Cultural 
Heritage for Society. Retrieved on November, 15, 2016 from http://www.coe.
int/t/dg4/cultureheritage/heritage/Identities/default_en.asp
Council of Europe. (2012). Guidelines on Cultural Heritage: Technical Tools 
for Heritage Conservation and Management. Retrieved on November, 15, 
2016 from https://www.coe.int/t/dg4/cultureheritage/cooperation/Kosovo/
Publications/Guidelines-ENG.pdf
De Kerckove, D. (1991). Brainframes. Technology, Mind and Business. 
Utrecht: Bosh & Keuning.
De Luca, L. (2011). Methods, formalisms and tools for the semantic-based 
surveying and representation of architectural heritage. Applied Geomatics, 
1-25.
De Luca, L., Bussayarat, C., Stefani, C., Véron, P., & Florenzano, M. (2011). 
A semantic-based platform for the digital analysis of architectural heritage. 
Computers & Graphics, 2(35), 227–241. doi:10.1016/j.cag.2010.11.009
Denard, H. (2012). A New Introduction to The London Charter. In Para-
data and Transparency in Virtual Heritage (pp. 57–72). Farnham: Ashgate 
Publishing.
Docci, M. (1989). Disegno e rilievo: Quale didattica? Disegnare Idee Im-
magini, 0, 37–54.
Docci, M. (Ed.). (2005). Metodologie innovative integrate per il rilievo 
dell’architettura e dell’ambiente. Roma: Gangemi.
Docci, M. (2007). The unbuilt Vatican Basilica. The project by Antonio da 
Sangallo. Disegnare idee immagini, 34, 24-35.
Docci, M., & Maestri, D. (1993). Storia del rilevamento architettonico e 
urbano. Roma, Bari: Laterza.
Docci, M., & Maestri, D. (2009). Manuale di rilevamento architettonico e 
urbano. Rome: Laterza.

Related Readings
140
Dore, C., & Murphy, M. (2015). Historic Building Information Model-
ling (HBIM). In S. Brusaporci (Ed.), Handbook of Research on Emerging 
Digital Tools for Architectural Surveying, Modeling, and Representation (pp. 
233–273). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8379-2.ch007
Drucker, J. (2014). Graphesis: Visual Forms of Knowledge Production. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Dvořák, M. (1916). Katechismus der Denkmalpflege. Wien: Anton Schroll.
Dylla, K., Frischer, B., Mueller, P., Ulmer, A., & Haegler, S. (2010). Rome 
Reborn 2.0: A Case Study of Virtual City Reconstruction Using Procedural 
Modeling Techniques. In CAA 2009. Making History Interactive (pp. 62–66). 
Oxford, UK: Archaeopress.
EUROCITIES. (2005). European Charter of Rights of Citizens in the Knowl-
edge Society. Retrieved on November 15, 2016 from http://www.praha.eu/
public/e7/ba/5/574198_62687_bem_charter_bar.pdf
Ferraris, M. (2011). Manifesto of New Realism. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Ferraris, M. (2012). Esistere è resistere. In M. De Caro & M. Ferraris (Eds.), 
Bentornata realtà (pp. 139–166). Milano: Einaudi.
Filippa, M., Docci, M., & Chiavoni, E. (Eds.). (2011). Metodologie integrate 
per il rilievo, il disegno, la modellazione dell’architettura e della città. Rome: 
Gangemi.
Fiorucci, T. (Ed.). (2005). Metodologie innovative integrate per il rilievo 
dell’architetturaa e dell’ambiente. Roma: Gangemi.
Floridi, L. (2013). The Philosophy of Information. Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press.
Forte, M. (2000). About Virtual Archaeology: Disorders, Cognitive Interac-
tions and Virtuality. In Virtual Reality in Archaeology (pp. 247-263). Oxford, 
UK: BAR International Series S843 (Archaeopress).
Forte, M. (2008). Introduzione. In M. Forte (Ed.), La Villa di Livia. Un per-
corso di realtà virtuale (pp. 1-36). Roma: “L’Erma” di Bretschneider.
Forte, M., & Siliotti, A. (Eds.). (1996). Virtual Archaeology. Re-creating 
Ancient Words. New York: Harry N. Abrams.

Related Readings
141
Frischer, B. (2008). From digital illustration to digital heuristic. In B. D. 
Frischer (Ed.), Beyond illustration: 2d and 3d Digital Technologies As Tool 
for Discovery in Archaeology. Oxford, UK: British Archaeological Reports.
Gaiani, M. (2006). Un viaggio attraverso gli strumenti e i metodi di produzi-
one del progetto di disegno industriale nell’epoca della progettazione digitale 
totale. In M. Gaiani (Ed.), La rappresentazione riconfigurata (pp. 23–57). 
Milano: Poli.Design.
Gaiani, M. (2012). Towards a critical rethinking of the theory of surveying 
following the advent of digital media. In L. Carlevaris & M. Filippa (Eds.), 
In Praise of Theory. The fundamentals of the disciplines of representation 
and survey (pp. 375–381). Roma: Gangemi.
Gaiani, M. (2012). Trattamento, tutela e comunicazione dei giacimenti 
documentali dell’architettura antica. In P. Clini (Ed.), Vitruvio e il disegno 
di architettura (pp. 177–219). Venezia: Marsilio.
Gaiani, M., Benedetti, B., & Apollonio, F. I. (2011). Teorie per rappresentare 
e comunicare i siti archeologici attraverso modelli critici. SCIRES-IT, 1(2), 
33–70.
Gallozzi, A., Carbone, G., Ceccarelli, M., De Stefano, C., Scotto di Freca, 
A., Bianchi, M., & Cigola, M. (2017). The MuseBot Project: Robotics, Infor-
matic, and Economics Strategies for Museums. In Handbook of Research on 
Emerging Technologies for Digital Preservation and Information Modeling 
(pp. 45-66). IGI Global.
Garagnani, S. (2013). Building Information Modeling and real world knowl-
edge: a methodological approach to accurate semantic documentation for 
the built environment. In Proceedings of Digital Heritage 2013 (vol. 1, 
pp.489,496). Marseille: IEEE. doi:10.1109/DigitalHeritage.2013.6743788
Garagnani, S. (2015). Semantic Representation of Accurate Surveys for the 
Cultural Heritage: BIM Applied on the Existing Domain. In S. Brusaporci 
(Ed.), Handbook of Research on Emerging Digital Tools for Architec-
tural Surveying, Modeling, and Representation. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8379-2.ch009
Gere, C. (2002). Digital Culture. London: Reaktion Books.
Geremia, F. (2014). Building on our losses: Principles and methodologies 
of virtual restoration applied to Rome’s historic centre. Città & Storia, 9(1), 
33–60.

Related Readings
142
Getty Conservation Institute. (2009). Conservation Management Planning: 
Putting Theory into Practice. Retrieved on November 15, 2016 from http://
www.getty.edu/conservation/publications_resources/pdf_publications/
cons_mgt_planning.html#
Giaccardi, E. (2012). Introduction: reframing Heritage in a participatory 
culture. In E. Giaccardi (Ed.), Heritage and Social Media: Understanding 
heritage in a Participatory Culture (pp. 1–10). Abingdon: Routledge.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Boston, 
MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Gilliland, A. J. (2008). Setting the Stage. In M. Baca (Ed.), Introduction to 
Metadata (pp. 1–19). Los Angeles, CA: Getty Research Institute.
Gold, M. K. (Ed.). (2012). Debates in the Digital Humanities. University of 
Minnesota Press. doi:10.5749/minnesota/9780816677948.001.0001
Greengrass, M., & Hughes, L. (Eds.). (2008). The Virtual Representation of 
the Past. Farnham: Ashgate.
Gul, S., Tramboo, S. R., & Ahangar, H. (2015). Metadata Diversity in the 
Cultural Heritage Repositories. In M. Khosrow-Pour (Ed.), Encyclopedia of 
Information Science and Technology (3rd ed.; pp. 1843–1854). Hershey, PA: 
IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-5888-2.ch178
Hermon, S. (2012). Scientific Method, chaîne opératoire and Visualization: 
3D Modelling as a Research Tool in Archaeology. In Paradata and Transpar-
ency in Virtual Heritage (pp. 13–22). Farnham: Ashgate Publishing.
Hermon, S., & Nicolucci, F. (2006). A Fuzzy Logic Approach to Realiabil-
ity in Archaeological Virtual Reconstruction. In S. Hermon & F. Nicolucci 
(Eds.), Beyond the Artefact. Digital Interpretation of the Past (pp. 28–35). 
Budapest: Archaeolingua.
Hoel, A. S., & Webmoor, T. (Eds.). (2014). Visualization in the Age of Com-
puterization. Oxford, UK: Routledge.
Huvila, I. (2013). The Unbearable Complexity of Documenting Intellectual 
Processes: Paradata and Virtual Cultural Heritage Visualisation. Human IT, 
12(1), 97–110.
ICOMOS. (1964). International charter for the conservation and restora-
tion of monuments and sites. Accessed on November, 15 from http://www.
icomos.org/charters/venice_e.pdf

Related Readings
143
ICOMOS. (1999). International Cultural Tourism Charter Managing Tourism 
at Places of Heritage Significance. Retrieved on November 15, 2016 from 
http://www.icomos.org/charters/tourism_e.pdf
ICOMOS. (2008). Charter for the Interpretation and Presentation of Cultural 
Heritage Sites. Retrieved on November, 15, 2016 from http://icip.icomos.org/
downloads/ICOMOS_Interpretation_Charter_ENG_04_10_08.pdf
ICOMOS. (2013). Charter for Places of Cultural Significance. Retrieved on 
November, 15 from http://australia.icomos.org/publications/charters/
Ioannides, M., Fink, E., Moropoulou, A., Hagedorn-Saupe, M., Fresa, A., 
Liestøl, G., . . . Grussenmeyer, P. (Eds.). (2016). Digital Heritage. Progress 
in Cultural Heritage: Documentation, Preservation, and Protection. Berlin: 
Springer.
Ippoliti, E., & Calvano, M. (2017). Enhancing the Cultural Heritage between 
Visual Technologies and Virtual Restoration: Case Studies to Models for 
Visual Communication. In A. Ippolito & M. Cigola (Eds.), Handbook of 
Research on Emerging Technologies for Digital Preservation and Informa-
tion Modeling (pp. 316-354). IGI Global.
Ippolito, A. (2015). Digital documentation for archaeology. Case studies on 
etruscan and roman heritage. SCIRES-IT, 5(2), 71–90.
Ippolito, A. (Ed.). (2017). Handbook of Research on Emerging Technologies 
for Architectural and Archaeological Heritage. IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-5225-0675-1
Ippolito, A., & Cigola, M. (Eds.). (2017). Handbook of Research on Emerg-
ing Technologies for Digital Preservation and Information Modeling. IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0680-5
Jenkins, H. (2006). Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Col-
lide. New York: NY University Press.
Jenkins, H. (2007). Reconsidering Digital Immigrants. Retrieved November 
15, 2016, from www.henryjenkins.org/2007/12/reconsidering_digital_im-
migran.html
Jenkins, H. (2009). Confronting the Challenges of Participatory Culture: 
Media Education for the 21st Century. Cambridge, MA: MIT.
Kalay, Y., Kvan, T., & Affleck, J. (Eds.). (2007). New Heritage: New Media 
and Cultural Heritage. Routledge.

Related Readings
144
Keyes, R. (2004). The Post-Truth Era: Dishonesty and Deception in Con-
temporary Life. New York: St. Martin Press.
Koh, A. (2015, April 19). A Letter to Humanities: DH Will Not Save You. 
Hybridpedagogy.
Kreuter, F. (Ed.). (2013). Improving Surveys with Paradata. Hoboken, NJ: 
Wiley. doi:10.1002/9781118596869
Lake, M. W. (2014). Trends in Archaeological Simulation. Journal of Archaeo-
logical Method and Theory, 21(2), 258–287. doi:10.1007/s10816-013-9188-1
Lévi Strauss, C. (1962). La pensée sauvage. Paris: Plon.
Levy, P. (1994). L’intelligence collective: Pour une anthropologie du cyber-
space. Paris: La Découverte.
Lowenthal, D. (1985). The Past is a Foreign Country. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press.
Maggio, F., & Villa, M. (2008). Architettura demolita. Palermo: Edizioni 
Caracol.
Maldonado, T. (1992). Reale e virtuale. Milan: Feltrinelli.
Mangione, F., Ribichini, L., & Terragni, A. (2015). Giuseppe Terragni a 
Roma. Roma: Prospettive Edizioni.
Manovich, L. (2001). The Language of New Media. Cambridge, MA: The 
MIT Press.
Manovich, L. (2013). Software Takes Command. New York: Bloomsbury 
Academic.
Menicucci, M. (2014). Restauro del Politeama Ruzzi (1934-1973) a Vasto 
(CH) (Unpublished graduation thesis). University of L’Aquila, L’Aquila, Italy.
Migliari, R. (Ed.). (2008). Prospettiva dinamica interattiva. Roma: Kappa.
Milgram, P., & Kishino, F. (1994). A taxonomy of mixed reality visual displays. 
IEICE Transactions on Information and Systems, E77-D(12), 1321–1329.
Mitchell, W. (1992). The Reconfigured Eye: Visual Truth in the Post-Photo-
graphic Era. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Moles, A. (1972). Teoria informazionale dello schema. Versus, 2, 29–37.

Related Readings
145
Moles, A. (1987). La visualisation thématique du monde. Cahiers Interna-
tionaux de Sociologie, 82, 162.
Muratori, S. (1960). Studi per una operante storia urbana di Venezia. Roma: 
Istituto poligrafico dello Stato.
Murray, J. (1997). Hamlet on the Holodeck. The Future of Narrative in Cy-
berspace. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Murray, J. H. (2012). Inventing the Medium. Principles of Interaction Design 
as a Cultural Practice. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
National Science Digital Library. (2010). Paradata. Retrieved on November 
15, 2016 from https://wiki.ucar.edu/display/nsdldocs/Paradata
Negroponte, N. (1995). Being Digital. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Nicolucci, F. (2012). Setting Standards for 3D Visualization of Cultural 
Heritage. In Paradata and Transparency in Virtual Heritage (pp. 23–36). 
Farnham: Ashgate Publishing.
Norberg-Schulz, C. (1979). Genius Loci. Milano: Electa.
Openshaw, J. (2015). Postdigital Artisans: Craftsmanship with a New Aesthetic 
in Fashion, Art, Design and Architecture. Amsterdam: Frame Publishers.
Oreni, D., Brumana, R., Della Torre, S., Banfi, F., Barazzetti, L., & Previ-
tali, M. (2014). Survey turned into HBIM: The restoration and the work in-
volvedconcerning the Basilica di Collemaggio after the earthquake (L’Aquila). 
ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry,Remote Sensing and Spatial Information 
Sciences, 2, 267–273.
Panofsky, E. (1927). Die Perspektive als “symbolische Form”. Vorträge der 
Bibliothek Warburg. Lipsia-Berlino.
Parry, R. (Ed.). (2010). Museums in a Digital Age. Abingdon: Routledge.
Perry, R. (2003). Foreword. Digital Heritage: Agora and Agility. In E. Ch’ng, 
V. Gaffney, & H. Chapman (Eds.), Visual Heritage in the Digital Age (pp. 
v–vii). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Pescarin, S. (2016). Digital Heritage into Practice. SCIRES-IT, 6(1), 1–4.
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital Natives, Digital Immigrants Part 1. On the Ho-
rizon, 9(5), 1–6. doi:10.1108/10748120110424816

Related Readings
146
Principles of Seville. (2012). Retrieved November 15, 2016, from http://
www.arqueologiavirtual.com/carta/?page_id=12
Progetti e ricerche della città di Pesaro. (1980). Pesaro. 10 supplemento. 
Pesaro: Amministrazione Comunale di Pesaro.
Purini, F. (2003). Digital divide. In L. Sacchi & M. Unali (Eds.), Architettura 
e cultura digitale (pp. 87–96). Milano: Skira.
Putnam, H. (2012). Realismo e senso comune. In M. De Carlo & M. Ferraris 
(Eds.), Bentornata realtà (pp. 5–20). Torino: Einaudi.
Ramsay, S. (2013). Who’s In and Who’s Out. In M. Terras, M. Nyhan, & 
E. Vanhoutte (Eds.), Defining Digital Humanities (pp. 239–241). Farnham: 
Ashgate.
Romeo, G. M. A. (2012). Rappresentazione video-ludica e Modelli tridi-
mensionali interattivi (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of 
Reggio Calabria.
Sacchi, L. (2015). La fine del disegno? Op. Cit., 123, 5–15.
Sauer, C. (1925). Morphology of Landscape. Retrieved on November 15, 2016 
from http://geog.uoregon.edu/amarcus/geog620/readings/sauer_1925_mor-
phology_of_landscape.pdf
Schafer, D. P. (2014). The Age of Culture. Rock’s Mills Press.
Scheer, D. R. (2014). The Death of Drawing: Architecture in the Age of 
Simulation. Abington: Routledge.
Silberman, N. (2008). Chasing the Unicorn? The Quest for Essence in Digi-
tal Heritage. In Y. E. Kalay, T. Kvan, & J. Affleck (Eds.), New Heritage. 
Abington: Routledge.
Silberman, N. (2016). Heritage places: Evolving conceptions and changing 
forms. In W. Logan, M. N. Craith & U. Kockel (Eds.), A Companion to 
Heritage Studies. London: Wiley-Blackwell.
Silberman, N., & Puser, M. (2012). Collective memory as affirmation: People-
centered cultural heritage in a digital age. In E. Giaccardi (Ed.), Heritage 
and Social Media: Understanding heritage in a Participatory Culture (pp. 
13–29). Abingdon: Routledge.

Related Readings
147
Simeone, D., Cursi, S., Toldo, I., & Carrara, G. (2014). B(H)IM – Built Heri-
tage Information Modelling. Extending BIM to historical and archeological 
heritage representation. In Fusion,Proceedings of the 32nd International 
Conference on Education and research in Computer Aided Architectural 
Design in Europe (vol. 1, pp. 613-622). Newcastle upon Tyne, UK: Nor-
thumbria University.
Souhami, R. (2014). Manifesto for the Future of Museums. Retrieved on De-
cember 30, 2016 from https://museumsshowoff.files.wordpress.com/2013/10/
manifesto-for-the-future-of-museums1.pdf
Spagnesi, G. (1979). Il centro storico di Roma. Roma: Multigrafica editrice.
Spagnesi, G. (Ed.). (1984a). Storia e restauro dell’architettura. Roma: Istituto 
della Enciclopedia Italiana Treccani.
Spagnesi, G. (1984b). Autonomia della Storia dell’architettura. In G. Spag-
nesi (Ed.), Storia e restauro dell’architettura (pp. 7–10). Roma: Istituto della 
Enciclopedia Italiana Treccani.
Spallone, R. (2015). Digital Reconstruction of Demolished Architectural 
Masterpieces, 3D Modeling and Animation: The Case Study of Turin Horse-
Racing by Mollino. In S. Brusaporci (Ed.), Handbook of Research on Emerging 
Digital Tools for Architectural Surveying, Modeling, and Representation (pp. 
476–509). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8379-2.ch017
Stone, R. J. (1999, November). Virtual heritage. UNESCO World Heritage 
Magazine, 18-20.
Sutherland, I. (1965). The Ultimate Display.Proceeding of the IFIP Congress, 
2, 506-508.
Tamborrino, R. (Ed.). (2014). Digital Urban History. Telling the History of 
the City in the Age of ICT Revolution. Roma: Croma.
Terras, M., Nyhan, J., & Vanhoutte, E. (Eds.). (2013). Defining Digital Hu-
manities: A Reader. Farnham: Ashgate.
The Athens Charter for the Restoration of Historic Monuments. (1931). 
Retrieved on November 15, 2016 from http://www.icomos.org/en/charters-
and-texts/179-articles-en-francais/ressources/charters-and-standards/167-
the-athens-charter-for-the-restoration-of-historic-monuments
The London Charter. (2009). Retrieved November 15, 2016 from http://www.
londoncharter.org/

Related Readings
148
The Onlife Manifesto. (2015). Retrieved November 15, 2016 from https://
ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/onlife-manifesto
Tielden, F. (1957). Interpreting Our Heritage. Chapel Hill, NC: University 
of North Carolina Press.
UNESCO. (1972). Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cul-
tural and Natural Heritage. Retrieved on November, 15, 2016, from http://
whc.unesco.org/en/conventiontext/
UNESCO. (1976). Recommendation concerning the Safeguard and Con-
temporary Role of Historic Areas. Retrieved on November, 15, 2016, from 
http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-URL_ID=13133&URL_DO=DO_
TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html
UNESCO. (1994). The Nara Document on Authenticity. Retrieved November, 
15, 2016, from whc.unesco.org/document/9379
UNESCO. (2003). Charter on the Preservation of the Digital Heritage. 
Retrieved November 15, 2016, from http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-
URL_ID=17721&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html
UNESCO. (2003). Charter on the Preservation of the Digital Heritage. 
Retrieved November 15, 2016, from http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-
URL_ID=17721&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html
UNESCO. (2003). Convention for the Safeguarding of Intangible Cultural 
Heritage. Retrieved on November, 15, 2016, from http://www.unesco.org/
culture/ich/en/convention
UNESCO. (2009). World Heritage Cultural Landscape. Retrieved on No-
vember, 15, 2016, from http://whc.unesco.org/en/culturallandscape/
UNESCO. (2010). Reflection on the trends of the state of conservation. Re-
trieved on November, 15, 2016, from http://whc.unesco.org/archive/2010/
whc10-34com-7Ce.pdf
UNESCO. (2011). Recommendation on the Historic Urban Landscape. Re-
trieved on November, 15, 2016, from http://whc.unesco.org/en/activities/638
UNESCO. (2013). Managing Cultural World Heritage. Paris: UNESCO. 
Retrieved November 15, 2016, from http://whc.unesco.org/en/managing-
cultural-world-heritage/

Related Readings
149
UNESCO. (2015). Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the 
World Heritage Convention. Retrieved on November, 15, 2016, from http://
whc.unesco.org/en/guidelines/
US Department of Education. (2011). Paradata in 20 Minutes or Less. Re-
trieved November 15, 2016, from https://docs.google.com/document/d/1QG
0lAmJ0ztHJq5DbiTGQj9DnQ8hP0Co0x0fB1QmoBco/edit?pli=1
Valentino, P. A., & Delli Quadri, M. R. (Eds.). (2004). Cultura in gioco. 
Firenze, Milano: Giunti.
Ware, C. (2000). Information Visualization: Perception for Design. San 
Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann.
Weinberger, D. (2011). Too Big To Know. New York: Basic Book.
Weller, T. (2012). History in the Digital Age. Abington: Routledge.
Wijesuriya, G. (2008). An Integrated Approach to Conservation and Manage-
ment of Heritage. ICCROM Newsletter, 34, 8.
Wurzel, G., Kowarik, K., & Reschreiter, H. (Eds.). (2015). Agent-based 
Modeling and Simulation in Archeology. Cham: Springer.
Zan, L., Bonini Baraldi, S., Lusiani, M., Shoup, D., Ferri, P., & Onofri, F. 
(2015). Managing Cultural Heritage: An International Research Perspective. 
Burlington, VT: Ashgate.

  150
About the Author
Stefano Brusaporci is Associate Professor of Architectural Representation 
and Survey at the University of L’Aquila (Italy) – Department of Civil, 
Construction-Architectural and Environmental Engineering. He is Ph.D. in 
“Conservation, Planning and Preservation of Settlements and Territorial 
Contexts of Elevated Environmental and Landscape Value”. His research 
fields are: surveying and historical-critical analysis of architecture and his-
torical urban contexts; surveying and documentation of architectural heritage, 
also with integrated information systems; 3-D modeling and computer-based 
visualization for architectural and urban interpretation and presentation.

Index
“meta-medium” logic 51
3D model 61, 77, 101
3-D Modeling 55, 77-78, 80
A
aesthetic values 50, 77, 82, 86
ancient 17, 68-69, 77, 81, 94, 100-101
Architectural Heritage 7, 18, 22, 26, 57-59, 
69, 72, 76-79, 81-83, 87-92, 94, 96-97, 
100-102, 105, 108, 112-114
Architectural History 76, 83, 85, 95
Authenticity 2-3, 7, 9-10, 16, 25, 30-31, 37, 
41, 44-46, 49, 60, 74, 94, 103, 107, 118
B
baroque church 77
BIM 87-92, 99, 102, 113, 115, 117
Built Heritage 6, 16, 18, 22, 43, 50-52, 54-
56, 59-60, 70, 91, 95, 117
C
Charter 2-4, 6-7, 9, 13, 16-17, 27-31, 34-35, 
40, 48-49, 51, 55-57, 66-68, 72-74, 
93-95, 103-104, 107, 115, 118
Communication 6-8, 10, 18-20, 22-24, 32, 
35, 51-54, 62-63, 66-67, 70, 77-79, 
88, 93-94, 97, 103-105, 108, 110, 112
computer-based visualisation 17, 67-68, 
93-94
Conservation 1-7, 10-14, 19-21, 24-28, 30, 
33-36, 44, 48, 50, 53, 60, 62, 70, 73, 
76, 85, 91, 94, 97, 103-109, 115
Cultural Diversity 20, 37, 44
Cultural Heritage 1-4, 6-12, 19, 25, 27-34, 
36-37, 41, 43-45, 47-51, 55, 59, 65, 
69-71, 73, 78, 93, 97-98, 104, 107, 115
cultural significance 2-4, 6, 9, 13, 25, 28, 
40, 48, 100
D
Digital Heritage 1, 15, 17, 20-22, 29-30, 
35, 49-52, 55-57, 59, 64, 68, 70-72, 
74, 93, 96, 114, 117
Digital Libraries Initiative 51
Digital technologies 1, 17, 27, 42, 69, 71, 
77-78, 94-95, 109
Digitalization 106
Documentation 3, 5, 16, 18-19, 51, 67-68, 
76, 83, 91, 93-94, 96-97, 111, 114-115
H
Heritage Diversity 37, 44
heuristic process 77
human knowledge 51
I
ICT 1-2, 14, 21, 23-24, 41, 51-52, 62, 71, 
105-106, 117
Intangible Heritage 31-32, 34, 36-37, 39, 
41, 43, 45, 47, 70, 83, 108
Integrity 31, 44-46, 67, 93
Interdisciplinarity 14, 92-94
Interpretation 2, 4, 7-11, 13, 16-21, 24, 28, 
35, 37, 39-40, 42-43, 50, 52, 54, 57, 
59, 62, 65, 67-69, 73, 76-78, 80-81, 
101, 104-105, 107-110, 115
  151

L
landscape 24, 31-32, 34-35, 38-41, 47-49, 
100
M
Management 1-4, 6-7, 12-14, 19-20, 25-28, 
30, 45, 51, 56, 77, 86-88, 91, 97-98, 
103, 113
medieval castle 77
Memory 7, 31-32, 39, 41-42, 44-46, 49, 
104, 107-108
O
Operational Guidelines 25, 30, 34, 38, 44, 
49, 70, 74
Outstanding Universal Value 32, 34, 45
P
Paradata 17-18, 23, 27-29, 66-68, 71-74, 
97-99, 103, 111, 116, 118
Participation 1-2, 4, 10-14, 20, 26, 35, 50, 
65-66, 70, 76, 94, 106
Place 3, 9, 13-14, 31-33, 35, 39-40, 43, 46, 
51, 54, 105-106
political legitimacy 32
Presentation 1-2, 4, 7-11, 19-21, 24, 28, 
50, 54-55, 62, 65, 76-77, 80, 97-98, 
104-107, 109, 115
R
Reconstruction 3-4, 9, 17-18, 28, 52, 68, 73, 
80, 82, 84-86, 100-103, 110-111, 117
renaissance palace 77
restoration 1-5, 7, 9, 25, 28-29, 48, 66, 73, 
86, 91, 100, 103, 115-116
S
Scholars 11, 14-15, 18-19, 21-22, 43, 47, 
51-52, 62, 69, 71, 77, 81, 91-95, 97, 
105, 109
Survey 5, 28, 53, 59, 71, 79, 90, 98, 100, 
102-103, 111, 114, 116
Sustainability 1-2, 9, 11-12, 14, 20, 26, 52, 
67, 93, 107
T
Tangible Heritage 31-32, 34, 39, 47, 83
three-dimensional space 78
Transparency 6, 15-19, 22, 26-29, 50, 54, 
57-58, 66-70, 72, 94, 98, 101-102, 
110, 112
twenty-first century 32
U
Urban Heritage 7, 76, 85-86
V
Virtual Heritage 17, 27-29, 50, 56, 62, 72, 
74, 78
virtual reality 2, 23-24, 54, 62, 66, 72, 78, 106
Visualization 16-19, 21-23, 26-29, 50-52, 
54-57, 59-63, 67-68, 72, 75, 77-79, 83, 
93-95, 97, 101, 108, 110-112
W
web pages 51, 56
World Heritage 2, 19, 25-26, 30, 32-34, 
38-39, 41, 44, 47, 49-50, 70, 74
World Heritage Convention 25, 30, 33-34, 
38, 44, 49, 70, 74
  152

