
GLOBAL REFUGEE CRISIS

Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
American Families in Crisis, Jeffrey S. Turner
Animal Rights, Clifford J. Sherry
Climate Change, David L. Downie, Kate Brash,
and Catherine Vaughan
Corporate Crime, Richard D. Hartley
DNA Technology, David E. Newton
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Education in Crisis, Judith A. Gouwens
Environmental Justice, David E. Newton
Gangs, Karen L. Kinnear
Gay and Lesbian Rights, David E. Newton
Global Organized Crime, Mitchel P. Roth
Globalization, Justin Ervin and Zachary A. Smith
Identity Theft, Sandra K. Hoffman and Tracy G. McGinley
Lobbying in America, Ronald J. Hrebenar and Bryson B. Morgan
Modern Sports Ethics, Angela Lumpkin
Obesity, Judith Stern and Alexandra Kazaks
Renewable and Alternative Energy Resources, Zachary A. Smith
and Katrina D. Taylor
Same-Sex Marriage, David E. Newton
Sentencing, Dean John Champion
Sexual Crime, Caryn E. Neumann
Sexual Health, David E. Newton
Substance Abuse, David E. Newton
U.S. Border Security, Judith A. Warner
U.S. National Security, Cynthia A. Watson
U.S. Trade Issues, Alfred E. Eckes, Jr.
Waste Management, Jacqueline Vaughn
For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit
www.abc-clio.com.

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society, such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
ﬁnd the information they need to have a better understanding of
the social, political, environmental, and economic issues facing
the world today.

This page intentionally left blank

GLOBAL REFUGEE
CRISIS
A Reference Handbook,
Second Edition
Mark Gibney
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES

Copyright 2010 by ABC-CLIO, LLC
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Gibney, Mark.
Global refugee crisis : a reference handbook / Mark Gibney. — 2nd ed.
p. cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
Rev. ed. of: The global refugee crisis : a reference handbook / Gil
Loescher, Ann Dull Loescher. 1994.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-59884-455-9 (hbk. : alk. paper) — ISBN 978-1-59884-456-6
(ebook) 1. Refugees. 2. Refugees—Services for. 3. Disaster relief.
I. Loescher, Gil. Global refugee crisis. II. Title.
HV640.L625
2010
362.87—dc22
2010030686
ISBN: 978-1-59884-455-9
EISBN: 978-1-59884-456-6
14 13 12 11 10
1 2 3 4 5
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook.
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, LLC
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper
Manufactured in the United States of America

Contents
List of Tables and Figures, xiii
Preface, xv
1
Background and History, 1
Introduction, 1
The History of Protecting Refugees, 6
The Post-War Human Rights Revolution, 8
The 1951 Refugee Convention, 11
Alienage, 13
“Well-Founded Fear,” 14
Persecution, 16
The Nexus Requirement, 18
Exclusions, 22
Exceptions to Nonrefoulement, 23
Cessations, 24
Refugee Rights, 25
Nonrefoulement, 25
Rights Owed to Refugees Physically Present in the
Receiving State, 26
Rights Owed to Refugees Lawfully in the
Contracting State, 26
Rights Owed to Refugees Lawfully Staying in the
Contracting State, 27
Rights Owed to Refugees Residing in the
Contracting State, 27
Interface with International and Regional Human Rights
Instruments, 27
Nonrefoulement, 28
Racism, 30
Detention, 30
vii

Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights, 31
Rights of the Child, 31
Domestic Procedures, 32
Establishing Eligibility, 32
Denial of Asylum Hearings and Accelerated Procedures, 33
Returned Refugees, 35
Conclusion, 36
References, 36
Books, Articles, and Chapters, 36
Cases and Administrative Decisions, 37
2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 39
Asylum Abuse?, 40
United Kingdom, 45
The Netherlands, 46
Sweden, 47
United States, 49
Summary, 51
Nonrefoulement: When (and Where) Does the Prohibition
Apply?, 52
Sale v. Haitian Centers Council, 509 U.S. 155 (1993), 52
Justice Blackmun’s Dissent, 59
Summary, 65
The Practices of Other States, 66
Re-Conceptualizing Human Rights—and Refugee
Protection, 67
The Responsibility to Protect (R2P), 73
Extraterritorial Obligations (ETO) Consortium, 78
Implications for Refugee Protection, 80
References, 81
Books, Articles, and Chapters, 81
Cases and Administrative Decisions, 82
3
Special U.S. Issues, 83
A Historical Survey of U.S. Alien Admission Practices, 84
The Cold War, U.S. Foreign Policy, and Refugee Protection, 90
Current Refugee/Asylum Law and Practice in the
United States, 96
Overseas Refugee Program, 97
Criticisms of ORP, 103
Asylum, 105
1996 Changes to U.S. Asylum Law, 106
viii
Contents

Asylum and Withholding of Deportation, 107
Disqualiﬁcations, 109
Detention, 110
Temporary Protection, 111
Conclusion, 113
References, 113
Books, Articles, and Chapters, 113
Cases and Administrative Decisions, 114
4
Chronology, 115
5
Biographical Sketches, 137
Mahnaz Afkhami, 137
Sonya Aho, 138
Madeleine Albright, 138
Isabel Allende, 139
Hannah Arendt, 139
Christine Arnothy, 140
Mathangi Maya Arulpragasam (a.k.a. M.I.A.), 141
Bertolt Brecht, 142
Nadia Comaneci, 142
Zohra Daoud, 143
Leandro Despouy, 143
Emmanuel Dongala, 144
Ariel Dorfman, 145
Jaroslav Drobny, 145
Albert Einstein, 146
Nawal El Saadawi, 147
Philip Emeagwali, 147
Enrico Fermi, 148
Tenzin Gyatso, 148
Thich Nhat Hanh, 148
Jo´se Ramos Horta, 149
Michae¨lle Jean, 149
Wassily Kandinsky, 150
Fazil Kawani, 151
Mebrahtom Keﬂezighi, 151
Akbar Khurasani, 151
Walter Lam, 152
Raphael Lemkin, 152
Miriam Makeba, 153
Tatyana Mamonova, 154
Contents
ix

Predrag Matvejevic, 154
Thabo Mbeki, 155
Golda Meir, 155
Makau Mutua, 156
Martina Navratilova, 156
Le Thanh Nhon, 157
Rudolf Nureyev, 157
Edward Said, 158
Nolvia Dominguez Skjetne, 158
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, 159
George Soros, 159
Loung Ung, 160
Alek Wek, 160
Gao Xingjian, 161
6
Data and Documents, 163
International and Regional Treaties, 163
Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, 163
Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees, 179
Organization of African Unity, Convention
Governing the Speciﬁc Aspects of Refugee
Problems in Africa, 182
Cartagena Declaration on Refugees, 189
Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment, 194
Data on Asylum Applicants for Selected Western States
2008, 1998, and 1988, 200
7
Directory of Organizations, 215
8
Resources, 257
Print Resources, 257
Journals, 257
Important Document Sources, 261
Reference Works, 262
Books, 268
Selected Articles and Essays, 293
Reports, 295
Cases and Administrative Decisions, 300
x
Contents

Selected Non-Print Resources, 301
Online Resources, 301
DVD Resources, 302
Glossary, 305
Index, 313
About the Author, 325
Contents
xi

This page intentionally left blank

List of Tables and Figures
Tables
1.1
Top Ten Refugee Producing States, 2008, 2
1.2
Breakdown of IDP Population by Continent, 4
1.3
Countries with Most IDPs as a Percentage of Their
Population, 6
2.1
Top Ten Refugee Producing States, 2008 and PTS Scores, 43
2.2
Asylum Claims Filed in the United Kingdom, 2008, 45
2.3
Asylum Claims Filed in The Netherlands, 2008, 47
2.4
Asylum Claims Filed in Sweden, 2008, 48
2.5
Asylum Claims Filed in the United States, 2008, 49
2.6
Refugee Resettlement in the United States, 2008, 51
3.1
Refugee Arrivals: Fiscal Years 1980 to 2008, 98
3.2
Refugee Arrivals by Region and Country of Nationality:
Fiscal Years 1999 to 2008, 100
3.3
Refugee Admissions Ceilings: Fiscal Years 2006 to 2008, 102
3.4
All Asylees by Country of Nationality: Fiscal Years 2006 to
2008, 106
3.5
Countries Designated with TPS or DED Status, 112
6.1
Asylum Applicants in Selected Western Countries, 2008/
1998/1988, 200
Figures
1.1
Major Refugee Hosting Countries, End 2007, 3
1.2
Worldwide Refugee and IDP Population, 1989–2007, 4
xiii

This page intentionally left blank

Preface
G
lobal Refugee Crisis provides an overview of the world’s
migration situation, but it also offers up a different way of
conceptualizing human rights—as well as refugee protection
itself. There are presently upwards of 40 million people who have
been forced to ﬂee their homes because of political violence and
oppression. One segment of this population consists of refugees—
individuals who have left their country of nationality because of
a well-founded fear of persecution. The population of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) is approximately twice as large as this.
However, what distinguishes refugees from IDPs is that the for-
mer have crossed a national border and have gained some form
of international assistance, while the latter have not. The focus of
the present work is on refugees, and we spend a considerable
amount of time analyzing the meaning of refugee under inter-
national law.
In addition to examining law and current practice, Global
Refugee Crisis places refugee protection within a much broader
human rights context. After all, refugee protection is human
rights protection. Yet, what differentiates the refugee phenome-
non from all other areas of human rights is that it is based on
protecting the human rights of others, rather than nationals of
that state. In that way, refugee protection offers a more expan-
sive understanding of the human rights responsibilities of
states.
Yet, at the same time, refugee phenomenon serves as a strong
reafﬁrmation of the principle of state sovereignty. For one thing,
no state is obligated to admit any refugees. In addition, inter-
national law seemingly allows receiving states to pursue mea-
sures that will work to prevent refugees from arriving at their
xv

national borders. Beyond this, what also has to be recognized is
that there is seemingly no obligation under international law to
prevent refugee ﬂows in the ﬁrst place. Thus, refugee protection
remains reactive. States respond—if they respond at all—only
after a human catastrophe has taken place.
Global Refugee Crisis challenges several key assumptions that
human rights and refugee protection have been premised on.
One is the notion that Western democratic states have had to bear
the brunt of the world’s refugee protection needs. Another is that
common, but untested, charge that there is widespread asylum
abuse. And for a country like the United States that loudly pro-
claims itself the haven for the “the tired, the poor, the huddled
masses yearning to breathe free,” what is also challenged is a
policy that admits vastly more immigrants than refugees.
Yet, perhaps the single strongest challenge is to the dominant
approach to human rights—and along with that, to our conceptu-
alization of refugee protection. Notwithstanding near universal
declarations concerning the universality of human rights, the sys-
tem that has emerged is one that has limited a state’s human
rights obligations to its own domestic sphere—but no further
than this. This approach can most clearly be seen in the U.S.
Supreme Court’s opinion in Sale v. Haitians Centers Council where
the court held that the prohibition against returning an individual
back to a country where that person’s life or well-being might be
threatened (nonrefoulement) only applied after a person had
arrived at American shores, but not before this. What is also note-
worthy is that a number of other Western states have adopted
similar measures that have had the effect of extending immigra-
tion control—but not refugee protection—further and further
away from a state’s national borders.
This territorial approach to human rights has recently been
subject to serious challenge. We examine two challenges: the
Responsibility to Protect (R2P) initiative and the work of the
Extraterritorial Obligations (ETO) Human Rights Consortium.
Both posit a proactive approach to human rights, and both are
based on the principle that a state’s human rights obligations do
not suddenly and rather arbitrarily end at its own national border.
This new approach to human rights—new only in the sense that
the original intent behind much of international human rights
law is ﬁnally being recognized—will have enormous implications
in terms of our conceptualization of refugee protection. Most
xvi
Preface

notably, this posits that all states would have an obligation to pre-
vent refugee ﬂows from arising in the ﬁrst place.
Let me close by acknowledging the excellent and painstaking
work of Rachel Elrod, without whom this work would never have
been carried out.
Mark Gibney
Asheville, NC
February 24, 2010
Preface
xvii

This page intentionally left blank

1
Background and History
Introduction
A refugee is a person who is outside of his or her country of origin
and fearful of returning home because of a well-founded fear of
persecution based on race, religion, nationality, membership of a
particular social group, or political opinion. The basic international
instrument concerning refugee protection is the 1951 Convention
Relating to the Status of Refugees (Refugee Convention). As the
reader will see when we analyze the Refugee Convention, the term
refugee has a well deﬁned meaning under international law. How-
ever, what also has to be recognized is that the term is oftentimes
used to describe individuals who are in a bad way and in need of
assistance more generally. For example, there were repeated refer-
ences to the victims Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans as refugees.
According to the latest data from the United Nations, at the end
of 2008 there were 16 million refugees in the world, although only a
small percentage of these would be formally recognized as such.
The reason for this is that status precedes recognition. Table 1.1
presents data on the countries that presently produce the largest
number of refugees. Perhaps it is no great surprise that Iraq and
Afghanistan—two countries that have experienced longstanding
wars—are at the top of this list.
Of course, refugees need some place else to go. In most
instances, this will be in a neighboring country. Some very small
number of these refugees will eventually be resettled in an indus-
trialized Western state, but the overwhelming majority will not
be, and substantial numbers will be warehoused in refugee camps
1

in Third World states for many years. Thus, one of the great ﬁc-
tions is that the bulk of refugees are housed in the industrialized
countries of the West, which in turn has elicited repeated com-
plaints of compassion fatigue. In fact, the exact opposite of this
is true. Figure 1.1 presents data on those states that housed the
largest number of refugees at the end of 2007.
Altogether, less than 10% of present-day refugees are in
countries where the per capita income is more than $10,000, while
fully half are in countries with a per capita income of $2,000 or
less. The larger and more obvious point is that countries that are
the most poorly equipped to handle refugee ﬂows due to their
own economic insecurity are the same states that have been
forced to provide the lion’s share of refugee protection.
A separate but related category consists of Internally Displaced
Persons (IDPs). Much like refugees, IDPs have been forced to ﬂee
their homes and their livelihoods and move some place else in order
to secure safety. However, what differentiates IDPs from refugees
is that the latter have crossed their own national borders, while the
former have not. Figure 1.2 presents an overview of the world’s ref-
ugee and IDP population over the course of the past two decades.
The IDP phenomenon has truly been remarkable. Roberta
Cohen, one of the leading experts on this subject, has pointed out
that when ﬁrst counted in 1982, there were 1.2 million IDPs in only
11 countries. However, in just four years, this total had increased to
14 million, and by 1997 there were more than 20 million IDPs in 35
to 40 countries (Cohen 2007). Cohen attributes this startling increase
in IDPs to the internal conﬂicts that began after the end of the Cold
2
Background and History
TABLE 1.1
Top Ten Refugee Producing States, 2008
Country
Number
Afghanistan
2,833,128
Iraq
1,903,519
Somalia
561,154
Sudan
419,248
Colombia
373,532
Democratic Republic Congo
367,995
Occupied Palestinian Authority
340,016
Vietnam
328,183
Burundi
281,592
Turkey
214,378
Source: UNHCR, “2008 Global Trends.”

War, growing from less than 10 in 1960 to almost 50 internal con-
ﬂicts in 1992. At the end of 2008 it is estimated that there were
26 million IDPs, or approximately twice the number of refugees in
the world. Table 1.2 presents a breakdown of IDP populations by
continent and it includes in parentheses the number of countries
in that region that are being monitored for IDP populations. To
put some speciﬁcity to this, the countries with the largest number
of IDPs in 2008 included: Sudan 4,900,000; Colombia 2,650,000–
4,360,000; Iraq 2,840,000; Democratic Republic of Congo 1,400,000;
and Somalia 1,300,000. Note that some countries, such as Iraq and
Sudan, have large number of both refugees and IDPs.
To be clear, in some instances the decision not to cross a
national border and assume the mantle of refugee is one that the
ﬂeeing individual makes on his or her own accord. However, in
many other instances this decision is not made by the individual
himself or herself, but by larger political (and military) forces.
Introduction
3
FIGURE 1.1
Major Refugee Hosting Countries, End 2007
Source: UNHCR Statistical Yearbook 2007.

FIGURE 1.2
Worldwide Refugee and IDP Population, 1989–2007
Source: IDMC, Global Overview of Trends and Developments in 2008.
TABLE 1.2
Breakdown of IDP Population by Continent
Country
Number
Africa (19)
11.6 million
Americas (4)
4.5 million
Middle East (6)
3.9 million
South and South-East Asia (10)
3.5 million
Europe and Central Asia (13)
2.5 million
Total: (52)
26.0 million
Source: IDMC, Global Overview of Trends and Developments in 2008.

Certainly one of the most visible manifestations of this took place
in the aftermath of the ﬁrst Persian Gulf War where massive num-
bers of Kurds in the northern part of Iraq were desperately trying
to ﬂee from the advancing Iraqi army, only to be turned away by
force at the Turkish border. If these individuals had crossed over
into Turkey, they would have been considered as refugees. How-
ever, because of their failure to leave their country—a failure that
was certainly not of their own choosing—they remained IDPs.
However, because of the great deal of worldwide attention that
was given to this particular situation (because of the Persian Gulf
War itself), this group of IDPs received vastly more attention and
resources than would otherwise be the norm.
However, what this also suggests is that, for the most part,
IDPs are virtually invisible to the international community. One
longstanding rationale for this inattention is that internal displace-
ment is invariably a short-term event. Cohen provides a strong
argument against this position:
Civil wars can go on for decades, disrupting not only the
lives of the individuals concerned but whole commun-
ities and societies. In such cases, both the areas left
behind and the areas to which the displaced ﬂee suffer
extensive damage. In the areas that have been vacated,
property and land are neglected, and community struc-
tures collapse as the population thins (Cohen 2007, 19).
Cohen continues:
In the areas to which people ﬂee, the displaced quickly
strip forests and grasslands for housing and fuel, with
long-term economic and ecological effects . . . When
ﬂight is to urban areas, social services, water supplies,
and sanitation facilities become overburdened, espe-
cially when the population doubles or triples in size.
Since most conﬂicts and displacement occur in the
world’s poorest countries, the already weak infrastruc-
ture rapidly deteriorates sometimes to the point of col-
lapse (Cohen 2007, 19).
Although our focus is on refugees, it is important to note that
the only thing that differentiates this population from IDPs is the
simple (or not so simple) act of crossing a national border. What
Introduction
5

also has to be considered is that the decrease in the number of ref-
ugees (as has happened in the last few years) is not necessarily a
positive thing, particularly if this only means that the number of
IDPs continues to increase. Table 1.3 presents data on IDPs as a
percentage of various countries’ population.
The last term we will introduce is asylum (or refugee) seeker.
The term asylum is typically understood in the sense of a right of a
refugee to enter a country and to remain there on a permanent
basis. As is oftentimes repeated, while all refugees have a right to
seek asylum, no country has a legal obligation under international
law to grant refugee status (Goodwin-Gill 1996, 289). However, all
states are under an obligation not to send a person back to a coun-
try where his well-being or life would be in serious risk (refoule-
ment). For our purposes, we will refer to an asylum seeker as one
who claims to be entitled to the protection against refoulement.
This, of course, is the legal deﬁnition, but it also needs to be
pointed out that in receiving societies the term asylum seeker has
a decidedly negative connotation with an overtly racist meaning.
The History of Protecting Refugees
By way of brief history, the notion of refugee protection not only
has ancient roots but the principle of protecting the necessitous
stranger is something that can be found in virtually all religions.
However, international refugee protection only arose with the rise
of nationalism (but also statelessness) in the late nineteenth and
early twentieth century and then in the aftermath of World War I.
6
Background and History
TABLE 1.3
Countries with Most IDPs as a Percentage of Their Population
Country
Percentage
Cyprus
Up to 23%
Somalia
13%
Sudan
12.4%
Iraq
9.6%
Colombia
5.7–9.3%
Zimbabwe
4.2–7.4%
Azerbaijan
6.7–7.1%
Georgia
5.7–6.3%
Lebanon
2–9%
Source: IDMC, Global Overview of Trends and Developments in 2008.

The international community’s ﬁrst effort to formally address this
issue was the High Commissioner for Russian Refugees, created
by the League of Nations in 1921 to deal with the massive social
dislocations brought about the Bolshevik Revolution and the col-
lapse of the Ottoman Empire. The Norwegian explorer and
humanitarian, Fridtjof Nansen, was elected to the position of High
Commissioner and he is renowned for the Nansen passports that
he was able to procure for refugees. Notwithstanding these and
other efforts, the refugee crisis persisted, and over the course of
the next three decades, there were no less than nine international
bodies that were created to deal with refugee issues.
World War II and its aftermath created even greater numbers
of refugees and even greater political problems for dealing with
these. In 1950, the Ofﬁce of the United Nations High Commis-
sioner for Refugees (UNHCR) was created. UNHCR has func-
tional responsibility for administering international refugee
assistance, although for both political and historical reasons the
decades-long Palestinian refugee situation has been dealt with
by another UN agency, the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). The
statute of the UNHCR assigns responsibility to the agency of pro-
viding international protection for refugees and seeking permanent
solutions for the problems of refugees. In pursuing this work, the
UNHCR monitors and reports on states’ refugee status determina-
tion processes as well as the overall treatment of asylum seekers,
and the agency makes representations to governments on protec-
tion concerns either on behalf of individual asylum seekers or
larger groups. In seeking durable solutions to refugees’ problems,
the UNHCR attempts to help those who wish to return home (vol-
untary repatriation) and to assist reintegration into their home
communities. However, if this is not feasible or if voluntary repa-
triation is not likely to take place in the foreseeable future, the
UNHCR works to settle refugees within the region (local settle-
ment). However, for refugees who can neither return to their coun-
try of origin nor safely remain in their country of refuge, the third
and last option is third country resettlement. To be clear, there are
great difﬁculties with each of these options, particularly as states
have become increasingly more resistant to housing refugees.
Unlike some of the other international human rights treaties,
the Refugee Convention does not provide individuals with the
possibility of challenging their own treatment, nor has the
UNHCR been given the authority to adjudicate individual claims
The History of Protecting Refugees
7

in the same manner as the Human Rights Committee and some of
the other UN treaty bodies. On the other hand, it is well accepted
that the contracting states give great deference to the UNHCR’s
interpretation of the Convention, and in this regard the UNHCR
Handbook is widely considered to have substantial authority even
if it is not legally binding.
The Post-War Human Rights Revolution
Although there have been visions of human rights in all societies
and throughout history (Lauren 2003), what brought about the
present-day human rights revolution was the devastation of World
War II, and the horrors of the Holocaust in particular (Morsink
1999). Certainly, the most noteworthy achievement was the creation
of the United Nations, dedicated to preserving international peace
and security as well as the protection of human rights. In addition,
many of the most important international human rights instru-
ments were drafted during this period of time, including the
so-called “International Bill of Rights” consisting of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), and the Inter-
national Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)—along
with the 1951 Refugee Convention.
What are human rights? Although there are varying ideas
on this, one of the most elegant has been provided by the legal
philosopher Michael Perry (1998) who has described human rights
as based on the principle that there are certain things that you do
not do to people (i.e., torture and kill) and certain other things that
you do to and for them (i.e., feed, clothe, house, and educate). Before
the advent of the human rights revolution, the manner in which a
government treated its own people was in large part viewed as
being a purely domestic matter that was considered outside the
purview of the rest of the international community. In that way,
the only rights that individuals possessed were those that their
own government was willing to give to them. But what if that
government granted few political rights—or worse, if it carried
out all manner of atrocities against its own people? For the most
part, the international community simply looked the other way.
In that way, the fundamental change that arose in the post-war
period was the understanding that all human beings have human
rights. What simply does not matter is where a person lives, the
8
Background and History

kind of government this person lives under, whether that particular
state has signed and ratiﬁed none or all of the major international
human rights treaties, and so on. But what was equally important
was the understanding that the international community could no
longer turn a blind eye and ignore human rights violations based
on the idea that this was in the domestic sphere of a state.
It is within this broader context that the 1951 Refugee Conven-
tion needs to be viewed. Yet, in a number of ways, refugee protec-
tion served as a precursor to what we now know as human rights.
For one thing, while the International Bill of Rights and most of the
other international human rights instruments were novel undertak-
ings, as mentioned earlier, the 1951 Refugee Convention had been
preceded by a number of attempts by the international community
to deal with what appeared to be a never-ending refugee crisis.
The Refugee Convention precedes the human rights revolution in
another way as well. In its essence, refugee protection is human
rights protection—only this protection now has to be provided by
a state other than one’s own. The larger point is that this concern
with others, which goes to the very essence of human rights, has
long been manifested in the form of refugee protection. One might
even go so far as to say that it took centuries for the notion of human
rights to catch up with principle and practice of refugee protection.
Yet, it would be a mistake to equate refugee protection gener-
ally, and the 1951 Refugee Convention in particular, only with
humanitarian concerns. For one thing, the treaty itself is a political
document in the sense that it was originally limited to one place
(Europe) and one time (events occurring before 1951). There is
another political element to the Convention and it relates to the
heavy emphasis it places on the protection of civil and political
rights (CPR), but to the near exclusion of economic, social, and
cultural rights (ESCR). This demarcation was not the result of
any accident, but reﬂected political considerations, particularly
in the context of the Cold War (Hathaway 1991, 7).
Finally and more broadly, refugees and refugee protection are
very much hostage to larger political phenomena. Bill Frelick
(2007) has suggested that there have been three distinct refugee
paradigms. The ﬁrst is the exilic period from 1948 to the 1990s.
During this period of time, Western states actively encouraged refu-
gee ﬂows, especially from communist states. Frelick uses the
Vietnamese exodus from the mid-1970s onward as the model for
this period. With at least some cooperation by the communist
government in that country, large numbers of Vietnamese were able
The Post-War Human Rights Revolution
9

to gain access to ﬁrst asylum countries as Thailand and Malaysia.
However, these camps only remained open and receptive to these
refugee ﬂows because of the promise that a large percentage would
be resettled in Western states, which is exactly what took place.
However, following the end of the Cold War, Western states
began to take a decidedly more jaundiced view of refugee popula-
tions. Or to state this more bluntly, refugees no longer served the
foreign policy interests of Western states. As a result, there were
several different ways that this situation was approached includ-
ing: temporary protection (as opposed to permanent asylum arising
out of refugee status determinations); cross border humanitarian
assistance, often in the form of creating humanitarian corridors in
various conﬂict zones as well as the establishment of safe areas
in refugee-producing countries; and ﬁnally, humanitarian interven-
tion in such countries as Iraq (1991), Haiti (1994), Bosnia (1995),
Serbia (1999), and (belatedly) in Rwanda (1994).
As Frelick points out, in most of the humanitarian emergen-
cies of the 1990s the international community pursued policies
that were designed to prevent refugee ﬂows.
While the rhetoric—and undoubtedly the motivation—
of many actors in the international community was
humanitarian and predicated on the idea of attenuating
the causes of refugee ﬂows, in reality it was often power-
ful governments, the protagonists with a vested interest
in avoiding refugee ﬂows, who became the major spon-
sors of “protection” or “prevention” schemes inside coun-
tries that generated refugee ﬂows or potential refugee
ﬂows. The UN agencies involved in peacekeeping and
humanitarian response, and their NGO partners often
found themselves trying not only to protect internally dis-
placed persons (IDPs) within their country of origin, but
also working to prevent their escape (Frelick 2007, 37).
The third and ﬁnal paradigm began on September 11, 2001,
and it continues to the present time and what marks this stage is
the deep suspicion, and even fear, of refugees. Frelick suggests
that the most obvious sign of this new paradigm shift is the
decrease in asylum applications, noting that in one year alone,
from 2003 to 2004, worldwide asylum applications decreased
22 percent, from 508,100 in 2003 to 396,400 in 2004, and overall,
there has been a 40 percent drop since 1991. In terms of speciﬁc
10
Background and History

countries, it is noteworthy that the United States and Canada
received 48 percent fewer asylum requests in 2004 than in 2001.
Frelick explains what is behind this phenomenon:
Under the security paradigm, refugees are devalued to the
point where providing asylum or intervening to provide
source-country solutions are trumped by the desire to
keep terrorists out. As with the previous paradigms, these
are not formalized international-community positions,
but rather represent general trends, for which there will
certainly be exceptions (Frelick 2007, 47).
In sum, the human rights revolution following the massive
horrors of World War II attempted to make a new world order.
What was recognized for the ﬁrst time in history was that all indi-
viduals had human rights by the mere fact of their humanity. How-
ever, what the international community has continued to struggle
with has been assigning responsibility for the protection of those
rights. In some strange and even perverse way, the protection of
human rights has in large part been left with the state that has com-
mitted the human rights violation in the ﬁrst place. To point out
what should be obvious: this system of human rights protection
has not worked—and in all likelihood, it will never work.
Refugee protection provides a different approach to human
rights protection. For one thing, the Refugee Convention was a
product of this same time period and this same kind of thinking
about creating a world that was vastly different from the Holo-
caust and the other horrors of World War II. But more impor-
tantly, refugee protection represents one of the few instances
where one state takes responsibility for protecting the human
rights of others. When it works well, it displays humanity at its
very best. However, what must also be said is that there have been
far too many instances when it has not worked well.
The 1951 Refugee Convention
Because of the central role that it plays in this realm, we will
spend some time analyzing the 1951 Refugee Convention. On
one level, the Convention (reprinted in Chapter 6) is a rather sim-
ple and straightforward international treaty. The treaty begins by
deﬁning the term refugee (Article 1) and then sets forth a catalogue
The 1951 Refugee Convention
11

of rights for refugees and obligations for receiving states in
Articles 3–34. We will take these issues up in this order but we
begin our analysis of the Convention by pointing out two things.
The ﬁrst is that like virtually all other international law instru-
ments, many of the terms (i.e., “well-founded fear” and “persecu-
tion”) are vague and uncertain and the effort here will be to bring
more deﬁnite meaning to them. The second point is that one of the
unique features of the Refugee Convention is that although some of
the rights set forth in the treaty are absolute—most notably, the right
of a refugee not to be penalized for unauthorized entry (Article 31)
and the right not to be subjected to refoulement (Article 33)—other
rights are not absolute, but rather, are dependent on other factors.
For example, the Convention distinguishes between refugees who
are lawfully present, lawfully residing, and ﬁnally, those who are
habitually residing in the receiving state—and it provides addi-
tional rights for refugees as one goes up this scale. Furthermore,
certain other refugee rights are relative in the sense that they
depend on how other non-nationals are treated by the host state.
For example, the right to public housing (Article 21) and the right
to freedom of movement (Article 26) are both dependent upon
the extent to which other non-citizens are afforded these same
rights. Finally, there are certain things that exclude a person from
refugee protection altogether, but also an additional set of actions
through which refugees will come to forfeit their refugee status,
along with all the rights that go with being a refugee.
According to Article 1 of the Refugee Convention (as supple-
mented by the 1967 Protocol, reprinted in Chapter 6, which
removed the temporal and geographical restrictions in the 1951
treaty), the term refugee applies to any person who
owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted for
reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a
particular social group or political opinion, is outside
the country of his nationality and is unable, or, owing
to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protec-
tion of that country; or who, not having such nationality
and being outside the country of his former habitual res-
idence as a result of such events, is unable or, owing to
such fear, is unwilling to return to it.
It is perhaps noteworthy that the Convention does not make
any speciﬁc reference to political violence, although two later
12
Background and History

regional refugee instruments do. The refugee deﬁnition adopted in
1969 by the Organization of African Unity (reprinted in Chapter 6)
also includes people ﬂeeing “external aggression, internal civil
strife, or events seriously disturbing public order.” Similarly, the
Cartagena Declaration of Refugees in 1984 (reprinted in Chapter 6)
covering Central American refugees extends the 1951 Refugee Con-
vention by including “persons who have ﬂed their country because
their lives, safety or freedom have been threatened by generalized
violence, foreign aggression, internal conﬂicts, massive violations
of human rights or other circumstances which have seriously dis-
turbed public order.”
There remains disagreement with regard to whether the Refu-
gee Convention itself provides protection to those merely ﬂeeing
civil war and political violence (Zolberg et al. 1989). However, note
that many countries that will not grant refugee status under the
Convention on this basis have been willing to provide what has
come to be called complementary protection, which is based
broadly on humanitarian grounds, including political violence back
in the country of origin (McAdam 2007). There are a few things to
note about such practices. One is that in some countries the num-
bers receiving complementary protection will be much larger than
those recognized as Convention refugees. A second point is that
the protections and beneﬁts for these individuals will invariably
be far fewer than they are for Convention refugees. A third point
relates to the political confusion engendered by such practices in
the sense that the general populations in these countries are being
given two diametrically opposed messages. The ﬁrst is that these
individuals are not refugees. But this message is then seemingly
negated by allowing large numbers of these non-refugees to remain
in this country. Perhaps it is no wonder that refugee and asylum
practice has been such a political powder keg in those states.
Alienage
We begin with the requirement under the Convention deﬁnition that
a refugee is someone who is outside his or her country of nation-
ality, or origin. Note that the deﬁnition does not require that an indi-
vidual had to ﬂee his or her country because of a well-founded fear
of persecution, although in many instances this is exactly what has
taken place. Rather, the Convention also gives leeway for a person
to develop the well-founded fear while this individual is already
outside his or her country of nationality. One situation might
The 1951 Refugee Convention
13

involve a military coup that occurred while an individual was out-
side his or her country of nationality, and this person is now fearful
of returning home. This category of refugees is commonly referred
to as refugees sur place. Another situation is where a person, while
in another country, expresses or adopts certain views or engages
in certain activities that would now place him or her in danger if
he or she is returned to his or her country of nationality. However,
what would certainly raise questions is whether this individual
was politically active before, the idea being that someone who
otherwise appeared apolitical before departing but who then turns
into a sharp critic of the ruling regime after leaving that state might
simply be manufacturing these views for purposes of gaining refu-
gee status. On the other hand, refugee law also recognizes that indi-
viduals should not be put to the test of having to prove that they are
bona ﬁde refugees by having to engage in behavior that could get
them harmed or killed. Thus, both law and state practice try to cal-
ibrate whether seemingly newfound expressions of political dissent
are real or not.
“Well-Founded Fear”
The second requirement of the refugee deﬁnition is that the claim-
ant must have a well-founded fear. Most of the debate in this realm
has centered around whether this term is referring to a subjective
fear, an objective fear—or both. According to the dominant view,
the term fear is referring to the claimant’s actual state of mind,
although what must also be proved is that this particular state of
mind was in fact well-founded, which is to say that there was some
objective criteria upon which this (subjective) fear could be based.
One of the most important considerations, then, is the credibility
of the claimant. Essentially, is the asylum seeker believable?
The other view is that this standard denotes a purely objec-
tive criterion. The proponents of this view argue that relying on
subjective factors might result in similarly situated individuals
being treated differently on the basis of their degree of fearless-
ness. They also argue that such an interpretation would result in
the denial of protection to many applicants who are unable to
express their own experiences and fears effectively. This would
be particularly apt in the case of children who are refugee claim-
ants or those who, perhaps because of their own previous treat-
ment by national authorities, have great difﬁculty articulating in
front of immigration ofﬁcials in another country.
14
Background and History

A separate, but related, issue is the threshold of risk. In the
vast majority of cases the central issue is what will happen to a
person if he or she is returned to his or her country of nationality.
More particularly, will this individual be persecuted on the basis
of one of the ﬁve Convention grounds—or is there a strong likeli-
hood that this person will be free of such treatment? How much
risk is too much risk?
Although there is no set answer to this issue, there are several
parameters that have generally been agreed upon. For one thing,
the mere chance or the remote possibility of being persecuted is
insufﬁcient to establish a well-founded fear. On the other hand,
an applicant need not show that there is a clear probability that
he or she will be persecuted. Rather the governing standard that
seems to be emerging is that the person seeking recognition as a
refugee must show a real chance or reasonable possibility of being
persecuted. The UNHCR has provided this analysis:
A substantial body of jurisprudence has developed in
common law countries on what standard of proof is to be
applied in asylum claims to establish well-foundedness.
This jurisprudence largely supports the view that there is
no requirement to prove well-foundedness conclusively
beyond doubt, or even that persecution is more probable
than not. As a general rule, however, to establish “well-
foundedness,” persecution must be proved to be reason-
ably possible (UNHCR: 1998, par. 17).
In its decision in INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, the U.S. Supreme
Court provided this analysis to the meaning of well-founded fear.
That the fear must be “well-founded” does not alter the
obvious focus on the individual’s subjective beliefs, nor
does it transform the standard into a “more likely than
not” one. One can certainly have a well-founded fear of
an event happening when there is less than a 50 percent
chance of the occurrence taking place.
The Court then proceeded to use this example from the writ-
ings of refugee scholar Atle Grahl-Madsen:
Let us . . . presume that it is known that in the applicant’s
country of origin every tenth adult male person is either
The 1951 Refugee Convention
15

put to death or sent to some remote labor camp. . . . In
such a case it would be only too apparent that anyone
who has managed to escape from the country in ques-
tion will have a “well-founded fear of being persecuted”
upon his eventual return.
Although mathematical probabilities provide some useful
concreteness to this issue, it is important to underscore that refu-
gee protection is anything but taking chances with the lives and
well-being of others.
In establishing a well-founded fear, another issue relates to
whether the individual who is facing the prospect of being per-
secuted could simply move to another part of his or her country
and enjoy relative safely there. This is termed the internal ﬂight
alternative (IFA) and it is based on the idea that there is no need
to seek refugee protection in another country when there are other
areas of the claimant’s home state where these same ends could
be achieved. One of the problems with establishing whether there
is an IFA or not is that it is not known whether those parts of a
country that were safe will remain as such, or whether violence
will follow a person (or a larger group of people). The UNHCR
has settled on something resembling a middle ground:
The fear of being persecuted need not always extend to
the whole territory of the refugee’s country of national-
ity. Thus in ethnic clashes or in cases of grave disturb-
ances involving civil war conditions, persecution of a
speciﬁc ethnic group may occur in only one part of the
country. In such situations, a person will not be excluded
from refugee status merely because he could have
sought refuge in another part of the same country, if
under all the circumstances it would not have been
reasonable to expect him to do so (UNHCR Handbook
1979, par. 91).
In situations not involving civil conﬂict, it is expected that the
requirement of seeking an IFA will generally be pushed harder.
Persecution
Oddly enough given its use in the Refugee Convention, there is no
universally accepted deﬁnition of what constitutes persecution.
16
Background and History

What is clear is that there is a direct connection between the
notion of persecution and international human rights standards
and there seems to be common agreement that the prospect of
the denial of certain rights such as freedom from torture, the right
to life, and liberty of the person, would constitute persecution.
However, after this there is much less agreement.
One of the continual challenges in determining the meaning
of persecution is to distinguish instances of persecution from
legitimate prosecution by government ofﬁcials. For instance, say
that a small group of dissidents attempts to assassinate their coun-
try’s leaders and are not successful. Assuming they are able to ﬂee
the country, should these would-be assassins be recognized as ref-
ugees? Their obvious fear is that if they were returned to their
home country they would be brought to trial (assuming that gov-
ernmental authorities would provide even this much due process
of law) and subjected to severe criminal penalties, and perhaps
even death. Undoubtedly, many would think that this would be
a perfectly proper disposition of such a matter and that this sce-
nario would be a proper form of prosecution—and thus would
not constitute persecution. On the other hand, what if this group
sought to remove a brutal dictator—the likes of Adolf Hitler or
Pol Pot—and what if there was no other way of changing the rul-
ing government? Would this still constitute lawful prosecution,
or has this now moved into the realm of persecution?
Beyond this situation, it is not unknown for states to apply
criminal penalties for purposes that would be considered illegiti-
mate in most other countries. For example, a state’s criminal law
might outlaw certain forms of political or religious expression,
or else treat certain ethic groups in a discriminatory fashion as
was the case of the white apartheid regime in South Africa. There
might also be instances where a state pursues legitimate govern-
mental ends, but the effect of its policies falls more heavily on cer-
tain religious or ethnic groups. One common example is where a
state has a policy of universal military service, but such practices
are contrary to the beliefs of certain religions such as Jehovah’s
Witnesses. If those who refuse to serve are imprisoned, is this
prosecution or persecution? Finally, there might be instances
where a country applies a law of general applicability and it does
so in a nondiscriminatory manner. However, what if it is difﬁcult
for a criminal defendant to get a fair trial? Or if the penalties are
excessive by international standards? As a general rule, in deter-
mining whether a national criminal law constitutes prosecution
The 1951 Refugee Convention
17

or persecution will depend quite heavily on the conformity of this
law with international human rights standards.
One ﬁnal issue relates to the degree of government involve-
ment in persecution. Note that the Convention does not specify or
demand any connection between government authorities and the
sources of persecution. Still, the clearest cases of persecution occur
when state agents are actively involved. The other extreme is
where there is a private dispute between two individuals. There
is general agreement that refugee status is not warranted in these
cases. However, the more difﬁcult situations are those that fall
between these two extremes: (1) where there is state sponsorship
of the harm, (2) where the state tolerates the harm, and (3) where
the state is simply not able to offer protection, either because it is
overwhelmed with other matters or is otherwise a failed state.
There are two schools of thought on this. The accountability model
holds that the prospective treatment that would be afforded to a
refugee claimant would only constitute persecution if the state
could be held accountable under international human rights law.
This would generally cover the ﬁrst two categories. The protection
approach, as its name suggests, focuses more on the protection
needs of the individual and less on attributions of state responsibil-
ity and would in most cases cover the third situation as well.
The Nexus Requirement
The last element of the refugee deﬁnition we will look at is the so-
called nexus requirement, namely, that the persecution the refugee
would face would be based on one of ﬁve enumerated grounds:
(1) race, (2) political opinion, (3) nationality, (4) religion, or (5) mem-
bership of a particular social group. What this means, quite simply,
is that if the refugee claimant can prove persecution, but cannot tie
this in with one of these ﬁve factors, he or she will be denied refugee
status. The signiﬁcance of this limitation depends on how broadly
or narrowly the different grounds for persecution are interpreted.
Race
The ﬁrst nexus ground is race. The Refugee Convention never
deﬁnes this term, although the UNHCR Handbook provides that:
“the term race . . . has to be understood in its widest sense to
include all kinds of ethnic groups that are referred to as ‘races’ in
the common usage.” This deﬁnition is consonant with the deﬁni-
tion set forth by the International Covenant on the Elimination
18
Background and History

of all Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD), which deﬁnes
racial discrimination as:
any distinction, exclusion or preference based on race,
colour, descent, or national or ethnic origin which has
the purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing the rec-
ognition, enjoyment, or exercise on an equal footing of
human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political,
economic, social, cultural or any other ﬁeld of public life.
Despite this common agreement on the meaning of race, the
term will oftentimes not immediately translate into the granting
of refugee status. Thus, although there is little question that South
African blacks suffered severe persecution based on their race at
the hands of the white apartheid government, the dominant
thinking would question the appropriateness of proving refugee
status on this basis alone. Yet, given the enormous disparities
between South African blacks and whites in terms of such things
as infant mortality, tuberculosis, per capita educational expendi-
tures, household incomes, and so on, this might simply reﬂect
the Refugee Convention’s disfavor for protecting economic,
social, and cultural rights.
Political Opinion
A second nexus ground is political opinion. The clearest case is the
political dissident who expresses views in opposition to the ruling
government. However, political opinion should generally be inter-
preted much broader than this to include opinions on any matter
in which state policy is involved. Note that a person is not required
to express a political opinion outright, either through speeches or in
writing. Rather, persecution on the basis of political opinion not
only encompasses individuals who openly express strong opinions
on matters that are clearly political, but it includes political behavior
as well.
Some of the most troubling cases concerning this nexus arise
in the context of civil wars, especially those citizens who have a
strong desire to be left alone. The question addressed by the U.S.
Supreme Court in INS v. Elias-Zacarias was whether a refugee
claimant from Guatemala who did not want to ﬁght for either
the government or for opposition forces—and who was fearful
of reprisal by both sides—was expressing a political opinion by
and through his neutrality. The Court held that neutrality, by
The 1951 Refugee Convention
19

itself, did not constitute a political opinion. Furthermore, it ruled
that even if it could be assumed that neutrality did rise to the level
of a political opinion, the refugee claimant would have to offer
some kind of proof that his feared persecution was based on this,
rather than on some other basis.
Nationality
The term nationality is not to be understood as citizenship, but
refers primarily to an ethnic or linguistic group within that society.
According to the UNHCR,
Persecution for reasons of nationality may consist of
adverse attitudes and measures directed against a
national (ethnic, linguistic) minority and in certain
circumstances the fact of belonging to such a minority
may in itself give rise to a well-founded fear of persecu-
tion (UNHCR Handbook 1979, par. 74).
Religion
The Convention ground of persecution on account of religion
covers believers and nonbelievers alike. While states are prohib-
ited from interfering with religious beliefs, or forcing religious
beliefs on those who are without, it can place limitations on reli-
giously motivated conduct when such limitations are necessary
to protect public safety and order. Earlier we made note of the
common governmental practice of imprisoning those who refuse
military service based on their religious beliefs. Is this persecution
on account of religion, or are individuals free to believe whatever
they wish—but only so long as their actions do not interfere with
general governmental policy?
Membership of a Particular Social Group
The drafting of the Refugee Convention provides little insight on
what the intent or aim of this last nexus happens to be. Some
scholars and commentators take the position that social group
is intended as a catch-all phrase that would include any and all
other forms of persecution that are not covered by the other cat-
egories. At the other extreme are those who take the position
that this ground serves mainly to clarify certain elements in the
other nexus grounds. This, however, makes the term in large
part superﬂuous. The more common approach is to take a posi-
tion in between where social group does not encompass every
20
Background and History

deﬁnable group in a population no matter how loose or seem-
ingly non-existent the connection, but limit this to certain kinds
of characteristics.
According to the dominant view, the characteristic that
deﬁnes a social group must be one that the members of the group
either cannot change (because it is an innate attribute or because
the attribute that deﬁnes the group refers to some past actions or
experiences shared by the members) or else should not be
required to change because it is so fundamental to their identity.
As described by Guy Goodwin-Gill:
In determining whether a particular group of people
constitutes a “social group” within the meaning of the
Convention, attention should . . . be given to the pres-
ence of linking and uniting factors such as ethnic,
cultural, and linguistic origin; education; family back-
ground; economic activity; shared values, outlook and
aspirations. Also highly relevant are the attitudes to
the putative social group of other groups in the same
society and, in particular, the treatment accorded to it
by State authorities. The importance, and therefore the
identity, of a social group may well be in direct propor-
tion to the notice taken of it by others—the view which
others have of us—particularly at the ofﬁcial level. The
notion of social group thus possesses an element of
open-endedness potentially capable of expansion in
favour of a variety of different classes susceptible to
persecution (Goodwin-Gill 1996, 47–48).
Thus far, we have treated the nexus grounds in isolation from
one another, but in many instances a refugee applicant can validly
make a claim on more than one ground. For example, the individ-
ual who refuses to ﬁght might be expressing a religious belief as
well as a political opinion. Likewise, a woman who refuses to
wear certain kinds of dress (such as the full burka), could be
expressing a political opinion as well as a religious belief—and
at the same time be considered to be a member of a social group
that consists of women who oppose having their means of dress
dictated to them by the government.
We close by mentioning two other matters. The ﬁrst is that
there will be instances when a person is attributed certain politi-
cal or religious views by governing authorities that, in fact, this
The 1951 Refugee Convention
21

person does not have. It would make a mockery to deny refugee
status to an individual on the grounds that the government’s per-
secution is based on mistaken beliefs. Rather, what is essential is
not whether the refugee has the attributes the government thinks
he or she has, but whether the persecutor perceives that this per-
son has these attributes—and it likely to persecute this individual
on the basis of these (mistaken) attributes.
A second issue relates to whether the claimant’s fear or risk
of harm is shared by large numbers of other citizens. It is often
said that the size of the group does not matter. However, in terms
of actual state practice there frequently has been the demand that
an individual prove that he or she has somehow been singled out
for persecution beyond what a host of other people in that society
suffer from.
Exclusions
Article 1(F) of the Refugee Convention identiﬁes three categories
of individuals who because of their past actions are considered
to be undeserving of refugee protection, although in many instan-
ces these individuals will face prosecution if and when they are
returned to their country of nationality. An individual falling into
any one of these categories is not a refugee, and thus, not entitled
to any of the rights enshrined in the Convention, including the
prohibition against refoulement.
The ﬁrst category applies to those who have “committed a
crime against peace, a war crime, or a crime against humanity.”
Crimes of peace include planning, preparing, initiating, or partici-
pating in an unlawful war. Crimes against humanity are generally
associated with war, but these may arise outside this context and
include such international crimes as murder, rape, the forcible
transfer of a population, and other inhumane acts that are com-
mitted as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed
against any civilian population.
The second category applies to any person of whom there are
serious reasons to consider that he or she has committed a serious
non-political offense. What constitutes a serious non-political
offense is not deﬁned, but this exclusion should be read in the
context of extradition law upon which it is based. In determining
whether a crime is political or non-political, what needs to be
determined is the nature of the crime, its alleged purpose, and
the causal connection between the crime and the alleged political
22
Background and History

purpose. Thus, a crime will not be considered as a political crime
if the act in question is grossly disproportionate to its alleged
political objective.
The third and last category of excludable persons consists of
those who have been considered guilty of acts contrary to the
principles and purposes of the United Nations. It is not clear what
this exclusion adds that is not covered by the ﬁrst one in the sense
that those who carry out war crimes and crimes against humanity
would be doing so contrary to the principles and purposes of the
United Nations. In all, the three exclusions demand serious rea-
sons for denying refugee protection.
Exceptions to Nonrefoulement
Article 33(2) of the Convention provides two exceptions to the
duty of nonrefoulement (analyzed below in more detail), both of
which seek to protect the safety and security interests of the
receiving state:
The beneﬁt of the present provision may not, however,
be claimed by a refugee whom there are reasonable
grounds for regarding as a danger to the security of the
country in which he is, or who, having been convicted
by a ﬁnal judgment of a particularly serious crime, con-
stitutes a danger to the community of that country.
The ﬁrst exception authorizes a country to return a refugee—
even one who would then face the prospects of persecution—if
there are reasonable grounds for believing that this person would
pose a security risk to the receiving state and its inhabitants. Given
the stakes involved, such a determination should be undertaken
with utmost care. For one thing, it should not be assumed that a
particular individual would be a security threat simply on the
basis of group membership or afﬁliation alone. In addition, such
determinations should be made with regard to a particular person
and not on the basis that a mass inﬂux of refugee claimants
who are seen as posing a grave threat to the national security of
that state.
The second exception authorizes a state to return a refugee
who having been convicted by a ﬁnal judgment of a particularly
serious crime constitutes a danger to the community of the receiv-
ing state. Note that this exception only applies to crimes of a
The 1951 Refugee Convention
23

particularly serious nature. In addition, the state must show that
this individual constitutes a present danger. Thus, while a prior
conviction is a necessary condition, it is not a sufﬁcient condition
in order to return an individual back home.
Cessations
A basic premise of the Refugee Convention is that international
protection is a surrogate for national protection and is only war-
ranted if and when national protection is not available. Thus, the
cessation clause is premised on the idea that refugee protection
should be removed when this protection is no longer warranted.
Article 1(c) addresses ﬁve different scenarios when international
protection is no longer considered necessary or justiﬁed because
of the proof of adequate national protection.
The ﬁrst is re-availment of national protection, most notably,
the renewal of a passport from the refugee’s state of nationality.
According to the UNHCR Handbook, in the absence of proof to
the contrary, a refugee who has obtained or renewed a passport
will be presumed to avail himself or herself of the protection of
his or her former country, although the Handbook also notes three
factors that need to be considered: voluntariness, intent, and
actual re-availment.
The second basis for cessation is the re-acquisition of nation-
ality. The third is acquisition of a new nationality other than the
refugee’s (new) country of nationality. In this instance, protection
will be provided by a state other than the country of nationality or
the state that has granted refugee status. The fourth cessation
ground is re-establishment in the country of origin and the focus
here is on whether the refugee has maintained sufﬁcient connec-
tions with his or her former home, oftentimes in the form of
repeated visits, which would indicate the re-establishment, once
again, of a citizen-government relationship. All four of these
grounds for cessation are based on the idea that the refugee’s con-
duct is proof positive of the removal of persecution.
The ﬁnal ground for cessation is the only one out of the hands
of the refugee and it relates to a fundamental change in the country
of origin. The usual manifestation of this change is a substantial
improvement in human rights conditions at home, although this
cessation should not automatically and readily be applied at the
slightest change in the political winds. Rather, there must be strong
evidence that the changes are deep seated and not ephemeral and
24
Background and History

there should also be substantial reason to believe that the refugee
who would be returned would not face the prospect of persecution
once again.
Refugee Rights
Nonrefoulement
As noted earlier, the Refugee Convention sets forth a number of
rights that refugees are to enjoy, although many of these rights
are dependent on the particular status of the refugee. However,
we begin with what is certainly the most important of all refugee
rights and this is protection against refoulement, which is set
forth in Article 33(1):
No Contracting State shall expel or return (“refouler”) a
refugee in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of ter-
ritories where his life or freedom would be threatened
on account of his race, religion, nationality, membership
of a particular social group or political opinion.
A state’s duty against nonrefoulement extends to all refugees
who are within its jurisdiction who meet the criteria for being a ref-
ugee. One of the problems is that it is impossible for government
authorities to know whether a particular refugee applicant is in fact
a bona ﬁde refugee without examining the facts and basis of that
individual’s claim. Therefore, to effectively implement the duty
against nonrefoulement, states must provisionally extend this right
until such time that a ﬁnal determination of refugee status has been
made. As this has been explained by the UNHCR:
Every refugee is, initially, also an asylum seeker; there-
fore, to protect refugees, asylum seekers must be treated
on the assumption that they may be refugees until their
status has been determined. Otherwise, the principle of
non-refoulement would not provide effective protection
for refugees, because applicants might be rejected at bor-
ders or otherwise returned to persecution on the
grounds that their claim had not been established
(UNHCR, Note on International Protection, UN Doc.
A/AC.96/815 (1993), par. 11).
Refugee Rights
25

Rights Owed to Refugees Physically Present
in the Receiving State
As noted earlier, many of the rights provided to refugees by the
Convention are dependent on the status of that particular refugee.
We begin with the right set forth in Article 31 that provides that all
refugees who are physically present in the receiving state are to be
free from punishment because of unlawful entry. This provision is
based on the realization that bona ﬁde refugees are rarely able to
comply with immigration requirements, although actual state prac-
tice seems to show that this provision is oftentimes ignored. The
effective implementation of Article 31 requires that it be applied to
asylum seekers as well, until and unless it is determined through a
fair process that an individual does not meet the criteria of a refu-
gee. However, this does not mean that a state cannot impose certain
restrictions on the movement of asylum seekers during the time in
which the refugee determination process is taking place, although
such restrictions must relate to a recognized and legitimate state
objective. In addition to this, detention of refugees and asylum
seekers is permissible for the purpose of provisional investigation
of identity and circumstances of entry. However, it does not author-
ize detention throughout the asylum procedure and alternative
measures should always be considered ﬁrst. As the UNHCR has
advocated, the detention of refugees and asylum seekers is an
exceptional measure that should only be used in extraordinary
circumstances and applied against particular individuals when this
is found to be necessary to achieve an important governmental
objective. Thus, mass and indiscriminate detentions are invariably
not justiﬁable or warranted.
Rights Owed to Refugees Lawfully
in the Contracting State
A number of rights, including Article 18 (self-employment),
Article 26 (freedom from movement), and Article 32 (expulsion),
are provided to refugees lawfully in the host country. While
national laws concerning the requirements for entry and stay
should be taken into account, the decisive issue is the actual rela-
tionship between the receiving state and the refugee. Although
disputed by some governments, it is quite clear that an asylum
seeker who has submitted to all necessary investigations and
26
Background and History

submitted documentation or statements in support of his or her
claim must be deemed lawfully present in the receiving state.
The asylum seeker’s presence would cease to be lawful upon a
ﬁnal decision to deny refugee status. However, until such time,
the state must treat the asylum seeker as a lawfully present refu-
gee and provide those rights set forth in the Convention.
Rights Owed to Refugees Lawfully Staying
in the Contracting State
Those refugees who are not only lawfully in a country’s territory
but who are lawfully staying are entitled to additional rights
including freedom of association (Article 15), the right to engage in
wage-earning employment and to practice a profession (Article 17),
and the right to access to housing (Article 21). The term lawfully
staying denotes legal residency of some continuity and length.
However, it is not synonymous with permanent resident status.
Refugees who have been admitted and treated as refugees for some
period of time and whom no other state will assume responsibility
over are to be considered as lawfully staying in a receiving state
and to be afforded rights commensurate with that status.
Rights Owed to Refugees Residing
in the Contracting State
Finally, a few rights are reserved for refugees who reside in the
receiving state. Habitual resident refugees have a right to legal aid
and to receive national treatment in regard to the posting of security
for costs in a court proceeding (Article 16[2]). And after a period of
three years residence, such refugees are also exempted from both
requirements of legislative reciprocity (Article 7[2]) and any restric-
tive measures imposed on the employment of aliens (Article 17[2]).
Interface with International and Regional
Human Rights Instruments
The Refugee Convention serves as the primary means of ensuring
human rights protection for refugees. However, this does not
mean that refugees—but also refugee claimants and even those
Interface with International and Regional Human Rights Instruments
27

denied refugee status—thereby forfeit all other forms of human
rights protection. What we look to in this section is the manner
in which the Refugee Convention interfaces with other inter-
national and regional human rights instruments.
Nonrefoulement
As we have noted before, nonrefoulement is the linchpin of the
1951 Convention and this same principle is embodied in other
human rights instruments as well. Most notably, Article 3(1) of
the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment (CAT, reprinted in Chapter 6) provides:
“No State Party shall expel, return (‘refouler’) or extradite a per-
son to another State where there are substantial grounds for
believing that he would be in danger of being subjected to tor-
ture.” Although the language is quite similar to that in Article 33
of the Refugee Convention, there are also some notable differ-
ences. The most obvious is that the CAT does not have a nexus
requirement in the same manner as the Refugee Convention.
Thus, those making a claim under CAT are not required to prove
that the harm they face if returned to their country of nationality
(or any other country) is based on race, religion, and so on.
Another major difference between the two instruments is
that there are no exceptions to CAT as there are in the Refugee
Convention. Recall that under Article 1(F) of the Convention, a
person could be excluded from refugee status altogether for hav-
ing previously committed certain international crimes; while
under Article 33(2) a refugee could be returned because he or
she posed a security threat to the receiving state notwithstanding
the persecution that he or she might endure. In contrast to this,
the CAT does not have any exceptions to the prohibition against
returning a person to a country where there are substantial
grounds for believing that a person might be tortured. What this
means, then, is that even individuals who themselves have
directed and/or carried out gross and systematic human rights
abuses would be protected from being sent back home if it
appeared that this individual might be subjected to torture.
Note, however, that there has been some recent challenge to
this principle. For example, in Suresh v. Canada, the Canadian
Supreme Court ruled that “We do not exclude the possibility that
in exceptional circumstances, deportation to face torture might be
justiﬁed” (par. 78). Within the United Nations, both the Human
28
Background and History

Rights Committee (HRC) and the Committee Against Torture
have sharply criticized the Canadian government for this posi-
tion, with the former making these pointed remarks in its Con-
cluding Observations to Canada’s state report:
The Committee is concerned by the State party’s policy
that, in exceptional circumstances, persons can be
deported to a country where they would face the risk of
torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment . . . The
State party should recognize the absolute nature of the
prohibition of torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treat-
ment, which in no circumstances can be derogated from.
Such treatments can never be justiﬁed on the basis of a bal-
ance to be found between society’s interest and the indi-
vidual’s rights . . . No person, without any exception,
even those suspected of presenting a danger to national
security or the safety of any person, and even during a
state of emergency, may be deported to a country where
he/she runs the risk of being subjected to torture or cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment. The State party should
clearly enact this principle into its law (HRC 2006, par. 15).
Beyond Suresh, the practice of extraordinary rendition has
severely tested the meaning of Article 3, as several Western states,
and the United States in particular, have engaged in far-ranging
and geographically far-ﬂung programs that have resulted in those
suspected of supporting international terrorism being sent to coun-
tries that have a long and ugly history of carrying out torture.
Although the CAT’s nonrefoulement provision is in many
ways considerably broader than the Refugee Convention’s provi-
sion, what must also be said is that, in a technical sense, the
prohibition against return only applies to torture as such, while
the Convention applies to persecution much more broadly. What
this means is that persons who might be subject to severe pain
or even death that would be carried out by private actors might
not qualify for protection under CAT, unless it could be shown
that such ill-treatment was to be carried out at the instigation of
or with the consent or acquiescence of a public ofﬁcial.
The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR) does not have a speciﬁc provision against nonrefoule-
ment. However, the Human Rights Committee, the treaty body
in the United Nations that monitors enforcement of this
Interface with International and Regional Human Rights Instruments
29

international treaty, has interpreted such an obligation, placing
special emphasis on Article 7, which provides: “No one shall be
subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment.” As mentioned earlier, the HRC criticized the
Canadian Supreme Court’s ruling in Suresh, which held that the
prohibition against nonrefoulement might not be absolute.
Finally, although there is no speciﬁc nonrefoulement provi-
sion in the European Convention, the European Court of Human
Rights (ECHR) has reached the same conclusion as the HRC. In
its landmark decision in Soering v. United Kingdom, the ECHR
ruled that states were prohibited from sending a person to a coun-
try where there are substantial grounds for believing that the per-
son faces a real risk of being subjected to torture or to inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment. Furthermore, the Court has
also held that no derogation can be made against this prohibition,
even in times of public emergency threatening the life of the coun-
try. Thus, in Chahal v. United Kingdom, the Court ruled against the
deportation of a Sikh separatist who was viewed by British
authorities as a security threat, holding that “the activities of the
individual in question, however undesirable or dangerous, can-
not be a material consideration.”
Racism
As noted at the outset, the term asylum seekers has become a
pejorative term in Western states and it is reﬂective of the kinds of
racism that many of those seeking refugee status have had to face.
All of these countries are a state party to the Convention on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD), which provides
under Article 2(1): “States Parties condemn racial discrimination
and undertake to pursue by all appropriate means and without
delay a policy of eliminating racial discrimination in all its forms,
and promoting understanding among all races.” Governments
that continue to ignore the racial animus so often directed against
asylum seekers and refugees are simply not living up to their obli-
gations under CERD.
Detention
The Refugee Convention imposes certain restrictions on the
detention of asylum seekers and refugees and these are but-
tressed by other human rights treaties that prohibit the arbitrary
30
Background and History

deprivation of liberty, most notably, Article 9 of the ICCPR. The
key here is that the deprivation of liberty must be carried out to
achieve a legitimate government interest. Using detention as a
means of dissuading refugee ﬂows does not meet that standard.
This is not to suggest that there are no other policy grounds that
a receiving state could invoke. For example, it might be valid for
a state to use detention in order to verify the identity of asylum
seekers, to determine the basic elements of their claim for protec-
tion, and to make sure they do not pose a risk to the society. In
addition, there might be instances in the removal process where
a rejected asylum seeker could be detained in order to ensure that
this person does not abscond into the general population.
However, what is not acceptable under the law is the massive
and indiscriminate detention of all asylum seekers based on some
vague national security grounds. Likewise, the indeﬁnite detention
of those who are denied refugee status but who cannot be returned
to their country of nationality is likewise not warranted.
Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights
As noted earlier, the Refugee Convention provides certain rights
depending on a refugee’s particular status. Yet, as part of a general
restrictive trend towards asylum seekers, a number of countries
(Western states in particular) have taken to restricting access
to economic and social beneﬁts. While states enjoy a certain
degree of latitude in such matters, they must not adopt policies
that effectively amount to a violation of the prohibition against
nonrefoulement.
To reiterate, refugees, asylum seekers, and even those whose
claims for refugee status have been rejected do not leave their
human rights at the borders of the receiving state (or would-be
receiving state). In that way, since nearly all recipient countries
are a state party to the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights, any denial of these rights to these individuals
will constitute a violation of international human rights law.
Rights of the Child
A substantial portion of the world’s refugee population is
comprised of children, and these children beneﬁt from the provi-
sions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC). One of
the key provisions of the CRC is Article 3, which stipulates that
Interface with International and Regional Human Rights Instruments
31

the child’s best interest must be the primary consideration in all
actions that affect them. Beyond that, Article 22(1) provides that
a child seeking refugee protection must be given appropriate
humanitarian assistance, while Article 22(2) imposes an obliga-
tion on state parties to cooperate with the competent authorities
in ﬁnding parents of unaccompanied refugee children. Finally,
Article 37 sets forth particularly stringent conditions dealing with
the detention of children.
Domestic Procedures
The 1951 Refugee Convention does not specify how a state is to
implement the provisions of the treaty, although under general
international law, each state party has an obligation to carry out its
treaty obligations in good faith. In an effort to assist states on these
matters, the UNHCR has recommended that states should: adopt
formal and uniform procedures for making refugee determina-
tions; seek to ensure that decision makers are well versed in the rel-
evant international instruments; assist applicants in pursuing their
claim; and ﬁnally, give rejected applicants the opportunity to
appeal and to remain in the country while the appeal is pending.
Establishing Eligibility
For a whole host of reasons, including sudden ﬂight, refugee
claimants are oftentimes not able to provide substantial documen-
tation in support of their claim. For this reason, one of the keys to
the refugee determination process is careful consideration of the
claimant’s own testimony. As a general rule, the applicant bears
the responsibility for proving he or she is a bona ﬁde refugee.
However, it is generally accepted that a fairer approach is one in
which this burden is shared with competent authorities in the
receiving state. In addition, as the UNHCR Handbook points out,
because of the inherent difﬁculties facing the claimant as well as
the consequences of a wrongful determination, it is generally
agreed that the applicant should be given the beneﬁt of any doubt.
Decision-making in this realm is fraught with difﬁculties. Not
only must the adjudicator be generally knowledgeable with con-
ditions in the claimant’s country of origin, but he must also be sen-
sitive to the unique situation faced by the applicant himself or
herself. There are at least two major problems that complicate this
32
Background and History

process even further. The ﬁrst has already been alluded to before
and it relates to a deep-seated fear that many refugee applicants
have of government ofﬁcials quite generally, in nearly all cases due
to their previous treatment in their former country, which is then
carried over to immigration ofﬁcials in the receiving state.
The second issue is how authorities should deal with refugee
claimants who are thought to be lying and/or who have used
false documents in order to gain entry into the recipient state. In
many instances, state authorities will summarily deny the appli-
cation. However, this ignores several factors. One is that an appli-
cant might exaggerate his or her story because the enormous (and
justiﬁed) fear of being sent back home. All of us tell lies—and we
do so even when our life and well-being are not in the balance.
Beyond this, what adjudicators need to be reminded of is the fact
that without false travel documents, a good number of asylum
seekers would not even have the ability of being able to gain
access to most states in order to be able to present their claim in
the ﬁrst place. Because of this, there has grown to be a heavy reli-
ance on professional smugglers who provide the refugee seeker
with the necessary documents and along with that the story that
is to be conveyed to immigration ofﬁcials in the receiving state.
The larger point is that inconsistencies and even proven lies
(including false travel documents) should not automatically lead
to the rejection of an asylum claim. The adjudicator needs to ﬁnd
out whether there are reasonable explanations for inconsistencies,
misrepresentations and even falsehoods. In particular, immigra-
tion ofﬁcials need to discern how central these things are to the
refugee seeker’s claim.
Denial of Asylum Hearings and
Accelerated Procedures
A growing number of states have adopted measures that either
deny asylum hearings altogether or else provide for accelerated
proceedings. The ostensible aim of these measures is for receiving
states to have to spend little or no time and resources on claims
that are thought to be manifestly unfounded.
Most Western states have denied access to asylum proce-
dures altogether in situations where responsibility for assessing
an application for asylum could have been assumed by another
state. This is generally referred to as the principle of “ﬁrst country
of asylum” or “safe third country,” and the idea at work here is
Domestic Procedures
33

that the refugee claimant should now be denied the opportunity
to present a claim because this could have been (and should have
been) done in the safe country this individual previously had
passed through. Thus, if an asylum seeker from Iraq had a brief
layover at Heathrow Airport in the United Kingdom, and then
proceeded to ﬂy to Oslo, Norway, the Norwegian government
would deny the ability to ﬁle an asylum claim on the basis that
this individual had passed through a safe country.
It should be pointed out that there is no obligation under
international law for a state to re-admit non-nationals and many
safe countries have done exactly that. The term refugees in orbit
has been coined to describe refugee claimants who are repeatedly
bounced around from recipient country back to safe country
back to recipient country, and so on. To help address this problem,
states have adopted various bilateral and multilateral re-admission
agreements that determine which state among the contracting par-
ties shall be responsible for assessing certain refugee claims.
In addition to the safety of countries that asylum seekers
have passed through, many Western states have developed the
notion of safe countries of origin, which has meant that asylum
seekers from these countries will either be barred from making a
claim altogether or else will be subjected to accelerated proce-
dures or different evidentiary standards. Although the notion of
safe countries of origin has a certain intuitive feel, in practice
these policies have been questionable at best and unlawful at
worst. One problem is the lack of transparency that invariably
has marked this process, but an even more serious problem is that
a number of the countries that have been placed on various coun-
tries’ lists of safe countries—Algeria in the 1990s represents one of
the most egregious examples—are certainly anything but this.
Finally, receiving states have adopted a number of measures
that are aimed at, or which effectively prevent, would-be refugees
from reaching their borders altogether, manifesting what Matthew
Gibney describes as a form of schizophrenia about refugee
protection:
A kind of schizophrenia seems to pervade Western
responses to asylum seekers and refugees; great impor-
tance is attached to the principle of asylum but enormous
efforts are made to ensure that refugees (and others with
less pressing claims) never reach the territory of the state
where they could receive its protection (Gibney 2004, 2).
34
Background and History

The two most important means of instituting this non-entre´e
policy (Hathaway 2005, 291) are the application of visa require-
ments and the institution of carrier sanctions. A visa require-
ment is essentially permission to travel to a receiving state and it
allows a country to decide whether to allow individuals (or certain
individuals) from a particular country to travel there. Typically,
states institute visa requirements against countries that produce
refugees—invariably countries experiencing gross and systematic
human rights violations—but what is important to note is that
there are no exceptions for those in need of refugee protection.
Of course, what this means is that many refugees (or would-be
refugees) are effectively prevented from leaving their country of
origin altogether. Moreover, in order to make these visa require-
ments an effective bar against entry, states have imposed sanc-
tions on carriers (airlines, boats, etc.) that have brought aliens to
their borders without visas or with improper travel documents.
In addition, states have also started to send their own agents into
foreign waters and even on to foreign land in an effort to enforce
these restrictions. We will discuss this in much greater detail in
Chapter 2.
All of these measures have gone far in signiﬁcantly reducing
the ability of individuals to ﬂee their country of origin—at least
legally. As a result, a growing problem has been asylum seekers
who arrive at a country’s borders with either no documents or
forged documents. Some governments have responded to this
by assigning persons who lack valid travel documents to acceler-
ated asylum procedures and/or by subjecting these individuals
to mandatory detention. However, what these governments have
failed to acknowledge is that those in need of refugee protection
will oftentimes need to resort to such measures in order to gain
entry into another country. Thus, what should be reiterated are
the provisions in Article 31(1) of the Refugee Convention, which
provides that the lack of appropriate documentation or the use
of fraudulent documents does not, by itself, render a claim abu-
sive or fraudulent and should not be relied on to deny access to
refugee proceedings.
Returned Refugees
Obviously, not all those who apply for refugee status will
be successful. States have no obligation under international
law to allow rejected applicants to remain, nor do they have a
Domestic Procedures
35

responsibility to provide a home for those whose status as a refu-
gee has ceased. The UNHCR has adopted the view that the pre-
ferred option for dealing with these situations is voluntary
repatriation that is carried out in safety and dignity. However,
one of the continuing concerns is that repatriation that has been
labeled (by the government itself) as voluntary has been anything
but—and, thus, constitutes refoulement. Returned refugees do
not forfeit their human rights. Thus, any such measures must be
consonant with human rights standards and under the guidance
of international and regional human rights treaties.
Conclusion
This chapter was designed to do two things. The ﬁrst was to
provide a snapshot of the current situation. It should be no sur-
prise that countries experiencing massive levels of political vio-
lence, including civil conﬂict, would produce the largest
number of refugees and IDPs. However, what will be surprising
to many is that most refugees are not located in the Western
industrialized states. In fact, only about 10 percent are—which
means that the overwhelming majority of the world’s refugees
are being housed in poor, developing countries.
The second thing this chapter sought to achieve was to provide
the reader with an overview and analysis of the 1951 Refugee Con-
vention. Although the Convention has been supplemented by two
of the regional refugee instruments and its work complemented
by other human rights treaties, it remains the central element of ref-
ugee protection.
References
Books, Articles, and Chapters
Cohen, Roberta. 2007. “The Global Crisis of Internal Displacement,” in
James D. White, and Anthony Marsella, eds. Fear of Persecution; Global
Human Rights, International Law, and Human Well-Being. Lanham, MD:
Lexington Books.
Frelick, Bill. 2007. “Paradigm Shifts in the International Responses to
Refugees,” in James D. White, and Anthony Marsella, eds. Fear of
36
Background and History

Persecution; Global Human Rights, International Law, and Human Well-Being.
Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
Gibney, Matthew. 2004. The Politics and Ethics of Asylum: Liberal Democracy
and the Response to Refugees. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Goodwin-Gill, Guy. 1996. The Refugee in International Law, 2d ed. Oxford,
UK: Clarendon Press.
Hathaway, James. 1991. The Law of Refugee Status. Toronto: Butterworths.
Hathaway, James. 2005. The Rights of Refugees Under International Law.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lauren, Paul Gordon. 2003. The Evolution of Human Rights: Visions Seen.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
McAdam, Jane. 2007. Complementary Protection in International Refugee
Law. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Morsink, Johannes. 1999. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights: Origins,
Drafting and Intent. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Perry, Michael. 1998. The Idea of Human Rights. New York: Oxford
University Press.
UNHCR. January 1992. Handbook on Procedures and Criteria for
Determining Refugee Status under the 1951 Convention and the 1667
Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees (UNHCR Handbook). HCR/IP/
4/Eng/REV.1. UNHCR: Geneva.
UNHCR. December 16, 1998. “Note on Burden and Standard of Proof in
Refugee Claims.”
UNHCR. 1993. Note on International Protection, UN Doc. A/AC.96/815.
Zolberg, Aristide, Astri Suhrke, and Sergio Aguayo. 1989. Escape from
Violence; Conﬂict and the Refugee Crisis in the Developing World. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Cases and Administrative Decisions
Chahal v. United Kingdom. 2007. 108 ILR 385. [p. 33]
Human Rights Committee. April 20, 2006. Concluding observations of the
Human Rights Committee: Canada. CCPR/C/CAN/CO/5.
INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca. 1987. 480 U.S. 421.
INS v. Elias-Zacarias. 1992. 502 U.S. 478.
Soering v. United Kingdom. 1989. App. No. 4038/88, ECHR 14 (July 7, 1989).
Suresh v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration). 2002.
1 S.C.R. 3, 2002 SCC 1.
References
37

This page intentionally left blank

2
Problems, Controversies,
and Solutions
I
n this chapter we provide an in-depth analysis of three major
issues, two of which relate directly to the issue of refugee pro-
tection while the other involves a much different conceptualiza-
tion of human rights that could have enormous implications in
terms of refugee protection itself. We begin by addressing the
issue of asylum abuse, a charge that frequently has been made
in all Western states, and which has served as a basis for many
of the non-entre´e policies in those countries. The question we take
up is whether there is any empirical proof of this claim, or
whether asylum seekers come from exactly the kinds of states that
one might expect: countries experiencing gross and systematic
human rights violations.
The second issue involves the scope of the prohibition against
refoulement. We return to a question that has been touched upon
previously, namely, how far (literally) does a state’s obligation to
protect extend? In this section we spend a fair amount of time
analyzing the U.S. Supreme Court’s opinion in Sale v. Haitian
Centers Council.
The third and ﬁnal issue involves the broader issue of human
rights. Although human rights are (universally) declared to be
universal, the enforcement and protection of human rights has
been conﬁned by territorial considerations. Thus, the dominant
thinking has been that while states have human rights obligations
within their own domestic realm, they do not have the same (or
perhaps any) such obligations outside their own territorial bor-
ders. Refugee protection presents a slight variant on this in the
39

sense that it is based on one state providing human rights protec-
tion to citizens of a foreign land. Still, refugee protection is itself
territorially based, as evidenced by the oft-repeated principle that
no state has an obligation to admit any refugees. However, within
the past decade there have been some strong challenges to the
territorial conceptualization of human rights, and we will explore
what this has been based on, but also what the implications of this
might be in terms of refugee protection more generally.
Asylum Abuse?
One of the overarching themes in this work is there is a very
strong relationship between human rights violations and refugee
protection and perhaps the most essential way to think about
refugees is that they are a manifestation of such violations in the
sense that people do not otherwise ﬁnd it necessary to suddenly
ﬂee their homes in order to seek protection in some other land.
More than that, because refugees are people whose human rights
have not, or will not, be protected by their home state, this respon-
sibility is then taken over by some other country.
If refugees are people ﬂeeing from political violence, what we
would expect is that those countries experiencing the worst levels
of human rights violations would produce the largest number of
refugees. Conversely, one would expect to see very few refugees
from countries where political violence is either low or virtually
non-existence. Beyond this, one of the things that could also be
tested is whether there is any kind of systematic abuse of the asy-
lum system in various states.
To test these propositions we will undertake what we will
term a human rights analysis. What this analysis is intended to
do is to capture two different, but related, phenomena. The ﬁrst
is the probability of persecution, while the second relates to the
severity of persecution. Under the refugee standard an individual
must prove that he or she has a well-founded fear of persecution.
The problem, of course, is that it is oftentimes difﬁcult, if not
impossible, to determine exactly when a particular individual
has the requisite fear. However, what we can establish through a
macro-level analysis is a rough approximation of the probability
of persecution based on the level of human rights violations in
that country. Thus, all else being equal, individuals who live in a
state that has a very high level of political violence will have a
40
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

greater probability of facing persecution, while individuals who
live in states where there are very low levels of human rights vio-
lations will face a much lower probability of persecution. This is
not to say that there is a one-to-one correlation or that individual
determinations can be based on macro-level data. On the other
hand, there should be a strong correlation between levels of
political violence and refugee ﬂows. Certainly no one would be
surprised that the political violence in Iraq has resulted in mas-
sive refugee ﬂows and an enormous Internally Displaced Persons
(IDP) population. In the same way, one would be greatly sur-
prised if a peaceful country like Costa Rica suddenly produced
large numbers of refugees.
The second thing that a human rights analysis provides is
some insight in terms of the severity of persecution. As we dis-
cussed earlier in Chapter 1, the 1951 Refugee Convention does
not deﬁne persecution, nor does it make any attempt to differenti-
ate between different kinds of persecution. Guy Goodwin-Gill has
deﬁned persecution this way:
Persecution within the Convention thus comprehends
measures taken on the basis of one of more of the stated
grounds, which threaten: deprivation of life or liberty;
torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment;
subjection to slavery or servitude; non-recognition as a
person (particularly where the consequences of such
non-recognition impinge directly on an individual’s life,
liberty, livelihood, security, or integrity); and oppression,
discrimination, or harassment of a person in his or her
private, home or family life (Goodwin-Gill 1983, 40).
Under this view, individuals who face job discrimination
based on their religious beliefs would face persecution and would
be considered as refugees, as would those ﬂeeing from death and
torture. What is being suggested here is that while it might not be
necessary to distinguish between levels of persecution in order to
make the refugee determination itself, receiving states ought to
prioritize among those who are most in need of assistance. Under
that approach, those facing the prospect of torture or death
should receive priority over those whose claim for refugee status
is based on harassment.
To test some of these propositions we will make use of one of
the most widely used human rights datasets: the Political Terror
Asylum Abuse?
41

Scale (PTS) (Gibney, Cornett and Wood, 2008). The PTS ranks
countries on a scale of 1–5, with the data coming from two differ-
ent annual sources: the U.S. Department of State’s Country Reports
on Human Rights Practices and the Amnesty International’s Annual
Report. Countries are coded on the following scale (Wood and
Gibney, 2010):
Level 1: Countries . . . under a secure rule of law, people are
not imprisoned for their views, and torture is rare or
exceptional. . . . Political murders are extremely rare. . . .
Level 2: There is a limited amount of imprisonment for
nonviolent political activity. However, a few persons are
affected; torture and beating are exceptional. . . . Political
murder is rare. . . .
Level 3: There is extensive political imprisonment. . . .
Execution or other political murders and brutality may be
common. Unlimited detention, with or without trial, for
political views is accepted. . . .
Level 4: The practices of Level 3 are expanded to larger
numbers. Murders, disappearances, and torture are part of
life. . . . In spite of its generality, on this level terror affects
primarily those who interest themselves in politics or ideas.
Level 5: The terrors of Level 4 have been extended to the
whole population. . . . The leaders of these societies place no
limits on the means or thoroughness with which they
pursue personal or ideological goals.
There are a few things to note about the PTS. The ﬁrst is that
it only measures actual violence. In that way, it is not a measure of
overall state repression. In fact, there will be some cases (the
Soviet Union in the 1980s is an excellent example) where a gov-
ernment’s repressive measures are so efﬁcient and effective that
there will be relatively few incidents of torture, political imprison-
ment, summary executions, and disappearances. Another point is
that the PTS only measures human rights violations carried out
by the state, although it also measures political violence that is
carried out by those known to be associated with the state. An
example of this is Colombia where the government has strong ties
to various paramilitary forces. In that way, the government’s PTS
score will reﬂect these acts of violence as well. Finally, the PTS
42
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

only reﬂects what is in these two annual human rights reports.
Thus, in the construction of the index for each year, countries are
scored as if the reports are accurate and complete and any biases
should be evident in the indices. In addition, those who serve as
coders to this project are instructed not to consider their own
knowledge of a particular country. Instead, each country receives
two scores—one based on the Amnesty International Report and
the other on the U.S. State Department Report—and that score
should only reﬂect what is actually in those respective reports.
We begin with the question of the relationship between lev-
els of human rights violations and refugee ﬂows. The following
Table 2.1 has taken the data from Table 1.1 in Chapter 1 that lists
the top 10 refugee producing countries for the year 2008, but
adds the U.S. State Department PTS score for that year.
As you can see, four of the top ﬁve refugee producing coun-
tries were coded at a level 5—states experiencing the very highest
levels of political violence. What also should be considered is that
the PTS only coded ten countries that year at level 5: Afghanistan,
Chad, Democratic Republic of Congo, Iraq, Israel and the Occu-
pied Territories, North Korea, Somalia, Sri Lanka, and Zimbabwe.
Thus, Table 2.1 provides afﬁrmation that there is a strong relation-
ship between levels of human rights abuse and the creation of ref-
ugee ﬂows.
Although the results here are by no means surprising, they are
an important means of testing whether people leave their home
country because of political violence—or whether, instead, they do
so for economic betterment. What this data shows is that what
Asylum Abuse?
43
TABLE 2.1
Top Ten Refugee Producing States, 2008 and PTS Scores
Country
Number
Afghanistan
2,833,128 (5)
Iraq
1,903,519 (5)
Somalia
561,154 (5)
Sudan
419,248 (5)
Colombia
373,532 (4)
Democratic Republic Congo
367,995 (5)
Occupied Palestinian Authority
340,016 (5)
Vietnam
328,183 (3)
Burundi
281,592 (4)
Turkey
214,378 (3)

drives people out of their homelands is not poverty so much—
unfortunately, there are a lot of poor countries in the world—but
political violence, particularly very high levels of political violence.
As noted earlier, macro-level data such as this cannot be used to
determine whether a particular individual has the requisite well-
founded fear of persecution. On the other hand, however, one
would think that states could easily establish asylum procedures
whereby individuals ﬂeeing from a level 4 or level 5 country would
enjoy a rebuttable presumption that they are bona ﬁde refugees,
while they could work under the same (rebuttable) presumption
that individuals ﬂeeing from a level 1 or level 2 country are simply
not refugees.
What about at the receiving end? The reason why Western
states have undertaken such measures as visa restrictions, carrier
sanctions, interdiction, and so on is the belief that there has been a
great deal of asylum abuse. However, very little empirical analy-
sis has been carried out on this issue. Instead, most of the proof
of this charge is to be found in the denials for refugee protection
made by receiving countries themselves. However, there is
another way that this proposition can be tested and it is to exam-
ine where asylum seekers are coming from. If most applicants are
arriving from states experiencing relatively low levels of political
violence, it would be fair to say that the charge of asylum abuse
does have a strong basis in fact. On the other hand, if the opposite
of this is true—that is, if the overwhelming majority of those seek-
ing refugee protection are from countries experiencing the very
highest levels of political violence—then a very strong case can
be made for the opposite proposition.
The empirical evidence shows that in one Western country
after another, and over an extended period of time, substantial
majorities of asylum seekers have come from countries experienc-
ing gross and systematic human rights violations. In Chapter 6,
there is a complete set of data presented on asylum claims for ten
Western countries (United States, United Kingdom, Sweden,
Netherlands, Italy, Germany, France, Denmark, Canada, and Aus-
tralia) for three different time periods: 2008, 1998, and 1988. For
each country, the top ten countries of origin are listed along with
the number of asylum seekers from that country as well as that
country’s PTS score for that year. Note that this data only lists
non-European asylum seekers and there are several reasons for
doing this. The ﬁrst is that the number of asylum seekers from other
European countries is relatively small to begin with, so this is a way
44
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

of taking out some of the noise. A second reason is that, almost with-
out exception, the European countries are reasonably safe coun-
tries, something that is reﬂected in the PTS scores of these states.
Finally, when the term asylum seeker is hurled at people the way
that it so often is, it is not other Europeans who are the target.
Instead, it is invariably used against non-Europeans, particularly
those who do not look European. For these reasons, we limit our
analysis to non-Europeans—for truly it is against this population
that the charge of asylum abuse has so frequently been made.
United Kingdom
What we will do here is to try to summarize some of the ﬁnd-
ings from the data in Chapter 6. We will begin with the United
Kingdom and Table 2.2 presents data on asylum applications for
2008. What is listed is the total number of asylum seekers that
year (30,065) along with the ten top states and their PTS score
for that year. Finally, and most importantly for the present
Asylum Abuse?
45
TABLE 2.2
Asylum Claims Filed in the United Kingdom, 2008
United Kingdom
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Zimbabwe
4,330
5
Afghanistan
3,730
5
Iran
2,585
4
Eritrea
2,345
4
Iraq
2,030
5
Pakistan
2,010
4
Sri Lanka
1,840
5
Somalia
1,575
5
China
1,490
4
Nigeria
970
4
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
30,065
% from PTS 5
48.2
% from PTS 4
40.8
% from PTS 3
7.5
% from PTS 2
2.2
% from PTS 1
0
% from other/unscored
1.3

analysis, what is also included is a breakdown of what percentage
of asylum seekers to the United Kingdom that year were from
level 5 countries, level 4 countries, and so on.
As the reader can see, the greatest number of claims were
made from these three countries: Zimbabwe, Afghanistan, and
Iran. Furthermore, breaking this down by PTS level, fully 89 per-
cent of the asylum claims that year were from individuals from
countries experiencing the highest levels of political violence—
with 48.2 percent being from a level 5 state and 40.8 percent com-
ing from a level 4 country. The converse of this is also true; that is,
almost none of the asylum claims ﬁled in 2008 were from individ-
uals from relatively safe countries. In fact, asylum claims from
level 1 and level 2 countries totaled only 2.2 percent of the total
claims ﬁled that year.
What also needs to be pointed out is that 2008 is by no means
an aberration. In order to test this, we also computed data from
1998 and 1988 (see Chapter 6), and the results are quite similar to
what they are in 2008. In 1998, there were a similar number of total
asylum claims (35,180) as there were in 2008. In 1998, 65.2 percent
of the asylum applicants to the United Kingdom were from level 4
and level 5 countries, while only 0.1 percent were ﬁled by asylum
seekers from level 1 and level 2 countries. In 1988, the biggest dif-
ference is that the UK only received a small fraction (3,980) of the
asylum claims that it would later receive in 1998 and 2008. Still,
more than half (57.8 percent) of the claims ﬁled in 1988 were from
asylum seekers from level 4 and level 5 countries, while there was
not a single asylum application from a person from a level 1 coun-
try and only 4.6 percent of the total asylum applications were from
people coming from a level 2 country.
The Netherlands
The Netherlands (see Table 2.3) provides the same kind of results.
In 2008, individuals from two countries—Iraq (5,027) and Somalia
(3,842)—produced the highest number of asylum claims. Both of
these countries received a score of 5 on the PTS that year. Reﬂec-
tive of this, what is most stunning about the Dutch data is that
nearly three quarters of the asylum claims ﬁled in Holland in
2008 were from individuals coming from a level 5 country. Recall
that only ten countries in the entire world were designated as
such. At the opposite end, only 1.5 percent of the asylum claims
were ﬁled by individuals arriving from a level 1 or level 2 country.
46
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Sweden
The third example we will use is Sweden (see Table 2.4). In 2008
there were 21,146 asylum claims ﬁled. Like the Netherlands,
Iraq (6,083) and Somalia (3,361) asylum seekers constituted the
two largest groups, and as mentioned above, both were coded
as level 5 countries that year. In total, 71.8 percent of the (non-
European) asylum claims ﬁled in Sweden in 2008 were from
individuals ﬂeeing from either a level 4 or level 5 country, while
only 2.8 percent were from a level 1 or level 2 countries. Was
1998 an aberration? The data in Chapter 6 show that it was not.
Although Sweden received far fewer asylum claims from non-
Europeans in 1998 (7,545), nearly 65 percent of these claims were
from level 5 countries. If we move back in time another decade to
1988, that year Sweden received 16,453 (non-European) asylum
claims, the bulk of which were from Iran (5), Chile (4), Iraq (5),
and Ethiopia (5). That year, nearly 45 percent of the asylum
claims in Sweden were from a level 5 country (and note that
Asylum Abuse?
47
TABLE 2.3
Asylum Claims Filed in The Netherlands, 2008
The Netherlands
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Iraq
5,027
5
Somalia
3,842
5
China
563
4
Afghanistan
395
5
Iran
322
4
Eritrea
236
4
Sri Lanka
216
5
Guinea
154
3
Sierra Leone
129
2
Mongolia
103
3
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
13,092
% from PTS 5
73.3
% from PTS 4
16.3
% from PTS 3
6
% from PTS 2
1.5
% from PTS 1
0
% from other/unscored
2.9

there were nine level 5 countries in 1988): Afghanistan, Ethiopia,
Iran, Iraq, Myanmar (Burma), Peru, South Africa, Sri Lanka, and
Sudan.
Interested readers can peruse Chapter 6 for more data
on some of the other Western democracies but for the most part
the results are the same. In terms of the most recent data (2008),
these were the percentage of asylum seekers from level 4 and
level 5 countries: Italy (78 percent), Germany (77 percent), France
(60 percent), Denmark (90 percent) and Australia (76 percent).
The only exceptions to this trend were Canada and the United
States. In terms of the former, there were 32,310 claims ﬁled in
2008 with Mexico (8,070), Haiti (4935) and Colombia (3,130) con-
stituting the three largest groups. Mexico and Haiti were coded
at level 3 by the PTS, while Colombia was coded as a level 4 coun-
try. Reﬂecting this, nearly half (49.3) of the asylum applications
were ﬁled by individuals from a level 3 country.
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
TABLE 2.4
Asylum Claims Filed in Sweden, 2008
Sweden
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Iraq
6,083
5
Somalia
3,361
5
Russia
933
4
Eritrea
857
4
Iran
799
4
Mongolia
791
3
Afghanistan
784
5
Uzbekistan
741
3
Libya
646
3
Syria
551
4
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
21,146
% from PTS 5
49.3
% from PTS 4
22.5
% from PTS 3
18.1
% from PTS 2
2.8
% from PTS 1
0
% from other/unscored
7.2

United States
The ﬁnal country we will examine is the United States, where
37,597 asylum claims were ﬁled in 2008 (see Table 2.5).
As you can see, although a majority (56.3 percent) of the
asylum claims ﬁled in 2008 were from individuals from coun-
tries that were coded at either level 4 (50.4 percent) or level 5
(5.9 percent), this number is not as high as it is for the other
Western democracies that year (excluding Canada). However, like
these other countries (including Canada), there were extraordi-
narily few claims ﬁled by individuals from level 1 and level 2
counties (4.1 percent total).
An earlier analysis of U.S. practice (Gibney et al. 1992) based on
data from the 1980s showed that there were substantial differences
between U.S. asylum practices and the country’s Overseas Refugee
Program (ORP) (described in much more detail in Chapter 3), with
the latter being dominated by states with only low to moderate
Asylum Abuse?
49
TABLE 2.5
Asylum Claims Filed in the United States, 2008
United States
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
China
9,831
4
El Salvador
2,789
3
Mexico
2,713
3
Haiti
2,078
3
Guatemala
1,853
3
Ethiopia
1,168
4
Colombia
910
4
Indonesia
894
3
Honduras
893
3
Iraq
809
5
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
37,597
% from PTS 5
5.9
% from PTS 4
50.4
% from PTS 3
38.4
% from PTS 2
4
% from PTS 1
0.1
% from other/unscored
1.1

levels of political violence, whereas nearly three quarters of asy-
lum applicants were from a level 4 or level 5 country. The asser-
tion made then was that there was no indication of any form of
asylum abuse in the United States, but if there were abuse it
was practiced by the government itself. The reason for saying
this is that the asylum applications were almost exactly what
one might both expect in the sense that the countries most repre-
sented were individuals from some of the most violent countries
in the world. In strong contrast to this, the ORP, where U.S.
government ofﬁcials literally go out into the world and pick and
choose which refugees to admit to the United States, was seem-
ingly driven by foreign policy considerations, as evidenced by
the continued admission of tens of thousands of refugees from
the (former) Soviet Union, but also in terms of continued large-
scale ﬂows from Vietnam.
Since that time, U.S. practices have become somewhat more
mixed. Thus, while in 1988 an astounding 92.4 percent of the asy-
lum applicants were from either a level 4 or a level 5 country (see
Chapter 6), a decade later this number had fallen substantially to
35.7 percent (see Chapter 6), which truly does suggest that there
was substantial abuse in the asylum system at that time. However,
the 2008 data (see Table 2.5) represents something much closer to
what one might expect.
A much greater change has recently appeared in the ORP
(see Table 2.6). Applying the same kind of human rights analy-
sis to the 2008 ORP that we did to asylum practices, what we see
is that fully 71 percent of the refugees admitted to the United States
through ORP were from either a level 4 or level 5 country.
The biggest reason for this is that until 2008 refugee admis-
sions from Iraq were virtually non-existent (see Table 3.2 in the
following chapter). However, after a great deal of negative public-
ity regarding the manner in which Iraqi refugees had been sys-
tematically ignored by the U.S. government—notwithstanding the
fact that it was the U.S. invasion that certainly helped create
these refugee and IDP ﬂows in the ﬁrst place—in 2008 the United
States admitted 13,823 Iraqi refugees. The same is true of Burma/
Myanmar, which previously had barely been represented in the
ORP (see Table 3.2). However, what remains uncertain is the extent
to which U.S. refugee policy will remain a (true) refugee policy, or
whether other interests, particularly foreign policy interests, come
to dominate once again.
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Summary
Western states are no longer desirous of receiving large numbers
of refugees. On the other hand, it would be impossible for these
states to renounce the principle of refugee protection. Thus, what
these states have done instead is to observe the principle of refugee
protection, while at the same time they have taken a number of
measures to severely reduce refugee ﬂows arriving at their borders.
In order to achieve this, what these states have done is to claim that
there is widespread abuse of the asylum system. However, the
empirical evidence points in quite the opposite direction. As we
have seen here, in every country (except Canada in 2008), the over-
whelming majority of those ﬁling asylum claims in Western coun-
tries have been from states experiencing massive levels of political
violence. Of course, what is not being said is that all (or any one)
of these individuals is a bona ﬁde refugee. However, what the data
do show is that there is a strong relationship between levels of
political violence and the creation and maintenance of refugee
Asylum Abuse?
51
TABLE 2.6
Refugee Resettlement in the United States, 2008
Country of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Burma
18,139
4
Iraq
13,823
5
Bhutan
5,320
2
Iran
5,270
4
Cuba
4,177
3
Burundi
2,889
4
Somalia
2,523
5
Vietnam
1,112
3
Ukraine
1,022
3
Liberia
992
3
Other
4,841
n/a
Total
60,108
n/a
% from PTS 5
27.2
% from PTS 4
43.8
% from PTS 3
12.1
% from PTS 2
8.9
% from PTS 1
0
% from other/unscored
8

ﬂows, but also, that nearly all of those seeking refugee protection in
the West are from countries experiencing gross and systematic
human rights violations.
Nonrefoulement: When (and Where) Does
the Prohibition Apply?
As we have noted before, although no state has an obligation to
admit a refugee to its territory, under a number of international
and regional human rights treaties—i.e., the 1951 Refugee Con-
vention, but also the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, the European Convention, and arguably under customary
international law as well—all states are under an obligation not to
send an individual to a country where this person’s life or free-
dom might be threatened. This is the prohibition against refoule-
ment, and as we have said earlier, this is the single most
important right under the 1951 Convention.
However, one of the questions that has been raised recently
is how far—literally—a country’s nonrefoulement obligations
extend. The way this issue has arisen is that several Western
states have undertaken to enforce their immigration laws outside
their own territorial borders. Although many of these efforts
have taken place on the high seas, other states have patrolled
the territorial waters of sending states as well (Gammeltoft-
Hansen 2009). Beyond this, destination states have taken a num-
ber of other measures in an attempt to regulate, and arguably
even eliminate, refugee ﬂows in the ﬁrst place. One means is
through visa restrictions that are backed up by carrier sanctions,
while other states have taken to placing their own immigration
ofﬁcials in other countries. Thus, the question is whether the
prohibition against refoulement applies whenever and wherever
a state acts.
Sale v. Haitian Centers Council, 509 U.S.
155 (1993)
This issue was confronted directly by the U.S. Supreme Court
in Sale v. Haitians Center Council. The case centered around the
U.S. Coast Guard’s Haitian interdiction program, which stopped
and then returned ships from Haiti, returning all those on board.
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

The argument of the U.S. government was that the prohibition
against refoulement only applied to aliens who had reached
American shores. What the U.S. government was espousing was
a territorial reading of the 1980 Refugee Act, a statute that sought
to make U.S. law consonant with international law. In contrast to
this, the plaintiffs claimed that the prohibition against refoule-
ment operated no matter where a state’s immigration enforce-
ment practices were carried out, in this case, that the prohibition
applied to these interdictions on the high seas. In their view, any
other reading would be inconsistent with the object and purpose
of both domestic and international law.
Background
Although there has been a long history of Haitians attempting to
come to the United States seeking refugee protection, these num-
bers increased signiﬁcantly in the late 1970s and early 1980s. There
seem to have been at least two reasons for this. The ﬁrst was the
ever-increasing levels of political violence in a country that has
had more than its fair share of brutality, either at the hands of the
Haitian military or its long-time associates the Tonton Macoutes.
A second explanation is that during this same period of time, the
United States was taking in massive numbers of Cubans as refu-
gees, and this fact was not lost on Haitians who sought to escape
their own dictatorship. However, as we will explain in more detail
in the next chapter, while Cubans were overwhelmingly welcomed
(although in 1980 U.S. President Jimmy Carter eventually had to
renege on his promise to take in all Cubans who wanted to come
to the United States with open arms), Haitians were not welcomed
at all, as evidenced not only by very low asylum acceptance rates
but also by the policy of policing the Atlantic Ocean.
In order to attempt to regularize migratory ﬂows from Haiti,
on September 23, 1981, the United States and the Republic of Haiti
entered into an agreement authorizing the U.S. Coast Guard to
intercept vessels engaged in the illegal transportation of undocu-
mented aliens to our shores. While the parties agreed to prosecute
illegal trafﬁckers, the Haitian Government also guaranteed that its
repatriated citizens would not be punished for their illegal depar-
ture. The agreement also established that the U.S. Government
would not return any passengers whom the U.S. authorities
determined to qualify for refugee status.
On September 29, 1981, U.S. President Ronald Reagan issued a
proclamation describing the continued migration to the United
Nonrefoulement: When (and Where) Does the Prohibition Apply?
53

States as a “serious national problem detrimental to the interests of
the United States,” and he suspended the entry of undocumented
aliens from the high seas and ordered the Coast Guard to intercept
vessels carrying such aliens and to return them to their point of
origin. However, the Executive Order expressly provided that “no
person who is a refugee will be returned without his consent.”
In the ensuing decade, the Coast Guard conducted 22,176
interviews on board ships in the Atlantic, but of these only
28 Haitians were screened in and transported to the United States
in order to ﬁle a formal application for asylum. All of the others
were summarily returned to Haiti.
On September 30, 1991, a group of military leaders displaced
the government of Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the ﬁrst democrati-
cally elected president in Haitian history. As a result, hundreds
of Haitians were killed, tortured, detained without a warrant, or
subjected to violence and the destruction of their property because
of their political beliefs, while thousands of others were forced
into hiding. This, in turn, prompted even larger numbers of
Haitians to ﬂee. In the six months after October, 1991, the Coast
Guard interdicted over 34,000 Haitians and because of the logisti-
cal problems of holding asylum hearings on board Coast Guard
cutters, a temporary facility was created at the U.S. Naval Base
in Guantanamo, Cuba. However, these facilities subsequently
proved to be inadequate and at this juncture the Bush adminis-
tration decided to forgo asylum proceedings altogether and to
simply return all those it encountered on the high seas of the
Atlantic. It was this policy and practice that was being challenged
in Sale v. Haitian Centers Council.
The Majority Opinion
In Chapter 3 we spend some time explaining that under U.S. law,
there are two statutes that govern refugee protection. One of
these is the deﬁnition of refugee that we examined in Chapter 1,
while the second provision is the withholding of deportation
statute, which had been Sec. 243(h) (1) of the Immigration and
Nationality Act (INA) at the time of the Sale litigation, but which
has since been renumbered as Sec. 241(b) (3):
The Attorney General shall not deport or return any
alien . . . to a country if the Attorney General determines
that such alien’s life or freedom would be threatened in
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

such country on account of race, religion, nationality,
membership in a particular social group, or political
opinion.
The original 1952 version of this statute included the phase
any alien “within the United States.” However, during the pas-
sage of the 1980 Refugee Act, this language was removed, but also
the phrase “or return” was added. What is also noteworthy is that
prior to 1980, relief under Sec. 243 was discretionary. This
prohibition was made mandatory by the inclusion “shall” in the
phrase “shall not deport or return.”
Notwithstanding these amendments, the Court held that Sec-
tion 243 remained territorial:
The addition of the phrase “or return” and the deletion of
the phrase “within the United States” are the only relevant
changes made by the 1980 amendment to 243 (h) (1), and
they are fully explained by the intent to apply 243 (h) to
exclusion as well as to deportation proceedings. That
intent is plainly identiﬁed in the legislative history of the
amendment. There is no change in the 1980 amendment,
however, that could only be explained by an assumption
that Congress also intended to provide for the statute’s
extraterritorial application. It would have been extraordi-
nary for Congress to make such an important change in
the law without any mention of that possible effect. Not
a scintilla of evidence of such an intent can be found in
the legislative history (509 U.S. at 176).
The majority supported its conclusion by examining Article
33 of the Refugee Convention, which U.S. law is based on. First,
it looked to the structure and language of Article 33 and it then
examined some of the drafting history of this provision.
Article 33 reads in its entirety:
Article 33.—Prohibition of expulsion or return (“refoulement”)
1. No Contracting State shall expel or return (“refouler”) a
refugee in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of ter-
ritories where his life or freedom would be threatened on
account of his race, religion, nationality, membership of a
particular social group or political opinion.
Nonrefoulement: When (and Where) Does the Prohibition Apply?
55

2. The beneﬁt of the present provision may not, however, be
claimed by a refugee whom there are reasonable grounds
for regarding as a danger to the security of the country in
which he is, or who, having been convicted by a ﬁnal
judgment of a particularly serious crime, constitutes a
danger to the community of that country.
According to the majority opinion, under the second para-
graph of Article 33 an alien may not claim the beneﬁt of the ﬁrst
paragraph if he or she poses a danger to the country in which he
or she is located. The majority then went on to say that if the ﬁrst
paragraph did apply on the high seas, then no state could invoke
the second paragraph’s exception with respect to an alien there on
the basis that an alien intercepted on the high seas is in no country
at all. Thus, the Court held that if Article 33 (1) did apply extrater-
ritorially, Article 33 (2) would create what it termed an absurd
anomaly, namely, that dangerous aliens on the high seas would
be entitled to the beneﬁts of the ﬁrst paragraph, while those resid-
ing in the country that sought to expel them would not. The Court
then went on to say that it was more reasonable to assume that the
coverage of the second paragraph was limited to those already in
the country, because it was understood that Article 33 (1) obli-
gated the signatory state only with respect to aliens within its
territory.
In addition to the internal structure of Article 33, the Court
also examined the language in Article 33 itself. It began by saying
that the word expel has the same meaning as deport, and that
deportation or expulsion can only be effectuated against those
who are already within a state’s territory. It then went on to say
that the term return has a legal meaning that is narrower than its
common meaning, and that this conclusion is reinforced by the
parenthetical reference to refouler, a French word that is not an
exact synonym for the English word return. In the words of the
Court:
[N]either of two respected English-French dictionaries
mentions “refouler” as one of many possible French
translations of “return.” Conversely, the English transla-
tions of “refouler” do not include the word “return.” They
do, however, include words like “repulse,” “repel,” “drive
back,” and even “expel.” To the extent that they are rel-
evant, these translations imply that “return” means a
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

defensive act of resistance or exclusion at a border, rather
than an act of transporting someone to a particular desti-
nation. In the context of the Convention, to “return”
means to “repulse,” rather than to “reinstate” (509 U.S. at
180–182).
Finally, the Court then turned to the drafting history of
Article 33 (which in its original version was Article 28), paying
particular attention to the negotiating conference of plenipotenti-
aries held in Geneva, Switzerland on July 11, 1951, where the
Swiss delegate (Philippe Zutter) explained his understanding that
the words expel and return covered only refugees who had
actually entered the host country.
Mr. ZUTTER (Switzerland) said that the Swiss Federal
Government saw no reason why article 28 should not
be adopted as it stood; for the article was a necessary
one. He thought, however, that its wording left room
for various interpretations, particularly as to the mean-
ing to be attached to the words “expel” and “return.” In
the Swiss Government’s view, the term “expulsion”
applied to a refugee who had already been admitted to
the territory of a country. The term “refoulement,” on
the other hand, had a vaguer meaning; it could not, how-
ever, be applied to a refugee who had not yet entered the
territory of a country. The word “return,” used in the
English text, gave that idea exactly. Yet article 28 implied
the existence of two categories of refugee: refugees who
were liable to be expelled, and those who were liable to
be returned. In any case, the States represented at the
Conference should take a deﬁnite position with regard
to the meaning to be attached to the word “return.” The
Swiss Government considered that in the present in-
stance, the word applied solely to refugees who had
already entered a country, but were not yet resident
there. According to that interpretation, States were not
compelled to allow large groups of persons claiming ref-
ugee status to cross its frontiers. He would be glad to
know whether the States represented at the Conference
accepted his interpretations of the two terms in question.
If they did, Switzerland would be willing to accept
article 28, which was one of the articles in respect of
Nonrefoulement: When (and Where) Does the Prohibition Apply?
57

which States could not, under article 36 of the draft Con-
vention, enter a reservation (509 U.S. at 184–185).
As the Court pointed out, no other delegate expressed any
disagreement with the position of the Swiss delegate on that day
or at the session two weeks later when Article 28 was again dis-
cussed. At that session, the delegate of the Netherlands (Baron
van Boetzelaer) recalled the Swiss delegate’s earlier position:
Baron van BOETZELAER (Netherlands) recalled that, at
the ﬁrst reading, the Swiss representative had expressed
the opinion that the word “expulsion” related to a refu-
gee already admitted into a country, whereas the word
“return” (“refoulement”) related to a refugee already
within the territory but not yet resident there. According
to that interpretation, article 28 would not have involved
any obligations in the possible case of mass migrations
across frontiers or of attempted mass migrations.
He wished to revert to that point, because the Nether-
lands Government attached very great importance to the
scope of the provision now contained in article 33. The
Netherlands could not accept any legal obligations in
respect of large groups of refugees seeking access to its
territory.
At the ﬁrst reading, the representatives of Belgium,
the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, the Netherlands
and Sweden had supported the Swiss interpretation.
From conversations he had since had with other repre-
sentatives, he had gathered that the general consensus
of opinion was in favour of the Swiss interpretation.
In order to dispel any possible ambiguity and to
reassure his Government, he wished to have it placed
on record that the Conference was in agreement with
the interpretation that the possibility of mass migrations
across frontiers or of attempted mass migrations was not
covered by article 33.
There being no objection, the PRESIDENT ruled that
the interpretation given by the Netherlands representative
should be placed on record.
Mr. HOARE (United Kingdom) remarked that the
Style Committee had considered that the word “return”
was the nearest equivalent in English to the French term
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

“refoulement.” He assumed that the word “return” as
used in the English text had no wider meaning.
The PRESIDENT suggested that, in accordance with
the practice followed in previous Conventions, the
French word “refoulement” (“refouler” in verbal uses)
should be included in brackets and between inverted
commas after the English word “return” wherever the
latter occurred in the text (509 U.S. at 185–186).
According to the Sale majority, what the drafting history
shows is that was a general consensus, and in July of 1951, several
delegates understood the right of nonrefoulement to apply only
to aliens physically present in the host country. In addition, the
Court pointed out that there is no record of any later disagree-
ment with that position. And ﬁnally, the Court believed that
the use of the term refouler was purposeful and was intended
to avoid an inappropriately broad reading of the English term
return.
In sum, the Court ruled that an extraterritorial reading of
Article 33 of the Refugee Convention was not warranted, either
by the language in the treaty itself or by the drafting history. In
its view, notwithstanding the harsh or even immoral results that
might ensue from this reading, the prohibition against refoule-
ment only applied after a refugee had arrived at a state’s
territorial boundaries. In that way, then, the Court upheld the
government’s view that the prohibition against nonrefoulement
did not apply to the actions of the U.S. government while operat-
ing on the high seas.
Justice Blackmun’s Dissent
The Sale case was an 8–1 decision, with only Justice Harry Blackmun
in dissent. Blackmun began his dissent by stating that when the
United States acceded to the UN Protocol Relating to the Status of
Refugees (see Chapter 6), it pledged not to “return (refouler) a refu-
gee in any manner whatsoever” to a place where he would face
political persecution, and that in 1980 Congress amended U.S.
immigration law to reﬂect the Protocol’s directives. However,
according to Justice Blackmun, the majority decision reached its
decision by concluding that return does not mean return, and by
adopting the position that the opposite of “within the United States”
is not outside the United States.
Nonrefoulement: When (and Where) Does the Prohibition Apply?
59

Blackmun writes:
I believe that the duty of nonreturn expressed in both the
Protocol and the statute is clear. The majority ﬁnds it
“extraordinary,” that Congress would have intended
the ban on returning “any alien” to apply to aliens at
sea. That Congress would have meant what it said is
not remarkable. What is extraordinary in this case is that
the Executive, in disregard of the law, would take to the
seas to intercept ﬂeeing refugees and force them back to
their persecutors—and that the Court would strain to
sanction that conduct (509 U.S. at 189).
A Return Is a Return Is a Return
Like the majority, Blackmun begins with the language of Article 33.
In his view, the terms are unambiguous. He writes: “Vulnerable
refugees shall not be returned. The language is clear, and the com-
mand is straightforward; that should be the end of the inquiry”
(509 U.S. 190). Furthermore, he pointed out that until the litigation
in this case, the U.S. government had consistently acknowledged
that the Convention applied on the high seas.
For Blackmun, the problem is that the majority insists on giv-
ing the term return a special meaning. He writes:
It is well settled that a treaty must ﬁrst be construed
according to its “ordinary meaning” . . . The ordinary
meaning of “return” is “to bring, send, or put (a person
or thing) back to or in a former position” Webster’s Third
New International Dictionary 1941 (1986). That describes
precisely what petitioners are doing to the Haitians. By
dispensing with ordinary meaning at the outset, and by
taking instead as its starting point the assumption that
“return,” as used in the treaty, “has a legal meaning nar-
rower than its common meaning,” the majority leads
itself astray (509 U.S. at 191).
Blackmun argues that the straightforward interpretation of
the duty of nonreturn is strongly reinforced by the Convention’s
use of the French term refouler, which means to repulse, to drive
back, or to repel. In his view, this is exactly what the government
is doing in this case, and he describes the majority as reaching its
conclusion in a peculiar fashion:
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

After acknowledging that the ordinary meaning of “refou-
ler” is “repulse,” “repel,” and “drive back,” the majority,
without elaboration, declares: “To the extent that they are
relevant, these translations imply that “ ‘return’ means a
defensive act of resistance or exclusion at a border. . . . ”
I am at a loss to ﬁnd the narrow notion of “exclusion at a
border” in broad terms like “repulse,” “repel,” and “drive
back.” Gage was repulsed (initially) at Bunker Hill. Lee
was repelled at Gettysburg. Rommel was driven back
across North Africa. The majority’s puzzling progression
(“refouler” means repel or drive back; therefore “return”
means only exclude at a border; therefore the treaty does
not apply) hardly justiﬁes a departure from the path of
ordinary meaning. The text of Article 33.1 is clear, and
whether the operative term is “return” or “refouler,” it
prohibits the Government’s actions (509 U.S. at 192–193).
In further support of his position, Blackmun pointed out that
while Article 33 does have a geographical limitation—it only
speaks in terms of where a refugee could not be sent to, but not
where a refugee is coming from.
Blackmun then turned to the majority’s reliance on the juxta-
position of the two paragraphs of Article 33, especially the major-
ity’s position that an extraterritorial reading of Article 33 would
create an absurd anomaly. Blackmun responds:
Far from constituting “an absurd anomaly,” the fact that
a state is permitted to “expel or return” a small class of
refugees found within its territory, but may not seize
and return refugees who remain outside its frontiers,
expresses precisely the objectives and concerns of the
Convention. Nonreturn is the rule; the sole exception
(neither applicable nor invoked here) is that a nation
endangered by a refugee’s very presence may “expel or
return” him to an unsafe country if it chooses. The tauto-
logical observation that only a refugee already in a coun-
try can pose a danger to the country “in which he is”
proves nothing (509 U.S. at 194).
The Drafting History of Article 33
Blackmun took sharp issue with the majority’s reliance on
the drafting history of Article 33. He began his analysis by
Nonrefoulement: When (and Where) Does the Prohibition Apply?
61

pointing out that under widely established rules governing
statutory and treaty interpretation, the plain language of the
treaty is controlling, while reliance on the travaux pre´paratoires
(the drafting history) is only appropriate where the terms of the
document are obscure or lead to manifestly absurd or unreason-
able results. Moreover, even the general rule of treaty construction
allowing limited resort to travaux pre´paratoires has no application
to oral statements made by those engaged in negotiating the
treaty that were not embodied in any writing and were not com-
municated to the government of the negotiator or to its ratifying
body. In terms of the accession of the United States to the Refu-
gee Convention in particular, Blackmun noted that there is no
evidence that the comments made by the Swiss and Dutch
representatives were ever communicated to the United States
Government or to the Senate in connection with the ratiﬁcation
of the Protocol.
Yet, even assuming that these statements had been known,
Blackmun argues that one must place these comments within a
broader context, something that he alleges the majority failed to do:
The pitfalls of relying on the negotiating record are under-
scored by the fact that Baron van Boetzelaer’s remarks
almost certainly represent, in the words of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, a mere “parlia-
mentary gesture by a delegate whose views did not pre-
vail upon the negotiating conference as a whole . . . ”
The Baron, like the Swiss delegate whose sentiments he
restated, expressed a desire to reserve the right to close
borders to large groups of refugees. . . . ” Yet no one seri-
ously contends that the treaty’s protections depend on
the number of refugees who are ﬂeeing persecution.
Allowing a state to disavow “any obligations” in the case
of mass migrations or attempted mass migrations would
eviscerate Article 33, leaving it applicable only to “small”
migrations and “small” attempted migrations.
There is strong evidence as well that the Conference
rejected the right to close land borders where to do so
would trap refugees in the persecutors’ territory. Indeed,
the majority agrees that the Convention does apply to
refugees who have reached the border. The majority thus
cannot maintain that Van Boetzelaer’s interpretation
prevailed (509 U.S. at 195–196).
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Blackmun also makes note of the fact that van Boetzelaer’s
interpretation of Article 33 was merely placed on record, in con-
trast to formal amendments to the Convention, which were agreed
to or adopted. Given this, in his view the silence of the other states
should not be interpreted as indicating any kind of consent.
Instead, Blackmun argued that the majority’s statement that “this
much cannot be denied: At one time, there was a ‘general consen-
sus,’ is simply wrong. All that can be said is that, at one time, van
Boetzelaer remarked that ‘he had gathered’ that there was a gen-
eral consensus, and that his interpretation was placed on record”
(509 U.S. at 197).
Yet, even if van Boetzelaer’s statement had in fact been
agreed to and reﬂected the dominant thinking, Blackmun argues
that the present situation is not a case about the right of a nation
to close its borders, but rather, one in which a country “has gone
forth to seize aliens who are not at its borders and return them
to persecution. Nothing in the comments relied on by the majority
even hints at an intention on the part of the drafters to counte-
nance a course of conduct so at odds with the Convention’s basic
purpose” (509 U.S. at 197) (emphasis in original). He then con-
cludes: “In sum, the fragments of negotiating history upon which
the majority relies are not entitled to deference, were never voted
on or adopted, probably represent a minority view, and in any
event do not address the issue in this case” (509 U.S. at 198).
The 1980 Amendments to U.S. Law
Blackmun also questioned the majority’s view that the 1980 Refu-
gee Act did not effectuate any change to U.S. law. As he points
out, before 1980, 243 (h) simply provided that:
The Attorney General is authorized to withhold depor-
tation of any alien . . . within the United States to any
country in which in his opinion the alien would be sub-
ject to persecution on account of race, religion, or politi-
cal opinion and for such period of time as he deems to
be necessary for such reason.
In his view, the 1980 Refugee Act explicitly amended this
provision in three critical respects. First, Congress deleted the
words “within the United States.” Second, the statute barred the
Government from returning as well as deporting alien refugees.
And third, the statutory changes made the prohibition against
Nonrefoulement: When (and Where) Does the Prohibition Apply?
63

return mandatory, thereby eliminating the discretion of the
Attorney General over such decisions. He writes:
The import of these changes is clear. Whether “within the
United States” or not, a refugee may not be returned to his
persecutors. To read into 243 (h)’s mandate a territorial
restriction is to restore the very language that Congress
removed (509 U.S. at 202).
Blackmun surmises that notwithstanding the clarity of the
text and the object and purpose behind Article 33 of the Refugee
Convention and Sec. 243 of the Immigration and Nationality
Act, the majority is driven to its conclusion because of a heavy
reliance on the presumption against extraterritoriality. In
response, he ﬁrst notes that this reliance is misplaced because
Congressional intent in favor of an extraterritorial reading of the
withholding statute has been expressed—by removing the geo-
graphical scope of Section 243 by means of the 1980 Refugee Act.
Beyond this, the subject matter itself is extraterritorial in nature.
Blackmun writes:
In this case, we deal with a statute that regulates a distinc-
tively international subject matter: immigration, national-
ities, and refugees. Whatever force the presumption may
have with regard to a primarily domestic statute evapo-
rates in this context. There is no danger that the Congress
that enacted the Refugee Act was blind to the fact that
the laws it was crafting had implications beyond this
Nation’s borders (509 U.S. at 206).
Furthermore:
If any canon of construction should be applied in
this case, it is the well-settled rule that “an act of congress
ought never to be construed to violate the law of nations if
any other possible construction remains.” Murray v.
Schooner Charming Betsy, 2 Cranch 64, 117–118 (1804). The
majority’s improbable construction of 243 (h), which ﬂies
in the face of the international obligations imposed by
Article 33 of the Convention, violates that established
principle (509 U.S. at 207).
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

The Purpose and Meaning of the 1951 Convention
Finally, Blackmun suggests that the majority has simply ignored
the overall purpose of the Refugee Convention itself—which is
to protect desperate people—and he ends his dissent on this stir-
ring note:
The Convention that the Refugee Act embodies was
enacted largely in response to the experience of Jewish
refugees in Europe during the period of World War II.
The tragic consequences of the world’s indifference at
that time are well known. The resulting ban on refoule-
ment, as broad as the humanitarian purpose that
inspired it, is easily applicable here, the Court’s protesta-
tions of impotence and regret notwithstanding (509 U.S.
at 207–208).
And ﬁnally:
The refugees attempting to escape from Haiti do not
claim a right of admission to this country. They do not
even argue that the Government has no right to inter-
cept their boats. They demand only that the United States,
land of refugees and guardian of freedom, cease forcibly
driving them back to detention, abuse, and death. That
is a modest plea, vindicated by the treaty and the statute.
We should not close our ears to it (509 U.S. at 208).
Summary
When confronted with the question of the scope of nonrefoule-
ment in a challenge to lawfulness of the Haitian interdiction
program, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the withholding of
deportation statute was territorial in nature. Thus, for individuals
physically located within the United States as well as those at
American borders (although this latter part remains unclear), the
U.S. government does have a legal obligation not to return/send
these refugees to a country where their life or freedom might be
threatened. However, the Court ruled that this same obligation
does not exist for refugees on the high seas. Rather, these individ-
uals could be returned to Haiti—presumably even in the face of
certain persecution and even death.
Nonrefoulement: When (and Where) Does the Prohibition Apply?
65

The lone dissent in this case was ﬁled by Justice Blackmun,
who argued that taking a territorial approach to this extraterrito-
rial phenomenon was inconsistent with the object and purpose
of the Refugee Convention itself. In his view, while the United
States was under no obligation to admit Haitian refugees, it most
certainly had an obligation not to return these individuals back
home where there was a good likelihood of facing persecution.
In his view, any other reading would defeat the very purpose of
the law itself.
The Practices of Other States
The Sale decision remains the leading judicial authority on the
matter of the scope of nonrefoulement. However, what is also
noteworthy is that a number of other countries have undertaken
practices that are similar to the Haitian interdiction program that
was at issue in that case. For example, Spain has an agreement
with Senegal and Mauritania to intercept and directly return
irregular migrants within the territorial waters of those states,
while Italy has signed a similar treaty with Libya that allows for
joint patrolling in Libyan waters (Gammeltoft-Hansen 2009, 65).
Beyond this, in February 2003, a British proposal for a new vision
for refugee protection was unveiled that envisaged the establish-
ment of “transit processing centres” in third countries on the
major transit routes of the European Union (EU). Under this pro-
posal, asylum seekers arriving spontaneously in the EU would be
sent back for status determinations.
Certainly, Australia’s Paciﬁc Solution has garnered the most
worldwide attention. The plan was developed followed the
incident involving the Norwegian ship MV Tampa, which in
August 2001 responded to a distress issued by the Australian
government involving an Indonesian ship that was carrying 433
asylum seekers, most of whom were from Afghanistan. However,
the Australian government refused to allow the Tampa to enter
Australian waters, although due to the humanitarian crisis on
board this directive was ignored. Subsequent to this, an agree-
ment was reached with Papua New-Guinea and Nauru, where
the asylum seekers were taken for processing. The Tampa incident
led to three changes in Australian law. The ﬁrst was the passage
of the 2001 Border Protection Act, which established general
interdiction powers. The second was that two amendments were
passed to the Migration Act, one excising certain northern islands
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

from its migration zone, and thus part of Australian territory
where asylum claims could be ﬁled. The second enabled Australian
authorities to send interdicted asylum seekers or persons who
arrived in the (now) excised areas to other countries for refugee
processing (Gammeltoft-Hansen 2009, 108–109).
Notwithstanding these attempts to off-shore refugee protec-
tion, the actions of these countries should not necessarily be inter-
preted as a rejection of the nonrefoulement principle. Most
notably, these states have sought to make assurances that
international refugee protection standards are being followed.
Whether this is true or not remains to be seen. However, what
does seem certain is that Western states are continuing to make
strong efforts to remove themselves from participating more fully
in a system of worldwide refugee protection and one of the ways
that they have done this is by designating certain areas—either
the high seas or even parts of their own national territory—and
claiming that their own obligations under international law do
not apply within this geographic space.
Re-Conceptualizing Human Rights—
and Refugee Protection
As we have noted throughout this work, there is a very strong
connection between refugee admissions and human rights
protection. A refugee ﬂees from his/her home state due to a
well-founded fear that he or she will be subjected to certain
human rights violations. And because the refugee’s home state
does not, or will not, protect that person’s human rights—and in
most instances will actually be the source of these violations—it
is thereby necessary for some other country to provide this pro-
tection by granting refugee status. It is this transnational dimen-
sion that differentiates refugee protection from other areas of
human rights.
Yet, what is also important to note is that refugee protection
and international human rights law are both based on traditional
notions of state sovereignty. In terms of the latter, under the dom-
inant approach, each state has sole responsibility for protecting
human rights within its own territorial borders. The ﬂip side to
this is the notion that states do not have any human rights obliga-
tions outside those borders.
Re-Conceptualizing Human Rights—and Refugee Protection
67

Notwithstanding its transnational nature, refugee protection
is also based on a traditional conception of state sovereignty. For
one thing, as we have already seen, although individuals are
given the right to seek asylum, no state is obligated to admit a
single refugee. Rather, states are only obligated not to send a
person to a country where his or her life or freedom might be
threatened—and apparently this obligation only arises if and
when a refugee is either at the borders of that state or else has
somehow gained entry. Beyond this, if a state does decide to
admit refugees, it is that state, and that state alone, which deter-
mines how many refugees, what countries they will come from,
and so on. Moreover, as we have seen in Chapter 1, although
the 1951 Refugee Convention provides a series of ascending
rights to refugees and asylum seekers depending on their par-
ticular legal status in the receiving country, what is important
to note is that not one of the these rights will arise unless and
until the refugee has gained access to the territory of this other
country. Furthermore, the exercise of state sovereignty now even
seems to include the ability of countries to take whatever mea-
sures they can in order to prevent refugees from ever arriving
at their borders in the ﬁrst place.
But the protection of state sovereignty apparently goes much
further than this. Thus, there is no readily identiﬁable principle
under international law that a state should not contribute to the
creation of refugee ﬂows in some other country, and if the policies
of one state do bring massive human displacement in some other
land—for example, the U.S. invasion of Iraq that has resulted in
approximately two million refugees from that country and an
additional two million Internally Displaced Persons—the acting
state is seemingly under no obligation to help provide any kind
of protection, by means of refugee admissions or otherwise.
In sum, international human rights law (and this includes
international refugee law) has been based on territorial considera-
tions. Thus, according to the dominant approach, while
international human rights law restricts the domestic behavior
of states, it is not clear what effect (if any) such law has on the
behavior of states when they are operating outside their own bor-
ders. However, this conceptualization of human rights has
recently been challenged and we will discuss two such initiatives
in a moment. To be clear, what is not being challenged is the prin-
ciple that each state has the primary responsibility for protecting
human rights within its own territorial borders. Rather, the issue
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

that has been raised is whether these territorial obligations com-
prise the entirety of a state’s human rights obligations—or
whether a state might also have a secondary obligation to protect
the human rights of individuals in other states.
Oddly enough, perhaps, one of the things that helped raise
this issue has been the U.S. conduct in the “war on terror.” As
the reader must know, the Bush administration has used the U.S.
military base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, as a detention facility
for hundreds of so-called enemy combatants. The primary reason
for choosing this offshore site is the idea that U.S. human rights
obligations will be different (and perhaps even nonexistent) in
this locale than they would be if the detainees were held in some
facility within the territorial boundaries of the United States.
In taking this approach, the U.S. government has espoused a
territorial reading of international human rights law. Certainly,
the United States cannot deny that it is a state party to the Con-
vention against Torture and the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights. On the other hand, the position that the
U.S. government has taken is that the obligations that arise from
these and other human rights treaties will only be applicable to
actions that are taken within the territorial borders of the United
States, but no further.
This position may (or may not) seem tenable to you, but note
that this is the same position the U.S. government maintained
with respect to the scope of the prohibition against refoulement
in the 1951 Refugee Convention. As we discussed in the previous
section, in its Sale decision the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the
withholding of deportation statute under U.S. immigration law
had no extraterritorial effect. What this means is that while the
U.S. is under an obligation not to send an individual who has
arrived on U.S. soil back to a country where this person’s life or
freedom might be threatened, it has no obligation to offer the
same kind of protection (and, arguably, no protection at all) to ref-
ugees who, for whatever reason, are not within the territorial
boundaries of the United States.
Although the Sale decision has been sharply criticized, what
also needs to be pointed out is that all states—or, more accurately,
all Western states—apparently operate under the same belief that
human rights are territorially based (Gibney and Skogly 2010). We
have already seen some indications of this previously in terms of
the number of states that are now engaged in interdiction prac-
tices outside their own border, but it is important to point out that
Re-Conceptualizing Human Rights—and Refugee Protection
69

the implications of this approach to human rights are much more
far-ranging than this.
Thus, one of the most important cases in this realm is Bankovic
et al. v. Belgium et al. (2001), an admissibility decision of the
European Court of Human Rights (ECHR). The background for
this case involved a 1999 NATO bombing mission over Belgrade,
Serbia in which 16 civilians were killed and another 16 wounded.
Although Serbia is not a state party to the European Convention,
those who were injured and/or killed during the attack brought
a claim against the NATO countries before the ECHR, alleging
that they were victims of various human rights violations that
were prohibited by the Convention.
Article 1 of the European Convention provides: “The High
Contracting Parties shall secure to everyone within their jurisdic-
tion the rights and freedoms deﬁned in . . . this Convention.”
According to the ECHR, at the time these injuries and/or deaths
occurred, the affected individuals were not within the jurisdiction
of the Contracting States, and on this basis the case was dis-
missed. According to the Court, the original draft of Article 1
included the term territory, and although this wording was even-
tually dropped, the European Convention remained territorial in
scope—or to use the Court’s terminology, essentially or primarily
territorial. One reason for these qualiﬁers was that in previous
decisions involving Turkey’s occupation of part of Cyprus, the
Court (as well as its former counterpart the European Commission
on Human Rights) had given the Convention an extraterritorial
reading, ruling that the Convention applied to Turkey’s actions in
this part of Cyprus.
The Bankovic court did not disavow these prior rulings, but
rather, it held that in order for the Convention to apply to actions
undertaken outside the territorial boundaries of the European
states there would have to be some “exceptional circumstances.”
Although the Court never fully explained what constituted
“exceptional circumstances” (never mind where this standard
came from and why), what we do know from the ruling in the
case itself is that dropping bombs and killing people on the
ground does not rise to this level (Roxstrom et al. 2005).
Like the U.S. Supreme Court decision in Sale before it, the
Bankovic decision was based on a territorial reading of human
rights standards, only in this instance the territory was the
entirety of Europe. And also like Sale, the Bankovic ruling caused
quite a stir. The reason for this is that the case could be read to
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

mean that when European states are acting outside of Europe,
they are not bound by the provisions of the European Conven-
tion. More than that, the Bankovic court went so far as to say that
all other international human rights treaties were territorial in
scope as well. Of course, if this were true this would mean is that
when a state operates outside its own borders it is exempt from
any and all international human rights law.
Bankovic remains good law. However, what should also be
noted is that at around the time of this ruling there began a move-
ment away from reading international human rights treaties in a
strictly territorial fashion. In terms of the ECHR itself, in Ocalan v.
Turkey, the Court ruled that Turkish ofﬁcials making an arrest of a
terrorist suspect in Nairobi, Kenya, were subject to the provisions
of the European Convention. According to the Court, what made
this case different from Bankovic was that the defendant was in the
actual physical custody of Turkish security forces. Beyond this, in
Issa v. Turkey, the Court held that the Convention would apply to a
situation where Turkish troops had entered on to Iraqi territory
and had tortured and killed a group of Iraqi civilians. However,
immediately after enunciating this principle, the Court then went
on to rule that there was no conclusive proof that Turkish soldiers
had in fact gone onto Iraqi territory as alleged, and it dismissed
the complaint. Still, the seeds of change should be apparent.
There are other manifestations of a different interpretation of
international human rights law that go beyond this. Two phenom-
ena seem to be at work here. One simply relates to state practice.
It is one thing to think about a state’s human rights obligations
as being restricted to its own territorial borders when states limit
their operations to the domestic setting. However, it is something
else altogether different when many states engage in practices
outside their borders almost as a matter of course—refugee inter-
diction, drug enforcement, arms sales, pollution, and so on—
particularly in recognition of the fact that the actions of one state
can have a decided effect on the human rights protection of indi-
viduals living in other countries. Economists refer to the process
of globalization, and in a way what we are speaking about here
is the law’s response to some of the negative consequences of
globalization.
The second reason relates to the work of human rights schol-
ars and practitioners (Coomans and Kamminga 2004; Gondek
2009; Salomon 2007; Salomon et al. 2007; Gibney 2008). In that
way, there has been a growing recognition and understanding
Re-Conceptualizing Human Rights—and Refugee Protection
71

that a strictly territorial reading of international human rights
treaties will oftentimes go far in defeating the object and purpose
of international human rights law itself. Thus, if it is unlawful for
a state to carry out torture within its territorial borders, but not
unlawful to do so in some other land, then there is a very strong
incentive for a state simply to move its basis of operations to some
other place—as we have seen all too clearly with the practice of
“extraordinary rendition” (Mayer 2008).
One of the most notable examples of this new scholarship has
been Sigrun Skogly’s work on the drafting of the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR).
Like other international human rights treaties, the natural (but
unquestioned) interpretation was that the ICESCR was territorial
in scope, notwithstanding the fact that there is no mention in the
treaty of either territory or jurisdiction. Furthermore, there is also
language in the treaty that is certainly extraterritorial in nature,
most notably Article 2:
Each state party . . . undertakes to take steps, individu-
ally and through international assistance and cooperation,
especially economic and technical, to the maximum of
its available resources, with a view to achieving progres-
sively the full realization of the rights recognized in the
present Covenant by all appropriate means. . . . (empha-
sis supplied).
After undertaking an extensive study of the drafting process
of the ICESCR, Skogly concluded that there was a general consen-
sus among the drafters of the Covenant that the economic, social,
and cultural rights set forth in the treaty could only be protected
through international means. Skogly writes:
[T]he drafting history of Article 2 (1) shows that there are
some inconsistencies in the approaches held as to the
concrete meaning of through international co-operation
and assistance. However, it seems that the delegations
were quite agreed that international co-operation and as-
sistance is needed for the full implementation of the
rights, and that the resources available based upon this
co-operation and assistance should be part of the re-
sources used for the full realization of these rights
(emphasis in original) (Skogly 2006, 86).
72
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

We will take up this issue of reconceptualizing human rights
by focusing on two recent initiatives. The ﬁrst is the Responsibility
to Protect (R2P) proposal that was undertaken under the lead of
the Canadian government. R2P is ostensibly concerned with the
issue of humanitarian intervention, but as you will see immediately,
the issue of the responsibility to protect goes much further than this,
and what it is based on is the idea that all states have obligations to
prevent humanitarian disasters—at home, for sure, but in other lands
as well. The second initiative is even more recent than this and it
involves the work of the Extraterritorial Obligations (ETO) Consor-
tium (http://www.lancs.ac.uk/fass/projects/humanrights/).
The ﬁnal issue is how all this relates to refugee protection more
speciﬁcally. With only rare exception (Gammeltoft-Hansen 2009),
there has not been a great deal of scholarly attention given to the
possible extraterritorial effect of the Refugee Convention aside from
the nonrefoulement issue that has been analyzed previously. On the
other hand, we will suggest that a reconceptualization of inter-
national human rights law will have enormous implications for ref-
ugee protection quite generally. Among other things, this would
suggest that states have certain legal obligations to work towards
the prevention and elimination of all refugee ﬂows.
The Responsibility to Protect (R2P)
Much like refugee protection, humanitarian intervention has been
a longstanding principle under international law. In addition, and
again like refugee protection itself, humanitarian intervention is
based on the notion of one state engaging in certain practices to
protect the human rights of other people. The major distinction,
of course, is that while one is based on giving physical protection
by admitting refugees, humanitarian intervention is based on
taking military measures in another country in an attempt to
remove the causes of these violations.
Notwithstanding its long pedigree, there have been a number
of problems associated with humanitarian intervention in practice.
One is the continuing conﬂict concerning whether a particular
intervention is in fact humanitarian—or whether such measures
were undertaken as a means of promoting the geo-political interests
of the intervening state. For example, there were three major
interventions in the 1970s: Vietnam’s intervention in Cambodia,
Tanzania’s intervention in Uganda, and India’s intervention in what
was then East Pakistan (now Bangladesh). Notwithstanding the
Re-Conceptualizing Human Rights—and Refugee Protection
73

gross and systematic human rights violations (and genocide in the
case of Cambodia) in each of these countries, because of the pre-
vious enmity between the states involved, many scholars and
policymakers refused to recognize these interventions as being
humanitarian in nature.
A much different kind of problem relates to the failure to inter-
vene. Consider, then, some of the interventions (but also the non-
interventions) from the 1990s. The ﬁrst involved an American-led
humanitarian intervention in Somalia in 1992 as a response to mas-
sive starvation in that country. By most accounts, Operation Restore
Hope represented a humanitarian intervention in its purest form in
the sense that there was no geo-political end sought by the United
States, and it is also estimated that the intervention saved the lives
of upwards of a million. However, when the mission became more
military in nature, but also when Western soldiers began to get
killed as a result of this changed mission, the intervention came
to be viewed as a failure and the United States and the United
Nations both began to remove themselves from Somalia. What
should also be pointed out is that Somalia has remained the world’s
basket case ever since. What is equally important is that this failure
in Somalia played a central role in explaining the non-intervention
in Rwanda in 1994 as well as the decidedly belated response to the
ethnic cleansing in Bosnia from 1992 to 1995.
Although there were some successful humanitarian interven-
tions in the late 1990s, including East Timor and Kosovo, there
was growing dissatisfaction with the principle of humanitarian
intervention itself. For one thing, although the UN Charter places
responsibility for military intervention squarely on the Security
Council, this body was repeatedly seen as failing in this role. Typ-
ical of the growing frustration with the whole notion of humani-
tarian intervention were these remarks by UN Secretary General
KoﬁAnnan at the 2000 Millennium Summit Meeting:
If humanitarian intervention is, indeed, an unacceptable
assault on sovereignty, how should we respond to a
Rwanda, to a Srebrenica—to gross and systematic viola-
tions of human rights that offend every precept of our
common humanity?
Responding to the Secretary-General’s challenge, in 2000 the
Canadian government, along with several international founda-
tions, created an International Commission on Intervention and
74
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

State Sovereignty that was made up of a body of distinguished
academics and international policymakers who subjected the issue
of military intervention to intense scrutiny. In December 2001 they
published a report The Responsibility to Protect. At the 2005 UN
World Summit, world leaders unanimously declared that all
states have a responsibility to protect their citizens from genocide,
war crimes, crimes against humanity, and ethnic cleansing and
that as members of the international community they stand “pre-
pared to take collective action” in cases where national authorities
“are manifestly failing to protect their populations” from these
four ills. In April 2006, the UN Security Council reafﬁrmed R2P
and indicated its readiness to adopt appropriate measures where
necessary.
The driving force behind the Commission’s work was its
deep commitment to spare the world of any more Rwandas. In
order to achieve this, the Commission set forth the following four
objectives:
To establish clearer rules, procedures and criteria for
determining whether, when and how to intervene;
To establish the legitimacy of military intervention when
necessary and after all other approaches have failed;
To ensure that military intervention, when it occurs, is
carried out only for the purposes proposed, is effective, and
is undertaken with proper concern to minimize the human
costs and institutional damage that will result; and
To help eliminate, where possible, the causes of conﬂict
while enhancing the prospects for durable and sustainable
peace (R2P 2001, par. 2.3).
The ﬁrst thing to note about R2P is that it is based on a much
different notion of state sovereignty. Under the traditional approach,
countries automatically enjoy the privileges of state sovereignty,
no matter how gruesome or brutal state practices happen to be,
and no matter what level of refugee ﬂows these policies and prac-
tices produce. However, under R2P, sovereignty is something that
states have to earn and the way to achieve this is by protecting
human rights. The Report explains the nature of this change:
First, it implies that the state authorities are responsible for
the functions of protecting the safety and lives of citizens
Re-Conceptualizing Human Rights—and Refugee Protection
75

and promotion of their welfare. Secondly, it suggests that
the national political authorities are responsible to the citi-
zens internally and to the international community
through the UN. And thirdly, it means that the agents of
state are responsible for their actions; that is to say, they
are accountable for their acts of commission and omission
(par. 2.15).
Where does the responsibility to protect lie? In the ﬁrst in-
stance, of course, it is the territorial state. As the report explains:
The Commission believes that responsibility to protect
resides ﬁrst and foremost with the states whose people
are directly affected. This fact reﬂects not only interna-
tional law and the modern state system, but also the prac-
tical realities of who is best placed to make a positive
difference. The domestic authority is best placed to take
action to prevent problems from turning into potential
conﬂicts (par. 2.30).
However, if domestic authorities fail to meet this respon-
sibility, that is, if this state essentially forfeits its own sover-
eignty, then this task is placed in the hands of the international
community.
While the state whose people are directly affected has
the default responsibility to protect, a residual respon-
sibility also lies with the broader community of states.
This fallback responsibility is activated when a particu-
lar state is clearly either unwilling or unable to fulﬁl its
responsibility to protect or is itself the actual perpetrator
of crimes or atrocities; or where people living outside a
particular state are directly threatened by actions taking
place there. This responsibility also requires that in some
circumstances action must be taken by the broader com-
munity of states to support populations that are in jeop-
ardy or under serious threat (par. 2.31).
However, perhaps what distinguishes R2P the most from
present practice is that rather than being reactive, the proposal is
based on a decidedly proactive approach to human rights. The
Responsibility to Protect proposal posits that there are three
76
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

separate, but related, obligations: the responsibility to prevent,
the responsibility to react, and the responsibility to rebuild.
The ﬁrst duty of states is the responsibility to prevent humani-
tarian disasters from arising in the ﬁrst place. The report sums
this up nicely: “Intervention should only be considered when pre-
vention fails—and the best way of avoiding intervention is to
ensure that it doesn’t fail” (par. 3.34). How is this to be done? To
begin, it is important to establish again that the primary respon-
sibility for prevention rests with the territorial state. If states suc-
ceed in preventing humanitarian disaster within their borders,
then there is no need to look any further to ensure prevention,
and certainly not intervention. However, if the territorial state
fails to meet its responsibility, then the states of the international
community share an obligation to take whatever measures are
necessary—“more resources, more energy, more competence,
more commitment” (par 3.40)—to prevent humanitarian disaster.
As noted before, what R2P is seeking to avoid is the reactive
nature of present practice. Currently, the international community
only responds (if it responds at all) after the fact. That is, after
widespread human rights violations occur and only after large-
scale refugee ﬂows and IDP populations arise. The problem, of
course, is that these efforts are invariably much too late and far
too little. What R2P calls for is a complete change in mindset, from
what it refers to as a “culture of reaction” to a “culture of preven-
tion,” which can only be accomplished by holding states account-
able for their actions and by attending to preventive measures at
the local, national, regional, and global levels. As the report warns:
Without a genuine commitment to conﬂict prevention at
all levels—without new energy and momentum being
devoted to the task—the world will continue to witness
the needless slaughter of our fellow human beings, and
the reckless waste of precious resources on conﬂict
rather than social and economic development. The time
has come for all of us to take practical responsibility to
prevent the needless loss of human life, and to be ready
to act in the cause of prevention and not just in the after-
math of disaster (par. 3.43).
The second obligation is the responsibility to react if, for
whatever reasons, preventive measures have not worked, and
this is where R2P comes closest to looking like traditional
Re-Conceptualizing Human Rights—and Refugee Protection
77

humanitarian intervention. Yet, as the Report makes clear, one of
the great problems with those interventions that have taken place
is that they are not based on any discernible standards. To ﬁll this
vacuum, the R2P initiative sets forth these six standards, based in
large part on just war theory, that should be followed in all inter-
ventions: 1) just cause, 2) right intention, 3) last resort, 4) propor-
tionate means, 5) reasonable prospect of success, and 6)
legitimate authority—preferably the UN Security Council.
The third and ﬁnal duty is the obligation to rebuild after an
intervention takes place. As the Report points out, because this
principle has long been ignored in practice, what this oftentimes
has led to is a situation where an intervention might halt ﬁghting
for some period of time, but begin once again simply because con-
ditions on the ground have not fundamentally changed. In certain
ways, the responsibility to rebuild can be interpreted literally in
the sense of engaging in public works projects to rebuild houses,
roads, buildings, and bridges that were destroyed during the
course of the ﬁghting. Beyond this, the responsibility to rebuild
also dedicates to establishing both security and the rule of law.
In short, the R2P initiative is offering up a much different
vision of the world. Each state has the primary responsibility for
protecting human rights within its own territorial boundaries,
but if a state fails to do this—if it essentially forfeits its own sover-
eignty—then this task has to be undertaken by the international
community. As we have seen, the goal here is to create an
international system that avoids humanitarian disasters in the
ﬁrst place. Thus, rather than reacting to disasters after the fact,
by means of refugee protection or humanitarian intervention,
R2P is premised on the international community taking the neces-
sary steps to avoid humanitarian disasters in the ﬁrst place.
Extraterritorial Obligations (ETO) Consortium
The second initiative we will look at is the groundbreaking work
of the Extraterritorial Obligations (ETO) Consortium, which was
founded in 2007, bringing together a rare blend of scholars, non-
governmental organizations, and representatives of certain
international institutions and organizations. The ETO Consortium
bases its work on a set of tripartite duties, namely, that all states
have an obligation to respect, protect, and fulﬁl human rights.
Under the obligation to respect, states have an obligation not to
violate human rights themselves. In terms of the responsibility
78
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

to protect, states have an obligation to ensure that other actors do
not violate human rights. And ﬁnally, under the obligation to ful-
ﬁl, states have an obligation to provide human rights protection
when this is needed.
Yet, where the ETO Consortium challenges existing ortho-
doxy is in positing that these obligations apply both inside and
outside a state’s territorial borders. Consider the prohibition
against torture. Under international law it is unlawful for a state
to torture an individual within its own domestic realm, but
according to the approach of the ETO Consortium, this obligation
would also extend to areas outside that state’s territorial borders.
In terms of the obligation to protect, states have an obligation to
ensure that private entities under its control or jurisdiction do
not torture, and once again, territorial considerations would sim-
ply not matter. To choose a real-world example, that would mean
that the U.S. government has an obligation to see to it that private
security ﬁrms operating in countries such as Iraq and Afghanistan
do not carry out torture.
The third and ﬁnal obligation is the duty to protect, which
means that a state has a positive obligation to prevent human rights
violations when it is within its powers to do so. Although most of
the work of the ETO Consortium has been based on economic,
social and cultural rights, the responsibility to protect applies in
other areas of human rights as well. To stay with the example of
the prohibition against torture, this would mean that states have
an obligation to help prevent torture in other lands. We have already
spent a considerable period of time on the prohibition against
refoulement, and this provides a perfect example as an extraterri-
torial application of the obligation to protect.
But the Torture Convention provides other means of achieving
this as well (Nowak 2010). One is that under the “prosecute or
extradite” provision of Article 7, all state parties have a legal obliga-
tion to either prosecute an alleged torturer themselves or else extra-
dite that person to a country that will do so. Note that what simply
does not matter is if the torture did not occur in that country, or that
neither the torturer nor the victim is a national of that state. Rather,
all states have agreed to form a kind of international constabulary
force to help ensure that all torturers are held accountable for their
actions. Finally, the Torture Convention also has an inter-state com-
plaint system under which one state party can ﬁle a complaint
against another state party on the grounds that the latter is not ful-
ﬁlling its obligations under the treaty (Article 21).
Re-Conceptualizing Human Rights—and Refugee Protection
79

Implications for Refugee Protection
What these two initiatives—R2P and ETO—represent is a much
different way of conceptualizing human rights. Under the domi-
nant approach, human rights obligations are limited by territorial
considerations. In certain ways, both refugee protection and the
principle of humanitarian intervention have served as counter-
examples to this approach in the sense that human rights pro-
tection came from some other state. Still, the responsibilities
(assuming they are legal responsibilities) of these outside states
remain quite limited. Thus, if a state decided not to admit any ref-
ugees it was under no obligation to do so. In addition, state sover-
eignty has been interpreted in such as way so as to allow states to
engage in practices that would be detrimental to the human rights
protection of individuals in other states—whether it is selling
arms to repressive governments, applying visa restrictions that
would prevent would-be refugees from being able to ﬂee, or
returning individuals back to a country where there is a strong
likelihood of persecution, so long as this was done outside that
state’s territorial boundaries.
The same has been true of humanitarian intervention as well.
Like refugee protection, humanitarian intervention challenges
state sovereignty in the sense that one state (or a group of states)
is intervening militarily in another country in order to protect
the human rights of foreign nationals. Yet, humanitarian interven-
tion poses only a mild challenge to the principle of state sover-
eignty most notably in that there is no obligation to intervene.
And as we have seen over the course of the past few decades
alone, there are a number of instances where countries have expe-
rienced massive levels of human rights violations—Sudan,
Democratic Republic of Congo, Rwanda, and Bosnia, to mention
some of the most egregious examples—but where there has either
been no intervention, or intervention occurred well after the
slaughter had already taken place.
In a seminal article more than two decades ago, Andrew
Shacknove (1985) posited that there is only a small overlap between
those who are victims of human rights violations and those
who receive refugee protection. And as he points out, of all the
human rights victims in the world, refugees enjoy a form of
preferred position in the sense that they have at least some recourse
to the international community in ways that other victims do not.
Unfortunately, Shacknove’s work has not prompted very much
80
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

attention and thinking as to why so many victims are ignored, if
not abandoned, by the international community. Human rights
are (universally) described as being universal. Why, then, do we
allow territorial considerations to override all other considera-
tions in terms of the protection of those rights?
In certain ways, refugee protection has served as a challenge to
state sovereignty, but in many other ways it has protected and forti-
ﬁed this principle. Refugee protection serves as a kind of safety
valve for some of those denied human rights protection in their
home state. However, the international community has established
a system where this safety valve is not opened too much, and where
the international community seemingly has no obligations or
responsibilities to close the valve in the ﬁrst place. In that way, refu-
gee protection is decidedly reactive and as long as it is reactive there
will always be refugees—and there will always be human rights
violation. The key, then, is to eliminate human rights violations in
the ﬁrst place—but isn’t this what international human rights law
is supposed to accomplish?—and what this will do is to help elimi-
nate the world’s global refugee crisis.
References
Books, Articles, and Chapters
Coomans, Fons, and Menno Kamminga, eds. 2004. Extraterritorial
Application of Human Rights Treaties. Antwerp: Intersentia.
Gammeltoft-Hansen, Thomas. 2009. Access to Asylum: International
Refugee Law and the Offshoring and Outsourcing of Migration Control, Ph.D.
Thesis. Aarhus University.
Gibney, Mark. 2008. International Human Rights Law: Returning to
Universal Principles. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littleﬁeld.
Gibney, Mark, Vanessa Dalton, and Marc Vockell. 1992. “USA Refugee
Policy: A Human Rights Analysis Update.” Journal of Refugee Studies 5: 33–46.
Gibney, Mark, and Sigrun Skogly, eds. 2010. University Human Rights and
Extraterritorial Obligations. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Gibney, Mark, Linda Cornett, and Reed Wood. The Political Terror Scale
1976–2008. Last accessed on January 28, 2010, http://www.politicalterrorscale
.org.
Gondek, Michael. 2009. The Reach of Human Rights in a Globalising World:
Extraterritorial Application of Human Rights Treaties. Antwerp: Intersentia.
References
81

Goodwin-Gill, Guy. 1983. The Refugee in International Law. Oxford, UK:
Clarendon Press.
Mayer, Jane. 2008. The Dark Side: The Inside Story of How the War on Terror
Turned Into a War On American Ideals. New York: Doubleday.
Nowak, Manfred. 2010. “Obligations of States to Prevent and Prohibit
Torture in an Extraterritorial Perspective,” in Mark Gibney, and Sigrun
Skogly, eds. University Human Rights and Extraterritorial Obligations.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Roxstrom, Erik, Mark Gibney, and Terje Einarsen. “The NATO Bombing
Case and the Limits of Western Human Rights Protection.” Boston
University International Law Journal 23: 55–136.
Salomon, Margot. 2007. Global Responsibility for Human Rights: World
Poverty and the Development of International Law. Oxford University Press.
Salomon, Margot E., Arne Tostensen, and Wouter Vandenhole, eds. 2007.
Casting the Net Wider: Human Rights, Development and New Duty-Bearers.
Antwerp: Intersentia.
Shacknove, Andrew. 1985. “Who Is a Refugee?” Ethics 95: 274–284.
Skogly, Sigrun. 2006. Beyond National Borders: States’ Human Rights
Obligations in International Cooperation. Antwerp: Intersentia.
The Responsibility to Protect: Report of the International Commission on
Intervention and State Sovereignty. 2001. Ottawa, Canada: International
Development Research Centre.
Wood, Reed, and Mark Gibney. (2010). “The Political Terror Scale: A
Re-Introduction and a Comparison With CIRI.” Human Rights Quarterly
367–400.
Cases and Administrative Decisions
Bankovic et al. v. Belgium et al., App. No. 52207/99 Eur. Ct. H.R. (2001)
(Dec. on admissibility).
Ocalan v. Turkey, App. No. 46221/99 Eur. Ct. H.R. (2000) (Dec. on
admissibility).
Issa v. Turkey, App. No. 31821/96 Eur. Ct. H.R. (2000) (Dec. on
admissibility).
Sale v. Haitian Centers Council, 509 U.S. 155 (1993).
82
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

3
Special U.S. Issues
M
ore than any other country, the United States has come to be
associated with issues of immigration and refugee protec-
tion. In the stirring words of Emma Lazarus’s poem The
New Colossus that is inscribed on the base of the Statue of Liberty:
Give me your tired, your poor,
Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free,
The wretched refuse of your teeming shore.
Send these, the homeless, tempest-tost to me,
I lift my lamp beside the golden door!
Despite the national mythology surrounding this issue, it is
important to note that there are, and always have been, two sides
to U.S. immigration/refugee policy. On the one hand, there is the
nation of immigrants, which is not only reﬂected in Lazarus’s
poem, but more importantly in a reality that has brought count-
less millions to the United States. America has always seen itself
as a country of immigration. In fact, one of the charges set forth
in the Declaration of Independence in justifying the separation
from Great Britain was that King George III had unlawfully
restricted immigration: “He has endeavored to prevent the Popu-
lation of these States; for that purpose obstructing the Laws for
Naturalization of Foreigners; refusing to pass others to encourage
their migrations hither, and raising the conditions of new Appro-
priations of Land.” More than this, many of those who ﬂed to
America over the course of the last three centuries have been peo-
ple who would now be termed refugees—those ﬂeeing from
political and religious persecution in their native lands.
83

On the other hand, as we will see in a moment, there has
always been a deep anti-foreigner strain as well, which oftentimes
has been obscured by the golden door imagery. To a certain extent,
then, the treatment accorded Mexicans today mirrors that experi-
enced by Germans, Irish, Chinese, Italians, and all (or nearly all)
immigrant groups that have come to the United States.
A Historical Survey of U.S. Alien
Admission Practices
Since there was no differentiation between immigrants and
refugees for most of American history, we will spend some time
examining the history of U.S. alien admission policy more gener-
ally. At the time of the ﬁrst census in 1790, there were 3,227,000
people in this new country—all immigrants or descendants of
immigrants. Despite this scarcity of people, Congress passed a
series of acts that regulated naturalization. The ﬁrst effort in
1790 was fairly liberal in scope, requiring only a two year period
of residence and the renunciation of former allegiances before cit-
izenship could be obtained. However, by 1795, largely in response
to turmoil brought on by the French Revolution, the residency
requirement was increased to ﬁve years. Three years later the
residency requirement was raised to 14 years, and the new Alien
Enemies Act and the Alien Friends Act gave the president the
power to deport any alien whom he considered dangerous to
the welfare of the nation. The expressed concern was that if the
president did not have the ability to keep foreign undesirables out,
the United States would be under the power of other sovereign
countries. With the passing of political power in 1800 from the
Federalists to the Republicans some of the national xenophobia
abated. The Alien Friends Act was allowed to expire, and in 1802
a new Naturalization Act was passed that re-established the ﬁve
year residency requirement for citizenship that in large part
remains today.
Immigration was rather modest at the beginning of the
republic. From the Revolutionary War to 1830, it is estimated that
only 375,000 immigrants came to the new country. However,
between 1830 and the start of the Civil War almost 4.5 million
migrated here. Moreover, the composition of these immigrants
began to change as there were more and more non-English—
84
Special U.S. Issues

primarily Germans and Irish. In response to this, a number of
America First political parties came into existence, going under
the banner of such colorful names as the Secret Order of the Star
Spangled Banner or the Know-Nothing Party. What these groups
all shared was a commitment to curb further immigration and to
keep these new arrivals from participating in the country’s political
affairs. However, not all efforts followed democratic and lawful
processes, as evidenced by the anti-immigrant riots that broke out
in cities such as New York, Philadelphia, and Boston.
Yet immigration continued apace. From 1860 to 1880 about
2.5 million Europeans entered into this country during each of these
decades, and this number then doubled to 5.25 million in the 1880s.
Another 16 million immigrants entered during the next quarter cen-
tury, with 1.25 million entering in 1907 alone—a number that has
only been approached again in recent American history.
Despite these concerns with the American-ness of many of
the new European arrivals, an even deeper fear related to immi-
gration from Asia. From 1860 to 1880, Chinese immigration had
increased from 40,000 to 100,000 as Chinese labor was welcomed
to lay the railway lines of the transcontinental railway. However,
with the completion of the line, followed by an economic depres-
sion in the 1870s, deep anti-Chinese sentiment began to grow. The
fear of these newcomers was well captured in this 1878 report, An
Address to the American People of the United States upon the
Evils of Chinese Immigrants, by the California State Senate’s Spe-
cial Committee on Chinese Immigration, which described Chi-
nese nationals as follows:
They fail to comprehend our system of government; they
perform no duties of citizenship. . . . they do not compre-
hend or appreciate our social ideas. . . . The great mass of
the Chinese are not amenable to our laws. . . .
The Committee then concluded that “Chinese are inferior to
any race God ever made.” The general feeling, one even counte-
nanced by the U.S. Supreme Court, was that the Chinese people
were, at best, simply unassimilable—and at worse, nothing more
than low-level criminals and prostitutes.
In 1882, the U.S. passed the Chinese Exclusion Act, represent-
ing the ﬁrst racist, restictionist law in this country’s history. This
exclusion was to continue until 1943 at a time when China was
an ally of the United States in World War II. In place of exclusion,
A Historical Survey of U.S. Alien Admission Practices
85

China was awarded a yearly quota of 105 admissions. The animos-
ity toward Asians was not restricted to Chinese nationals. In 1907
the United States and Japan reached the Gentleman’s Agreement
that effectively ended Japanese immigration to the United States
for decades. The terminology was used to help mask the virulent
racism upon which the policy was based.
For followers of the nativist creed, these efforts did not go far
enough—and they certainly did little to stem the tide of immi-
grants, now overwhelmingly from southern and eastern Europe.
The 1.25 million immigrants in 1907 remains the highest one year
total, and what also needs to be considered is that this occurred
among a national population that was considerably smaller than
it is today—representing one immigrant for every 60 persons in this
country. These numbers, but also the origins of these newcomers,
caught the attention of lawmakers in Washington and in response
a special joint House-Senate committee (headed by Senator William
Dillingham of Vermont) established a commission to study immi-
gration. The Dillingham Commission produced a 42-volume report
that conﬁrmed what nativists had been claiming all along, namely,
that the new immigrants were vastly inferior to those who had
come to the United States before them. Proof of this proposition
came mainly through science—eugenic science to be exact—which
the Dillingham Commission relied on quite heavily for its ﬁndings
and it conclusions. According to Edward Ross, one of the leading
proponents of nativism, eugenics proved that Jews are “the polar
opposite of our pioneer breed. Undersized and weak muscled, they
shun bodily activity and are exceedingly sensitive to pain.” In
terms of Italians, another of the unpopular groups migrating to
the United States at that time, Ross’s studies showed that they
“possess a distressing frequency of low foreheads, open mouths,
weak chins, poor features, skewed faces, small or knobby crania,
and backless heads.” In addition, Italians “lack the power to take
rational care of themselves” (Select Commission on Immigration
and Refugee Policy 1981).
Based on the ﬁndings of the Dillingham Commission as well
as public sentiment, Congress passed the Immigration Act of
1917, over U.S. President Woodrow Wilson’s veto, which had four
major provisions. The ﬁrst was a literacy requirement. The second
was an expanded list of deportable offenses that included men
who entered the country for immoral purposes, chronic alco-
holics, and those with one or more attacks of insanity. The third
provision constituted a further geographic expansion excluding
86
Special U.S. Issues

Asiatic immigration. Interesting enough, however, an effort to
exclude from immigration “all members of the African or black
race” failed to win approval in the House of Representatives,
although a similar measure passed the Senate. Finally, the 1917
Act expanded the country’s ability to deport. In terms of this pro-
vision, Norm and Naomi Zucker explain how deportation can to
be transformed:
In the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries deporta-
tion was a bureaucratic mechanism used to return
recently admitted aliens who should have been denied
admission at the port of entry. Under the new act, aliens
who preached revolution or sabotage could be deported
at any time after entry. The act, and subsequent legisla-
tion, raised deportation from a simple administrative
procedure to a public policy weapon, a potent instru-
ment for enforcing social, cultural, and political con-
formity (Zucker and Zucker 1996, 15).
Restrictionism and isolationism reached new heights follow-
ing World War I, as manifested in the congressional rejection of
the Treaty of Versailles and the League of Nations. Beyond this,
there was the Red Scare brought about by the Bolshevik Revolution
in Russia, but also the fear of anarchism that resulted in the (in)
famous trial against Ferdinando Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti.
One of the responses of the government were the so-called Palmer
raids, carried out by U.S. Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer
against anarchists, communists, and all other groups that the
government disapproved of and sought to remove from this
country.
All of this led to further initiatives to close U.S. borders. In
1921 Congress passed what came to be called the National Origins
Quota system, which established per country ceilings based on the
1910 census—when immigration from certain targeted countries
was not as great. When this law did not fully satisfy nativist
demands, the National Origins Quota Act of 1924 was passed,
moving the base period back to 1890. As a result of these changes,
the Italian quota was reduced from 42,000 to 4,000, the Polish
quota from 31,000 to 6,000, and the Greek quota from 3,000 to 100.
Although World War II was fought against the Nazi German
regime that was premised on the notion of racial superiority, in
1952 Congress passed the McCarran-Walter Act, over President
A Historical Survey of U.S. Alien Admission Practices
87

Truman’s veto, which effectively kept in place an immigration
quota system that gave strong preference to those from northern
and western Europe. It was not until 1965 that Congress ﬁnally
eliminated the practice of racial quotas—and for the ﬁrst time
instituted a category of admissions speciﬁcally for refugees,
which we will return to in a moment.
Interestingly enough, given the national mythology concern-
ing the admission of the “the tired, the poor, and the huddled
masses yearning to breathe free,” it was not until after World
War II that the United States had anything even resembling a ref-
ugee policy as such. Certainly one of the cruelest instances of this
inattention to people in great need was the incident involving the
steamship S.S. St. Louis, which in 1939 sought to bring 900 Jewish
children from Germany to the United States, but was turned away
on the grounds that the German quota for that year had already
been ﬁlled. The ship was eventually forced back to Europe, where
the majority of its passengers were killed.
But it must also be said that the non-response to the plight of
Germany’s desperate Jews was mirrored throughout Europe. In
1938, an international conference at E´ vian-les-Bains, France
(E´ vian Conference) sought to come up with solutions to this
expanding crisis, but it did so only by promising that no country
would be asked to accept additional immigrants. With respect to
U.S. involvement in these proceedings, as Alan Dowty has writ-
ten in his book Closed Borders: The Contemporary Assault on Freedom
of Movement: “the principal aim in promoting the conference was
precisely to head off any pressure to increase American quotas”
(Dowty 1987, 92).
Unfortunately, the same obstructionist policies prevailed
during the war itself. The historian David Wyman (1968) has used
the term paper walls to describe the quiet, but deadly, manner by
which administrative hurdles were erected and then used to pre-
vent German Jews facing genocide in their home country from
entering into the United States. Norm and Naomi Zucker quote
U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Breckinridge Long, who was pri-
marily responsible for refugee matters and a long time
restrictionist:
We can delay and effectively stop for a temporary period
of indeﬁnite length the number of immigrants into the
United States. We could do this by simply advising our
consuls to put every obstacle in the way and to require
88
Special U.S. Issues

additional evidence and to resort to various administra-
tive devises which would postpone the granting of visas
(Zucker and Zucker 1996, 21–22).
Delay, the U.S. State Department did. And as Wyman has
pointed out, no exceptions were made, not even when an appli-
cant faced immediate danger.
Some have argued that U.S. policy might have been different
if the full extent of Nazi atrocities had been known during World
War II. While it is debatable what was known and what was not
known, and while it is also debatable whether U.S. policy would
have changed one iota, what certainly is clear is that the same
anti-Semitism that fueled opposition to increased Jewish immi-
gration during the war was also evident even after the liberation
of the concentration camps provided positive proof of Germany’s
genocidal goals.
Much has been made of the 1948 Displaced Persons Act (DP
Act). Under the Act, approximately 400,000 refugees gained
admission to the United States. The DP Act also began the process
of differentiating between immigrants and refugees, and in this
instance placing an emphasis on the admission of the latter over
the former. However, what is perhaps the most noteworthy aspect
of the DP Act is that a bill that ostensibly was aimed at providing
protection to a group that had faced unimaginable horrors—and
this is not even to mention the six million Jews who were extermi-
nated—would be skewed in such a way so as to provide as little
assistance as it could to these same people. In their book Calcu-
lated Kindness: Refugees and America’s Half-Open Door 1945–Present,
Gil Loescher and John Scanlan describe the workings of the DP
Act in this manner:
Thus the DP act that Congress passed was fraught with
restrictions, and appeared purposely designed to favor
groups other than surviving European Jews. . . .
President Truman reluctantly signed the bill on June 25,
1948, but characterized it in an accompanying message as
“form[ing] a pattern of discrimination and intolerance
wholly inconsistent with the American sense of justice.”
The victims of that discrimination, he claimed, were
Jewish displaced persons, more than 90 percent of
whom would be denied the act’s beneﬁts. . . . No ration-
ale, other than “abhorrent . . . intolerance,” could explain
A Historical Survey of U.S. Alien Admission Practices
89

the wrongful exclu[sion] of almost all recent arrivals
(Loescher and Scanlan 1986, 21).
The Cold War, U.S. Foreign Policy,
and Refugee Protection
Although nativist sentiments had prevailed during the war and
to a certain extent after it as well, much of this changed with the
advent of the Cold War, as refugee admissions from communist
states became one of the central tenets of U.S. refugee policy for
the next half century. As such, U.S. refugee policy became an
arm of U.S. foreign policy, and each refugee-escapee from a com-
munist country was offered as further proof of the superiority of
the Western way of life.
Urged by Presidents Harry S. Truman and Dwight D. Eisen-
hower, Congress abandoned the numerical limits and quotas for
refugees from communist states, and even allocated speciﬁed
funding for the encouragement of departure (such as through
the Voice of America and Radio Free Europe) as well as for the
resettlement of these new heroes. The President’s Escapee Pro-
gram (PEP) began in 1952 and this was then followed by the Ref-
ugee Relief Act (RRA) a year later. The RRA authorized more than
200,000 non-quota visas for persons escaping from behind the
Iron Curtain (Zucker and Zucker 1996, 28).
Just as the RRA was about to expire, the Hungarian uprising
against Soviet-style rule broke out and approximately 200,000
freedom ﬁghters ﬂed to neighboring Austria, and from there
nearly 40,000 came to the United States. Some were given visas
under RRA, but others were simply paroled into the United
States—a source of admission for refugees-escapees that would
repeatedly be used in the ensuing years. Other Hungarians were
admitted under Refugee Escape Act (REA) and what was signiﬁ-
cant about this is that rather than having refugee admissions
apply against a country’s immigration quota as it had in the past,
the REA created a separate category for refugee admissions. In
addition, the REA deﬁned refugee-escapees as those ﬂeeing com-
munist lands, and this would remain the central core of American
refugee policy until 1980.
At the close of the decade there was to be another noteworthy
group ﬂeeing from communist rule that would have a profound
90
Special U.S. Issues

effect on American refugee policy, but also U.S. politics, and this
was the ﬁrst wave of Cuban exiles arriving in the United States in
1959 after Fidel Castro came into power. Although there was
always a steady steam of intermittent arrivals, the next large ﬂow
of Cubans came in the mid-1960s, and then again in 1980, which
helped bring about passage of the Refugee Act of that year. It
would not be inaccurate to say that for much of this time (and to
a certain extent even in the present), Cubans had a refugee policy
wholly on to themselves in the sense that Cuban nationals were
almost automatically granted refugee status in the United States,
while other groups—most notably Haitians who ﬂed from another
Caribbean country—were afforded much different treatment.
As mentioned earlier, the 1965 Immigration Act set aside
17,400 slots for refugee admissions. Perhaps the most telling fea-
ture of this new policy was that refugee admissions were pur-
posely restricted to those ﬂeeing from the Middle East (which
was rarely ever invoked) or those from communist countries.
However, what also has to be said is that the new law played only
a peripheral role in terms of U.S. refugee policy. Rather, repeated
waves of refugees ﬂeeing from communist or former communist
countries were simply and quickly paroled into the United States
by authority of the Attorney General. After the 1980 Mariel boat-
lift, which resulted in the frantic admission of approximately
125,000 Cubans, Congress sought to regularize U.S. refugee ﬂows
by passage of the 1980 Refugee Act. The Refugee Act set a base-
line of 50,000 and it also removed the ideological and geographi-
cal restrictions from the previous deﬁnition.
Notwithstanding these changes, for nearly two decades after
this U.S. refugee policy remained virtually unchanged (Helton
1984). One aspect of U.S. refugee policy was the continuation of
the Vietnam War—even decades after the ﬁghting in this part of
the world had ended. During the height of these practices, from
1975 to 1996, approximately 1.2 million Southeast Asians were
admitted to the United States, with the largest group coming from
Vietnam (700,000), followed by Laotians (250,000) and Cambodians
(150,000).
Related to this, another aspect of U.S. refugee policy was
devoted to the admission of refugees from the Soviet Union and
then its successor the Russian Republic. Of course, the United
States was always deeply interested in increased refugee admis-
sions from its old adversary (or former adversary). As noted
before, what better way of establishing the superiority of the West
The Cold War, U.S. Foreign Policy, and Refugee Protection
91

than by the existence of these courageous ﬂights from totalitarian
oppression? What prevented this from occurring for a long period
of time were restrictions on emigration instituted by the Soviet
government. However, when these restrictions were eventually
loosened after the fall of the Berlin Wall and the institutionaliza-
tion of perestroika in the (former) Soviet regime, what had been a
trickle became a steam. To give some indication of those numbers,
but also a tell-tale sign of U.S. refugee and foreign policy prior-
ities, consider the year 1994. That year, the U.S. admitted 112,682
refugees and fully 43,000 of these were from the Russian Republic.
What simply did not matter was that the Soviet Union ceased to
exist, or that communism in that part of the world had no longer
existed for half a decade. Apparently what also did not matter
was that this same year, Rwanda experienced one of the worst
episodes of genocide in human history, as 800,000 civilians were
slaughtered in a matter of 100 days and even larger numbers
desperately sought refuge in surrounding countries. That year—
the same year that 43,000 Russian refugees came to the United
States—all of 31 refugees from Rwanda were admitted to the
United States. What also has to be noted is that 1994 was no aber-
ration. Refugee admissions from Russia continued apace for a
number of years, and it still remains one of the greatest sources
of refugees for the United States. Likewise, refugee admissions
from Rwanda remained virtually non-existent as well.
What this shows is not only the extent of the ideological bias
in U.S. refugee admissions, even after the ideological exclusion
had been removed from the law, but also the ﬂip side, namely,
the great difﬁculty that individuals from non-communist coun-
tries have had in gaining refugee status in the United States, no
matter what levels of political violence and suffering. Perhaps
no group suffered more or at least longer from this policy than
Haitians, who repeatedly took to the seas in a desperate attempt
to reach American shores. The United States did establish a spe-
cial program for Haitians, but the Haitian interdiction program
was not intended to provide assistance and protection to a group
of people coming from the poorest country in the entire Western
Hemisphere and arguably ruled by the most brutal dictatorship,
at least in that part of the world. When the interdiction program
began it was the policy of the U.S. government to provide asylum
hearings for all those gathered up in the Atlantic Ocean. Up until
the 1991 coup in Haiti, 22,716 Haitians had been stopped and
interviewed on board U.S. Coast Guard cutters. However, of this
92
Special U.S. Issues

number only 28 were allowed to proceed to the United States in
order to pursue their claim for refugee status, while the rest were
returned to Haiti. Mercifully, the pretense of fair and even-
handed hearings was eventually stopped.
Yet, perhaps the worst manifestation of the other side of
America’s obsession with pursuing ideological ends through its
refugee policy was with regard to Central America refugees
throughout the entire decade of the 1980s. Notwithstanding the
existence of brutal wars in both Guatemala (where some 200,000
civilians were killed) and El Salvador (where approximately
75,000 civilians were killed), year after year the United States
rejected anywhere between 97 to 99 percent of the asylum claims
ﬁled by refugees from these two countries. In defense of this pol-
icy, Reagan administration ofﬁcials repeatedly proclaimed that
these asylum seekers were nothing but economic migrants seek-
ing a better life in the United States. By way of proof, they would
note that in order to get to the United States these migrants would
have to pass through Mexico, a country where, at least according
to the thinking of the Reagan administration, these individuals
could have applied for refugee status.
Empirical research provides a much different story. William
Stanley (1987) of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology con-
ducted a study that showed that as political violence in El Salvador
increased, so did apprehensions by the Immigration and Naturali-
zation Service (INS) while, conversely, the numbers arriving at the
U.S. border decreased substantially during those times when
violence abated in that country. Stanley’s conclusion was that
political violence, and not economic circumstances, was the actual
driving force behind Salvadoran migration patterns.
Similarly, Segundo Montes (1988) of Central American Uni-
versity in El Salvador conducted a study that used Salvadoran
towns and villages as the unit of analysis. Similar to Stanley’s ﬁnd-
ings, Montes data showed that the most violent provinces in El
Salvador sent the largest proportions of their populations to the
United States, while areas of the country that were relatively safe
sent far fewer refugees to the United States. Like Stanley, Montes
concluded that the rise and fall in asylum applicants in the United
States could best be explained by violence, and not by poverty.
Yet, one reason why Salvadorans and Guatemalans were
almost totally excluded from refugee protection in the United States
was because of the enormous inﬂuence that the State Department
played in refugee determinations. Under the asylum system that
The Cold War, U.S. Foreign Policy, and Refugee Protection
93

was employed at that time, each asylum application was sent to the
State Department’s Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian
Affairs (BHRHA) for an advisory opinion. Not surprisingly, the
opinions that came back to immigration ofﬁcials strongly reﬂected
the political stance of the Reagan administration. Perhaps what is
more surprising was how enormously inﬂuential these opinions
were in the asylum determination process itself. Of course, what
further condemned the prospect of Salvadorans and Guatemalans
was the deep seated fear that because of the geographical proxim-
ity to the United States, very large number of those people could
actually arrive at the U.S. borders. What this led to was a non-
admission policy directed at both of these groups, something that
was conﬁrmed by an internal INS study.
Certain nationalities appear to beneﬁt from presumptive
status while others do not.
For example, for an El Salvadoran national to receive
a favorable asylum advisory opinion, he or she must
have a “classic textbook case.” On the other hand,
BHRHA sometimes recommends favorable action where
the applicant cannot meet the individual well-founded
fear of persecution test. This happened in December 1981
a week after martial law was declared in Poland. Seven
Polish crewmen jumped ship and applied for asylum in
Alaska. Even before seeing the asylum applications, a
State Department ofﬁcial said, “We’re going to approve
them.” All the applications, in the view of INS senior ofﬁ-
cials, were extremely weak. In one instance, the crewman
said that the reason he feared returning to Poland was
that he had once attended a Solidarity rally (he was one
of the more than 100,000 participants at the rally). The
crewman had never been a member of Solidarity, never
participated in any political activity, etc. His claim was
approved within forty-eight hours (INS 1982, 59).
Similarly, a General Accounting Ofﬁce (GAO) study conﬁrmed
the degree to which nationality and ideology were the primary con-
siderations driving U.S. refugee policy. For one thing, the GAO
study compared asylum success rates for those who claimed to
have been tortured. The success rate for Salvadorans was four per-
cent, while it was 15 percent for those from Nicaragua (a country
run by a group the Reagan administration considered communists),
94
Special U.S. Issues

but fully 64 percent for Iranian claimants, and ﬁnally, an over-
whelming 80 percent for Polish applicants who claimed to have
been tortured (General Accounting Ofﬁce 1987).
Although ideological considerations ruled U.S. refugee policy
for nearly a half century, its role has now been diminished, although
it continues to manifest itself in a number of ways. For one thing,
Cubans no longer get a free pass. Rather, under agreements signed
by the two countries in the mid-1990s, the United States now has
implemented what has been described as a “wet foot, dry foot” pol-
icy. Individuals intercepted at sea are screened, and those found to
have a well-founded fear of persecution are then resettled, but in
some country other than the United States. This, of course, stands
in marked contrast to previous policy whereby all Cubans were
essentially guaranteed entry into the United States. However,
Cubans who somehow manage to get to the United States are
paroled in, and are eligible for adjustment of status under the
Cuban Adjustment Act. Obviously, this dual-policy continues to
provide an enormous incentive for Cubans to attempt to get to the
United States and no other country receives similar treatment.
The lingering effect of ideological bias continues to manifest
itself with regard to Russian refugees, although these numbers
are less than a fraction of what they had been at the height of ref-
ugee ﬂows in the early and mid-1990s. Under priority guidelines
that will be discussed further on, certain groups of Russians are
singled out as being of humanitarian concern to the United
States—these are Jews, Evangelical Christians, and Ukrainians.
Russia is still a dangerous country and certain groups are exposed
to very high levels of political violence, particularly those in the
civil war zone of Chechnya. Unfortunately, U.S. refugee policy is
not set up to meet the protection needs of this group. Instead,
the focus has been almost exclusively on those who, quite argu-
ably, are really not refugees at all in the sense that they suffer from
discrimination, but certainly not persecution.
Before turning to present practice, we will close this historical
section by offering one last observation of U.S. policy—and this
relates more to those who are absent (by and large) from the rolls
of those arriving in the United States as refugees. Since late 2001,
the United States has been ﬁghting a war in Afghanistan and since
the spring 2003 it has waged a war in Iraq. Both conﬂicts have had
an enormous effect on refugee practices in both of these countries.
Afghanistan has experienced all sides: both a massive inﬂux of
repatriated refugees, but sizable numbers of refugees ﬂeeing the
The Cold War, U.S. Foreign Policy, and Refugee Protection
95

country as well. However, one country where these refugees are
not ﬂeeing to is the United States. For example, in 2008, the United
States admitted all of 576 refugees from Afghanistan and the year
before that 441. In terms of Iraq, it has been estimated that the war
in that country has brought about the displacement of more than
four million people, two million of whom have crossed national
borders and are considered refugees. Given U.S. involvement in
this war—which is an understatement of the highest order—one
might expect the United States to shoulder a substantial amount
of the load in providing refugee protection to these refugees.
However, there were 298 Iraqi refugees admitted in 2003, 66 in
2004, 198 in 2005, 202 in 2006, and 1,608 in 2007. After a great deal
of public criticism of these practices, in 2008 this number jumped
to 13,823, which still represents a very small portion of the total
Iraqi refugee population.
Current Refugee/Asylum Law and Practice
in the United States
In this section we provide a closer analysis of U.S. refugee/asylum
law and practice. As before, we begin with the deﬁnition of refu-
gee, which, for the most part, mirrors that in the 1951 Refugee
Convention, with a few exceptions. One minor difference is that
while the Refugee Convention is only prospective in scope—the
refugee applicant bases his or her claim on what might happen
in the future, rather than what has already taken place in the
past—under U.S. law an individual can base a claim on the future
prospects of harm, but also on the basis of past harm, where the
law provides a rebuttable presumption that those who have suf-
fered past persecution will suffer future persecution as well.
Another difference, one that has grown to be fairly signiﬁcant, is
that U.S. law does not demand that the refugee claimant be outside
his or her country of nationality. In some years, in fact, upwards of
80 percent of those who are admitted as refugees under the Over-
seas Refugee Program (ORP) are individuals who have never left
their country of origin, but instead, have applied for refugee status
in country and awaited word of the status of their application
from home. Of course, this raises the question (or at least should
raise the question) whether it is accurate to describe this situation
as one involving persecution.
96
Special U.S. Issues

The deﬁnition of refugee under the 1980 Refugee Act has
been amended once and that was in 1996 when Congress sought
to address claims based on China’s one-child policy:
For purposes of determination under this Act, a person
who has been forced to abort a pregnancy or to undergo
involuntary sterilization, or who has been persecuted for
failure or refusal to undergo such a procedure or for other
resistance to a coercive population control program, shall
be deemed to have been persecuted on account of political
opinion, and a person who has a well founded fear that he
or she will be forced to undergo such a procedure or sub-
ject to persecution for such failure, refusal, or resistance,
shall be deemed to have a well founded fear of persecu-
tion on account of political opinion.
Initially, the immigration act placed a ceiling of 1,000 per year
on the number of persons who could receive protection on this
basis. Those who applied after this yearly limit was reached were
provided with a provisional grant of asylum. Within a decade there
was a backlog of nearly 9,000 conditional grants, at which point
Congress repealed the ceiling in 2005.
The 1980 Refugee Act establishes two procedures by which
persons who meet the refugee deﬁnition can obtain such protec-
tion. The ﬁrst set of procedures, referred to as the ORP, applies
to refugees persons who are outside the United States (but who
may be within their own country) who are then admitted to the
United States as refugees, while the second set of procedures
applies to persons seeking protection from within the United
States or upon arrival at the country’s borders. Although the term
refugee does not change, the two programs will, at times, differ
substantially.
Overseas Refugee Program
In a host of ways, the United States is unique with respect to alien
admissions. One aspect of this is the relatively large inﬂux of legal
immigrants, with these numbers now routinely being in the vicinity
of a million new arrivals each year. In addition, there is the undocu-
mented population that in recent years has rivaled, and even
surpassed, the number of those lawfully admitted. There is also
the category of non-immigrants, people admitted for a limited
Current Refugee/Asylum Law and Practice in the United States
97

period of time, but many of whom are ultimately able to regularize
their status and remain in the country permanently.
In term of refugees speciﬁcally, although the United States can-
not claim to be the only country that resettles refugees from outside
the country (12 other Western states do as well), the ORP is unique
both in terms of its size but also in terms of its the geographical scope.
Table 3.1 provides data on refugee admissions from 1980 to 2008.
98
Special U.S. Issues
TABLE 3.1
Refugee Arrivals: Fiscal Years 1980 to 2008
Year
Number
1980
207,116
1981
159,252
1982
98,096
1983
61,218
1984
70,393
1985
67,704
1986
62,146
1987
64,528
1988
76,483
1989
107,070
1990
122,066
1991
113,389
1992
115,548
1993
114,181
1994
111,680
1995
98,973
1996
75,421
1997
69,653
1998
76,712
1999
85,076
2000
72,143
2001
68,925
2002
26,776
2003
28,304
2004
52,837
2005
53,738
2006
41,150
2007
48,218
2008
60,108
Note: Data series began following the Refugee Act of 1980. Excludes Amerasian immigrants except in ﬁscal years
1989 to 1991.
Source: U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration (PRM), Worldwide Refugee
Admissions Processing System (WRAPS), Fiscal Years 1980 to 2008.

As you can see in Table 3.1, the height of ORP admissions
was 1980 when 207,116 refugees were brought to the United
States. That number had decreased by more than two-thirds by
1986 (62,146), but refugee numbers increased again in the early
1990s, as the United States admitted tens of thousands of refugees
from the (former) Soviet Union and from Vietnam. However, by
2001, refugee admission numbers had fallen to 68,925 and then
following the September 11 attacks on the United States, only
26,776 refugees were admitted in 2002 and 28,304 in 2003. The
numbers have increased since then, and in 2008, 60,108 were
granted admission.
Table 3.2 provides data on refugee admissions for certain
countries from 1999 to 2008. The countries selected represent both
extremes of U.S. refugee admissions—those that are generally
well represented (i.e., Bosnia, Iran, and Russia), as well as those
that have not been well represented (i.e., Colombia, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and the Sudan), although the levels of
political violence in those countries would indicate otherwise.
How are refugees selected? Each year, the President in consul-
tation with Congress establishes the annual determination as to
the number of refugees to be admitted that year under ORP as well
as the how these slots are to be allocated worldwide by region of the
world. Under the provisions of the Refugee Act, the numbers and
the allocation are to reﬂect both humanitarian concerns as well as
the national interest. In addition, the statute gives the President the
authority to respond to “unforeseen emergency refugee” situations
and provide additional slots for refugees of “special humanitarian
concern” where “justiﬁed by grave humanitarian concerns or . . .
otherwise in the national interest.” Table 3.3 shows the work of this
consultative process for the years 2006–2008.
Priorities for these categories are also established annually
through the consultative process and individuals must come
within a priority category in order to be considered for admission.
As described by (Musalo et al. 2007, 76–76):
Priority One is the only category not restricted by
regional designation, but can include an individual in
any nationality who has been identiﬁed by UNHCR or
U.S. embassy personnel to be in need of resettlement
for speciﬁed and compelling reasons.
Two is comprised of groups of “Special Concern” to
the United States, and generally includes speciﬁed
Current Refugee/Asylum Law and Practice in the United States
99

TABLE 3.2
Refugee Arrivals by Region and Country of Nationality: Fiscal Years 1999 to 2008
Country of
Nationality
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
REGION
Total
85,076
72,143
68,925
26,776
28,304
52,837
53,738
41,150
48,218
60,108
Africa
13,048
17,624
19,070
2,551
10,719
29,110
20,746
18,185
17,486
8,943
Asia
14,041
13,622
15,356
6,886
5,862
10,896
14,977
9,245
23,195
44,545
Europe
55,877
37,664
31,526
15,407
11,269
9,254
11,316
10,456
4,561
2,343
North America
D
3,233
2,968
1,924
305
2,998
6,368
3,145
2,922
4,177
Oceania
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
South America
D
–
5
8
149
579
331
119
54
100
COUNTRY
Total
85,076
72,143
68,925
26,776
28,304
52,837
53,738
41,150
48,218
60,108
Afghanistan
365
1,709
2,930
1,683
1,453
959
902
651
441
576
Bhutan
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
D
–
5,320
Burma
295
637
543
128
203
1,056
1,447
1,612
13,896
18,139
Burundi
223
165
109
62
16
276
214
466
4,545
2,889
Central African
Republic
D
–
D
–
D
24
–
23
15
56

China, People’s
Republic
D
D
12
9
9
3
13
21
27
50
Colombia
–
–
–
8
149
577
323
115
54
94
Congo,
Democratic
Republic
42
1,354
260
107
251
569
424
405
848
727
Cuba
2,018
3,184
2,944
1,919
305
2,980
6,360
3,143
2,922
4,177
Haiti
91
49
24
5
–
17
8
–
–
–
Iran
1,750
5,145
6,590
1,540
2,471
1,786
1,856
2,792
5,481
5,270
Iraq
1,955
3,158
2,473
472
298
66
198
202
1,608
13,823
Russia
4,386
3,723
4,454
2,105
1,394
1,446
5,982
6,003
1,773
426
Rwanda
153
345
94
47
47
176
183
112
202
108
Sudan
2,393
3,833
5,959
897
2,139
3,500
2,205
1,848
705
375
Ukraine
8,649
7,334
7,172
5,217
5,065
3,482
2,889
2,483
1,605
1,022
Vietnam
9,622
2,841
2,730
2,988
1,354
974
2,009
3,039
1,500
1,112
NA Not Available.
X-Not applicable.
D-Data withheld to limit disclosure.
–Represents zero.
Note: Excludes Amerasian Immigrants.
Source: U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration (PRM), Worldwide Refugee Admissions Processing System (WRAPS).

categories within nationality groups. For example, in
2006, Priority Two included Cubans in certain catego-
ries, including former political prisoners, members of
persecuted religious minorities, human rights activists,
and those subjected to disproportionately or harsh dis-
criminatory treatment because of their perceived or
actual political or religious beliefs; citizens of the former
Soviet Union who are Jewish, evangelical Christians,
or members of the Ukrainian Catholic and Orthodox
churches; certain categories of Vietnamese, including
former re-education camp detainees or employees of
the U.S. government who meet speciﬁed criteria; and
speciﬁed ethnic or religious groups from Nepal, Burma,
Tanzania, the former Soviet Union, and Iran.
Three includes family members of U.S. citizens, or
other persons with speciﬁed legal status in the United
States.
To be clear, individuals within in these priority categories are
not guaranteed admission as refugees and they must also be
approved in an interview that occurs outside the United States
and conducted by a representative of the Department of Home-
land Security’s (DHS) Citizenship and Immigration Services,
which makes this determination, one that is not subject to appeal
or judicial review. In addition to the involvement of DHS, the U.S.
State Department coordinates resettlement policy, including
maintaining connections with nongovernmental organizations
102
Special U.S. Issues
TABLE 3.3
Refugee Admissions Ceilings: Fiscal Years 2006 to 2008
Ceiling
Region
2008
2007
2006
Total
80,000
70,000
70,000
Africa
16,000
20,000
20,000
East Asia
20,000
15,000
13,000
Europe/Central Asia
3,000
15,000
9,500
Latin America/Caribbean
3,000
5,000
5,000
Near East/South Asia
28,000
5,000
2,500
Unallocated Reserve
10,000
10,000
20,000
Source: U.S. Department of State, Proposed Refugee Admissions for FY 2008—Report to Congress.

that assist newly arrived refugees, while the Department of
Health and Human Services is responsible for ﬁnancial, medical,
and social services for the newly arrived refugees (Musalo et al.
2007, 76).
Criticisms of ORP
It is not easy to criticize a program that provides human rights
protection to large numbers of people. It is estimated that since
passage of the 1980 Refugee Act, the United States has admitted
more than two million refugees through the ORP. In large part
because of this humanitarian basis, refugee scholars are often
reluctant to question the ORP more generally, or the priorities that
it establishes more particularly. Rather, what seems to be at work
is some notion that the admission of a refugee—perhaps any
refugee—is a good thing that should not be seriously analyzed or
questioned.
However, there is another way to think of U.S. refugee policy
and it is to see admission slots as a kind of zero-sum game, where
the admission of one refugee means that the chances of all other
refugees are thereby diminished. More than this, and at the risk
of sounding overly dramatic, the consequences for those who
are not able to gain admission might well be severe. It is for this
reason that we believe that there is something seriously and fun-
damentally wrong with a refugee protection system that admits
43,000 Russians, but only 31 Rwandans, at a time when the latter
was experiencing massive levels of genocidal killing while the
former was enjoying newfound freedoms.
Unfortunately, there are a host of other situations that are not
much different from this. For example, over the course of the past
decade arguably the single most violent country in the world has
been the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where an estimated
four million civilians have been killed. Based on this, one might
expect a substantial number of refugee admissions. However, as
shown in Table 3.2, throughout this entire period of time there
has only been one year where more than 1,000 refugees were
admitted from this country, while the norm has been to admit
approximately 750 refugees a year.
Yet, this anemic response is reﬂective of U.S. refugee policy
regarding Africa more generally. Although the greatest number
of refugees in the world are from Africa (and have been for quite
a period of time), the U.S. response to this entire continent has
Current Refugee/Asylum Law and Practice in the United States
103

been underwhelming at best. It was not until 1992 that refugee
admissions for the entire continent for one year reached 5,000,
while admissions ﬁnally reached 10,000 in 1999. The next year,
approximately 20,000 refugees were admitted to the United
States—a fourfold increase in eight years, if you choose to look
at it this way—and the numbers remained in this range for a
few years, before falling substantially to 8,943 in 2008. The point
is that these numbers represent but a small fraction of the total
African refugee population (not to even mention the IDP popula-
tion in Africa), a large portion of which has been warehoused in
refugee camps for extensive periods of time. Of course, what this
also means is that refugee protection has been shunted aside and
left almost solely to a host of African states that are not well
equipped to deal with the ﬁscal strains that go along with this,
but which have also been negatively affected by the violence that
sometimes accompanies ﬂeeing refugees as well.
The last thing to note is that refugee admissions are almost
never compared to the immigrant population coming to this
country, which now averages nearly one million a year. As noted
in the ﬁrst part of this chapter, for much of U.S. history there
was no distinction made between immigrants and refugees.
Invariably, the term immigrant was used to describe all of those
migrating to the United States, but what needs to be recognized
is that many of these immigrants were what we would now term
refugees. Or to state this more succinctly, huddled masses is another
way of describing refugees. However, beginning in the post-
World War II period a distinction between these two categories
began to be made.
Yet, what is almost always ignored is the manner in which
refugee admissions has long served as a kind of stepchild to U.S.
immigration policy, although there is absolutely no reason why
this has to be the case. Perhaps this was predestined when at the
time that refugee admissions became permanent, this was accom-
plished as the seventh preference (which itself is revealing) of the
1965 Immigration Act (not the 1965 Immigration and Refugee
Act). Since that time, refugee admissions have generally run in
the vicinity of being one-tenth those admitted as normal ﬂow
immigrants, although in recent years the differential between the
number of refugees and the number of immigrants admitted to
the United States has gotten even larger. But this raises the ques-
tion—or at least should raise the question—what is the optimal
mix between refugees and immigrants?
104
Special U.S. Issues

Asylum
The second means by which individuals can gain refugee status
in the United States is by being granted this status either at the
country’s borders at the time of arrival, or else after gaining entry
into the United States. In terms of those already in the United
States, there is a distinction made between afﬁrmative applica-
tions and defensive applications—with the latter occurring once
deportation proceedings have been instituted, while under the
former an individual ﬁles for refugee status without a similar
prompting by government ofﬁcials. Note that unlike ORP, the sys-
tem of asylum adjudications makes no provision for refugees who
are of humanitarian or national concern to the United States.
In the 1970s, the number of asylum applications was in the
range of 2,000 to 6,000 per year. However, shortly after the adop-
tion of the 1980 Refugee Act, those numbers increased signiﬁ-
cantly, brought on by a conﬂuence of political events. One was
the Mariel boatlift, which brought approximately 125,000 Cuban
refugees to the United States. Another was a sharp increase in
the number of Haitians ﬂeeing to the United States, who seemed
to assume that the warm welcome given to Cuban nationals
would be extended to them (it was not). And ﬁnally, the fall of
the Shah of Iran and the ouster of Anastasio Somoza in Nicaragua
resulted in greatly increased asylum applications from nationals
of these two countries. In the 1980s, there were also an increasing
number of asylum applications from El Salvador and Guatemala,
although, as pointed out earlier, extraordinarily few were success-
ful. However, litigation and special legislation eventually led
to full legal status for most of the Nicaraguan, Guatemalan,
Salvadoran, and Haitian asylum seekers of that era (Aleinikoff
et al. 2008, 858).
In the latter part of the 1980s, the total numbers increased sig-
niﬁcantly, reaching 150,000 asylum claims a year. Congress
responded with a series of reforms, which we will discuss in a
moment. This, in turn, led to a substantial decrease in claims,
which now average between 30,000 and 50,000. Table 3.4 presents
data on countries with the largest number of asylum claims for
the years 2006–2008.
One thing that is noteworthy is that as the number of asylum
claims has decreased, the overall acceptance rate has generally
increased, going from a low of 17 percent in 1996 to the situation
at present where acceptance rates hover around 40 percent.
Current Refugee/Asylum Law and Practice in the United States
105

1996 Changes to U.S. Asylum Law
In 1996, Congress made a number of substantive changes to U.S.
asylum practices. One was the establishment of an expedited
removal procedure for arriving aliens who are not in possession
of valid travel documents, or who obtained their travel docu-
ments by fraud or misrepresentation. Under the new provisions
of this act, immigration ofﬁcials now have the authority to order
such persons removed without the right to a hearing or to admin-
istrative or judicial review. However, additional administrative
procedures will be given to all such persons who express a credible
fear of persecution. For those not able to establish a credible fear,
this individual can request a de novo review by an immigration
judge. Those found to have such a fear are allowed to present their
claims for refugee status or for other means of protection, such as
that under the Torture Convention.
The 1996 law also bars an individual from ﬁling for asylum
unless he or she “demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence
that the application has been ﬁled within 1 year after the date of the
alien’s arrival in the United States.” The only possible exception to
106
Special U.S. Issues
TABLE 3.4
All Asylees by Country of Nationality: Fiscal Years 2006 to 2008
(Ranked by 2008 Country of Nationality)
2008
2007
2006
Country
Number
Percent
Number
Percent
Number
Percent
Total
22,930
100.0
25,124
100.0
26,203
100.0
China
5,459
23.8
6,359
25.3
5,593
21.3
Colombia
1,646
7.2
2,177
8.7
2,961
11.3
Haiti
1,237
5.4
1,648
6.6
2,995
11.4
Venezuela
1,057
4.6
1,152
4.6
1,359
5.2
Iraq
1,002
4.4
671
2.7
370
1.4
Ethiopia
899
3.9
843
3.4
774
3.0
Indonesia
580
2.5
776
3.1
742
2.8
Russia
574
2.5
496
2.0
431
1.6
Guatemala
552
2.4
680
2.7
632
2.4
Nepal
497
2.2
413
1.6
376
1.4
All other countries,
including unknown
9,427
41.1
9,909
39.4
9,970
38.0
Source: U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Refugee, Asylum, and Parole System (RAPS) and Executive Ofﬁce
for Immigration Review (EOIR) of the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ).

this is if the applicant is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Attorney General either the existence of changed circumstances
which materially affect the applicant’s eligibility for asylum or
extraordinary circumstances relating to the delay in ﬁling an appli-
cation within the one year period. Note that there is no basis in the
Refugee Convention for this one year ban, although other countries
have instituted similar policies.
Prior to 1995, regulations authorized permission to work to all
asylum seekers whose claims were not deemed frivolous (Aleinikoff
et al. 2008, 852). In effect, nearly everyone who applied for asylum
was thereby authorized to work in the United States. In 1995, new
regulations were promulgated that postponed the issuance of work
authorization until at least 180 days had elapsed—unless asylum
had been granted before then. One of the immediate consequences
of this was that the number of asylum applications decreased
signiﬁcantly. These regulatory provisions have now been incorpo-
rated into the governing statute. It should also be noted that the
government generally completes the asylum proceedings within
this period of time.
Asylum and Withholding of Deportation
One of the unique features of U.S. law is that there are two different
statutory provisions dealing with individuals who seek to remain
in this country due to a fear of being returned home: refugee status
and withholding of deportation. The former should be familiar. The
refugee claimant must prove that she has a well-founded fear of
persecution on account of one of the ﬁve nexus factors. According
to the Supreme Court in INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, even if the standard
is met it is up to the discretionary authority of the Attorney General
to determine whether this refugee should be allowed to remain in
the United States. In Matter of Pula, the Board of Immigration
Appeals (BIA) set forth a totality of circumstances approach, and
it presented a wide range of factors to be considered in determining
whether to exercise this discretion:
Among the factors which should be considered are
whether the alien passed through any other countries
or arrived in the United States directly from his country,
whether orderly refugee procedures were in fact avail-
able to help him in any country he passed through, and
whether he made any attempt to seek asylum before
Current Refugee/Asylum Law and Practice in the United States
107

coming to the United States. In addition, the length of
time the alien remained in a third country, and his living
conditions, safety, and potential for long-term residency
there are also relevant. For example, an alien who faces
imminent deportation back to the country where he
fears persecution, may not have found a safe haven even
though he has escaped to another country. Further,
whether the alien has relatives legally in the United
States or other personal ties to this country which moti-
vated him to seek asylum here rather than elsewhere is
another factor to consider. In this regard, the extent of
the alien’s ties to any other countries where he does not
fear persecution should also be considered.
The BIA continues:
In addition to the circumstances and actions of the alien
in his ﬂight from the country where he fears persecution,
general humanitarian considerations, such as an alien’s
tender age or poor health, may also be relevant in a dis-
cretionary determination. A situation of particular con-
cern involves an alien who has established his statutory
eligibility for asylum but cannot meet the higher burden
required for withholding of deportation. Deportation to
a country where the alien may be persecuted thus
becomes a strong possibility. In such a case, the discre-
tionary factors should be carefully evaluated in light of
the unusually harsh consequences which he may befall
an alien who has established a well-founded fear of per-
secution; the danger of persecution should generally
outweigh all but the most egregious of adverse factors.
As noted in Pula, in addition to the refugee standard, there is
also a provision in the Immigration and Nationality Act (Sec. 241
(b) (3)) for withholding of deportation.
The Attorney General shall not deport or return any
alien . . . to a country if the Attorney General determines
that such alien’s life or freedom would be threatened in
such country on account of race, religion, nationality,
membership in a particular social group, or political
opinion.
108
Special U.S. Issues

Prior to the Supreme Court’s decision in Cardoza-Fonseca,
these two standards were generally equated with one another.
However, the Court ruled that there were important differences
between the two. For one thing, the withholding statute creates a
higher standard: the difference between “well-founded fear”
and “would be threatened.” However, along with this, withhold-
ing is mandatory, while an individual who only meets the refugee
standard (but not the withholding standard) could be returned to
her country of nationality at the Attorney General’s discretion.
Beyond this, however, there are other important differences.
For one thing, asylum leads to lawful permanent residence status
and then citizenship if the alien decides to pursue this, while
withholding only prevents the individual’s return to a speciﬁed
country in which his or her life or freedom would be threatened.
In addition, a grant of asylum to an individual confers derivate
status to that person’s spouse or child, while a grant of withhold-
ing does not extend any beneﬁt beyond the prohibition of
removal to the person himself or herself (Musualo 2007, 86). Note,
however, that many of these distinction between refugee and
those eligible for withholding of deportation are oftentimes more
theoretical than real. The primary reason for this is that if an indi-
vidual is able to meet the higher withholding standard it would
stand to reason that he or she would invariably also meet the
lower refugee standard.
Disqualifications
Similar to the disqualiﬁcations for refugee status that exist under
the 1951 Refugee Convention, U.S. law denies refugee status for
those who are thought to be undeserving of such protection due
to certain things that they have done—either in their home
country or else after their arrival in the United States. The refugee
deﬁnition provides: “The term ‘refugee’ does not include any
person who ordered, incited, assisted, or otherwise participated
in the persecution of any person on account of race, religion,
nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political
opinion.” In addition, other provisions of the Immigration and
Nationality Act (INA) further stipulate those who shall be denied
refugee status: The ﬁrst provision involves serious, nonpolitical
crimes committed by the refugee seeker before arriving in the
United States. The requirement that the crime be nonpolitical is
in recognition that dictatorships will often make criminal of those
Current Refugee/Asylum Law and Practice in the United States
109

who oppose the ruling regime. In terms of the serious component,
it is generally agreed that what needs to be weighed against one
another is the gravity of the persecution the individual would face
if returned to his or her country of nationality against the serious-
ness of the crime committed.
The second category consists of crimes committed by the alien
after arriving in the United States. Under the statutory framework,
those noncitizens who have been convicted of particularly serious
crimes are ineligible for relief under both asylum and withholding
of deportation. Note that the bar applies to those who “having been
convicted by a ﬁnal judgment of a particularly serious crime, con-
stitutes a danger to the community of the United States.” Thus,
the conviction alone will not sufﬁce, but it must also be proven that
this individual constitutes a present danger as well.
Finally, the deportation ground for the commission of aggra-
vated felonies has come to play a central role not only for immi-
grants and non-immigrants alike, but also those seeking refugee
status and/or withholding of deportation. The 1990 Act added lan-
guage to the INA so that the commission of an aggravated felony is
to be considered a particularly serious crime. Under present law,
asylum remains barred for all aggravated felonies, but requires a
threshold of a ﬁve year aggregate sentence in order to become ineli-
gible for withholding of deportation (Aleinikoff et al. 2008, 938).
Detention
According to the UNHCR, the detention of asylum seekers is inher-
ently undesirable, and this especially holds true for vulnerable
groups including single women, children, unaccompanied minors,
and those with special medial or psychological needs. Because of
this, the agency is of the view that detention should only be resorted
to in case of necessity. However, a number of states do not follow the
UNHCR Handbook on this matter and the United States is one of
those countries. From 1954 to 1982, the government followed a pol-
icy of paroling most undocumented persons seeking admission.
However, in response to the arrival of large numbers of asylum
seekers in the early 1980s, particularly Haitians and Cubans, the
United States has now instituted a policy that releases persons
much less frequently than they had in the past, and one in which
detention has now become the norm (Musalo et al. 2007, 959).
Under current law, undocumented individuals (unless they
committed certain crimes, are terrorists, or in expedited removal)
110
Special U.S. Issues

may be paroled or released upon payment of a bond, which the
Attorney General may grant for urgent humanitarian or signiﬁ-
cant public beneﬁt reasons. According to government regulations,
individuals can only be considered for parole if they “present nei-
ther a security risk nor a risk of absconding.” What is also note-
worthy is that the bond must be in the amount of at least $1,500.
Prior to 1996, release decisions made by the government were
subject to judicial review, but new amendments prohibit judicial
review “of any action or decision by the Attorney General . . .
regarding the detention or release of any alien or the grant, revo-
cation, or denial of bond or parole.” It is not unusual for asylum
seekers to remain in detention for months, and even years
(Musalo 2007, 960). And what should also be said is that most asy-
lum seekers are being detained in the same prisons and detention
centers that house some of the U.S.’s most hardened criminals. As
Karen Musalo has pointed out, Gauziya Kassindja, who became
famous because of her successful asylum application based on
her fear of facing female genital mutilation, was detained for
16 months and subject to solitary conﬁnement, punished for ris-
ing early to pray, repeatedly strip searched, and beaten and tear-
gassed during a riot at one of the detention facilities where she
was held (Musalo 1998, 369).
Temporary Protection
In Chapter 1, we brieﬂy analyzed the practice of a number of
European states that allow individuals who are not refugees
under the 1951 Refugee Convention to remain. The term used to
describe this practice is complementary protection. Similarly, the
United States has experimented with certain temporary protec-
tion measures as well since passage of the 1980 Refugee Act. The
ﬁrst efforts were Deferred Enforced Departure (DED) and
Extended Voluntary Departure (EVD). Under both of these pro-
grams, the Attorney General was able to exercise his/her discretion
to allow citizens of designated countries to remain in the United
States based on humanitarian considerations, particularly those
relating to civil conﬂict. Due in large part to the absence of any
governing standards, in 1990 Congress created a new temporary
protection program known as Temporary Protected Status (TPS).
TPS is blanket relief that may be granted under the fol-
lowing conditions: there is ongoing armed conﬂict
Current Refugee/Asylum Law and Practice in the United States
111

posing serious threat to personal safety; a foreign state
requests TPS because it temporarily cannot handle the
return of nationals due to environmental disaster; or
there are extraordinary and temporary conditions in a
foreign state that prevent aliens from returning, pro-
vided that granting TPS is consistent with U.S. national
interests (Wasem and Ester 2008, 3).
To be clear, TPS only applies to foreign nationals who are
already in the United States at the date of designation. Thus, it is
not an invitation for foreign nationals to pick up and travel to
the United States, nor is it intended as a way of helping to regular-
ize a foreign national’s immigration status. The Attorney General
may grant TPS for an initial period of six to eighteen months, and
then may extend this for another period of this same length.
Nationals of designated states must register for TPS status in
order to receive the statute’s protection. If this procedure is fol-
lowed, these individuals will be allowed to remain and to work
in the United States during the time that TPS applies to their
home country. In addition, they may not be detained on the basis
of the immigration status and they may even travel abroad with
permission. As of January 2010, the following countries listed in
Table 3.5, along with a listing of the number of nationals of those
countries, were designated for either TPS or DED status.
What remains unclear is why these particular countries have
been selected for temporary protection status, but other states—
some of which are suffering from much higher levels of political
violence—are not included. For example, according to data from
the Political Terror Scale (Gibney, Cornett, and Wood, 2008), which
112
Special U.S. Issues
TABLE 3.5
Countries Designated with TPS or DED Status
Burundi (27) TPS November 4, 1997—May 2, 2009 27
El Salvador (234,000) TPS March 2, 2001—March 9, 2009
Honduras (78,000) TPS December 30, 1998—January 5, 2009
Liberia (3600) DED October 1, 2007—March 31, 2009
Nicaragua (4000) TPS December 30, 1998—January 5, 2009
Somalia (300) TPS September 16, 1991—September 17, 2009
Sudan (500) TPS November 4, 1997—May 2, 2010
Haiti (100,000) TPS January 12, 2010 (18 months)

ranks countries according to their levels of political violence, the
following countries were scored as a level 5 in 2008—representing
the highest levels of political violence: Afghanistan, Chad,
Colombia, Democratic Republic of Congo, Iraq, Palestinian Occu-
pied Territories, Myanmar (Burma), Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
and the United Arab Emirates (Gibney et al. 2009). Out of this
group, only Somalia and the Sudan were designated for PTS/
DED status.
Conclusion
There are two sides to immigration/refugee issues in the United
States. There is the myth—but also the reality—of this being a
nation of immigrants. On the other hand, co-existing alongside
this has always been a nativist strain that has always questioned
the American-ness of each new wave of immigrants. In terms of
refugee protection in particular, once again there are two different
versions to choose from. On the one hand, the United States has
admitted more refugees than any other country in the world (by
far). Since 1980, more than two million refugees have been admit-
ted under the ORP, and this number does not include those granted
refugee status by means of applying for asylum.
However, we have also seen how U.S. refugee policy has long
been dominated by ideological and foreign policy considerations.
Of course, this has long worked out well for Russians, Vietnamese,
and Cubans who are desirous of living in the United States.
However, what this has also meant is that refugees from non-
communist countries have struggled mightily to gain refuge in this
country.
References
Books, Articles, and Chapters
Aleinikoff, T. Alexander, David Martin, Hiroshi Motomura, and
Maryellen Fullerton. 2008. Immigration and Citizenship: Process and Policy
6th ed. St. Paul, MN: Thompson/West.
Dowty, Alan. 1987. Closed Borders: The Contemporary Assault on Freedom of
Movement. New Haven: CT: Yale University Press.
References
113

General Accounting Ofﬁce. 1987. “Asylum: Approval Rates for Selected
Applicants.” Washington, DC: GAO.
Gibney, Mark, Linda Cornett, and Reed Wood. 2009. The Political
Terror Scale 1976–2008. Last accessed on January 28, 2010, http://
www.politicalterrorscale.org/.
Helton, Arthur. 1984. “Political Asylum under the 1980 Refugee Act:
An Unfulﬁlled Promise.” University of Michigan Journal of Law Reform 17:
243–264.
INS. June 1982. Asylum Adjudications: An Evolving Concept for the
Immigration and Naturalization Service. Washington, DC.
Loescher, Gil, and John Scanlan. 1986. Calculated Kindness: Refugees and
America’s Half-Open Door 1945–Present. New York: Free Press.
Montes, Segundo. 1988. “Migration to the United States as an Index of the
Intensifying Social and Political Crises in El Salvador.” Journal of Refugee
Studies 1: 107–126.
Musalo, Karen. 2007. “Protecting Victims of Gendered Persecution: Fear
of Floodgates or Call to (Principled) Action?” Virginia Journal of Social
Policy 14: 119–150.
Musalo, Karen, Jennifer Moore, and Richard A. Boswell. 2007. Refugee
Law and Policy: A Comparative and International Approach, 3rd ed. Durham:
Carolina Academic Press.
Select Commission on Immigration and Refugee Policy. 1981. U.S.
Immigration Policy and the National Interest. Washington, DC: GPO.
Stanley, William. 1987. “Economic Migrants or Refugees from Violence?
A Time Series Analysis of Salvadoran Migration to the U.S.” The Latin
American Research Review 22: 132–154.
Wasem, Rush Ellen, and Karma Ester. 2008. Temporary Protected Status:
Current Immigration Policy and Issues. Congressional Research Service.
Washington, DC: CRS.
Wyman, David. 1968. Paper Walls: America and the Refugee Crisis
1938–1945. Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press.
Zucker, Norm, and Naomi Zucker. 1996. Desperate Crossings: Seeking
Refuge in America. Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe.
Cases and Administrative Decisions
INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421 (1987)
Matter of Pula, 19 I. & N. Dec. 467 (BIA 1987)
114
Special U.S. Issues

4
Chronology
1914–
1919
Millions of people are displaced and made stateless in
Europe and the Middle East as a result of World War I
and the breakup of the Hapsburg, Romanov, Ottoman,
and Hohenzollern empires.
1921
The League of Nations appoints Fridtjof Nansen as the
ﬁrst high commissioner for refugees.
Over one million Russians become refugees as a result of
the collapse of czarist Russia, the Russian Civil War, the
Russo-Polish War, and the Soviet famine.
1922
The Graeco-Turkish War of 1922 displaces more than one
million people. Following the war, Nansen negotiates the
exchange of populations between Greece and Turkey,
and, later, between Greece and Bulgaria.
1930
Following the death of Nansen, the Nansen International
Ofﬁce for Refugees is created.
1933
The Nazis come to power in Germany.
The Ofﬁce of the High Commissioner for Refugees Com-
ing from Germany is established outside of the League of
Nations framework. After Germany leaves the League,
the High Commissioner for Refugees comes under the
auspices of the League of Nations and remains so until
1938.
115

1933
(cont.)
The Convention Relating to the International Status of Ref-
ugees (covering Russian, Armenian, Turkish, Assyrian,
and Assyro-Chaldean refugees) is signed and ratiﬁed.
1935
The Nuremberg Laws, which discriminate against Jews,
are passed in Germany.
Conﬂict breaks out in Spain between Republicans and
Fascists. During the next several years, over 400,000
Spanish Republicans take refuge in France.
1938
In a night of violence, Kristallnacht, nearly 100 Jews are
murdered, and tens of thousands were arrested in
Germany.
U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt calls together an
international refugee conference at E´vian-les-Bains con-
cerning European Jews.
As a result of the conference at E´vian-les-Bains, the Inter-
governmental Committee of Refugees (IGCR) is estab-
lished to discuss the fate of Jews with the German
government.
The Convention Concerning the Status of Refugees Com-
ing from Germany is signed and ratiﬁed.
1939
The High Commissioner for Refugees under the Protec-
tion of the League of Nations is created, merging the
International Nansen Ofﬁce with the High Commis-
sioner for Refugees Coming from Germany.
World War II begins in Europe. Between 20–30 million
people will be displaced as a consequence of the war.
The Nazis begin deporting German Jews to Poland.
1940
The Nazis adopt the “Final Solution” (the systematic
extermination for the Jewish population) as state policy.
As a result, approximately six million Jews are murdered
as well as huge numbers of Gypsies, other minorities,
and political dissidents.
116
Chronology

1943
The
United
Nations
Relief
and
Rehabilitation
Administration (UNRRA) is created to provide postwar
reconstruction, but it becomes involved with relief for
displaced persons and war victims and their repatriation.
UNRRA repatriates millions of East Europeans and
Soviet citizens, many of them forcibly.
The American Council for Voluntary Agencies in Foreign
Service (ACVA) is established as the main umbrella
organization for refugee voluntary agencies in the United
States (it is now called InterAction).
1945
The United Nations is created following World War II to
replace the League of Nations.
1946
The International Refugee Organization (IRO) is estab-
lished. IRO resettles well over one million displaced per-
sons overseas between 1946 and 1952.
1947
The partition of India unleashes the outﬂow of 14 million
Hindus and Muslims from India and Pakistan.
1948
Conﬂict in Palestine and the creation of the state of
Israel result in the expulsion and ﬂight of over 700,000
Palestinians from their homeland.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) is created to provide
assistance to displaced Palestinians.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) is
approved by the United Nations.
Conﬂict breaks out in Korea, where millions of people are
displaced.
1950
The United Nations Korean Reconstruction Agency
(UNKRA) is established to assist Korean refugees.
On December 14, Resolution 428 (V) of the UN General
Assembly provides for the creation of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Resolution
Chronology
117

1950
(cont.)
429 (V) calls for a conference of plenipotentiaries to draw
up a convention on refugees.
1951
UNHCR begins operating. At the time, there are roughly
1.5 million refugees in the world—mainly in Europe, but
also in Asia (Hong Kong and Macau) and in Latin
America.
On 28 July, the Convention Relating to the Status of Refu-
gees is adopted in Geneva.
The Intergovernmental Committee for European Migra-
tion is established (now called International Organiza-
tion for Migration, IOM).
1954
UNHCR is awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for the ﬁrst
time.
1956
Due to the political crisis in Hungary, 200,000 refugees
ﬂee to Austria and Yugoslavia.
An independence war in Algeria triggers an outward
ﬂow into Tunisia and Morocco.
1957
UNHCR intervenes to assist Algerian refugees in
Morocco and Tunisia.
1958
Additional refugee ﬂows take place in Africa, with
Uganda receiving people from Sudan and Rwanda.
1959
World Refugee Year is celebrated throughout the world.
The ﬁrst large-scale ﬂow of refugees from Cuba migrates
to the United States.
1960
The government of the Federal Republic of Germany
institutes an indemniﬁcation fund for victims of Nazism
and entrusts its administration to UNHCR.
1962
Burundi witnesses a mass inﬂux of ethnic Tutsi from
Rwanda.
118
Chronology

The International Council of Voluntary Agencies (ICVA)
is created as the umbrella organization for many
international and regional voluntary agencies working
for refugees.
UNHCR helps to repatriate 260,000 Algerians from
Morocco and Tunisia.
Ethnic Hutu of Burundi migrate to Rwanda. This will
occur again twice before 1994.
1965
Immigration Act in the United States creates a seventh
preference for refugees from the Middle East and/or
communist countries.
1966
Refugees from Mozambique, ﬁghting for independence,
migrate to neighboring countries. Many will repatriate
in 1975, when Mozambique becomes independent.
1967
The Protocol to the 1951 Convention Relating to the Sta-
tus of Refugees is adopted in New York.
The United Nations makes its Declaration on Territorial
Asylum.
1968
After the repression of the Prague Spring, 42,000 Czechs
abroad do not return to their country.
1969
On September 10, the Organization for African Unity
Convention governing the speciﬁc aspects of refugee
problems in Africa is adopted in Addis Ababa.
1971
Nearly 10 million Bengalis from Eastern Pakistan take
refuge in India.
1972
UNHCR launches special operations to repatriate and rein-
tegrate over 200,000 refugees in southern Sudan as well as
to assist hundreds of thousands of displaced persons.
The Bengalis taking refuge in India return home to the
newly created state of Bangladesh.
Chronology
119

1972
(cont.)
Thousands of Asians expelled from Uganda are resettled
abroad within a very short time.
Ethnic Hutus of Burundi migrate to Rwanda.
1973
Due to the political repression following the military
coup that overthrew Salvador Allende in Chile, a refugee
movement begins, resulting in some 200,000 Chileans
taking ﬂight abroad.
A military take-over in Uruguay generates the ﬂight of
about 200,000 Uruguayan refugees.
Approximately 160,000 Biharis are transferred from
Bangladesh to Pakistan. (Between 1977 and 1982 another
37,000 are moved.)
1974
Between 1974 and 1976, independence in Guinea-Bissau,
Mozambique, and Angola allows repatriation of hundreds
of thousands of refugees from neighboring countries.
In Cyprus, UNHCR launches a humanitarian program in
favor of those who have sought refuge on the other side
of the demarcation line. This includes 164,000 Greek
Cypriots from the north and 34,000 Turkish Cypriots
from the south.
1975
Between 1975 and 1980, about 350,000 Cambodians seek
asylum in Thailand, of which 310,000 are resettled in
third countries. (In 1993, as designated lead agency,
UNHCR repatriates approximately 370,000 border
Khmers and Cambodian refugees from Thailand, in the
context of an overall political settlement in their country.)
Tens of thousands of Saharawi move from Western
Sahara into Algeria.
In Argentina a military dictatorship emerges, which
drives 600,000 Argentine citizens into ﬂight abroad.
The fall of Vietnam and Laos provokes the ﬂight of
1.5 million Indochinese refugees into other countries in
120
Chronology

Southeast Asia. More than 1.3 million of these people
are eventually resettled in North America, Europe, and
Oceania.
1977
Approximately 90,000 Muslim Filipinos seek refuge in
Malaysia.
Angola receives 200,000 Zairians from the province of
Katanga (now Shaba).
An outward ﬂow of refugees from Equatorial Guinea
move to Cameroon and Gabon. They will repatriate after
a change of regime in their country.
About 200,000 Burmese of Bengali origin take refuge in
Bangladesh.
The Conference to Review Draft Convention on
Territorial Asylum fails.
1978
Movement from Laos to Thailand becomes a mass exodus.
A number of Laotians also seek refuge in Vietnam.
The exodus of the boat people, who have been leaving
Vietnam by sea since 1975, assumes dramatic dimension.
Many drown or become victims of piracy.
The 200,000 Bengali Burmese displaced the previous year
repatriate to Burma.
Afghan refugees begin to arrive in Pakistan and Iran. By
1990, ﬁve million Afghans leave their home country.
Approximately 130,000 Vietnamese of Chinese origin
take refuge in China. By 1990, they will total 286,000.
Zairians, who in previous years sought refuge in
neighboring countries, start returning to their home
country.
Immigrants from all over the world rejected at European
borders begin to ask for asylum, in addition to those
Chronology
121

1978
(cont.)
arriving in Europe because of the political crises prevail-
ing in Africa, the Middle East, and Latin America.
Central America begins to register outﬂows of popula-
tion from Nicaragua, El Salvador, and Guatemala, and
there are also many displaced persons within the coun-
tries themselves.
In the Caribbean area, many Haitians have already
sought asylum in Dominican Republic, Venezuela,
nearby islands, and the United States.
UNHCR launches an assistance program in the Horn of
Africa for hundreds of thousands of Ethiopian refugees
in the Sudan, Somalia, and Djibouti, as well as 500,000
internally displaced people in Ogaden.
An exodus of Ugandans moves into the Sudan.
1979
Following the Iranian Islamic Revolution, large numbers
of Iranian asylum-seekers cross into neighboring coun-
tries. About 25,000 refugees approach the UNHCR in
Pakistan and Turkey, request asylum, and the majority
of those accepted are eventually resettled in Western
countries.
The Conference on Indochinese Refugees meets in Geneva,
and countries make pledges to resettle Vietnamese boat
people.
The Pan-African Refugee Conference meets in Arusha,
Tanzania, to determine ways to better assist and protect
refugees.
1980
In repatriation efforts in Africa, 200,000 refugees return
to Zimbabwe following independence, 190,000 to Zaire,
and 50,000 to Angola.
Civil war in Chad again forces hundreds of thousands of
people to take refuge in neighboring countries. They will
repatriate in 1981–1982.
122
Chronology

In March, the U.S. Congress passes the 1980 Refugee Act,
the ﬁrst comprehensive American legislation on refugee
admission.
From April to September, 130,000 Cuban boat people
arrive in Florida, causing a refugee emergency.
The United States admits a record 207,000 refugees this
year.
1981
UNHCR is awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for the second
time.
The International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in
Africa (ICARA I) is held in Geneva to encourage donor
states to increase their assistance to African host countries.
U.S. Haitian Interdiction program begins.
1982
The number of refugees in Central America, Mexico, and
Panama increases considerably.
The United Nations Border Relief Operation is estab-
lished to assist refugees on the Thai-Cambodian border
until 1991.
Civil war in Sri Lanka causes an exodus of Tamils. By
1992, the numbers of Tamil refugees worldwide rises to
almost half a million—200,000 asylum seekers in Europe
and 230,000 in the Tamil populated regions of southern
India.
The Refugee Studies Center, a part of the Oxford Univer-
sity Department of International Development, is
founded. It will become a leading center for research
and teaching about the causes and consequences of, and
potential solutions to, forced migration.
1983
A mass inﬂux from southern Sudan into Ethiopia begins;
by 1990, this movement will have involved 400,000
Sudanese refugees.
Chronology
123

A limited repatriation operation starts from Somalia to
Ethiopia, and about 12,000 refugees return by 1990.
A 1990 crisis in Somalia will force many more Ethiopian
refugees to repatriate or to take refuge into Kenya.
1984
Papua New Guinea begins receiving refugees from the
Indonesian province of Irian Jaya.
Salvadoran refugees—in limited numbers—begin to return
home, mainly from Honduras. In 1990, almost all of them
will have repatriated under the auspices of UNHCR.
On November 22, the Cartagena Declaration on
International Protection of Refugees in Central America,
Mexico, and Panama is adopted.
The second International Conference on Assistance to
Refugees in Africa (ICARA II) meets in Geneva.
1985
The Sudan is in crisis as it receives an inﬂux of tens of
thousands of Ethiopians whose lives are menaced by
war and famine.
1986
Between 1986 and 1989, approximately 320,000 Ugandans
repatriate from the Sudan and Zaire.
Europe registers a considerable increase in asylum-
seekers, with a growing percentage being non-European.
A mass exodus from Mozambique into neighboring
countries begins. More than 900,000 of the one million
refugees seek asylum in Malawi, an amount equaling
10 percent of its population.
Tens of thousands of Poles arrive in various countries of
Western Europe.
1987
A Peace Plan for Central America (Esquipulas II) offers
new opportunities for repatriation.
1988
About 60,000 Burundi nationals take refuge in Rwanda.
They will be able to repatriate a few months later.
124
Chronology

Ethiopia receives a mass inﬂux of Somali refugees fol-
lowing armed conﬂict in Northwestern Somalia.
The International Conference on the Plight of Refugees,
Returnees and Displaced Persons in Southern Africa
meets in Oslo to effectuate a plan of action for the region.
The Journal of Refugee Studies is ﬁrst published by Oxford
Journals.
1989
Masses of East Germans ﬂee to neighboring countries,
particularly West Germany. In November, when it is clear
that refugee ﬂows cannot be contained, the Berlin Wall
collapses and the post-Cold War era begins.
Hungary, which has received refugees from Romania,
signs the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refu-
gees. Other East-European countries, such as Poland,
begin to receive asylum-seekers and to consider adhesion
to the Convention.
Following incidents in border areas, 75,000 refugees and
displaced persons arrive in Senegal and Mauritania from
Liberia.
In Geneva, the Conference on Southeast Asia adopts a
Comprehensive Plan of Action to provide solutions—
including refugee status determination and voluntary
repatriation—for Vietnamese and Laotian refugees.
In Guatemala, the International Conference on Central
American Refugees adopts a Plan of Action for Central
American refugees, returnees, and displaced persons.
After many years in exile, 43,000 Namibians return to
their home country from Angola and other countries.
The International Journal of Refugee Law is ﬁrst published
by Oxford Journals.
1990
Between 1990 and 1994, some 300,000 Colombians are
forcibly displaced within their country as a result of
Chronology
125

1990
(cont.)
guerrilla war, counterinsurgency, and violence related to
drug trafﬁcking.
During the same period, at least 500,000 Peruvians are
displaced as a result of continuing political violence
between the military and the Shining Path guerrillas.
As a consequence of civil war in Somalia, the number of
Somali refugees in Ethiopia reaches 375,000.
Due to civil war, 750,000 Liberians (32 percent of the
entire population) take refuge in Guinea, Coˆte d’Ivoire,
and Sierra Leone.
Approximately four million people are displaced in the
12 months following Iraq’s August invasion of Kuwait.
Between August and September, more than one million
migrant workers and other foreign nationals ﬂee from Iraq
and Kuwait into Jordan and other neighboring countries,
while 850,000 Yemenis living in Saudi Arabia return home.
The Cairo Declaration on Human Rights in Islam is
adopted in August at the nineteenth Islamic Conference
of Foreign Ministers in Cairo. It is generally seen as an
Islamic response to the United Nations 1948 Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.
1991
President Siad Barre of Somalia is ousted from ofﬁce, and
ﬁghting breaks out between rival clans. Increasing num-
bers of Somalis ﬂee into Kenya, Ethiopia, or the interior
of Somalia.
Shortly after the Gulf War, armed conﬂict between the
Iraqi government and Iraqi Kurds and Shiites provokes
one of the largest and fastest refugee movements to this
point. About 1.4 million people take refuge either in Iran
or along the eastern border of Iraq. A huge international
relief effort, Operation Provide Comfort, is mounted to
aid the Kurds.
As ﬁghting breaks out in Croatia, UNHCR begins to aid
people displaced by war.
126
Chronology

A military coup overthrows the ﬁrst democratically
elected president of Haiti, Jean-Bertrand Aristide. As
repression spreads throughout the country over the next
few months, more than 38,000 Haitians risk their lives at
sea in an attempt to reach the United States.
The UN General Assembly creates the post of emergency
relief coordinator to ensure more rapid and effective
international responses to humanitarian emergencies.
1992
As conﬂict spreads to Bosnia and Herzegovina, UNHCR
begins to distribute food aid to war victims. During the
war, UNHCR assumes the lead role in organizing the
UN relief effort in the former Yugoslavia.
The secretary-general of the United Nations creates the
Department of Humanitarian Affairs, to be led by a new
under secretary-general for humanitarian affairs.
Kenya is struck by one of the world’s fastest-growing ref-
ugee emergencies, with an average of 900 refugees,
mostly from Somalia, entering the country each day. By
the end of the year, more than 400,000 refugees are in
Kenya. In September, UNHCR launches a cross-border
operation with the aim of stabilizing population move-
ments inside Somalia.
During the ﬁrst half of the year, nearly 100,000 Nepalese
from Bhutan ﬂee ethnic persecution and enter Nepal.
In a war between the government and opposition forces,
up to half a million Tajiks are driven from their homes.
About 356,000 of these remain in the southern part of
the country of Tajikistan, while 60,000 refugees enter
Afghanistan.
At the end of the year, the ﬁrst of 28,000 U.S. troops arrive
in Somalia in Operation Restore Hope to establish a more
secure environment for humanitarian relief operations.
1993
In Togo, political unrest and government repression force
more than 200,000 Togolese into Ghana and Benin.
Chronology
127

1993
(cont.)
In Rwanda, peace negotiations between rebels and the
government fail, leading to renewed ﬁghting that displa-
ces about 600,000 persons.
In Zaire, an outbreak of politically instigated ethnic vio-
lence forces an estimated 300,000 people from their
homes by mid-year.
In Mozambique, UNHCR begins a three-year repatria-
tion program for about 1.5 million Mozambican refugees.
The repatriation is the largest in the history of Africa.
In Germany, the parliament passes a comprehensive asy-
lum law that signiﬁcantly restricts the previous unquali-
ﬁed right to apply for asylum in Germany.
In the United States, the Supreme Court rules the
international law prohibiting the forced return of refu-
gees does not apply to a country that goes outside its bor-
ders to apprehend and return refugees, upholding the
U.S. policy of summarily returning all Haitian asylum-
seekers seized by the U.S. Coast Guard on the high seas.
The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugo-
slavia (ICTY) is established as a United Nations court of
law for the purpose of investigating and prosecuting
war crimes committed during the conﬂicts in the Balkans.
Its decisions set international legal precedents showing
that an individual’s political status does not offer protec-
tion from prosecution.
The conﬂict over Nagorno-Karabakh, a region inside
Azerbaijan populated mainly by Armenians, causes the
largest refugee movement in the former Soviet Union.
By June, almost 200,000 Azeris have ﬂed from Armenia
to Azerbaijan, while some 300,000 Armenians have
escaped in the opposite direction. Within Azerbaijan, an
additional 300,000 people have been uprooted.
In Burundi, 800,000 people are displaced as a result of an
attempted coup d’e´tat in October.
128
Chronology

In preparation for the World Conference on Human
Rights, ministers and representatives of Asian states cre-
ate the Bangkok Declaration.
Germany amends its immigration laws so that those
who have passed through “safe” third countries,
including any European Union state, on their way to
Germany could now be returned home, and it also
streamlined its asylum determination process. The
effect was immediate. While 322,600 asylum claims
were ﬁled in 1992, only 127,200 asylum applications
were made in 1994.
1994
UNHCR assists four million people displaced by the con-
ﬂict in the former Yugoslavia.
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization sign a
Declaration of Principles, establishing the basis for a
peace accord, which includes a provision for the return
of the Palestinian refugees who ﬂed from Gaza and the
West Bank in 1967. The accord delays discussion of the
return of Palestinian refugees who ﬂed in 1948.
In Burma, the military government and UNHCR sign an
agreement on repatriation of Burmese Rohingya refugees
from Bangladesh.
After massive bloodletting in Rwanda, over 250,000
Rwandese, mostly Tutsis, ﬂee to Tanzania in a 24-hour
period in April.
As the Tutsi-led Rwanda Patriotic Front sweeps to vic-
tory in Rwanda, over one million Rwandese, mostly
Hutus, take refuge in neighboring Zaire over a 48-hour
period in July, causing a huge humanitarian crisis.
The United States rescinds its program of automatically
returning all Haitian boat people to Haiti without an
asylum hearing. Instead, the U.S. Coast Guard ships all
Haitian asylum applicants it picks up at sea to the U.S.
base at Guantanamo, Cuba, for asylum processing.
Chronology
129

1994
(cont.)
Alarmed by a sudden surge in the number of Cubans
reaching Florida in August, the Clinton Administration
dramatically changes its policy of open entry for all
Cubans arriving in the United States. About 30,000
Cubans are picked up at sea and are taken to Guanta-
namo for processing. The administration agrees to admit
more the 20,000 Cubans a year as part of a deal in which
it won Fidel Castro’s promise to stop the huge exodus
of Cuban boat people.
In November, the Security Council of the United Nations
creates the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) to investigate and prosecute persons responsible
for the genocide committed during the year.
1995
The Abuja Agreement is signed, marking a third attempt
to end a six-year long civil war in Liberia during which
an estimated one million people have ﬂed their country.
In Srebrenica, a UN protected “safe area” is breached
resulting in the summary execution of some 7,800 Bosnian
men and teenage boys; in addition, 25,000–30,000 Bosnians
are expelled from the area.
Naturalization becomes an option for 360,000 ethnic
Armenian refugees from Azerbaijan with Armenia’s
enactment of a citizenship law.
Between 330 and 8,000 individuals are massacred by the
Rwandan Patriotic Army at the Kibeho camp for refugees
and internally displaced Rwandans.
During a two-month period, up to 400,000 Tamils ﬂee
Jaffna and the surrounding areas as a result of the
ongoing civil war.
1996
Violence breaks out between Vietnamese boat people and
Filipino soldiers as the Philippine government attempts to
forcibly repatriate hundreds of Vietnamese asylum seekers.
During a period of heavy ﬁghting between Israeli
Defense Forces and Hezbollah, Israeli Defense Forces
130
Chronology

shelled a UN compound in Qana, killing 106 Lebanese
and Palestinian civilians who had ﬂed the ﬁghting in
other areas of Lebanon.
Around 200 Vietnamese boat people ﬂed a detention
center in Hong Kong after learning that they would be
forcibly repatriated.
Ireland’s Refugee Act, incorporating many of the
international guarantees for the protection of refugees,
becomes domestic law.
Following a 1992 peace accord and a national reconcilia-
tion ceremony, between 50,000 and 80,000 Malian refu-
gees voluntarily repatriated during the year.
The United States’ legislature passes the Illegal Immigra-
tion Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act, making
signiﬁcant changes to existing United States immigration
laws, and creating new obstacles to legal immigration.
1997
In Lebanon, 18 Palestinian refugees engaged in a hunger
strike to protest planned UN budget cuts to the UNRWA,
the agency which provides health, education, and relief
services to Palestinian refugees.
Estonia adopts a national refugee law governing the pro-
cesses for, and treatment of, refugees and asylum seekers.
European countries involuntarily return nearly 300 Tamil
asylum seekers to Sri Lanka.
As ﬁghting between Zairian rebels and government
forces increases, 100,000 Rwandan Hutu refugees ﬂee
their UN camps for the jungles of eastern Zaire.
In December, over 200 Tutsi refugees from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are massacred by
Hutu rebels at the Mudende refugee camp.
A military coup in Sierra Leone ousts the ﬁrst demo-
cratically elected government after its being in ofﬁce only
Chronology
131

1997
(cont.)
one year. This event comes after a six-year civil war, which
has resulted in at least 10,000 dead, 1 million refugees, and
another million individuals internally displaced.
1998
The U.S. Congress passes the Haitian Refugee Immigra-
tion Fairness Act, granting permanent U.S. residence for
eligible Haitian refugees.
Fighting between Cambodian government troops and
Khmer Rouge guerrillas drives over 30,000 Cambodians
to Thailand’s border in only one day.
The Rome Statute, establishing the International Criminal
Court (ICC), is adopted at a diplomatic conference in
Rome. It will enter into force in 2002.
1999
The humanitarian crisis continues in and around
Chechnya, as 200,000 individuals have ﬂed to the neigh-
boring republic of Ingushetia and at least as many
remain displaced within Chechnya itself as the ﬁghting
between the Russian military and Chechnyan ﬁghters
continues.
NATO conducts an 11-week bombing campaign against
Yugoslavia to end the country’s attempt to rid Kosovo of
its ethnic Albanian population. Approximately 90 percent
of Kosovo’s population ﬂees the region.
2000
In the worst single attack on UNHCR staff members, three
UNHCR workers are killed by militants in Atambua, West
Timor, highlighting the failure of Indonesian authorities to
protect humanitarian staff. The incident prompted the
evacuation of aid staff in the region.
Over 850,000 Albanians have ﬂed the violence in Kosovo
since 1999.
The border war between Ethiopia and Eritrea continues.
A two-week bombing campaign by Ethiopia displaces
hundreds of thousands of Eritreans, with tens of thou-
sands crossing borders into neighboring countries.
132
Chronology

2001
Up to 100,000 East Timorese people continue to live in
camps in Indonesian West Timor, 18 months after East
Timor’s independence.
After the terror attacks on September 11th, thousands of
Afghans, fearing a retaliatory attack, attempt to ﬂee their
country. Most aid workers, including the World Food Pro-
gramme, leave the country because of security concerns.
2002
The International Criminal Court, with the judicial
power to end impunity for perpetrators of the most seri-
ous crimes of concern to the international community, is
established.
Violence between Hindus and Muslims in the west
Indian state of Gujarat worsens; over 100,000 individuals,
mostly Muslims, take shelter in refugee camps.
2003
Renewed civil wars in Cote d’Ivoire and Liberia have
forced over a million West Africans to leave their home
countries in search of safety since 2002.
In Liberia, ﬁghting between rebel forces attempting to over-
throw President Charles Taylor and government troops
intensiﬁes. Most of the country’s 3.3 million people are
either sick or starving and a third are internally displaced,
with 50,000–60,000 living in one camp outside of Monrovia.
At least 35 million people in the world are either refugees,
asylum seekers, warehoused, or internally displaced.
The UN High Commissioner for Refugees, Ruud Lubbers,
issues a statement cautioning that war in Iraq could result
in over 600,000 people ﬂeeing the country, creating a
potential refugee crisis.
The “Coalition of the Willing” invade Iraq, resulting in
massive human displacement.
The Canal Hotel bombing in Iraq results in the deaths of
22 people including UN Special Representative Se´rgio
Chronology
133

2003
(cont.)
Vieira de Mello, refugee expert Arthur Helton, and more
than 100 were wounded including refugee scholar
Gil Loescher.
2004
In February, the northern Uganda based rebel group
called the Lord’s Resistance Army enters the Barlonyo
camp for displaced persons in Uganda and massacres
over 300 individuals.
Over 100,000 ethnic Nepalese of Bhutanese origin con-
tinue to live in seven refugee camps in eastern Nepal,
having ﬂed Bhutan in the 1990s after new citizenship
laws targeting speciﬁc ethnic groups were implemented.
In August, armed combatants, many of whom are mem-
bers of the Hutu rebel movement Forces for National Lib-
eration, massacre at least 156 refugees at Gatumba camp
in Burundi.
By the end of the year, Colombia’s internal conﬂict had
created up to three million internally displaced persons.
Fourteen Palestinians are killed when Israeli forces
assault two densely populated refugee camps in Gaza.
In March, the ICC issues a warrant for the arrests of indi-
viduals accused of committing crimes against humanity
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
2005
In July, the ICC issues arrest warrants for the leaders of the
Lord’s Resistance Army, a rebel group based in Uganda.
The director of the Institute for Environment and Human
Security at the United Nations University in Bonn issued
a report stating the rising sea levels, desertiﬁcation, and
shrinking freshwater supplies will create up to 50 million
environmental refugees by the end of the decade.
2006
The crisis in Darfur, in which more than 200,000 civilians
have been killed, spreads across the border into Chad,
internally displacing 20,000 Chadians. There are cur-
rently over 200,000 Sudanese refugees in Chad.
134
Chronology

The UN High Commissioner on Refugees visits China and
publicly states that North Koreans are “persons of con-
cern” and that forcibly repatriating them to North Korea
without determining their status is in violation of the Refu-
gee Convention. Depending on the source, between 10,000
and 300,000 North Koreans have ﬂed to China.
2007
Over the course of three weeks, Iran forcibly repatriates
85,000 Afghan refugees, moving them across Afghanistan’s
southeastern border amid escalating violence between
Taliban and coalition forces.
The inﬂux of Iraqi refugees to Syria, an estimated 30,000
per month for a total population of nearly 1.4 million
since 2003, puts a severe strain on Syrian society, over-
burdening social services and relief agencies.
Over two million Iraqis have ﬂed into neighboring coun-
tries, but without residency permits, they have no ability
to gain employment, and face severe impoverishment.
The continuing civil war in Somalia has led over half a
million people to ﬂee Mogadishu in three months.
2008
Nicaragua unanimously passes the Law for the Protection
of Refugees, a piece of legislation afﬁrming and clarifying
their traditional openness to refugees, and incorporating
the international guarantees for the protection of refugees.
In July, the Prosecutor for the ICC ﬁles formal charges
against Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir of genocide,
crimes against humanity, and war crimes. In 2009, the
ICC issued a warrant for his arrest. He is the ﬁrst sitting
head of state indicted by the ICC.
The UNHCR and Google collaborate to create a new online
mapping program, “Google Earth Outreach.” The pro-
gram will give non-proﬁt organizations a new resource to
use in making their work more visible to the public.
2009
Six years into the U.S. military intervention in Iraq, the
refugee and displacement crisis continues to be one of
Chronology
135

2009
(cont.)
the largest in the world, with two million Iraqis having
ﬂed to neighboring countries and nearly three million
more internally displaced within Iraq.
Nearly two million individuals have ﬂed the violence in
Swat Valley in northern Pakistan.
Since the beginning of armed conﬂict in 2006, thousands
of refugees have ﬂed to Kenya from Somalia every
month, with Dadaab in eastern Kenya hosting 280,000
refugees, triple its capacity.
Afghan refugees in Iran and Pakistan are under growing
pressure to leave, but Afghanistan, having endured
extensive infrastructure loss, is unable to cope with large
numbers of repatriating individuals. There are an esti-
mated 2.7 million Afghans residing in Pakistan and Iran.
Two thousand Roma refugees continue to live in the
Konik refugee camp, located just outside of Montenegro,
more than 10 years after ﬂeeing violence in Kosovo.
The United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations
releases a report focusing on the mistreatment of Burmese
refugees, migrants, and asylum seekers in Malaysia.
Burmese who have ﬂed the military junta in their home
country come to Malaysia to register with the UNHCR
for resettlement in a third country.
Colombia’s internal conﬂict between government troops
and the rebel Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia
continues, causing further internal displacement, esti-
mated at roughly four million individuals, and prompt-
ing about half a million Colombians to seek refuge in
neighboring countries.
2010
A devastating earthquake kills more than 111,000 Hai-
tians and leaves hundreds of thousands dispossessed.
In response, the Obama administration announces that
Haitians in the United States will receive Temporary Pro-
tected Status, but it vows to halt any efforts to ﬂee to the
United States.
136
Chronology

5
Biographical Sketches
Mahnaz Afkhami (1941–)
Mahnaz Afkhami was born into a traditional family in Kerman,
Iran. As a young woman, she went to the United States to study.
In 1967, after 13 years in the United States, she returned to Iran
and taught literature at the National University. With her stu-
dents, she founded the Association of University Women. In
1970 she became secretary general of the Women’s Organization
of Iran, and in 1975 became Iran’s Cabinet Minister for Women’s
Affairs. During this time, women’s rights in Iran improved sig-
niﬁcantly; laws were revised to ensure that women had equal
access to child care and divorce, the minimum marriage age for
girls was raised, and laws were passed that supported working
women. However, after the 1979 Revolution, many of the laws
that Afkhami and the Iranian women’s movement had seen
passed were overturned, her home and property were conﬁscated
by the revolutionary government, and she was put on the death
list, charged with “corruption on earth and warring with God.”
At the time the charges were brought against her, Afkhami was
in New York working with the United Nations. She remains in
exile in the United States. She is now the founder and president
of Women’s Learning Partnership for Rights, Development, and
Peace (WLP), executive director of Foundation for Iranian Stud-
ies, and a co-chair of the Women Leaders Intercultural Forum.
She has authored a number of books, including Safe and Secure:
Eliminating Violence Against Women and Girls in Muslim Societies.
137

Sonya Aho (1966–)
Sonya Aho was born in Midyat, Turkey. She and her family ﬂed
from persecution when she was four years old; they were among
the ﬁrst Assyrian refugees to settle in Sweden in the 1970s.
Throughout her adult life, Aho has used her experiences as a refu-
gee to produce prize-winning journalism about her diasporic
community. In 1990, she began a two-year documentary project
that traced the Assyrian origins of the inhabitants of So¨derta¨lje,
the Swedish city that is now home to over 15,000 of Sweden’s
70,000-member Assyrian community. In 1989, her newspaper, La¨n-
stidningen, was awarded a prestigious Swedish journalism prize
for its coverage of the Assyrian and other immigrant communities
living in Sweden. Aho stresses the need to preserve her national
identity and a cultural heritage that is at risk of disappearing.
Since 1998, Aho has served as Chair of the women’s section of
the Ethnic Minorities Group of Sweden. She is currently writing
a book that includes portraits of women from different cultural
backgrounds and reﬂects varying experiences of immigration.
Madeleine Albright (1937–)
Madeleine Albright was born Marie Jana Korbelova´, in Prague.
She and her family were forced from their homeland twice due
to political turmoil. When the Nazis invaded Czechoslovakia
during World War II, the family ﬂed to England. They returned
to Prague when Albright’s father, a diplomat, took a position with
his government in the brief period between the liberation from
the Germans and the communist coup of 1948. However, because
of the communist takeover, the Korbelovas once again had to
leave the country, immigrating to the United States when
Albright was 11 years old. She earned her bachelor’s degree in
political science from Wellesley College in 1959, and later was
awarded a masters (1968) and doctorate (1976) in public law and
government from Columbia University. She was a research
professor of International Affairs and director of Women in
Foreign Service Program at Georgetown University’s School of
Foreign Service, taught undergraduate and graduate courses in
international affairs and U.S. foreign policy, and was responsible
for developing and implementing programs designed to enhance
138
Biographical Sketches

women’s professional opportunities in international affairs. In
1993, U.S. President Bill Clinton named her the U.S. ambassador
to the United Nations, and in 1996 named her Secretary of State.
She was the ﬁrst female secretary of state and the highest-
ranking female in the history of U.S. government.
Isabel Allende (1942–)
Isabel Allende was born into a political family. Her father was the
Chilean ambassador to Peru, and her uncle, from 1970–1973, was
Chilean President Salvador Allende. After her father abandoned
the family, her mother remarried a diplomat appointed to Bolivia
and Beirut, Lebanon. The young Allende travelled with her fam-
ily, attending schools in Chile, Bolivia, and Lebanon, with a
period of time spent homeschooled as well. As a young woman,
Allende worked for the UN Food and Agriculture Organization
both in Santiago and in Europe; she also worked as a translator
of novels from English to Spanish. In 1973, she went into exile
after her uncle was overthrown in the military coup led by General
Augusto Pinochet. At the time, she was receiving numerous
death threats, and when she learned that her name was on a
blacklist, she ﬂed to Venezuela with her husband and two chil-
dren. She worked as a journalist in Caracas and wrote her ﬁrst
novel, The House of the Spirits in 1981. She has since moved to the
United States and written more than 15 novels. Allende visited
Chile in 1990, after a 17 year absence.
Hannah Arendt (1906–1975)
Born in Hanover, Germany, the only child of middle-class Jewish
parents, Hannah Arendt was encouraged to pursue academic
and intellectual activities at a young age. As a university student
in Germany, she studied with some of the most unorthodox schol-
ars of her time, including Martin Heidegger, Karl Jaspers, and
Edmund Husserl. She became politically active early, and was
arrested and brieﬂy imprisoned in 1933 for gathering evidence
of growing Nazi anti-Semitism. After Hitler’s rise to power,
Arendt’s apartment temporarily became a hiding place for fugi-
tives as they ﬂed Nazi persecution, but soon she ﬂed to France
with her mother and husband. There she worked for Jewish
Biographical Sketches
139

refugee organizations, but in 1940, she was taken to the intern-
ment camp at Gurs, near the Pyrenees. She managed to escape
before being taken to an extermination camp, moving to New York
in 1941. During the war years, Arendt wrote a weekly political col-
umn for a Jewish paper, Aufbau, and soon she began publishing
articles in leading journals. Her ﬁrst major work, The Origins of
Totalitarianism, published in 1951, explored the connection
between political fascism and political anti-Semitism, contending
that modern totalitarianism was a new form of government that
used fear to control society. She became a U.S. citizen the same
year, and her later works led to her appointment as a professor at
Princeton University, the ﬁrst time a woman worked as a full time
professor at that institution. In 1961, Arendt went to Jerusalem to
attend the trial of Adolf Eichmann, a Nazi who had been accused
of involvement in the murder of large numbers of Jews during
World War II. She later wrote about the trial, ﬁrst in The New Yorker,
then as Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil. Her
claims that evil actions are not necessarily the result of an evil
desire were not well received, and her reputation suffered from
the ensuing controversy. Arendt went on to teach at the University
of Chicago and the University of California at Berkeley, and
devoted her time as well as to her essays on political issues of the
day. She was honored throughout her later life by a number of
academic prizes, and her contributions to the study of political
philosophy continue to be drawn upon.
Christine Arnothy (1930–)
Born in Budapest, Christine Arnothy is an acclaimed French
author. During the battle of Budapest (occupied by the Germans
and besieged by the Soviets) in 1945, she hid in her basement with
her parents, keeping a daily journal in which she recorded the
battle for the city. After her clandestine departure from Hungary
with her parents, she moved ﬁrst to Belgium and later settled in
Paris. In 1954, her war journal, which she had titled I am Fifteen
and I Do Not Want to Die, won the Grand Prix Ve´rite´, an important
French literary prize. It is considered one of the greatest autobio-
graphical accounts of the Second World War.
140
Biographical Sketches

Mathangi Maya Arulpragasam
(a.k.a. M.I.A.) (1977–)
Mathangi Maya Arulpragasam was born in London into an eth-
nically Tamil family. Because of her father’s desire to support the
Tamil independence movement, the family moved to Sri Lanka
when she was only six months old, and her father became politi-
cally active with a militant Tamil group. At ﬁrst, the family lived
on a relative’s remote farm without electricity or running water.
However, as the civil war escalated, it became unsafe for them
to remain in Sri Lanka. Arulpragasam’s mother moved with the
three children to a small house in Madras, India, where the girls
were ﬁnally able to attend school. Arulpragasam and her sister
excelled as students, but as contact with their remaining family
in Sri Lanka became limited and money grew tight, they often
did not have enough to eat. She and her siblings became sick
and they eventually moved back with family in Sri Lanka
despite the danger posed by the conﬂict. Soon, however, the vio-
lence of the civil war peaked and Arulpragasam’s mother began
her attempts to ﬂee the country with her young children. Sol-
diers bombed roads and escape routes, and often shot Tamils
attempting to move across border areas. After a number of failed
attempts, her mother ﬂed the country with her children, moving
brieﬂy to India and then ﬁnally on to London. At 11 years old,
living in Surrey, Arulpragasam ﬁrst learned to speak English,
and eventually won a place at London’s Central Saint Martins
College of Art & Design, where she studied ﬁne art, ﬁlm, and
video. She began her career as an artist, and her ﬁrst exhibit, of
paintings depicting the Tamil movement, was nominated for
the Turner prize and published in a monogram book. She later
turned to music for expression, eventually adopting the alias
M.I.A., and ﬁrst gained notice in the music world in 2004 for
two hit singles. She has since been nominated for two Grammy
Awards and an Academy Award. She speaks publicly about the
post-war situation in Sri Lanka and the effects of war on civil-
ians. She has also actively participated in school-building proj-
ects in Liberia and spoken about the plight of former child
soldiers.
Biographical Sketches
141

Bertolt Brecht (1898–1956)
Bertolt Brecht was a German dramatist and poet who devel-
oped drama as a forum for leftist causes. His books and plays
were banned in Germany beginning in the 1930s because of
his leftist views, and he went into exile, living variously in
Denmark, Finland, and Russia, and ﬁnally moving to the United
States in 1941. During the war years, Brecht expressed his
opposition to Nazism and Fascism in some of his most famous
plays, including Life of Galileo, Mother Courage and her Children,
and Fear and Misery of the Third Reich. However, he was not suc-
cessful as a playwright in Hollywood, with only one script titled
Hangmen Also Die! ﬁnding partial acceptance. In 1947, Brecht
was accused of harboring communist and anti-American senti-
ment, and was required to give testimony before the House
Un-American Activities Committee. He subsequently left the
United States and went to Switzerland. He ﬁnally returned to
Berlin in 1949, becoming the most popular contemporary poet
in both East and West Germany. Brecht was awarded the Stalin
Peace Prize in 1954 for his work.
Nadia Comaneci (1961–)
Nadia Comaneci was born in Onesti, a factory town in the moun-
tains of Romania. An extremely active child, she had a habit of
jumping on her family’s couches until they broke. When Comaneci
was six, Be´la Ka´rolyi, a gymnastics coach from a local sports
school, came to her school to recruit potential gymnasts. Her love
of gymnastics was apparent at this early age and soon after, she
began training at his gym. She trained six days a week, four hours
per day, and after only one year of training, she was ready to
begin competing. At only seven years old, she placed 13th her
ﬁrst year competing in the Romanian National Junior Gymnastics
Championships. She returned to the same competition the next
year and won ﬁrst place. In 1971, Comaneci became a member
of the Romanian Gymnastics Team and over the next ﬁve years
won gold medals in national and international championships.
In 1976, she competed in the Montreal Olympics, where she won
eight perfect 10s, the ﬁrst person ever to do so. The Romanian
government awarded her the Hero of Socialist Labor because of
142
Biographical Sketches

the Olympic performance. It was the highest honor in Romania,
and she was the youngest woman ever to receive it. In 1981, her
former teacher, Ka´rolyi, and his wife defected from Romania.
The Romanian government feared that because of his inﬂuence,
she might defect also, and they would not allow her to leave the
country except as a coach of the Romanian team at the 1984
Olympics. In 1989, she defected to the United States in the middle
of the night, leaving everything including her family, behind. In
2000, she became the ﬁrst athlete to speak in the United Nations
to launch the International Year of Volunteers, and actively works
for charity organizations around the world. She built a clinic for
Romanian homeless children and orphans in 2006, the Nadia
Comaneci Children’s Clinic.
Zohra Daoud (1954–)
In 1972, Zohra Daoud was the ﬁrst and only woman to be
crowned Miss Afghanistan. Born into a life of privilege, Daoud
entered the competition out of personal interest, seeing it as an
opportunity for herself and the other young Afghan women to
promote higher education and academic achievement. She won
because of her intelligent responses during the question and
answer session. Daoud spent the ﬁrst months after the competi-
tion promoting literacy and distributing supplies throughout the
underdeveloped country. She later became the host of a television
quiz show and hosted shows on Radio Afghanistan; she also
earned a degree in French Literature from Kabul University. How-
ever, after the Soviet invasion in 1979, Daoud left Afghanistan
with her family, staying brieﬂy in Germany before immigrating
to the United States. She co-founded the Afghan International
Association for Professionals to assist in the reconstruction of
Afghanistan and works with the organization Women for Afghan
Women.
Leandro Despouy (1947–)
Leandro Despouy is an Argentinean lawyer who defended politi-
cal refugees from across Latin America, including Uruguayans,
Bolivians, Brazilians, and Chileans. Soon he began receiving
death threats, ﬁrst from neighboring countries and then from
Biographical Sketches
143

inside Argentina. A bomb was planted at his ofﬁce, and his
working partner was kidnapped and killed. Despouy realized
that he had to leave his country, and after a period of months in
hiding and moving clandestinely from country to country, he
arrived in France. Once there, he campaigned for international
recognition of the human rights abuses in Argentina and on
behalf of the tortured and the missing. Working with other Latin
American refugees, Despouy founded an agency to promote sol-
idarity in the exile community. Despouy returned to Argentina at
the beginning of 1984, after the democratic elections in the
country. He is currently an ambassador for Argentina, working
as Special Representative for International Human Rights for
the United Nations. Despouy was one of the ﬁve authors of a
recent report on human rights abuses committed against the
extrajudicial prisoners the United States detains at its naval base
at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
Emmanuel Dongala (1941–)
Emmanuel Dongala is a doctor of physics, a professor of chemis-
try, as well as one of the ﬁnest writers in the history of the Repub-
lic of the Congo. He studied science in France and the United
States, where he received his doctorate in Physics. He returned
home to lecture in chemistry at the University of Brazzaville
and was later appointed Dean. As an author, in 1973 he pub-
lished Un Fusil dans la Main (A Gun in Hand), which won him
the Ladislas-Dormandi prize. With his novel, The Fire of Origin,
published in Spanish in 1982, he gained the attention of
international literary circles. For that novel, Dongala won the
Grand Prix Litteraire de l’Aﬁque Noire and the Prix Charles-
Oulmont, awarded by the Fondation Franc¸aise. In honor of his
literary achievements, Dongala was appointed Chevalier des
Arts et des Lettres by the French Ministry of Culture. During
the civil war of the mid-1990s, Dongala and his family applied
for asylum at the French embassy in Brazzaville, but were unsuc-
cessful. However, in 1997, they were able to move to the United
States, due in part to the inﬂuence of writers and other individ-
uals in American literary circles. Dongala was awarded a
Guggenheim fellowship in 1999, and now writes for newspapers
and magazines in the United States.
144
Biographical Sketches

Ariel Dorfman (1942–)
Born to parents of Eastern European heritage who ﬂed to
Argentina as the Nazis took power, Ariel Dorfman’s life has
been deﬁned by the experience of exile. He was born in Buenos
Aries, where his father had become a prominent professor at the
Universidad Nacional de la Plata, but the family moved to New
York for safety when Dorfman was two years old. His father
had written a letter protesting the military regime’s takeover of
the university and had subsequently been threatened with a trial
and deportation. Dorfman’s father then took a post at the United
Nations, but in the mid-1950s, as the United States succumbed to
McCarthyism, he, along with other suspected communists, were
forced to leave their jobs. They went to Santiago, where Dorfman
spent the next 19 years. As a young man, he became involved
in politics, and as a student at the University of Chile, he was
elected president of the Independent Allendista Students. He
later wrote How to Read Donald Duck, a best-selling book examin-
ing Disney cartoons as an instrument of the spread of U.S. cul-
tural imperialism, and took posts as a professor of Literature at
the University of Chile, and eventually, as cultural advisor to
President Salvador Allende’s chief of staff. After the 1973 coup,
Dorfman went into exile in the United States, and has since writ-
ten extensively about Chile, political oppression and terror, and
human rights. He is a member of L’Academie Universelle Des
Cultures, in Paris, and the American Academy of Arts and Sci-
ences; his books have been internationally acclaimed and trans-
lated into more than 40 languages. He is now a professor of
literature and Latin American Studies at Duke University and
divides his time between the United States and Chile.
Jaroslav Drobny (1921–2001)
Jaroslav Drobny was born in Prague, the son of a grounds man
at the Prague Lawn Tennis Club. As a boy, Jaroslav learned to
string rackets and was a ball boy beginning at the age of ﬁve.
He soon began playing tennis, and by the time he was a teen-
ager, he was considered one of his country’s most promising
young athletes in both tennis and ice hockey. He ﬁrst went
to Wimbledon as a 16-year-old in 1938, losing to Argentinean
Biographical Sketches
145

Alejo Russell. He returned the next year, representing Bohemia
Moravia, the one part of his home country that had not been
annexed by the Nazis and lost again. During World War II,
Drobny worked in a munitions factory to avoid being sent to a
work camp in Germany. After the war, he returned to sports,
pursuing both ice hockey and tennis, and in 1948 won a silver
medal for ice hockey at the St. Moritz winter Olympics. The same
year, a Moscow-led coup removed the elected Czechoslovak
leader Eduard Benes, an event that eventually led to his defec-
tion from Czechoslovakia. In 1949, Drobny reached his ﬁrst
Wimbledon ﬁnal but lost. He was severely criticized by the
communist-controlled newspapers in Czechoslovakia, and was
ordered to return home. Instead, Drobny defected with another
teammate during a Swiss tournament in Gstaad. He traveled
on a passport provided by the Egyptian government, and began
the best part of his career. He was in the world’s top ten for ten
successive years from 1949, winning the French title in 1951
and 1952, and the Italian in 1950, 1951, and 1953. Drobny was a
Wimbledon ﬁnalist in 1952, ﬁnally winning Wimbledon on his
third attempt in 1954. Drobny retired in 1959 and became a British
citizen in 1960. He was inducted into the International Tennis Hall
of Fame in 1983.
Albert Einstein (1879–1955)
Albert Einstein was a theoretical physicist who is often regarded
as the creator of modern physics. He was born in Germany, and
was educated in Germany, Italy, and Switzerland. In 1901 he
gained his diploma, but, unable to ﬁnd a teaching position, took
a position as a technical assistant in the Swiss Patent Ofﬁce. He
obtained his doctor’s degree in physics in 1905 and held various
teaching posts in Berne, Zurich, Prague, and Berlin. In 1933, he
renounced his German citizenship for political reasons and immi-
grated to the United States. There he took a position as a professor
of Theoretical Physics at Princeton University. After World War II,
Einstein was a leading ﬁgure in the World Government Move-
ment and was offered the presidency of the State of Israel, which
he declined. He lived in Princeton until his death in 1955. His
most important works include Special Theory of Relativity and The
Evolution of Physics. Einstein was awarded the Nobel Prize in
Physics in 1921.
146
Biographical Sketches

Nawal El Saadawi (1931–)
Born in Egypt, Nawal El Saadawi was the second of nine children.
Her father, a civil servant, was relatively progressive and wanted
all of his children to get a university education. El Saadawi
attended the University of Cairo and graduated in 1955 with a
degree in psychiatry. In 1965, she published a novel, Memoirs of a
Female Physician, and in 1972, she published her ﬁrst non-ﬁction
book, Women and Sex, which caused her to lose her job as director
of health education for the Ministry of Health and as chief editor
of its journal. In 1977, she published The Hidden Face of Eve, in
which she recalls her own experience of undergoing female cir-
cumcision at the age of six. The book was banned in Egypt. In
1981, she was arrested on the orders of President Anwar El Sadat
under the Law for the Protection of Values from Shame. Released
the following year, following Sadat’s assassination, she founded
the Arab Women’s Solidarity Association (AWSA). It was the ﬁrst
legal, independent feminist organization in Egypt. However, the
Hosni Mubarak government forced AWSA to close down in 1991.
El Saadawi took the Egyptian government to court, but lost the
case. Following these events, El Saadawi was on a death list of
Islamic groups and lived with bodyguards. She decided that same
year to accept a job at Duke University in North Carolina, where
she taught until 1996. She has since moved back to Egypt.
Philip Emeagwali (1954–)
Philip Emeagwali was born in Nigeria, one of nine children, and
showed early promise in school, even though he often had to work
to help support his family. In 1966, the Biafran civil war broke out
and Emeagwali and his family were forced to ﬂee from their home
and live for nearly three years in a refugee camp. In 1974, Emeagwali
was able to go to the United States on a scholarship, and 15 years
later he graduated with degrees in mathematics, engineering, and
computer science. In 1989, he won the prestigious Gordon Bell Prize
for solving a problem that had been classiﬁed by the U.S. govern-
ment as one of the 20 most difﬁcult computing problems ever. His
invention is widely used in programming and building the world’s
most powerful supercomputers. Former President Clinton has
called him “one of the great minds of the information age.”
Biographical Sketches
147

Enrico Fermi (1901–1954)
Enrico Fermi showed an early aptitude for mathematics and
physics and gained his doctor’s degree in physics in 1922, at the
age of 21. In 1926, Fermi discovered the statistical laws, now
known as the Fermi-Dirac statistics, which govern the behavior
of certain types of particles. He was elected professor of theoreti-
cal physics at the University of Rome in 1927, a post he held until
1938, when he immigrated to the United States to escape Benito
Mussolini’s fascist dictatorship. Fermi is best known for discovery
of nuclear ﬁssion and the production of elements lying beyond
what was until then the Periodic Table. He was one of the leaders
of the team of physicists on the Manhattan Project for the develop-
ment of nuclear energy and the atomic bomb. Fermi was awarded
the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1938.
Tenzin Gyatso (1935–)
His Holiness the 14th Dalai Lama, Tenzin Gyatso, is both the head
of state and the spiritual leader of Tibet. He was born to a farming
family in a small town located in northeastern Tibet. At the age of
two, he was recognized as the reincarnation of the 13th Dalai
Lama, Thubten Gyatso. His Holiness began his monastic educa-
tion at the age of six. In 1950, His Holiness was called upon to
assume full political power after China’s invasion of Tibet in
1949. In 1954, he went to Beijing for peace talks with Mao Zedong
and other Chinese leaders, including Deng Xiaoping and Zhou
Enlai. However, in 1959, with the Chinese military occupation of
Tibet, His Holiness was forced to escape into exile. Since then he
has been living in Dharamsala, northern India, the seat of the
Tibetan political administration in exile. His Holiness was
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989.
Thich Nhat Hanh (1926–)
Thich Nhat Hanh is a Vietnamese Buddhist monk who joined the
monkhood in 1942 and founded the School of Youth for Social
Services in Saigon in the early 1960s. The organization, a corps
of Buddhist peace-workers, rebuilt bombed villages, set up
148
Biographical Sketches

schools, and established medical centers. He was banned from
returning to Vietnam after he travelled to the United States and
Europe in 1966. He was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize in
1967 by Martin Luther King, Jr., and spent years making the case
for an end to the Vietnam War to federal and Pentagon ofﬁcials.
Hanh founded Plum Village, a Buddhist community in exile, in
France in 1982. He continues to work to alleviate the suffering of
refugees and political prisoners throughout the Third World. In
2005, Hanh returned to Vietnam after a series of negotiations
allowed him to teach and publish some of his books in Vietnamese
and to travel the country brieﬂy. He lives in Plum Village, where
he leads meditation retreats. Hanh was awarded the Courage of
Conscience award in 1991.
Jo´se Ramos Horta (1949–)
Jo´se Ramos Horta was born in Dili, East Timor. He worked as a
journalist from 1969–1974, during which time he was exiled to
Mozambique by the Portuguese authorities for two years because
of his involvement in politics. He later co-founded the Revo-
lutionary Front for an Independent East Timor, and as the
Portuguese withdrew in 1974, he was appointed Minister for Exter-
nal Affairs and Information in the ﬁrst transitional government of
the Democratic Republic of East Timor. However, in 1975, while
Horta was travelling abroad, Indonesia invaded and annexed the
territory. Horta spent the next 23 years in exile, defending the right
of the people of East Timor to self-determination. He was the lead-
ing international representative for the East Timorese cause, and
formulated a three-phase peace plan that became the foundation
for UN negotiations with Indonesia. In 1996, Horta was jointly
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize along with Bishop Carlos Belo.
After a UN supervised referendum in 1999, East Timor voted for
independence, and in May 2002, East Timor became an indepen-
dent country (Timor-Leste), with Horta as Foreign Minister.
Michae¨lle Jean (1957–)
Michae¨lle Jean was born in Port-au-Prince, Haiti. At the age of 11,
she and her family ﬂed the Haiti to escape the regime of Franc¸ois
Duvalier and settled in Montreal. During her educational career,
Biographical Sketches
149

Jean worked in a women’s shelter, an experience which inspired
her to work for the establishment of a network of shelters for
women and children across Canada. She also worked for an organi-
zation dedicated to assisting immigrants gain entry to Canada.
After having a career as a well-known journalist and broadcaster
in Quebec, Jean became the ﬁrst black and only the third woman
to hold the post of governor-general of Canada in 2005. She is ﬂuent
in ﬁve languages—French, English, Italian, Spanish, and Haitian
Creole—and remains a social activist for women and children at
risk of domestic violence.
Wassily Kandinsky (1866–1944)
One of the founding fathers of abstract painting, Wassily
Kandinsky was born in Moscow, the son of a tea merchant.
Kandinsky was drawn to the artistic and the creative when he
was young, writing poetry, drawing, and playing the piano and
the cello. However, as a young man Kandinsky studied law, eco-
nomics, and ethnography at the University of Moscow, eventu-
ally accepting a position on the university’s law faculty in 1893.
It was not until 1896, when he was 30 years old, that he decided
to become an artist. He was greatly inﬂuenced by the French
Impressionist painters, especially Claude Monet, appreciating
that the subject of the painting played an inferior role to the col-
ors used. His earliest paintings, which were based on folk art,
demonstrate this fascination with color rather than form, and
even as his work became more complex, the focus remained with
color. In 1910, Kandinsky produced his ﬁrst abstract watercolor,
in which all aspects of subject representation have disappeared,
and continued perfecting his art over the following years.
During the Russian Revolution, Kandinsky held important posts
at the Commissariat of Popular Culture and at the Academy in
Moscow, later receiving a professorial appointment at the Uni-
versity of Moscow. However, near the end of 1921, the Soviet
attitude toward art changed, and to continue his work, Kandin-
sky had to leave Russia. He became a German citizen in 1928,
holding major exhibitions in Berlin and Paris. Because of Nazi
persecution Kandinsky emigrated to France in 1934 and contin-
ued working even during the period of German occupation until
his death.
150
Biographical Sketches

Fazil Kawani (1959–)
Fazil Kawani, an Iraqi Kurd, has had to ﬂee his country twice.
In 1974, as ﬁghting between the Iraqi authorities and the Kurd-
ish movement began, he and his family escaped, settling in a
refugee camp in Iran. Within a year, the Kurdish movement col-
lapsed and lost international support and he, as well as nearly
one million other Kurdish refugees, returned home. Although
there was an amnesty issued by Saddam Hussein at the time
of the refugees’ return, within one year, arrests and disappear-
ances of Kurdish people began and Hussein started a campaign
aimed at the destruction of Kurdish villages. Kawani, then still a
student, was active in the human rights movement. He became
a target of the government because of his open criticism of the
security forces, and in order to survive he had to leave Iraq for a
second time. Kawani applied for asylum in the United Kingdom
in 1987, and was recognized as a refugee in 1989. In 1993, after
earning a degree in civil engineering, he became the coordinator
of the Kurdish Cultural Center. Currently, Kawani is working as
the communications director at the Refugee Council in London.
Mebrahtom Keflezighi (1975–)
Mebrahtom Keﬂezighi is a U.S. athlete who specializes in long
distance running, especially marathons. He and his family were
refugees from Eritrea who moved to Italy in 1985 to escape the
civil war. They moved to the United States in 1987 and Keﬂezighi
became a naturalized citizen of the United States in 1998, the same
year he graduated from University of California, Los Angeles, with
a degree in business communications. He won the silver medal in
the men’s marathon in the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens.
Akbar Khurasani (1961–)
Akbar Khurasani was born in a small village located in the moun-
tains of Uruzgan province, Afghanistan. When he was 15, he
moved to Kabul and was drafted into the army. However, during
his military service, Khurasani began attending art classes with a
Biographical Sketches
151

tutor from Moscow, and painting became his passion. He displayed
an exceptional talent early, and was, in 1986, given the opportunity
to study at the Ukrainian Academy of Arts. Before he could ﬁnish
his education, the Taliban took over Afghanistan, preventing him
from returning home. In 1999, the UNHCR opened a social center
for refugees in Kiev, and Khurasani taught art there to both local
and refugee children. After living in the Ukraine for 16 years,
Khurasani was granted citizenship in 2003. His paintings can be
found in collections worldwide, and in 2000, he presented his
paintings at an International Art Festival in Kiev.
Walter Lam (1954–)
Walter Lam was born and raised in northern Uganda. After gradu-
ating from high school, he ﬂed to Kenya to escape political per-
secution. While in Kenya, he attended Egerton University and
graduated with a degree in agricultural engineering. He returned
to Uganda in 1981 where he worked with the government in vari-
ous management positions. He was forced out of the country
again in 1986 and moved to the United States. In 1989, he founded
the Alliance for African Assistance, an organization that helps ref-
ugees that are ﬂeeing persecution to settle in the United States by
providing the basic assistance needed to start a new life. The Alli-
ance began to assist Africans, but is now providing assistance to
refugees from all over the world.
Raphael Lemkin (1901–1959)
Raphael Lemkin was born in Poland and studied philology and
law at Lwow and Heidelberg Universities. He was a prominent
international jurist in pre-war Poland, and in 1933, he came
before the Legal Council of the League of Nations with a pro-
posal to outlaw acts of “Barbarism and vandalism.” When the
Nazis invaded Poland in 1939, Lemkin joined the resistance,
but ﬂed to Sweden after being injured. Lemkin was the ﬁrst aca-
demic to study Nazism from the standpoint of jurisprudence.
He identiﬁed Adolf Hitler’s intention, and labeled it genocide, a
hybrid word consisting of the Greek preﬁx genos, meaning race,
and the Latin sufﬁx cide, meaning killing. In 1941, he moved to
the United States, and in 1945 was appointed a consultant on
152
Biographical Sketches

international law to the Judge Advocate of the U.S. Army; he
also served as legal advisor to the U.S. Chief Prosecutor at
Nuremberg. At international legal meetings, he began to outline
ideas for a change in international law. On December 9, 1948,
the UN General Assembly adopted the Convention on the Pre-
vention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide unanimously.
Lemkin was twice nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize, in 1950
and 1952.
Miriam Makeba (1932–2008)
Sixties icon and singer Miriam Makeba was born in South Africa,
the daughter of a housekeeper and a Shell clerk. Makeba discov-
ered music early in her life, realizing that it was something that
could lift her out of the poverty and despair that surrounded
her. Her career began in the early 1950s as a vocalist for the
Manhattan Brothers. She then appeared in an anti-apartheid
documentary called Come Back Africa, a movie that made her
famous, but also caused the South African government to revoke
her citizenship. Makeba’s uncles were killed in the Sharpeville
Massacre, and her mother died soon afterwards, but she was pro-
hibited from entering South Africa to attend the funerals. In 1963,
she spoke to the United Nations about apartheid; later in her life,
during her exile in Guinea, she would become a Guinean delegate
to the UN General Assembly. Her song “Pata Pata” launched her
recording career, and she was toured worldwide. However, in
1968, when she married black social justice activist Stokely
Carmichael, her U.S. concerts were cancelled and her recording
contract broken. She found herself simultaneously exiled from
her home country and from many Western countries for her
anti-apartheid and civil rights activism. She was able to return to
South Africa in 1990, at the end of the apartheid regime, after
30 years of exile. Soon after, she began a charity project to raise
money for the protection of women in South Africa. Often
referred to as Mama Africa because of her lifelong commitment
to her homeland, Makeba received a number of awards, both for
her music and for her activism. She was the ﬁrst black African
woman to receive a Grammy Award; she was also given the Dag
Hammarskjo¨ld Peace Prize in 1986 for her peace efforts. Makeba
died in Italy, after a concert given to support writer Roberto
Saviano in his stand against organized crime.
Biographical Sketches
153

Tatyana Mamonova (1943–)
Tatyana Mamonova is considered the founder of the Russian
Women’s Movement. She was exiled from Russia in 1980 for edit-
ing and publishing an underground journal containing the ﬁrst
collection of Soviet feminist writings. She was awarded the U.S.
World Heroine Prize for her work as an international women’s
leader. During the 1990s, Mamonova founded, edited, and began
publishing Women and Earth, an international and bilingual
Russian-English eco-feminist almanac. It is a continuation of her
original underground journal.
Predrag Matvejevic (1932–)
Predrag Matvejevic was born in the ethnically mixed town of
Mostar in the former Yugoslavia, the son of a Croatian mother
and a Russian father. He studied philology and humanities at
Zagreb and Sarajevo universities, going on to study comparative
literature at the University of Paris. In 1968, when Matvejevic
was a Professor of French at the University of Zagreb, he was pro-
hibited from speaking at a student demonstration because of his
involvement in a circle known as the School of Korcula, a cultur-
ally mixed group of intellectuals that continually called for
“socialism with a human face.” The school, and its journal, Praxis,
were banned in Yugoslavia after 1974. In 1974, Matvejevic wrote
an open letter asking Yugoslavia’s President Josip Tito to step
down, one of dozens of open letters he wrote from the 1970s on.
He publicly supported the causes of many political dissidents,
actions that led to his expulsion from the Communist League.
One year before the outbreak of war in Yugoslavia, Matvejevic
wrote another open letter, this time to Slobodan Milosˇevic´, asking
him to resign. In the letter, Matvejevic claimed that the only other
option for Milosevic was suicide. When the war began, Matvejevic
chose to leave, a situation he calls “midway between asylum and
exile,” living variously in France and Italy. He currently serves as
president of the International Committee for the Mediterranean
Centre, vice-president of International Pen, and co-founder of the
Sarajevo Association based in Paris and Rome. He teaches Slavic
languages at the Sapienza University of Rome, and has published
over 20 books.
154
Biographical Sketches

Thabo Mbeki (1942–)
Born in South Africa to parents who were both teachers and activ-
ists, Thabo Mbeki joined the African National Congress (ANC) in
1956 as a 14-year-old student. In 1959, as a result of a strike, his
school was closed down and Mbeki continued his studies at home,
eventually enrolling in a correspondence course with University
of London. After the ANC was banned, Mbeki continued his
activism underground in Pretoria and Witwatersrand. It was at
this time that Mbeki’s father, along with Nelson Mandela, was
imprisoned for his activities with the ANC, and, facing a similar
fate, Mbeki left the country to continue his work in exile. He
played a critical role in building up the youth and student sections
of ANC, the underground movement in general, and coordinated
the movement’s propaganda campaign in London. In 1989, Mbeki
became head of the ANC’s International Affairs Department. He
returned to South Africa in 1990, after a 28-year exile, when he
was elected as the ﬁrst deputy president of the new Government
of National Unity. Mbeki succeeded Mandela as president of
South Africa when he was inaugurated in 1999.
Golda Meir (1898–1978)
Golda Meir was born in Kiev to a lower-middle-class family.
When she was eight years old, her family moved to the United
States because of the pogroms against Jews taking place in Russia
at that time. Meir later recalled that her childhood terror of anti-
Semitic violence strongly inﬂuenced her commitment to the
establishment of Israel as a safe and secure Jewish state. She mar-
ried in 1917 and moved with her husband to Palestine in 1921. By
1928, she was the secretary of the Working Women’s Council in
Palestine and in 1929 was chosen to be a delegate to the World
Zionist Organization. In 1940, she became the head of the political
department of Histadruth trade union. Her ofﬁcial political career
began in 1948 when she was elected to be a member of Israel’s
Provisional Council of State and served as the Israeli ambassador
to Soviet Union. She was chosen to be the foreign minister in 1956,
and despite poor health, she became Prime Minister of Israel in
1969. Meir was Israel’s ﬁrst female head of state and the third
woman in the world to hold that position.
Biographical Sketches
155

Makau Mutua (1958–)
Makau Mutua was born in Kenya, the second of seven children. An
excellent student, he attended the University of Nairobi Law
School, where he became the secretary general of the Students
Union. He was arrested and detained for organizing students
against one-party rule, ofﬁcial corruption, and human rights viola-
tions in Kenya. He was subsequently expelled from the University
of Nairobi during his second year in law school, and left the coun-
try in 1981. He went to Tanzania, where he applied for, and was
granted, UN refugee status. With the ﬁnancial assistance provided
for him by the UN refugee agency, he was able to attend the
University of Dar-Es-Salaam. In 1982, he survived an attempted
kidnapping by security forces. He left Tanzania and moved to
the United States, where he attended Harvard Law School. Mutua
is now a professor of law at the State University of New York at
Buffalo School of Law. He is also the director of Human Rights
Center, and is co-founder and chair of the Nairobi-based Kenya
Human Rights Commission. He has written extensively on
human rights, international law, and African politics.
Martina Navratilova (1956–)
Martina Navratilova received her ﬁrst tennis lesson at age six
and played her ﬁrst tournament at age eight. She won the
Czechoslovakian Women’s singles title in 1972 at the age of 16,
beginning a career that dominated women’s tennis from 1975
to 1994. She was the number one player in communist
Czechoslovakia from 1972 until her defection at the U.S. Open
in 1975; she would become a U.S. citizen in 1981. She had been
told by sports federation authorities in Czechoslovakia that she
needed to return to school in her homeland and make tennis
secondary because she was becoming too Americanized. She
made the decision to defect when they indicated to her that
they would begin to restrict her travel. Until her return to
Czechoslovakia as a U.S. citizen in 1986, when she led the
American team to a Federation Cup victory, she was con-
sidered a non-person, her name and results never appearing in
Czechoslovakian newspapers. From 1975 until she retired from
tennis in 1994, she was consistently in the top 10 worldwide,
156
Biographical Sketches

and by her retirement she had won 167 titles, more than any
other player, male or female, in the history of tennis. These
included nine Wimbledon, two French Open, three Australian
Open, and four U.S. Open championships. She was inducted into
the Tennis Hall of Fame in 2000, and is considered one of the
greatest tennis players in the history of the sport. Navratilova is
also renowned for being one of the ﬁrst athletes to acknowledge
being homosexual.
Le Thanh Nhon (1940–2002)
Le Thanh Nhon was one of the ﬁrst modern sculptors of Vietnam,
who was noted for his ability to combine the cultural heritage of
Eastern and Western art in his work. Nhon was a top graduate of
Saigon’s School of Fine Arts in 1964, and became internationally
known at an early age, participating in the Paris Biennale in 1963
when he was only 23. He became a lecturer in ﬁne arts at Saigon
University, Saigon College of Fine Arts, and The Imperial Capital
of Hue College of Fine Arts. In 1975, when the government changed
in Saigon, he gathered his family and ﬂed by boat. He and his family
were given asylum in Australia, and Nhon became a tram driver
and a spray painter to support his wife and four children. However,
he continued his art as well, and won a prize at the Asian Arts Exhi-
bition and Competition in 1976. He fashioned a career in Melbourne
as a sculptor, painter, book illustrator, and lecturer at the Royal
Melbourne Institute of Technology until his death in 2002.
Rudolf Nureyev (1938–1993)
Rudolf Nureyev was a Soviet ballet dancer, director, and choreog-
rapher, who is often best remembered for his versatility and
determination, as well as his work with dancer Margot Fonteyn.
His father held a post as a political education ofﬁcer in the Red
Army, and his mother was travelling to meet him when Nureyev
was born on the Trans-Siberian train. He was the youngest of four
children, and the only boy, growing up in the Soviet Union during
the Second World War. Nureyev saw a ballet for the ﬁrst time at
the age of six, and decided then that he wanted to be a dancer.
After considerable difﬁculty owing to his family’s poverty, he
was accepted as a student of the outstanding teacher Alexander
Biographical Sketches
157

Pushkin at the Leningrad Choreographic School. After his gradu-
ation, he accepted a position with the Kirov Ballet Company.
When the company went on tour to Paris in 1961, Nureyev seized
an opportunity to escape from Soviet security at the Le Bourget
airport and subsequently defected. He resided in Paris until his
death in 1993, having only returned to the Soviet Union once in
1989 to visit his mother.
Edward Said (1935–2003)
Edward Said was born into a Palestinian Christian family in East
Jerusalem. He was 13 when he and his family were forced to leave
Palestine and settle in Cairo. In 1951, he moved to the United
States, eventually obtaining his Ph.D. from Harvard. In 1963 he
took a faculty position at Columbia as a professor of English and
Comparative Literature. After the 1967 Arab-Israeli war, Said
became the main representative for the cause of Palestinian
independence in the United States. As a result of his high proﬁle
on this issue, he was viliﬁed as the professor of terror, his ofﬁce
at Columbia was set on ﬁre, and he and his family received death
threats. His books were banned in countries like Kuwait, Jordan,
and Saudi Arabia and in Palestine in 1996. His two most promi-
nent books are Orientalism (1978) and Culture and Imperialism
(1993). Said was a member of the Palestine National Council,
where he incurred the wrath of nationalists because he advocated
coexistence between Israeli Jews and Palestinian Arabs. After
resigning from the Council in the early 1990s, he called for a
bi-national state as a solution to the Israel-Palestine issue. Said’s
autobiography, Out of Place: A Memoir, was published in 1999.
Nolvia Dominguez Skjetne (1948–)
Nolvia Dominguez Skjetne was born in Chile, and as a young
adult was highly active in left-wing politics. In 1973, Augusto
Pinochet led a military coup that overthrew Salvador Allende,
the ﬁrst Marxist to be elected President by popular vote in the
country’s history. After the coup, Skjetne was ﬁred from her job
because of her leftist political involvement; her husband, a
member of the workers’ union, was executed. She spent several
subsequent years in Chile, ﬁghting against the military regime
158
Biographical Sketches

and working to protect and defend human rights. However, in
1980, she was arrested and detained by the Chilean intelligence
service. After her release, she ﬂed Chile with her 10-year-old
son, applying for refugee status in Norway, which she was
granted by the end of the year. She continued to campaign for
human rights and for the leftist movement in Chile. In the early
1980s, Skjetne became one of the leaders of the Association of
Latin American Exiles in Oslo, helping Norwegian lawyers to
work effectively with Chileans. She also founded the Norwegian
branch of the Committee for Defending People’s Rights. Skjetne
was the ﬁrst female immigrant to be elected to the Oslo City
Council in 1990, and she remains highly involved with Norwegian
and Chilean politics.
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn (1918–2008)
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn wrote that even as a child, he knew he
wanted to be an author. However, he was unable to attend a school
where he could get a good literary education, so instead he studied
mathematics at Rostov University. He was ﬁnally able to obtain
some literary education in the late 1930s and early 1940s and began
writing. In 1945, Solzhenitsyn wrote a letter to a friend criticizing
Joseph Stalin; as a result he spent eight years in prison and labor
camps and three years in enforced exile. He was rehabilitated and
allowed to return to Russia in 1956 where he began to write again.
He became a vocal opponent of the repressive Soviet regime after
Nikita Khrushchev’s fall from power in 1964. The authorities would
not allow him to publish his work legally, so he published illegally
in Russia and abroad. He was awarded the Nobel Prize for litera-
ture in 1970. In 1974, after the international publication of The Gulag
Archipelago, he was arrested and charged with treason. He was
exiled the day after his sentencing and resided in the United States
until his return to Russia in 1994.
George Soros (1930–)
Born in Budapest, George Soros survived the Nazi seizure of
Hungary and the 1945 battle of Budapest. In 1946, as the Soviet
Union was taking control of the country, Soros defected and
immigrated to England. He graduated in 1952 from the London
Biographical Sketches
159

School of Economics, and obtained an entry-level position with
an investment bank. In 1956, Soros moved to the United States.
In 1967, he helped establish an offshore investment fund; and in
1973, he set up a private investment ﬁrm that eventually evolved
into the Quantum Fund, one of the ﬁrst hedge funds, through
which he accumulated a massive fortune. A global ﬁnancier and
philanthropist, Soros is the founder and chairman of a network
of foundations that promote the creation of open, democratic soci-
eties based upon the rule of law, market economies, transparent
and accountable governance, freedom of the press, and respect
for human rights. Soros has received honorary degrees from the
New School for Social Research, Oxford University, the Budapest
University of Technology and Economics, and Yale University.
Loung Ung (1970–)
Loung Ung is a survivor of the killing ﬁelds of Cambodia, where
roughly 1.7 million Cambodians died at the hands of Pol Pot
and the Khmer Rouge regime. Ung was born in Phnom Penh to
a middle-class family, but at the age of ﬁve, she and her family
were forced out of the city in a mass evacuation to the country-
side. By 1978, the Khmer Rouge had killed her parents and two
of her siblings. Ung was forced to train as a child soldier. In
1980, she and her brother escaped to Thailand, and spent ﬁve
months in a refugee camp before being sponsored to immigrate
to the United States. Ung now works for justice and reconciliation
in her homeland as a human rights activist and featured speaker
on Cambodia, child soldiers, refugees, and landmines. She has
authored several books, including First They Killed My Father: a
Daughter of Cambodia Remembers, which was a recipient of the
2001 Asian/Paciﬁc American Librarians’ Association award for
Excellence in Adult Non-ﬁction Literature.
Alek Wek (1977–)
Alek Wek, one of the most famous African supermodels, was born
in Sudan, the seventh of what would be nine children. In 1991,
Wek and her family ﬂed the civil war in Sudan and received refugee
status in Britain. She was discovered by a talent agent at a street fair
in London at the age of 18, and has since been awarded for her
160
Biographical Sketches

modeling achievements with the Best New Model award, Model
of the Decade award, and the Venus de la Mode award (1997).
Outside of the fashion world, Wek has served on the advisory board
for the U.S. Committee for Refugees Advisory Council. In 2007, she
released an autobiography entitled Alek: From Sudanese Refugee to
International Supermodel, documenting her journey from a child-
hood of poverty in Sudan to the catwalks of Europe.
Gao Xingjian (1940–)
Gao Xingjian is a writer of prose and a dramatist. He was born in
Jiangxi province in eastern China. He received his basic education
in the schools of the People’s Republic and took a degree in French
in 1962 at the Beijing Foreign Studies University. However, during
the Cultural Revolution he was sent to a re-education camp where
he spent 10 years. In 1979, he was ﬁnally allowed to publish his
work and to travel abroad. During the period from 1980–1987, he
published four books as well as short stories, essays, and dramas
in literary magazines in China. A number of his dramas were pro-
duced at the Theater of Popular Art in Beijing, some of which were
successes, although several were condemned. One, Bus Stop, was
described as the most pernicious piece of writing since the founda-
tion of the People’s Republic. In 1986, his play The Other Shore was
banned and in 1987, he left China and settled in Paris as a political
refugee. Xingjian won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 2000.
Biographical Sketches
161

This page intentionally left blank

6
Data and Documents
T
his chapter is divided into two sections. The ﬁrst section con-
sists of four refugee treaties: the 1951 Refugee Convention, the
1967 Protocol, the Organization of African Union Convention,
and the Cartagena Declaration. In addition, the Torture Conven-
tion is also reproduced. All have been referred to in the text. The
second part of the chapter consists of data for the analysis of asy-
lum abuse that is taken up in Chapter 2. What the data track are
the non-European asylum applicants who have made claims in
select Western states for three time periods over three decades:
2008/1998/1988, along with the Political Terror Scale (PTS) score
(U.S. State Department) for these states for that year.
International and Regional Treaties
Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees
Adopted on 28 July 1951 by the United Nations Conference of
Plenipotentiaries on the Status of Refugees and Stateless
Persons convened under General Assembly resolution 429 (V)
of 14 December 1950. Entry into force: 22 April 1954, in
accordance with article 43
Preamble
The High Contracting Parties,
Considering that the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights approved on 10 December 1948 by the
General Assembly have afﬁrmed the principle that human beings shall
enjoy fundamental rights and freedoms without discrimination,
163

Considering that the United Nations has, on various occasions,
manifested its profound concern for refugees and endeavoured to
assure refugees the widest possible exercise of these fundamental rights
and freedoms,
Considering that it is desirable to revise and consolidate previous
international agreements relating to the status of refugees and to extend
the scope of and the protection accorded by such instruments by means
of a new agreement,
Considering that the grant of asylum may place unduly heavy burdens
on certain countries, and that a satisfactory solution of a problem of
which the United Nations has recognized the international scope and
nature cannot therefore be achieved without international co-operation,
Expressing the wish that all States, recognizing the social and
humanitarian nature of the problem of refugees, will do everything
within their power to prevent this problem from becoming a cause of
tension between States,
Noting that the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees is
charged with the task of supervising international conventions
providing for the protection of refugees, and recognizing that the
effective co-ordination of measures taken to deal with this problem will
depend upon the co-operation of States with the High Commissioner,
Have agreed as follows:
Chapter I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1. Deﬁnition of the term “refugee”
A. For the purposes of the present Convention, the term “refugee” shall
apply to any person who:
(1) Has been considered a refugee under the Arrangements of 12
May 1926 and 30 June 1928 or under the Conventions of 28
October 1933 and 10 February 1938, the Protocol of 14 September 1939
or the Constitution of the International Refugee Organization;
Decisions of non-eligibility taken by the International Refugee
Organization during the period of its activities shall not prevent the
status of refugee being accorded to persons who fulﬁl the conditions
of paragraph 2 of this section;
(2) As a result of events occurring before 1 January 1951 and owing
to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race,
religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or
political opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and is
unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the
164
Data and Documents

protection of that country; or who, not having a nationality and
being outside the country of his former habitual residence as a result
of such events, is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to
return to it.
In the case of a person who has more than one nationality, the term
“the country of his nationality” shall mean each of the countries of
which he is a national, and a person shall not be deemed to be
lacking the protection of the country of his nationality if, without any
valid reason based on well-founded fear, he has not availed himself
of the protection of one of the countries of which he is a national.
B. (1) For the purposes of this Convention, the words “events occurring
before 1 January 1951” in article 1, section A, shall be understood to
mean either (a) “events occurring in Europe before 1 January 1951”; or
(b) “events occurring in Europe or elsewhere before 1 January 1951”; and
each Contracting State shall make a declaration at the time of signature,
ratiﬁcation or accession, specifying which of these meanings it applies
for the purpose of its obligations under this Convention.
(2) Any Contracting State which has adopted alternative (a) may at any
time extend its obligations by adopting alternative (b) by means of a
notiﬁcation addressed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
C. This Convention shall cease to apply to any person falling under the
terms of section A if:
(1) He has voluntarily re-availed himself of the protection of the
country of his nationality; or
(2) Having lost his nationality, he has voluntarily reacquired it; or
(3) He has acquired a new nationality, and enjoys the protection of
the country of his new nationality; or
(4) He has voluntarily re-established himself in the country which he
left or outside which he remained owing to fear of persecution; or
(5) He can no longer, because the circumstances in connection with
which he has been recognized as a refugee have ceased to exist,
continue to refuse to avail himself of the protection of the country of
his nationality;
Provided that this paragraph shall not apply to a refugee falling
under section A (1) of this article who is able to invoke compelling
reasons arising out of previous persecution for refusing to avail
himself of the protection of the country of nationality;
(6) Being a person who has no nationality he is, because the
circumstances in connection with which he has been recognized
as a refugee have ceased to exist, able to return to the country of his
former habitual residence;
International and Regional Treaties
165

Provided that this paragraph shall not apply to a refugee falling
under section A (1) of this article who is able to invoke compelling
reasons arising out of previous persecution for refusing to return to
the country of his former habitual residence.
D. This Convention shall not apply to persons who are at present
receiving from organs or agencies of the United Nations other than the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees protection or
assistance.
When such protection or assistance has ceased for any reason, without
the position of such persons being deﬁnitively settled in accordance
with the relevant resolutions adopted by the General Assembly of the
United Nations, these persons shall ipso facto be entitled to the beneﬁts
of this Convention.
E. This Convention shall not apply to a person who is recognized by the
competent authorities of the country in which he has taken residence as
having the rights and obligations which are attached to the possession
of the nationality of that country.
F. The provisions of this Convention shall not apply to any person with
respect to whom there are serious reasons for considering that:
(a) He has committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or a crime
against humanity, as deﬁned in the international instruments drawn
up to make provision in respect of such crimes;
(b) He has committed a serious non-political crime outside the
country of refuge prior to his admission to that country as a refugee;
(c) He has been guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and principles
of the United Nations.
Article 2. General obligations
Every refugee has duties to the country in which he ﬁnds himself,
which require in particular that he conform to its laws and regulations
as well as to measures taken for the maintenance of public order.
Article 3. Non-discrimination
The Contracting States shall apply the provisions of this Convention to
refugees without discrimination as to race, religion or country of origin.
Article 4. Religion
The Contracting States shall accord to refugees within their territories
treatment at least as favourable as that accorded to their nationals with
respect to freedom to practice their religion and freedom as regards the
religious education of their children.
166
Data and Documents

Article 5. Rights granted apart from this Convention
Nothing in this Convention shall be deemed to impair any rights and
beneﬁts granted by a Contracting State to refugees apart from this
Convention.
Article 6. The term “in the same circumstances”
For the purposes of this Convention, the term “in the same
circumstances” implies that any requirements (including requirements
as to length and conditions of sojourn or residence) which the particular
individual would have to fulﬁl for the enjoyment of the right in
question, if he were not a refugee, must be fulﬁlled by him, with the
exception of requirements which by their nature a refugee is incapable
of fulﬁlling.
Article 7. Exemption from reciprocity
1. Except where this Convention contains more favourable provisions,
a Contracting State shall accord to refugees the same treatment as is
accorded to aliens generally.
2. After a period of three years’ residence, all refugees shall enjoy
exemption from legislative reciprocity in the territory of the Contracting
States.
3. Each Contracting State shall continue to accord to refugees the rights
and beneﬁts to which they were already entitled, in the absence of
reciprocity, at the date of entry into force of this Convention for that
State.
4. The Contracting States shall consider favourably the possibility of
according to refugees, in the absence of reciprocity, rights and beneﬁts
beyond those to which they are entitled according to paragraphs 2 and
3, and to extending exemption from reciprocity to refugees who do not
fulﬁl the conditions provided for in paragraphs 2 and 3.
5. The provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3 apply both to the rights and
beneﬁts referred to in articles 13, 18, 19, 21 and 22 of this Convention
and to rights and beneﬁts for which this Convention does not provide.
Article 8. Exemption from exceptional measures
With regard to exceptional measures which may be taken against the
person, property or interests of nationals of a foreign State, the
Contracting States shall not apply such measures to a refugee who is
formally a national of the said State solely on account of such
nationality. Contracting States which, under their legislation, are
prevented from applying the general principle expressed in this article,
shall, in appropriate cases, grant exemptions in favour of such refugees.
International and Regional Treaties
167

Article 9. Provisional measures
Nothing in this Convention shall prevent a Contracting State, in time of
war or other grave and exceptional circumstances, from taking
provisionally measures which it considers to be essential to the national
security in the case of a particular person, pending a determination by
the Contracting State that that person is in fact a refugee and that the
continuance of such measures is necessary in his case in the interests of
national security.
Article 10. Continuity of residence
1. Where a refugee has been forcibly displaced during the Second World
War and removed to the territory of a Contracting State, and is resident
there, the period of such enforced sojourn shall be considered to have
been lawful residence within that territory.
2. Where a refugee has been forcibly displaced during the Second World
War from the territory of a Contracting State and has, prior to the date
of entry into force of this Convention, returned there for the purpose of
taking up residence, the period of residence before and after such
enforced displacement shall be regarded as one uninterrupted period
for any purposes for which uninterrupted residence is required.
Article 11. Refugee seamen
In the case of refugees regularly serving as crew members on board a
ship ﬂying the ﬂag of a Contracting State, that State shall give
sympathetic consideration to their establishment on its territory and the
issue of travel documents to them or their temporary admission to its
territory particularly with a view to facilitating their establishment in
another country.
Chapter II
JURIDICAL STATUS
Article 12. Personal status
1. The personal status of a refugee shall be governed by the law of the
country of his domicile or, if he has no domicile, by the law of the
country of his residence.
2. Rights previously acquired by a refugee and dependent on personal
status, more particularly rights attaching to marriage, shall be respected
by a Contracting State, subject to compliance, if this be necessary, with
the formalities required by the law of that State, provided that the right
in question is one which would have been recognized by the law of that
State had he not become a refugee.
168
Data and Documents

Article 13. Movable and immovable property
The Contracting States shall accord to a refugee treatment as favourable
as possible and, in any event, not less favourable than that accorded to
aliens generally in the same circumstances, as regards the acquisition of
movable and immovable property and other rights pertaining thereto, and
to leases and other contracts relating to movable and immovable property.
Article 14. Artistic rights and industrial property
In respect of the protection of industrial property, such as inventions,
designs or models, trade marks, trade names, and of rights in literary,
artistic and scientiﬁc works, a refugee shall be accorded in the country in
which he has his habitual residence the same protection as is accorded to
nationals of that country. In the territory of any other Contracting States,
he shall be accorded the same protection as is accorded in that territory
to nationals of the country in which he has his habitual residence.
Article 15. Right of association
As regards non-political and non-proﬁt-making associations and trade
unions the Contracting States shall accord to refugees lawfully staying
in their territory the most favourable treatment accorded to nationals of
a foreign country, in the same circumstances.
Article 16. Access to courts
1. A refugee shall have free access to the courts of law on the territory of
all Contracting States.
2. A refugee shall enjoy in the Contracting State in which he has his
habitual residence the same treatment as a national in matters
pertaining to access to the courts, including legal assistance and
exemption from cautio judicatum solvi.
3. A refugee shall be accorded in the matters referred to in paragraph 2
in countries other than that in which he has his habitual residence the
treatment granted to a national of the country of his habitual residence.
Chapter III
GAINFUL EMPLOYMENT
Article 17. Wage-earning employment
1. The Contracting States shall accord to refugees lawfully staying in
their territory the most favourable treatment accorded to nationals of
a foreign country in the same circumstances, as regards the right to
engage in wage-earning employment.
International and Regional Treaties
169

2. In any case, restrictive measures imposed on aliens or the
employment of aliens for the protection of the national labour market
shall not be applied to a refugee who was already exempt from them at
the date of entry into force of this Convention for the Contracting State
concerned, or who fulﬁls one of the following conditions:
(a) He has completed three years’ residence in the country;
(b) He has a spouse possessing the nationality of the country of
residence. A refugee may not invoke the beneﬁt of this provision if
he has abandoned his spouse;
(c) He has one or more children possessing the nationality of the
country of residence.
3. The Contracting States shall give sympathetic consideration to
assimilating the rights of all refugees with regard to wage-earning
employment to those of nationals, and in particular of those refugees
who have entered their territory pursuant to programmes of labour
recruitment or under immigration schemes.
Article 18. Self-employment
The Contracting States shall accord to a refugee lawfully in their territory
treatment as favourable as possible and, in any event, not less favourable
than that accorded to aliens generally in the same circumstances, as regards
the right to engage on his own account in agriculture, industry, handicrafts
and commerce and to establish commercial and industrial companies.
Article 19. Liberal professions
1. Each Contracting State shall accord to refugees lawfully staying in their
territory who hold diplomas recognized by the competent authorities
of that State, and who are desirous of practising a liberal profession,
treatment as favourable as possible and, in any event, not less favourable
than that accorded to aliens generally in the same circumstances.
2. The Contracting States shall use their best endeavours consistently
with their laws and constitutions to secure the settlement of such
refugees in the territories, other than the metropolitan territory, for
whose international relations they are responsible.
Chapter IV
WELFARE
Article 20. Rationing
Where a rationing system exists, which applies to the population at
large and regulates the general distribution of products in short supply,
refugees shall be accorded the same treatment as nationals.
170
Data and Documents

Article 21. Housing
As regards housing, the Contracting States, in so far as the matter is
regulated by laws or regulations or is subject to the control of public
authorities, shall accord to refugees lawfully staying in their territory
treatment as favourable as possible and, in any event, not less
favourable than that accorded to aliens generally in the same
circumstances.
Article 22. Public education
1. The Contracting States shall accord to refugees the same treatment as
is accorded to nationals with respect to elementary education.
2. The Contracting States shall accord to refugees treatment as
favourable as possible, and, in any event, not less favourable than that
accorded to aliens generally in the same circumstances, with respect to
education other than elementary education and, in particular, as regards
access to studies, the recognition of foreign school certiﬁcates, diplomas
and degrees, the remission of fees and charges and the award of
scholarships.
Article 23. Public relief
The Contracting States shall accord to refugees lawfully staying in their
territory the same treatment with respect to public relief and assistance
as is accorded to their nationals.
Article 24. Labour legislation and social security
1. The Contracting States shall accord to refugees lawfully staying in
their territory the same treatment as is accorded to nationals in respect
of the following matters;
(a) In so far as such matters are governed by laws or regulations or
are subject to the control of administrative authorities: remuneration,
including family allowances where these form part of remuneration,
hours of work, overtime arrangements, holidays with pay, restrictions
on work, minimum age of employment, apprenticeship and training,
women’s work and the work of young persons, and the enjoyment of
the beneﬁts of collective bargaining;
(b) Social security (legal provisions in respect of employment injury,
occupational diseases, maternity, sickness, disability, old age, death,
unemployment, family responsibilities and any other contingency
which, according to national laws or regulations, is covered by a
social security scheme), subject to the following limitations:
(i) There may be appropriate arrangements for the maintenance of
acquired rights and rights in course of acquisition;
International and Regional Treaties
171

(ii) National laws or regulations of the country of residence may
prescribe special arrangements concerning beneﬁts or portions of
beneﬁts which are payable wholly out of public funds, and
concerning allowances paid to persons who do not fulﬁl the
contribution conditions prescribed for the award of a normal
pension.
2. The right to compensation for the death of a refugee resulting from
employment injury or from occupational disease shall not be affected
by the fact that the residence of the beneﬁciary is outside the territory
of the Contracting State.
3. The Contracting States shall extend to refugees the beneﬁts of
agreements concluded between them, or which may be concluded
between them in the future, concerning the maintenance of acquired
rights and rights in the process of acquisition in regard to social
security, subject only to the conditions which apply to nationals of the
States signatory to the agreements in question.
4. The Contracting States will give sympathetic consideration to
extending to refugees so far as possible the beneﬁts of similar
agreements which may at any time be in force between such
Contracting States and non-contracting States.
Chapter V
ADMINISTRATIVE MEASURES
Article 25. Administrative assistance
1. When the exercise of a right by a refugee would normally require the
assistance of authorities of a foreign country to whom he cannot have
recourse, the Contracting States in whose territory he is residing shall
arrange that such assistance be afforded to him by their own authorities
or by an international authority.
2. The authority or authorities mentioned in paragraph 1 shall deliver
or cause to be delivered under their supervision to refugees such
documents or certiﬁcations as would normally be delivered to aliens by
or through their national authorities.
3. Documents or certiﬁcations so delivered shall stand in the stead of
the ofﬁcial instruments delivered to aliens by or through their national
authorities, and shall be given credence in the absence of proof to the
contrary.
4. Subject to such exceptional treatment as may be granted to indigent
persons, fees may be charged for the services mentioned herein, but
such fees shall be moderate and commensurate with those charged to
nationals for similar services.
172
Data and Documents

5. The provisions of this article shall be without prejudice to articles 27
and 28.
Article 26. Freedom of movement
Each Contracting State shall accord to refugees lawfully in its territory
the right to choose their place of residence and to move freely within its
territory subject to any regulations applicable to aliens generally in the
same circumstances.
Article 27. Identity papers
The Contracting States shall issue identity papers to any refugee in their
territory who does not possess a valid travel document.
Article 28. Travel documents
1. The Contracting States shall issue to refugees lawfully staying in
their territory travel documents for the purpose of travel outside their
territory, unless compelling reasons of national security or public order
otherwise require, and the provisions of the Schedule to this Convention
shall apply with respect to such documents. The Contracting States may
issue such a travel document to any other refugee in their territory; they
shall in particular give sympathetic consideration to the issue of such a
travel document to refugees in their territory who are unable to obtain a
travel document from the country of their lawful residence.
2. Travel documents issued to refugees under previous international
agreements by Parties thereto shall be recognized and treated by the
Contracting States in the same way as if they had been issued pursuant
to this article.
Article 29. Fiscal charges
1. The Contracting States shall not impose upon refugees duties,
charges or taxes, of any description whatsoever, other or higher than
those which are or may be levied on their nationals in similar situations.
2. Nothing in the above paragraph shall prevent the application to
refugees of the laws and regulations concerning charges in respect of
the issue to aliens of administrative documents including identity
papers.
Article 30. Transfer of assets
1. A Contracting State shall, in conformity with its laws and regulations,
permit refugees to transfer assets which they have brought into its
International and Regional Treaties
173

territory, to another country where they have been admitted for the
purposes of resettlement.
2. A Contracting State shall give sympathetic consideration to the
application of refugees for permission to transfer assets wherever they
may be and which are necessary for their resettlement in another
country to which they have been admitted.
Article 31. Refugees unlawfully in the country of refuge
1. The Contracting States shall not impose penalties, on account of their
illegal entry or presence, on refugees who, coming directly from a
territory where their life or freedom was threatened in the sense of
article 1, enter or are present in their territory without authorization,
provided they present themselves without delay to the authorities and
show good cause for their illegal entry or presence.
2. The Contracting States shall not apply to the movements of such
refugees restrictions other than those which are necessary and such
restrictions shall only be applied until their status in the country is
regularized or they obtain admission into another country. The
Contracting States shall allow such refugees a reasonable period and all
the necessary facilities to obtain admission into another country.
Article 32. Expulsion
1. The Contracting States shall not expel a refugee lawfully in their
territory save on grounds of national security or public order.
2. The expulsion of such a refugee shall be only in pursuance of a
decision reached in accordance with due process of law. Except where
compelling reasons of national security otherwise require, the refugee
shall be allowed to submit evidence to clear himself, and to appeal to
and be represented for the purpose before competent authority or a
person or persons specially designated by the competent authority.
3. The Contracting States shall allow such a refugee a reasonable period
within which to seek legal admission into another country. The
Contracting States reserve the right to apply during that period such
internal measures as they may deem necessary.
Article 33. Prohibition of expulsion or return (“refoulement”)
1. No Contracting State shall expel or return (“refouler”) a refugee in
any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories where his life or
freedom would be threatened on account of his race, religion,
nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion.
2. The beneﬁt of the present provision may not, however, be claimed by
a refugee whom there are reasonable grounds for regarding as a danger
174
Data and Documents

to the security of the country in which he is, or who, having been
convicted by a ﬁnal judgment of a particularly serious crime, constitutes
a danger to the community of that country.
Article 34. Naturalization
The Contracting States shall as far as possible facilitate the assimilation
and naturalization of refugees. They shall in particular make every
effort to expedite naturalization proceedings and to reduce as far as
possible the charges and costs of such proceedings.
Chapter VI
EXECUTORY AND TRANSITORY PROVISIONS
Article 35. Co-operation of the national authorities
with the United Nations
1. The Contracting States undertake to co-operate with the Ofﬁce of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, or any other agency
of the United Nations which may succeed it, in the exercise of its
functions, and shall in particular facilitate its duty of supervising the
application of the provisions of this Convention.
2. In order to enable the Ofﬁce of the High Commissioner or any other
agency of the United Nations which may succeed it, to make reports to
the competent organs of the United Nations, the Contracting States
undertake to provide them in the appropriate form with information
and statistical data requested concerning:
(a) The condition of refugees,
(b) The implementation of this Convention, and
(c) Laws, regulations and decrees which are, or may hereafter be,
in force relating to refugees.
Article 36. Information on national legislation
The Contracting States shall communicate to the Secretary-General of
the United Nations the laws and regulations which they may adopt to
ensure the application of this Convention.
Article 37. Relation to previous conventions
Without prejudice to article 28, paragraph 2, of this Convention, this
Convention replaces, as between Parties to it, the Arrangements of 5
July 1922, 31 May 1924, 12 May 1926, 30 June 1928 and 30 July 1935, the
Conventions of 28 October 1933 and 10 February 1938, the Protocol of
14 September 1939 and the Agreement of 15 October 1946.
International and Regional Treaties
175

Chapter VII
FINAL CLAUSES
Article 38. Settlement of disputes
Any dispute between Parties to this Convention relating to its
interpretation or application, which cannot be settled by other means,
shall be referred to the International Court of Justice at the request of
any one of the parties to the dispute.
Article 39. Signature, ratiﬁcation and accession
1. This Convention shall be opened for signature at Geneva on 28
July 1951 and shall thereafter be deposited with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations. It shall be open for signature at the European
Ofﬁce of the United Nations from 28 July to 31 August 1951 and shall
be re-opened for signature at the Headquarters of the United Nations
from 17 September 1951 to 31 December 1952.
2. This Convention shall be open for signature on behalf of all States
Members of the United Nations, and also on behalf of any other State
invited to attend the Conference of Plenipotentiaries on the Status of
Refugees and Stateless Persons or to which an invitation to sign will
have been addressed by the General Assembly. It shall be ratiﬁed and
the instruments of ratiﬁcation shall be deposited with the Secretary-
General of the United Nations.
3. This Convention shall be open from 28 July 1951 for accession by the
States referred to in paragraph 2 of this article. Accession shall be
effected by the deposit of an instrument of accession with the Secretary-
General of the United Nations.
Article 40. Territorial application clause
1. Any State may, at the time of signature, ratiﬁcation or accession,
declare that this Convention shall extend to all or any of the territories
for the international relations of which it is responsible. Such a
declaration shall take effect when the Convention enters into force for
the State concerned.
2. At any time thereafter any such extension shall be made by
notiﬁcation addressed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and shall take effect as from the ninetieth day after the day of receipt
by the Secretary-General of the United Nations of this notiﬁcation, or as
from the date of entry into force of the Convention for the State
concerned, whichever is the later.
3. With respect to those territories to which this Convention is not
extended at the time of signature, ratiﬁcation or accession, each State
176
Data and Documents

concerned shall consider the possibility of taking the necessary steps in
order to extend the application of this Convention to such territories,
subject, where necessary for constitutional reasons, to the consent of the
Governments of such territories.
Article 41. Federal clause
In the case of a Federal or non-unitary State, the following provisions
shall apply:
(a) With respect to those articles of this Convention that come within
the legislative jurisdiction of the federal legislative authority, the
obligations of the Federal Government shall to this extent be the
same as those of parties which are not Federal States;
(b) With respect to those articles of this Convention that come within
the legislative jurisdiction of constituent States, provinces or cantons
which are not, under the constitutional system of the Federation,
bound to take legislative action, the Federal Government shall bring
such articles with a favourable recommendation to the notice of the
appropriate authorities of States, provinces or cantons at the earliest
possible moment;
(c) A Federal State Party to this Convention shall, at the request of
any other Contracting State transmitted through the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, supply a statement of the law and
practice of the Federation and its constituent units in regard to any
particular provision of the Convention showing the extent to which
effect has been given to that provision by legislative or other action.
Article 42. Reservations
1. At the time of signature, ratiﬁcation or accession, any State may make
reservations to articles of the Convention other than to articles 1, 3, 4, 16
(1), 33, 36–46 inclusive.
2. Any State making a reservation in accordance with paragraph 1 of
this article may at any time withdraw the reservation by a
communication to that effect addressed to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations.
Article 43. Entry into force
1. This Convention shall come into force on the ninetieth day following
the day of deposit of the sixth instrument of ratiﬁcation or accession.
2. For each State ratifying or acceding to the Convention after the
deposit of the sixth instrument of ratiﬁcation or accession, the
Convention shall enter into force on the ninetieth day following the
International and Regional Treaties
177

date of deposit by such State of its instrument of ratiﬁcation or
accession.
Article 44. Denunciation
1. Any Contracting State may denounce this Convention at any time by
a notiﬁcation addressed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
2. Such denunciation shall take effect for the Contracting State
concerned one year from the date upon which it is received by the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.
3. Any State which has made a declaration or notiﬁcation under article
40 may, at any time thereafter, by a notiﬁcation to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, declare that the Convention shall cease to extend
to such territory one year after the date of receipt of the notiﬁcation by
the Secretary-General.
Article 45. Revision
1. Any Contracting State may request revision of this Convention at any
time by a notiﬁcation addressed to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations.
2. The General Assembly of the United Nations shall recommend the
steps, if any, to be taken in respect of such request.
Article 46. Notiﬁcations by the Secretary-General of the United Nations
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inform all Members
of the United Nations and non-member States referred to in article 39:
(a) Of declarations and notiﬁcations in accordance with section B of
article 1;
(b) Of signatures, ratiﬁcations and accessions in accordance with
article 39;
(c) Of declarations and notiﬁcations in accordance with article 40;
(d) Of reservations and withdrawals in accordance with article 42;
(e) Of the date on which this Convention will come into force in
accordance with article 43;
(f) Of denunciations and notiﬁcations in accordance with article 44;
(g) Of requests for revision in accordance with article 45.
In faith whereof the undersigned, duly authorized, have signed this
Convention on behalf of their respective Governments.
Done at Geneva, this twenty-eighth day of July, one thousand nine
hundred and ﬁfty-one, in a single copy, of which the English and
French texts are equally authentic and which shall remain deposited in
178
Data and Documents

the archives of the United Nations, and certiﬁed true copies of which
shall be delivered to all Members of the United Nations and to the non-
member States referred to in article 39.
Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees
606 U.N.T.S. 267, entered into force Oct. 4, 1967.
The Protocol was taken note of with approval by the Economic and
Social Council in resolution 1186 (XLI) of 18 November 1966 and was
taken note of by the General Assembly in resolution 2198 (XXI) of 16
December 1966. In the same resolution the General Assembly requested
the Secretary-General to transmit the text of the Protocol to the States
mentioned in article 5 thereof, with a view to enabling them to accede
to the Protocol
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 4 October 1967, in accordance with article 8
The States Parties to the present Protocol,
Considering that the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees done
at Geneva on 28 July 1951 (hereinafter referred to as the Convention)
covers only those persons who have become refugees as a result of
events occurring before 1 January 1951,
Considering that new refugee situations have arisen since the
Convention was adopted and that the refugees concerned may therefore
not fall within the scope of the Convention,
Considering that it is desirable that equal status should be enjoyed by
all refugees covered by the deﬁnition in the Convention irrespective of
the dateline 1 January 1951,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1. General provision
1. The States Parties to the present Protocol undertake to apply articles 2
to 34 inclusive of the Convention to refugees as hereinafter deﬁned.
2. For the purpose of the present Protocol, the term “refugee” shall,
except as regards the application of paragraph 3 of this article, mean any
person within the deﬁnition of article I of the Convention as if the words
“As a result of events occurring before 1 January 1951 and . . .” and the
words “. . . as a result of such events”, in article 1 A (2) were omitted.
3. The present Protocol shall be applied by the States Parties hereto
without any geographic limitation, save that existing declarations made
by States already Parties to the Convention in accordance with article 1
B (I) (a) of the Convention, shall, unless extended under article 1 B (2)
thereof, apply also under the present Protocol.
International and Regional Treaties
179

Article 2. Co-operation of the national authorities
with the United Nations
1. The States Parties to the present Protocol undertake to co-operate
with the Ofﬁce of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
or any other agency of the United Nations which may succeed it, in the
exercise of its functions, and shall in particular facilitate its duty of
supervising the application of the provisions of the present Protocol.
2. In order to enable the Ofﬁce of the High Commissioner or any other
agency of the United Nations which may succeed it, to make reports to
the competent organs of the United Nations, the States Parties to the
present Protocol undertake to provide them with the information and
statistical data requested, in the appropriate form, concerning:
(a) The condition of refugees;
(b) The implementation of the present Protocol;
(c) Laws, regulations and decrees which are, or may hereafter be, in
force relating to refugees.
Article 3. Information on national legislation
The States Parties to the present Protocol shall communicate to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations the laws and regulations which
they may adopt to ensure the application of the present Protocol.
Article 4. Settlement of disputes
Any dispute between States Parties to the present Protocol which relates
to its interpretation or application and which cannot be settled by other
means shall be referred to the International Court of Justice at the
request of any one of the parties to the dispute.
Article 5. Accession
The present Protocol shall be open for accession on behalf of all States
Parties to the Convention and of any other State Member of the United
Nations or member of any of the specialized agencies or to which an
invitation to accede may have been addressed by the General Assembly
of the United Nations. Accession shall be effected by the deposit of an
instrument of accession with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Article 6. Federal clause
In the case of a Federal or non-unitary State, the following provisions
shall apply:
(a) With respect to those articles of the Convention to be applied in
accordance with article I, paragraph 1, of the present Protocol that
180
Data and Documents

come within the legislative jurisdiction of the federal legislative
authority, the obligations of the Federal Government shall to this extent
be the same as those of States Parties which are not Federal States;
(b) With respect to those articles of the Convention to be applied in
accordance with article I, paragraph 1, of the present Protocol that
come within the legislative jurisdiction of constituent States,
provinces or cantons which are not, under the constitutional system
of the Federation, bound to take legislative action, the Federal
Government shall bring such articles with a favourable
recommendation to the notice of the appropriate authorities of
States, provinces or cantons at the earliest possible moment;
(c) A Federal State Party to the present Protocol shall, at the request
of any other State Party hereto transmitted through the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, supply a statement of the law and
practice of the Federation and its constituent units in regard to any
particular provision of the Convention to be applied in accordance
with article I, paragraph 1, of the present Protocol, showing the
extent to which effect has been given to that provision by legislative
or other action.
Article 7. Reservations and declarations
1. At the time of accession, any State may make reservations in respect
of article IV of the present Protocol and in respect of the application in
accordance with article I of the present Protocol of any provisions of the
Convention other than those contained in articles 1, 3, 4, 16(1) and 33
thereof, provided that in the case of a State Party to the Convention
reservations made under this article shall not extend to refugees in
respect of whom the Convention applies.
2. Reservations made by States Parties to the Convention in accordance
with article 42 thereof shall, unless withdrawn, be applicable in relation
to their obligations under the present Protocol.
3. Any State making a reservation in accordance with paragraph 1 of
this article may at any time withdraw such reservation by a
communication to that effect addressed to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations.
4. Declarations made under article 40, paragraphs 1 and 2, of the
Convention by a State Party thereto which accedes to the present
Protocol shall be deemed to apply in respect of the present Protocol,
unless upon accession a notiﬁcation to the contrary is addressed by the
State Party concerned to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
The provisions of article 40, paragraphs 2 and 3, and of article 44,
paragraph 3, of the Convention shall be deemed to apply muratis
mutandis to the present Protocol.
International and Regional Treaties
181

Article 8. Entry into Protocol
1. The present Protocol shall come into force on the day of deposit of
the sixth instrument of accession.
2. For each State acceding to the Protocol after the deposit of the sixth
instrument of accession, the Protocol shall come into force on the date
of deposit by such State of its instrument of accession.
Article 9. Denunciation
1. Any State Party hereto may denounce this Protocol at any time by a
notiﬁcation addressed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
2. Such denunciation shall take effect for the State Party concerned one
year from the date on which it is received by the Secretary-General of
the United Nations.
Article 10. Notiﬁcations by the Secretary-General of the United Nations
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inform the States
referred to in article V above of the date of entry into force, accessions,
reservations and withdrawals of reservations to and denunciations of the
present Protocol, and of declarations and notiﬁcations relating hereto.
Article 11. Deposit in the archives of the Secretariat of the United Nations
A copy of the present Protocol, of which the Chinese, English, French,
Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, signed by the President
of the General Assembly and by the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, shall be deposited in the archives of the Secretariat of the United
Nations. The Secretary-General will transmit certiﬁed copies thereof to all
States Members of the United Nations and to the other States referred to
in article 5 above.
Organization of African Unity, Convention
Governing the Specific Aspects of Refugee
Problems in Africa
Adopted on 10 September 1969 by the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government. Entered into force on 20 June 1974.
Preamble
We, the Heads of State and Government, assembled in the city of Addis
Ababa,
1. Noting with concern the constantly increasing numbers of refugees in
Africa and desirous of ﬁnding ways and means of alleviating their misery
and suffering as well as providing them with a better life and future,
182
Data and Documents

2. Recognizing the need for an essentially humanitarian approach
towards solving the problems of refugees,
3. Aware, however, that refugee problems are a source of friction among
many Member States, and desirous of eliminating the source of such
discord,
4. Anxious to make a distinction between a refugee who seeks a
peaceful and normal life and a person ﬂeeing his country for the sole
purpose of fomenting subversion from outside,
5. Determined that the activities of such subversive elements should be
discouraged, in accordance with the Declaration on the Problems of
Subversion and Resolution on the Problem of Refugees adopted at
Accra in 1965,
6. Bearing in mind that the Charter of the United Nations and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights have afﬁrmed the principle that
human beings shall enjoy fundamental rights and freedoms without
discrimination,
7. Recalling Resolution 2312 (XXII) of 14 December 1967 of the United
Nations General Assembly, relating to the Declaration on Territorial
Asylum,
8. Convinced that all the problems of our continent must be solved in
the spirit of the Charter of the Organization of African Unity and in the
African context,
9. Recognizing that the United Nations Convention of 28 July 1951, as
modiﬁed by the Protocol of 31 January 1967, constitutes the basic and
universal instrument relating to the status of refugees and reﬂects the
deep concern of States for refugees and their desire to establish
common standards for their treatment,
10. Recalling Resolutions 26 and 104 of the OAU Assemblies of Heads of
State and Government, calling upon Member States of the Organization
who had not already done so to accede to the United Nations Convention
of 1951 and to the Protocol of 1967 relating to the Status of Refugees, and
meanwhile to apply their provisions to refugees in Africa,
11. Convinced that the efﬁciency of the measures recommended by the
present Convention to solve the problem of refugees in Africa necessitates
close and continuous collaboration between the Organization of African
Unity and the Ofﬁce of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1. Deﬁnition of the term “Refugee”
1. For the purposes of this Convention, the term “refugee” shall mean
every person who, owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for
International and Regional Treaties
183

reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social
group or political opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and
is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the
protection of that country, or who, not having a nationality and being
outside the country of his former habitual residence as a result of such
events, is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to it.
2. The term “refugee” shall also apply to every person who, owing to
external aggression, occupation, foreign domination or events seriously
disturbing public order in either part or the whole of his country of origin
or nationality, is compelled to leave his place of habitual residence in order
to seek refuge in another place outside his country of origin or nationality.
3. In the case of a person who has several nationalities, the term “a
country of which he is a national” shall mean each of the countries of
which he is a national, and a person shall not be deemed to be lacking
the protection of the country of which he is a national if, without any
valid reason based on well-founded fear, he has not availed himself of
the protection of one of the countries of which he is a national.
4. This Convention shall cease to apply to any refugee if:
(a) he has voluntarily re-availed himself of the protection of the
country of his nationality, or
(b) having lost his nationality, he has voluntarily reacquired it, or
(c) he has acquired a new nationality, and enjoys the protection of
the country of his new nationality, or
(d) he has voluntarily re-established himself in the country which he
left or outside which he remained owing to fear of persecution, or
(e) he can no longer, because the circumstances in connection with
which he was recognized as a refugee have ceased to exist, continue
to refuse to avail himself of the protection of the country of his
nationality, or
(f) he has committed a serious non-political crime outside his
country of refuge after his admission to that country as a refugee, or
(g) he has seriously infringed the purposes and objectives of this
Convention.
5. The provisions of this Convention shall not apply to any person with
respect to whom the country of asylum has serious reasons for considering
that:
(a) he has committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or a crime
against humanity, as deﬁned in the international instruments drawn
up to make provision in respect of such crimes,
(b) he committed a serious non-political crime outside the country of
refuge prior to his admission to that country as a refugee,
184
Data and Documents

(c) he has been guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and principles
of the Organization of African Unity,
(d) he has been guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and principles
of the United Nations.
6. For the purposes of this Convention, the Contracting State of asylum
shall determine whether an applicant is a refugee.
Article 2. Asylum
1. Member States of the OAU shall use their best endeavours consistent
with their respective legislation to receive refugees and to secure the
settlement of those refugees who, for well-founded reasons, are unable
or unwilling to return to their country of origin or nationality.
2. The granting of asylum to refugees is a peaceful and humanitarian
act and shall not be regarded as an unfriendly act by any Member State.
3. No person shall be subjected by a Member State to measures such as
rejection at the frontier, return or expulsion, which would compel him
to return to or remain in a territory where his life, physical integrity or
liberty would be threatened for the reasons set out in Article I,
paragraphs 1 and 2.
4. Where a Member State ﬁnds difﬁculty in continuing to grant asylum
to refugees, such Member State may appeal directly to other Member
States and through the OAU, and such other Member States shall in the
spirit of African solidarity and international co-operation take
appropriate measures to lighten the burden of the Member State
granting asylum.
5. Where a refugee has not received the right to reside in any country of
asylum, he may be granted temporary residence in any country of asylum
in which he ﬁrst presented himself as a refugee pending arrangement for
his re-settlement in accordance with the preceding paragraph.
6. For reasons of security, countries of asylum shall, as far as possible,
settle refugees at a reasonable distance from the frontier of their country
of origin.
Article 3. Prohibition of Subversive Activities
1. Every refugee has duties to the country in which he ﬁnds himself,
which require in particular that he conforms with its laws and regulations
as well as with measures taken for the maintenance of public order. He
shall also abstain from any subversive activities against any Member
State of the OAU.
2. Signatory States undertake to prohibit refugees residing in their
respective territories from attacking any State Member of the OAU, by
International and Regional Treaties
185

any activity likely to cause tension between Member States, and in
particular by use of arms, through the press, or by radio.
Article 4. Non-discrimination
Member States undertake to apply the provisions of this Convention to
all refugees without discrimination as to race, religion, nationality,
membership of a particular social group or political opinions.
Article 5. Voluntary Repatriation
1. The essentially voluntary character of repatriation shall be respected
in all cases and no refugee shall be repatriated against his will.
2. The country of asylum, in collaboration with the country of origin,
shall make adequate arrangements for the safe return of refugees who
request repatriation.
3. The country of origin, on receiving back refugees, shall facilitate their
re-settlement and grant them the full rights and privileges of nationals
of the country, and subject them to the same obligations.
4. Refugees who voluntarily return to their country shall in no way be
penalized for having left it for any of the reasons giving rise to refugee
situations. Whenever necessary, an appeal shall be made through
national information media and through the Administrative Secretary-
General of the OAU, inviting refugees to return home and giving
assurance that the new circumstances prevailing in their country of
origin will enable them to return without risk and to take up a normal
and peaceful life without fear of being disturbed or punished, and that
the text of such appeal should be given to refugees and clearly
explained to them by their country of asylum.
5. Refugees who freely decide to return to their homeland, as a result of
such assurances or on their own initiative, shall be given every possible
assistance by the country of asylum, the country of origin, voluntary
agencies and international and intergovernmental organizations, to
facilitate their return.
Article 6. Travel Documents
1. Subject to Article III, Member States shall issue to refugees lawfully
staying in their territories travel documents in accordance with the
United Nations Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and the
Schedule and Annex thereto, for the purpose of travel outside their
territory, unless compelling reasons of national security or public order
otherwise require. Member States may issue such a travel document to
any other refugee in their territory.
186
Data and Documents

2. Where an African country of second asylum accepts a refugee from
a country of ﬁrst asylum, the country of ﬁrst asylum may be dispensed
from issuing a document with a return clause.
3. Travel documents issued to refugees under previous international
agreements by State Parties thereto shall be recognized and treated by
Member States in the same way as if they had been issued to refugees
pursuant to this Article.
Article 7. Co-Operation of the National Authorities with the
Organization of African Unity
In order to enable the Administrative Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity to make reports to the competent organs
of the Organization of African Unity, Member States undertake to
provide the Secretariat in the appropriate form with information and
statistical data requested concerning:
(a) the condition of refugees,
(b) the implementation of this Convention, and
(c) laws, regulations and decrees which are, or may hereafter in force
relating to refugees.
Article 8. Co-Operation with the Ofﬁce of the United Nations High
Commissioner For Refugees
1. Member States shall co-operate with the Ofﬁce of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees.
2. The Present Convention shall be the effective regional complement
in Africa of the 1951 United Nations Convention on the Status of
Refugees.
Article 9. Settlement of Disputes
Any dispute between States signatories to this Convention relating to its
interpretation or application, which cannot be settled by other means,
shall be referred to the Commission for Mediation, Conciliation and
Arbitration of the Organization of African Unity, at the request of any
one of the Parties to the dispute.
Article 10. Signature and Ratiﬁcation
1. This Convention is open for signature and accession by all Member
States of the Organization of African Unity and shall be ratiﬁed by
signatory States in accordance with their respective constitutional
International and Regional Treaties
187

processes. The instruments of ratiﬁcation shall be deposited with the
Administrative Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity.
2. The original instrument, done if possible in African languages, and in
English and French, all texts being equally authentic, shall be deposited
with the Administrative Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity.
3. Any independent African State, Member of the Organization of African
Unity, may at any time notify the Administrative Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity of its accession to this Convention.
Article 11. Entry into Force
This Convention shall come into force upon deposit of instruments of
ratiﬁcation by one-third of the Member States of the Organization of
African Unity.
Article 12. Amendment
This Convention may be amended or revised if any Member State
makes a written request to the Administrative Secretary-General to that
effect, provided, however, that the proposed amendment shall not be
submitted to the Assembly of Heads of State and Government for
consideration until all Member States have been duly notiﬁed of it and
a period of one year has elapsed. Such an amendment shall not be
effective unless approved by at least two-thirds of the Member States
Parties to the present Convention.
Article 13. Denunciation
1. Any Member State Party to this Convention may denounce its
provisions by a written notiﬁcation to the Administrative Secretary-
General.
2. At the end of one year from the date of such notiﬁcation, if not
withdrawn, the Convention shall cease to apply with respect to the
denouncing State.
Article 14. Registration with the United Nations
Upon entry into force of this Convention, the Administrative Secretary-
General of the OAU shall register it with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, in accordance with Article 102 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Article 15. Notiﬁcations by the Administrative Secretary-General
of the Organization of African Unity
188
Data and Documents

The Administrative Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity shall inform all Members of the Organization:
(a) of signatures, ratiﬁcations and accessions in accordance with
Article X;
(b) of entry into force, in accordance with Article XI;
(c) of requests for amendments submitted under the terms of Article XII;
(d) of denunciations, in accordance with Article XIII.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF WE, the Heads of African State
and Government, have signed this Convention.
Cartagena Declaration on Refugees
Adopted at a colloquium entitled “Coloquio Sobre la
Proteccı´on Internacional de los Refugiados en Ame´rican
Central, Me´xico y Panama´: Problemas Jurı´dicos y
Humanitarios” held at Cartagena, Colombia from 19–22
November 1984
Having acknowledged with appreciation the commitments with regard
to refugees included in the Contadora Act on Peace and Co-operation in
Central America, the bases of which the Colloquium fully shares and
which are reproduced below:
(a) “To carry out, if they have not yet done so, the constitutional
procedures for accession to the 1951 Convention and the 1967 Protocol
relating to the Status of Refugees.”
(b) “To adopt the terminology established in the Convention and
Protocol referred to in the foregoing paragraph with a view to
distinguishing refugees from other categories of migrants.”
(c) “To establish the internal machinery necessary for the
implementation, upon accession, of the provisions of the Convention
and Protocol referred to above.”
(d) “To ensure the establishment of machinery for consultation between
the Central American countries and representatives of the Government
ofﬁces responsible for dealing with the problem of refugees in each State.”
(e) “To support the work performed by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in Central America and to
establish direct co-ordination machinery to facilitate the fulﬁllment
of his mandate.”
(f) “To ensure that any repatriation of refugees is voluntary, and is
declared to be so on an individual basis, and is carried out with the
co-operation of UNHCR.”
International and Regional Treaties
189

(g) “To ensure the establishment of tripartite commissions, composed
of representatives of the State of origin, of the receiving State and of
UNHCR with a view to facilitating the repatriation of refugees.”
(h) “To reinforce programmes for protection of and assistance to refugees,
particularly in the areas of health, education, labour and safety.”
(i) “To ensure that programmes and projects are set up with a view to
ensuring the self-sufﬁciency of refugees.”
(j) “To train the ofﬁcials responsible in each State for protection of and
assistance to refugees, with the co-operation of UNHCR and other
international agencies.”
(k) “To request immediate assistance from the international community
for Central American refugees, to be provided either directly, through
bilateral or multilateral agreements, or through UNHCR and other
organizations and agencies.”
(l) “To identify, with the co-operation of UNHCR, other countries which
might receive Central American refugees. In no case shall a refugee be
transferred to a third country against his will.”
(m) “To ensure that the Governments of the area make the necessary
efforts to eradicate the causes of the refugee problem.”
(n) “To ensure that, once agreement has been reached on the bases for
voluntary and individual repatriation, with full guarantees for the
refugees, the receiving countries permit ofﬁcial delegations of the
country of origin, accompanied by representatives of UNHCR and the
receiving country, to visit the refugee camps.”
(o) “To ensure that the receiving countries facilitate, in co-ordination
with UNHCR, the departure procedure for refugees in instances of
voluntary and individual repatriation.”
(p) “To institute appropriate measures in the receiving countries to prevent
the participation of refugees in activities directed against the country of
origin, while at all times respecting the human rights of the refugees.”
III
The Colloquium adopted the following conclusions:
1. To promote within the countries of the region the adoption of
national laws and regulations facilitating the application of the
Convention and the Protocol and, if necessary, establishing internal
procedures and mechanisms for the protection of refugees. In addition,
to ensure that the national laws and regulations adopted reﬂect the
principles and criteria of the Convention and the Protocol, thus
fostering the necessary process of systematic harmonization of national
legislation on refugees.
190
Data and Documents

2. To ensure that ratiﬁcation of or accession to the 1951 Convention and
the 1967 Protocol by States which have not yet taken these steps is
unaccompanied by reservations limiting the scope of those instruments,
and to invite countries having formulated such reservations to consider
withdrawing them as soon as possible.
3. To reiterate that, in view of the experience gained from the massive
ﬂows of refugees in the Central American area, it is necessary to consider
enlarging the concept of a refugee, bearing in mind, as far as appropriate
and in the light of the situation prevailing in the region, the precedent of
the OAU Convention (article 1, paragraph 2) and the doctrine employed
in the reports of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights.
Hence the deﬁnition or concept of a refugee to be recommended for use
in the region is one which, in addition to containing the elements of the
1951 Convention and the 1967 Protocol, includes among refugees persons
who have ﬂed their country because their lives, safety or freedom have
been threatened by generalized violence, foreign aggression, internal
conﬂicts, massive violation of human rights or other circumstances
which have seriously disturbed public order.
4. To conﬁrm the peaceful, non-political and exclusively humanitarian
nature of grant of asylum or recognition of the status of refugee and to
underline the importance of the internationally accepted principle that
nothing in either shall be interpreted as an unfriendly act towards the
country of origin of refugees.
5. To reiterate the importance and meaning of the principle of non-
refoulement (including the prohibition of rejection at the frontier) as a
corner-stone of the international protection of refugees. This principle is
imperative in regard to refugees and in the present state of international
law should be acknowledged and observed as a rule of jus cogens.
6. To reiterate to countries of asylum that refugee camps and
settlements located in frontier areas should be set up inland at a
reasonable distance from the frontier with a view to improving the
protection afforded to refugees, safeguarding their human rights and
implementing projects aimed at their self-sufﬁciency and integration
into the host society.
7. To express its concern at the problem raised by military attacks on
refugee camps and settlements which have occurred in different parts
of the world and to propose to the Governments of the Central
American countries, Mexico and Panama that they lend their support
to the measures on this matter which have been proposed by the High
Commissioner to the UNHCR Executive Committee.
8. To ensure that the countries of the region establish a minimum
standard of treatment for refugees, on the basis of the provisions of the
1951 Convention and 1967 Protocol and of the American Convention on
International and Regional Treaties
191

Human Rights, taking into consideration the conclusions of the
UNHCR Executive Committee, particularly No. 22 on the Protection
of Asylum Seekers in Situations of Large-Scale Inﬂux.
9. To express its concern at the situation of displaced persons within
their own countries. In this connection, the Colloquium calls on national
authorities and the competent international organizations to offer
protection and assistance to those persons and to help relieve the
hardship which many of them face.
10. To call on States parties to the 1969 American Convention on
Human Rights to apply this instrument in dealing with asilados and
refugees who are in their territories.
11. To make a study, in countries in the area which have a large number
of refugees, of the possibilities of integrating them into the productive
life of the country by allocating to the creation or generation of
employment the resources made available by the international
community through UNHCR, thus making it possible for refugees
to enjoy their economic, social and cultural rights.
12. To reiterate the voluntary and individual character of repatriation
of refugees and the need for it to be carried out under conditions of
absolute safety, preferably to the place of residence of the refugee
in his country of origin.
13. To acknowledge that reuniﬁcation of families constitutes a
fundamental principle in regard to refugees and one which should be
the basis for the regime of humanitarian treatment in the country of
asylum, as well as for facilities granted in cases of voluntary repatriation.
14. To urge non-governmental, international and national organizations
to continue their worthy task, co-ordinating their activities with UNHCR
and the national authorities of the country of asylum, in accordance with
the guidelines laid down by the authorities in question.
15. To promote greater use of the competent organizations of the inter-
American system, in particular the Inter-American Commission on
Human Rights, with a view to enhancing the international protection of
asilados and refugees. Accordingly, for the performance of this task, the
Colloquium considers that the close co-ordination and co-operation
existing between the Commission and UNHCR should be strengthened.
16. To acknowledge the importance of the OAS/UNHCR Programme
of Cooperation and the activities so far carried out and to propose that
the next stage should focus on the problem raised by massive refugee
ﬂows in Central America, Mexico and Panama.
17. To ensure that in the countries of Central America and the Contadora
Group the international norms and national legislation relating to the
protection of refugees, and of human rights in general, are disseminated
192
Data and Documents

at all possible levels. In particular, the Colloquium believes it especially
important that such dissemination should be undertaken with the
valuable co-operation of the appropriate universities and centres of
higher education.
IV
The Cartagena Colloquium therefore Recommends:
That the commitments with regard to refugees included in the
Contadora Act should constitute norms for the 10 States participating in
the Colloquium and be unfailingly and scrupulously observed in
determining the conduct to be adopted in regard to refugees in the
Central American area.
That the conclusions reached by the Colloquium (III) should receive
adequate attention in the search for solutions to the grave problems
raised by the present massive ﬂows of refugees in Central America,
Mexico and Panama.
That a volume should be published containing the working document
and the proposals and reports, as well as the conclusions and
recommendations of the Colloquium and other pertinent documents, and
that the Colombian Government, UNHCR and the competent bodies of
OAS should be requested to take the necessary steps to secure the widest
possible circulation of the volume in question. That the present document
should be proclaimed the “Cartagena Declaration on Refugees”.
That the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees should be
requested to transmit the contents of the present declaration ofﬁcially to
the heads of State of the Central American countries, of Belize and
of the countries forming the Contadora Group.
Finally, the Colloquium expressed its deep appreciation to the Colombian
authorities, and in particular to the President of the Republic, Mr. Belisario
Betancur, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Augusto Ramı´rez Ocampo,
and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Poul
Hartling, who honoured the Colloquium with their presence, as well as to
the University of Cartagena de Indias and the Regional Centre for Third
World Studies for their initiative and for the realization of this important
event. The Colloquium expressed its special recognition of the support
and hospitality offered by the authorities of the Department of Bolivar
and the City of Cartagena. It also thanked the people of Cartagena, rightly
known as the “Heroic City”, for their warm welcome.
In conclusion, the Colloquium recorded its acknowledgement of the
generous tradition of asylum and refuge practised by the Colombian
people and authorities.
Cartagena de Indias, 22 November 1984
International and Regional Treaties
193

Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
Adopted, without a vote, by the United Nations General
Assembly on December 10, 1984. Opened for signature on
February 4, 1985. Entered into force June 26, 1987
The States Parties to this Convention,
Considering that, in accordance with the principles proclaimed in the
Charter of the United Nations, recognition of the equal and inalienable
rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom,
justice and peace in the world,
Recognizing that those rights derive from the inherent dignity of the
human person,
Considering the obligation of States under the Charter, in particular
Article 55, to promote universal respect for, and observance of, human
rights and fundamental freedoms,
Having regard to article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, both of which provide that no one may be subjected to torture
or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Having regard also to the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons
from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment, adopted by the General Assembly
on 9 December 1975 (resolution 3452 (XXX)),
Desiring to make more effective the struggle against torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment throughout
the world,
Have agreed as follows:
Part I
Article 1
1. For the purposes of this Convention, torture means any act by which
severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally
inﬂicted on a person for such purposes as obtaining from him or a third
person information or a confession, punishing him for an act he or a
third person has committed or is suspected of having committed, or
intimidating or coercing him or a third person, or for any reason based on
discrimination of any kind, when such pain or suffering is inﬂicted by or
at the instigation of or with the consent or acquiescence of a public ofﬁcial
194
Data and Documents

or other person acting in an ofﬁcial capacity. It does not include pain or
suffering arising only from, inherent in or incidental to lawful sanctions.
2. This article is without prejudice to any international instrument or
national legislation which does or may contain provisions of wider
application.
Article 2
(1) Each State Party shall take effective legislative, administrative,
judicial or other measures to prevent acts of torture in any territory
under its jurisdiction.
(2) No exceptional circumstances whatsoever, whether a state of war or
a threat or war, internal political instability or any other public
emergency, may be invoked as a justiﬁcation of torture.
(3) An order from a superior ofﬁcer or a public authority may not be
invoked as a justiﬁcation of torture.
Article 3
1. No State Party shall expel, return (“refouler”) or extradite a person to
another State where there are substantial grounds for believing that he
would be in danger of being subjected to torture.
2. For the purpose of determining whether there are such grounds, the
competent authorities shall take into account all relevant considerations
including, where applicable, the existence in the State concerned of a
consistent pattern of gross, ﬂagrant or mass violations of human rights.
Article 4
1. Each State Party shall ensure that all acts of torture are offences under
its criminal law. The same shall apply to an attempt to commit torture
and to an act by any person which constitutes complicity or
participation in torture.
2. Each State Party shall make these offences punishable by appropriate
penalties which take into account their grave nature.
Article 5
1. Each State Party shall take such measures as may be necessary to
establish its jurisdiction over the offences referred to in article 4 in the
following cases:
(1) When the offences are committed in any territory under its
jurisdiction or on board a ship or aircraft registered in that State;
(2) When the alleged offender is a national of that State;
(3) When the victim was a national of that State if that State
considers it appropriate.
International and Regional Treaties
195

2. Each State Party shall likewise take such measures as may be
necessary to establish its jurisdiction over such offences in cases where
the alleged offender is present in any territory under its jurisdiction and
it does not extradite him pursuant to article 8 to any of the States
mentioned in Paragraph 1 of this article.
3. This Convention does not exclude any criminal jurisdiction exercised
in accordance with internal law.
Article 6
1. Upon being satisﬁed, after an examination of information available to
it, that the circumstances so warrant, any State Party in whose territory
a person alleged to have committed any offence referred to in article 4
is present, shall take him into custody or take other legal measures to
ensure his presence. The custody and other legal measures shall be as
provided in the law of that State but may be continued only for such
time as is necessary to enable any criminal or extradition proceedings
to be instituted.
2. Such State shall immediately make a preliminary inquiry into the
facts.
3. Any person in custody pursuant to paragraph 1 of this article shall
be assisted in communicating immediately with the nearest appropriate
representative of the State of which he is a national, or, if he is a stateless
person, to the representative of the State where he usually resides.
4. When a State, pursuant to this article, has taken a person into
custody, it shall immediately notify the States referred to in article 5,
paragraph 1, of the fact that such person is in custody and of the
circumstances which warrant his detention. The State which makes
the preliminary inquiry contemplated in paragraph 2 of this article shall
promptly report its ﬁndings to the said State and shall indicate whether
it intends to exercise jurisdiction.
Article 7
1. The State Party in territory under whose jurisdiction a person alleged
to have committed any offence referred to in article 4 is found, shall in the
cases contemplated in article 5, if it does not extradite him, submit the
case to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution.
2. These authorities shall take their decision in the same manner as in
the case of any ordinary offence of a serious nature under the law of
that State. In the cases referred to in article 5, paragraph 2, the
standards of evidence required for prosecution and conviction shall in
no way be less stringent than those which apply in the cases referred to
in article 5, paragraph 1.
196
Data and Documents

3. Any person regarding whom proceedings are brought in connection
with any of the offences referred to in article 4 shall be guaranteed fair
treatment at all stages of the proceedings.
Article 8
1. The offences referred to in article 4 shall be deemed to be included as
extraditable offences in any extradition treaty existing between States
Parties. States Parties undertake to include such offences as extraditable
offences in every extradition treaty to be concluded between them.
2. If a State Party which makes extradition conditional on the existence
of a treaty receives a request for extradition from another State Party
with which it has no extradition treaty, it may consider this Convention
as the legal basis for extradition in respect of such offenses. Extradition
shall be subject to the other conditions provided by the law of the
requested State.
3. States Parties which do not make extradition conditional on the
existence of a treaty shall recognize such offences as extraditable
offences between themselves subject to the conditions provided by the
law of the requested state.
4. Such offences shall be treated, for the purpose of extradition
between States Parties, as if they had been committed not only in the
place in which they occurred but also in the territories of the States
required to establish their jurisdiction in accordance with article 5,
paragraph 1.
Article 9
1. States Parties shall afford one another the greatest measure of
assistance in connection with civil proceedings brought in respect of
any of the offences referred to in article 4, including the supply of all
evidence at their disposal necessary for the proceedings.
2. States Parties shall carry out their obligations under paragraph 1 of
this article in conformity with any treaties on mutual judicial assistance
that may exist between them.
Article 10
1. Each State Party shall ensure that education and information
regarding the prohibition against torture are fully included in the
training of law enforcement personnel, civil or military, medical
personnel, public ofﬁcials and other persons who may be involved in
the custody, interrogation or treatment of any individual subjected to
any form of arrest, detention or imprisonment.
International and Regional Treaties
197

2. Each State Party shall include this prohibition in the rules or
instructions issued in regard to the duties and functions of any such
persons.
Article 11
Each State Party shall keep under systematic review interrogation rules,
instructions, methods and practices as well as arrangements for the
custody and treatment of persons subjected to any form of arrest,
detention or imprisonment in any territory under its jurisdiction, with
a view to preventing any cases of torture.
Article 12
Each State Party shall ensure that its competent authorities proceed
to a prompt and impartial investigation, wherever there is reasonable
ground to believe that an act of torture has been committed in any
territory under its jurisdiction.
Article 13
Each State Party shall ensure that any individual who alleges he has
been subjected to torture in any territory under its jurisdiction has the
right to complain to, and to have his case promptly and impartially
examined by, its competent authorities. Steps shall be taken to ensure
that the complainant and witnesses are protected against all ill-
treatment or intimidation as a consequence of his complaint or any
evidence given.
Article 14
1. Each State Party shall ensure in its legal system that the victim of an
act of torture obtains redress and has an enforceable right to fair and
adequate compensation including the means for as full rehabilitation as
possible. In the event of the death of the victim as a result of an act of
torture, his dependents shall be entitled to compensation.
2. Nothing in this article shall affect any right of the victim or other
person to compensation which may exist under national law.
Article 15
Each State Party shall ensure that any statement which is established to
have been made as a result of torture shall not be invoked as evidence
in any proceedings, except against a person accused of torture as
evidence that the statement was made.
198
Data and Documents

Article 16
1. Each State Party shall undertake to prevent in any territory under its
jurisdiction other acts of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment which do not amount to torture as deﬁned in article 1,
when such acts are committed by or at the instigation of or with the
consent or acquiescence of a public ofﬁcial or other person acting in an
ofﬁcial capacity. In particular, the obligations contained in articles 10, 11,
12 and 13 shall apply with the substitution for references to torture or
references to other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment.
2. The provisions of this Convention are without prejudice to the
provisions of any other international instrument or national law which
prohibit cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment or
which relate to extradition or expulsion.
International and Regional Treaties
199

Data on Asylum Applicants for Selected
Western States 2008, 1998, and 1988
200
TABLE 6.1
Asylum Applicants in Selected Western Countries, 2008/1998/1988
2008
United States
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
China
9,831
4
El Salvador
2,789
3
Mexico
2,713
3
Haiti
2,078
3
Guatemala
1,853
3
Ethiopia
1,168
4
Colombia
910
4
Indonesia
894
3
Honduras
893
3
Iraq
809
5
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
37,597
% from PTS 5
5.9
% from PTS 4
50.4
% from PTS 3
38.4
% from PTS 2
4
% from PTS 1
0.1
% from other/unscored
1.1
United Kingdom
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Zimbabwe
4,330
5
Afghanistan
3,730
5
Iran
2,585
4
Eritrea
2,345
4
Iraq
2,030
5
Pakistan
2,010
4
Sri Lanka
1,840
5
Somalia
1,575
5
China
1,490
4
Nigeria
970
4

TABLE 6.1 (Continued)
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
30,065
% from PTS 5
48.2
% from PTS 4
40.8
% from PTS 3
7.5
% from PTS 2
2.2
% from PTS 1
0
% from other/unscored
1.3
Sweden
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Iraq
6,083
5
Somalia
3,361
5
Russia
933
4
Eritrea
857
4
Iran
799
4
Mongolia
791
3
Afghanistan
784
5
Uzbekistan
741
3
Libya
646
3
Syria
551
4
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
21,146
% from PTS 5
49.3
% from PTS 4
22.5
% from PTS 3
18.1
% from PTS 2
2.8
% from PTS 1
0
% from other/unscored
7.2
The Netherlands
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Iraq
5,027
5
Somalia
3,842
5
China
563
4
Afghanistan
395
5
Iran
322
4
Eritrea
236
4
Sri Lanka
216
5
Guinea
154
3
Sierra Leone
129
2
Mongolia
103
3
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
13,092
% from PTS 5
73.3
% from PTS 4
16.3
(continued)

TABLE 6.1 (Continued)
% from PTS 3
6
% from PTS 2
1.5
% from PTS 1
0
% from other/unscored
2.9
Italy
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Nigeria
5,673
4
Somalia
4,864
5
Eritrea
2,934
4
Ghana
1,815
3
Afghanistan
1,732
5
Bangladesh
1,684
4
Ivory Coast
1,653
4
Pakistan
1,143
4
Iraq
758
5
Burkina Faso
646
3
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
29,884
% from PTS 5
27.8
% from PTS 4
50.2
% from PTS 3
18.2
% from PTS 2
2.3
% from PTS 1
0
% from other/unscored
1.4
Germany
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Iraq
6,836
5
Turkey
1,408
4
Viet Nam
1,042
3
Iran
815
4
Syria
775
4
Afghanistan
657
5
Nigeria
561
4
Lebanon
525
3
India
485
4
Sri Lanka
468
5
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
19,822
% from PTS 5
42.8
% from PTS 4
34.1
% from PTS 3
18.6
% from PTS 2
1.1
% from PTS 1
0
% from other/unscored
3.4

TABLE 6.1 (Continued)
France
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Russia
3,595
4
Mali
2,670
2
D.R. Congo
2,543
5
Sri Lanka
2,322
5
Turkey
2,198
4
Guinea
1,270
3
Bangladesh
1,249
4
Comoros
1,105
3
Algeria
978
3
Haiti
930
3
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
29,043
% from PTS 5
22.6
% from PTS 4
36.8
% from PTS 3
26.2
% from PTS 2
13.3
% from PTS 1
0
% from other/unscored
1.1
Denmark
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Iraq
543
5
Afghanistan
418
5
Iran
196
4
Russia
183
4
Syria
105
4
West Bank/Gaza Strip
91
5
Somalia
58
5
Sri Lanka
53
5
Turkey
39
4
Algeria
38
3
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
2,124
% from PTS 5
56
% from PTS 4
34.6
% from PTS 3
6.5
% from PTS 2
2.2
% from PTS 1
0
% from other/unscored
0.6
(continued)

TABLE 6.1 (Continued)
Canada
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Mexico
8,070
3
Haiti
4,935
3
Colombia
3,130
4
China
1,710
4
Sri Lanka
1,010
5
United States
970
n/a
Nigeria
765
4
El Salvador
585
3
India
560
4
Somalia
505
5
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
32,310
% from PTS 5
11.3
% from PTS 4
29
% from PTS 3
49.3
% from PTS 2
6.9
% from PTS 1
0.2
% from other/unscored
3.2
Australia
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
China
1,230
4
Sri Lanka
420
5
India
375
4
Indonesia
240
3
Malaysia
240
2
Pakistan
220
4
Zimbabwe
215
5
Iraq
200
5
Iran
160
4
South Korea
135
2
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
4,685
% from PTS 5
20.8
% from PTS 4
54.9
% from PTS 3
12.8
% from PTS 2
10.6
% from PTS 1
0.4
% from other/unscored
0.5

TABLE 6.1 (Continued)
1998
United States
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Mexico
4,460
3
El Salvador
3,553
2
China
3,074
4
Haiti
2,676
3
Guatemala
2,526
3
Somalia
2,268
3
India
1,764
4
Russia
1,073
5
Ethiopia
868
4
Mauritania
765
2
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
32,529
% from PTS 5
11.2
% from PTS 4
24.5
% from PTS 3
48.4
% from PTS 2
14.7
% from PTS 1
0.4
% from other/unscored
0.7
United Kingdom
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Somalia
4,685
3
Sri Lanka
3,505
4
Russia
2,820
5
Afghanistan
2,395
5
Turkey
2,015
4
Pakistan
1,975
4
China
1,925
4
Nigeria
1,380
4
Iraq
1,295
5
Algeria
1,260
5
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
35,180
% from PTS 5
28.7
% from PTS 4
36.5
% from PTS 3
19.8
% from PTS 2
0.1
% from PTS 1
0
% from other/unscored
14
(continued)

TABLE 6.1 (Continued)
Sweden
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Iraq
3,843
5
Iran
613
3
Afghanistan
330
5
Colombia
303
5
Turkey
280
4
Russia
229
5
Somalia
228
3
Syria
226
3
Lebanon
125
3
Pakistan
122
4
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
7,545
% from PTS 5
64.3
% from PTS 4
10
% from PTS 3
19
% from PTS 2
2.5
% from PTS 1
0
% from other/unscored
4.1
The Netherlands
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Iraq
8,300
5
Afghanistan
7,118
5
Somalia
2,775
3
Sudan
1,875
5
Iran
1,679
3
Azerbaijan
1,268
2
Turkey
1,222
4
Sri Lanka
1,049
4
China
919
4
Syria
828
3
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
34,966
% from PTS 5
60.5
% from PTS 4
13.9
% from PTS 3
18.4
% from PTS 2
4.8
% from PTS 1
0
% from other/unscored
2.4

TABLE 6.1 (Continued)
Italy
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Iraq
3,362
5
Turkey
1,790
4
D.R. Congo
149
5
Sierra Leone
134
5
Iran
69
3
Sri Lanka
65
4
Afghanistan
63
5
Algeria
63
5
Pakistan
60
4
Ethiopia
52
4
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
6,119
% from PTS 5
63.4
% from PTS 4
33.6
% from PTS 3
2.7
% from PTS 2
0.3
% from PTS 1
0
% from other/unscored
0
Germany
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Turkey
11,754
4
Iraq
7,435
5
Afghanistan
3,768
5
Viet Nam
2,991
2
Iran
2,955
3
Sri Lanka
1,982
4
Georgia
1,979
3
Syria
1,753
3
Algeria
1,572
5
Azerbaijan
1,566
2
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
56,832
% from PTS 5
29.6
% from PTS 4
36.4
% from PTS 3
19.3
% from PTS 2
10.8
% from PTS 1
0
% from other/unscored
3.8
(continued)

TABLE 6.1 (Continued)
France
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
China
2,076
4
Sri Lanka
1,832
4
D.R. Congo
1,778
5
Turkey
1,621
4
Algeria
920
5
Pakistan
813
4
Cambodia
563
4
Bangladesh
555
4
Mauritania
542
2
India
463
4
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
16,447
%from PTS 5
28.9
% from PTS 4
51.2
% from PTS 3
8.7
% from PTS 2
10.2
% from PTS 1
0.1
% from other/unscored
0.8
Denmark
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Iraq
2,007
5
Somalia
662
3
Afghanistan
332
5
India
172
4
Iran
170
3
Sri Lanka
142
4
Pakistan
73
4
Turkey
72
4
Burundi
60
5
Russia
60
5
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
4,857
% from PTS 5
52.2
% from PTS 4
11.9
% from PTS 3
21.2
% from PTS 2
2.3
% from PTS 1
0
% from other/unscored
12.3

TABLE 6.1 (Continued)
Canada
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Sri Lanka
2,634
4
Pakistan
1,607
4
China
1,420
4
Mexico
1,158
3
India
1,157
4
Iran
880
3
Algeria
813
5
D.R. Congo
744
5
Russia
666
5
Somalia
653
3
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
20,691
% from PTS 5
19.7
% from PTS 4
46.6
% from PTS 3
26.2
% from PTS 2
4.8
% from PTS 1
2.2
% from other/unscored
0.3
Australia
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Indonesia
1,895
4
China
1,091
4
Sri Lanka
464
4
Philippines
455
3
India
328
4
Thailand
247
2
Iraq
238
5
Colombia
201
5
Iran
169
3
Bangladesh
161
4
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
8,003
% from PTS 5
9
% from PTS 4
54.6
% from PTS 3
13.5
% from PTS 2
4.5
% from PTS 1
1.5
% from other/unscored
16.7
(continued)

TABLE 6.1 (Continued)
1988
United States
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
El Salvador
27,048
4
Nicaragua
16,170
4
Guatemala
6,384
4
Iran
1,742
5
Cuba
1,683
3
Ethiopia
900
5
Honduras
524
3
Haiti
314
3
Lebanon
262
n/a
China
205
3
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
57,110
% from PTS 5
5
% from PTS 4
87.4
% from PTS 3
5.4
% from PTS 2
0.1
% from PTS 1
0
% from other/unscored
2.1
United Kingdom
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Uganda
415
4
Sri Lanka
400
5
Iran
395
5
Turkey
335
3
Pakistan
330
3
Somalia
305
4
India
295
4
Ethiopia
225
5
Ghana
170
2
Iraq
165
5
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
3,980
% from PTS 5
30.3
% from PTS 4
27.5
% from PTS 3
20.7
% from PTS 2
4.6
% from PTS 1
0
% from other/unscored
16.8

TABLE 6.1 (Continued)
Sweden
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Iran
5,022
5
Chile
3,384
4
Iraq
1,147
5
Ethiopia
1,090
5
Turkey
869
3
Lebanon
760
n/a
Syria
363
4
Bangladesh
258
3
Somalia
160
4
Algeria
145
3
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
16,453
% from PTS 5
44.6
% from PTS 4
23.9
% from PTS 3
8.9
% from PTS 2
0.8
% from PTS 1
0
% from other/unscored
21.7
The Netherlands
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Ghana
920
2
Ethiopia
682
5
Iran
641
5
India
489
4
D.R. Congo
448
3
Sri Lanka
404
5
Somalia
395
4
Turkey
381
3
Lebanon
239
n/a
Pakistan
227
3
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
6,542
% from PTS 5
30.8
% from PTS 4
18.5
% from PTS 3
27.3
% from PTS 2
17.5
% from PTS 1
1.3
% from other/unscored
4.6
(continued)

TABLE 6.1 (Continued)
Italy
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Ethiopia
327
5
Iran
306
5
Somalia
129
4
Iraq
84
5
Angola
65
4
Lebanon
45
n/a
Turkey
37
3
Sri Lanka
37
5
Sudan
24
5
Syria
19
4
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
1,235
% from PTS 5
63.3
% from PTS 4
21.5
% from PTS 3
8.9
% from PTS 2
2.1
% from PTS 1
0.4
% from other/unscored
3.8
Germany
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Turkey
14,873
3
Iran
7,867
5
Lebanon
4,233
n/a
Sri Lanka
3,383
5
Pakistan
2,390
3
West Bank/Gaza Strip
1,705
4
India
1,590
4
Afghanistan
1,462
5
Ghana
1,304
2
D.R. Congo
1,192
3
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
46,649
% from PTS 5
29.5
% from PTS 4
11.4
% from PTS 3
43.2
% from PTS 2
5.4
% from PTS 1
1
% from other/unscored
9.5

TABLE 6.1 (Continued)
France
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
Turkey
6,735
3
D.R. Congo
4,255
3
Mali
2,703
2
Angola
1,876
4
Viet Nam
1,670
3
Sri Lanka
1,498
5
Haiti
1,456
3
Cambodia
1,416
4
Laos
1,377
3
Ghana
1,240
2
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
32,203
% from PTS 5
6.8
% from PTS 4
13.8
% from PTS 3
53.6
% from PTS 2
21.5
% from PTS 1
3.7
% from other/unscored
0.6
Denmark
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
West Bank/Gaza Strip
3,356
4
Lebanon
2,725
n/a
Iran
1,417
5
Sri Lanka
680
5
Iraq
588
5
Afghanistan
272
5
Turkey
121
3
Viet Nam
92
3
Somalia
89
4
Syria
86
4
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
10,162
% from PTS 5
30
% from PTS 4
35.6
% from PTS 3
3.2
% from PTS 2
0.8
% from PTS 1
0
% from other/unscored
30.2
(continued)

214
TABLE 6.1 (Continued)
Canada
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
n/a
n/a
n/a
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
48,000
Australia
Top Ten Countries of Origin
Population
State PTS Score
n/a
n/a
n/a
Total Number of Asylum
Applications
n/a
Asylum seekers from these European countries are excluded from this spreadsheet (44 countries).
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia/Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Ireland, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Macedonia, Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, Sweden, Ukraine and
United Kingdom.

7
Directory of Organizations
Afghan Bureau for Reconstruction and Development
Street 3, Part A
Khoshal Maina
Kabul, Afghanistan
Tel: +93 79 934 1118
www.brd.org.af
brd@brd.org.af
The Afghan Bureau for Reconstruction and Development was
established in 2002 by Afghans as a non-proﬁt organization for
the purpose of assisting and participating in the development
and reconstruction of the country. They assist in relief efforts,
implement and coordinate development projects, and, through
their four key programs—development of a viable civil society,
capacity building of the government, capacity building for stable
income generation, and human rights—they support the process
of developing a strong and pluralistic Afghan society.
Africare Inc.
International Headquarters
440 R Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20001
Tel: (202) 462-3614
Fax: (202) 387-1034
www.africare.org
info@africare.org
President: Darius Mans
215

Since its founding in the early 1970s, Africare has been a collabo-
rative effort of Africans and Americans to improve the quality of
life in rural Africa. It is now one of the leading NGO’s assisting
Africa and addresses needs in areas such as health, food security,
water resource development, and emergency response, as well as
refugee assistance. Africare has worked in 36 African countries
and has carried out more than 2,000 assistance projects.
The AMAR International Charitable Foundation
Hope House
45 Great Peter Street
London,
SW1P 3LT
United Kingdom
Tel: +44 (0) 207 799 2217
Fax: +44 (0) 207 222 4665
www.amarfoundation.org
london@amarfoundation.org
Established in London in 1991 to assist Arab refugees, the AMAR
International Charitable Foundation now operates in Iran, Iraq,
and Lebanon, providing relief as well as professional health and
education services to refugee and other communities living in
war zones or areas of civil disruption.
American Friends Service Committee
National Headquarters
1501 Cherry Street
Philadelphia, PA 19102
Tel: (215) 241-7000
Fax: (215) 241-7275
www.afsc.org
afscinfo@afsc.org
Presiding clerk: Arlene Kelly
The American Friends Service Committee implements service,
development, social justice, and peace programs around the
world. They advocate for economic justice, non-heterosexual
rights and recognition, refugee and immigrant rights, as well as
peaceful and just solutions to conﬂict situations.
216
Directory of Organizations

American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee
711 Third Avenue
New York, NY 10036
www.jdc.org
info@jdc.org
Tel: (212) 687-6200
Chief Executive Ofﬁcer: Steven Schwager
Founded in 1914 to channel ﬁnancial assistance to starving Jews
during World War I, the American Jewish Joint Distribution
Committee now provides non-sectarian aid to Jews and non-
Jews throughout the world who are the victims of natural and
man-made disasters. They also provide long-term development
assistance to rural and impoverished communities.
American Red Cross
National Headquarters
2025 E. Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20006
Tel: (202) 303-5000
www.redcross.org
President: Gail J. McGovern
The American Red Cross is the nation’s primary emergency
response organization. It also provides international relief and
assistance to victims of war and natural disasters. Working in co-
operation with the International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies it helps refugees ﬁnd missing family members
and assists them to secure basic material needs, as well as
supporting worldwide development programs.
American Refugee Committee
World Headquarters
430 Oak Grove Street, Suite 204
Minneapolis, MN 55403
1-800-875-7060
Tel: (612) 872-7060
Fax: (612) 607-6499
www.arcrelief.org
info@archq.org
President: Daniel Wordsworth
Directory of Organizations
217

The American Refugee Committee is an international non-proﬁt,
non-governmental organization that works with refugee com-
munities, providing humanitarian assistance and skills training
to refugees and displaced persons in seven countries around the
world. They provide shelter, health care, clean water, sanitation,
protection, and microcredit education, with the goal of assisting
individuals to rebuild their lives after a crisis.
Amnesty International
International Secretariat
1 Easton Street
London WCIX0DW
United Kingdom
Tel: +44 20 741 35500
Fax: +44 20 795 61157
www.amnesty.org
Secretary General: Claudio Cordone
Founded in 1961 as a campaign to stop the abuse of human rights
worldwide, Amnesty International now has ofﬁces in more than 80
countries. They work to improve internationally recognized human
rights through campaigning and international solidarity, advocating
for fair trials for political prisoners, the release of prisoners of
conscience, and to abolish the use of torture and capital punishment.
American Near East Refugee Aid (ANERA)
1111 14th Street N.W., #400
Washington, DC 20005
Tel: (202) 266-9700
Fax: (202) 266-9701
www.anera.org
anera@anera.org
President: William Corcoran
American Near East Refugee Aid provides assistance to underde-
veloped areas throughout the Middle East, especially focusing its
services on Palestinian communities. They help local organiza-
tions become more effective providers to their communities and
also offer development, health, employment, and education pro-
grams to communities in need. ANERA is a non-political and
non-religious non-proﬁt organization and has been working
solely in the Middle East for over 40 years.
218
Directory of Organizations

Armenian Assembly of America
National Headquarters
1334 G Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20005
Tel: (202) 393-3434
Fax: (202) 638-4904
www.aaainc.org
info@aaainc.org
Executive Director: Bryan Ardouny
Located in Washington, the Armenian Assembly of America has
worked for more than 35 years advocating for a swift and appropri-
ate American and international response to the needs of Armenian
refugees, as well as providing humanitarian and development
assistance in Armenia and Nagorno Karabakh. They also provide
information and resources about Armenian issues.
Boat People S.O.S., Inc.
National Headquarters
6066 Leesburg Pike, Suite 100
Falls Church, VA 22041
Tel: (703) 538-2190
www.bpsos.org
info@bpsos.org
Executive Director: Thang D. Nguyen, Ph.D.
Boat People S.O.S., Inc., works internationally, assisting Vietnamese
refugees on the open ocean or in refugee camps, providing them
with skill training and support after they relocate.
Bridging Refugee Youth and Children’s Services
U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops
3211 Fourth Street, N.E.
Washington, DC 20017
Tel: 1-888-572-6500
www.brycs.org
info@brycs.org
Senior Program Ofﬁcer: Lyn Morland, MSW, MA
Bridging Refugee Youth and Children’s Services (BRYCS) works to
strengthen the capabilities of refugee-serving organizations across
the United States. Their mission is to assist these organizations in
providing for the successful development of refugee children, youth,
Directory of Organizations
219

and their families. BRYCS provides technical assistance that builds
long-term capacity, as well as promoting collaboration between
organizations at the local, state, regional, and national levels.
British Refugee Council
Head Ofﬁce
240-250 Ferndale Road
Brixton
London SW9 8BB
United Kingdom
Tel: 020 7346 6700
Fax: 020 7346 6701
www.refugeecouncil.org.uk
Chair: Douglas Board
The British Refugee Council is a non-proﬁt, non-governmental
organization that works to ensure the protection of refugee rights.
They provide information resources and direct material support
to refugees and asylum seekers.
Canadian Council for Refugees
National Headquarters
6839 Drolet #302
Montreal, Quebec, H25 2T1
Canada
Tel: (514) 277-7223
Fax: (514) 277-1447
www.ccrweb.ca
info@ccrweb.ca
President: Wanda Yamamoto
Founded in 1978, the CCR has been recognized as an important
advocate for refugee and immigrant rights in Canada. It is a
non-proﬁt organization, committed to the protection and rights
of refugees and immigrants in Canada and around the world.
CARE-International
International Secretariat
Chemin de Balexert 7–9
1219 Chatelaine, Geneva
Switzerland
Tel: +41 22 795 10 20
220
Directory of Organizations

Fax: +41 22 795 10 29
www.care-international.org
Secretary General: Robert Glasser
CARE is an international, non-political humanitarian organization,
dedicated to working with individuals and communities in the
poorest regions of the world. Often one of the ﬁrst organizations
to provide emergency aid to survivors of wars and natural disas-
ters, CARE remains in the area after the crisis is over to assist
people to rebuild their lives. Over 90 percent of their staff are
nationals of the countries where their programs are run.
Catholic Relief Services
228 W. Lexington Street
Baltimore, MD 21201-3413
Tel: 1-888-277-7575
www.crs.org
info@crs.org
President: Ken Hackett
Founded in 1943 to assist World War II survivors in Europe,
Catholic Relief Services is the ofﬁcial humanitarian arm of the
Catholic Church in the United States. Their humanitarian and
development programs are aimed at improving the lives of
impoverished and disadvantaged individuals and communities
around the world. They also develop public policy positions and
advocate for them with United States and international govern-
mental ofﬁcials.
Cefored Institute of Relief and Development
P.O. Box 105020-00100
Nairobi, Kenya
Tel: +254 20 311328
www.cefored.co.ke
info@cefored.co.ke
Cefored Institute of Relief and Development was founded in 1996
and its headquarters is located in Nairobi, Kenya. It provides
training to individuals and groups with the goal of establishing
a human resource foundation that can respond effectively to
emergency and development needs and support human rights
worldwide.
Directory of Organizations
221

Center for Applied Linguistics
4646 40th Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20016-1859
Tel: (202) 362-0700
Fax: (202) 362-3740
www.cal.org
info@cal.org
President: Donna Christian
The Center for Applied Linguistics is a non-proﬁt organization
dedicated to providing research based information and resources
related to language and culture. Its Refugee Integration project
works with the U.S. government, international organizations, and
domestic refugee resettlement agencies to provide them training
and assistance with respect to refugee’s cultures, languages, and
their resettlement needs.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
1600 Clifton Road
Atlanta, GA 30333
Tel: 1-800-232-4636
Director: Thomas R. Frieden, M.D., M.P.H.
www.cdc.gov
cdcinfo@cdc.gov
Immigrant, Refugee and Migrant Health
www.cdc.gov/immigrantrefugeehealth/International
Emergency and Refugee Health Branch
www.cdc.gov/nceh/ierh
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is one of the main
components of the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services. The branches of the CDC serving immigrants and refu-
gees are the Immigrant, Refugee and Migrant Health, and the
International Emergency and Refugee Health Branch. These
branches post notices about current health and international
issues of concern relating to immigrants and refugees, as well as
guidelines regarding refugee health questions.
Center for Migration Studies
27 Carmine Street
New York, NY 10014-4423
Tel: (212) 337-3080
222
Directory of Organizations

Fax: (212) 255-1771
www.cmsny.org
cms@cmsny.org
Executive Director: Rene Manenti
Founded in 1964 as a non-proﬁt organization dedicated to
supporting and undertaking original research, the Center for
Migration Studies of New York provides a forum for discussion
and debate on international migration. They also publish
“International Migration Review,” a peer-reviewed scholarly
journal about international migration.
Center for Victims of Torture
1875 I Street, N.W., 5th Floor
Washington, DC 20006
1-877-265-8775
Tel: (202) 857-3284
Fax: (202) 429-9574
www.cvt.org
cvt@cvt.org
Executive Director: Douglas A. Johnson, M.P.P.M.
The Center for Victims of Torture has branches in Minneapolis
and St. Paul, Sierra Leone, Jordan, and the Democratic Republic
of Congo, where they work with victims of torture, providing
resources and counseling to aid in the healing process. They also
advocate for an end to the use of torture worldwide. Since their
founding in 1985, they have assisted over 18,000 torture victims
and their families.
Church World Service Immigration and Refugee Program
475 Riverside Drive, Suite 700
New York, NY 10115
Tel: (212) 870-2061
Fax: (212) 870-3523
www.churchworldservice.org/site/PageServer
info@churchworldservice.org
Director: Erol Kekic
The Immigration and Refugee Program of Church World Service is
an ecumenical organization that provides resources and informa-
tion to churches, enabling them to assist refugees and immigrants
Directory of Organizations
223

in the United States and around the world. Through their program,
approximately 8,000 refugees are resettled in the United States
each year. Their organization provides news and resources advo-
cating for fair and equitable U.S. policies toward refugees and
immigrants.
Council for Assisting Refugee Academics
London South Bank University
Technopark
90 London Road SE1 6LN
London
United Kingdom
Tel: +44 (0) 207 021 0880
Fax: +44 (0) 207 021 0881
www.academic-refugees.org
info.cara@lsbu.ac.uk
President: Sir John Ashworth
Council for Assisting Refugee Academics was founded in 1933 in
response to news that leading academics in Germany were being
removed from their posts, due to their race or their politics, under
the Nazi regime. The organization’s goal is to assist university
teachers and investigators in any country who are unable to work
because of their race, religion, or politics. In the past 75 years, the
organization has provided assistance to over 9,000 academics and
their dependents.
Cultural Survival
215 Prospect Street
Cambridge, MA 02139
www.culturalsurvival.org
Executive Director: Ellen Lutz
For 37 years, Cultural Survival has worked with indigenous peoples
in dozens of countries around the world, helping them protect their
lands, languages, and cultures. They advocate for indigenous issues
and work to end rights abuse.
Danish Refugee Council
Borgergade 10, 3rd Floor
1300 Copenhagen K.
224
Directory of Organizations

Denmark
Tel: +45 3373 5000
www.drc.dk
id@drc.dk
Founded in 1956, the Danish Refugee Council is a private, non-
proﬁt organization, committed to the realization of durable
solutions to refugee crises. They are comprised of 30 member
organizations working to provide relief and development services,
refugee support, and community rehabilitation worldwide.
Direct Aid Iraq
MECCS/Direct Aid Iraq
P.O. Box 382425
Cambridge, MA 02238
Tel: (802) 659-4281
www.directaidiraq.org
info@directaidiraq.org
Direct Aid Iraq is a program of the Middle East Cultural and Chari-
table Society, and is a non-proﬁt organization that supports peace
in Iraq through education, aid provision, and advocacy work.
Direct Relief International
27 S. La Patera Lane
Santa Barbara, CA 93117
Tel: (805) 964-4767
Fax: (805) 681-4838
www.directrelief.org
President: Thomas Tighe
Established in 1948, Direct Relief International provides medical
assistance for individuals affected by poverty, war, and disaster
both in the United States and abroad. They partner with domestic
organizations, providing them with direct material assistance,
including medicines, equipment, and other supplies.
Episcopal Migration Ministries
815 Second Avenue
New York, NY 10017
1-800-334-7626
Tel: (212) 716-6000
Directory of Organizations
225

www.episcopalchurch.org/emm
emm@episcopalchurch.org
Director: Deborah Stein
Episcopal Migration Ministries is one of the humanitarian arms of
the Episcopal Church. They work to ensure the basic civil and
human rights of immigrants and refugees, and provide assistance
with refugee resettlement.
Eritrean Relief Association
Robin House
2A Iverson Road
London NW6 2HE
United Kingdom
Tel: 00 44 20 7328 7888
www.era-uk.org
info@era-uk.org
The Eritrean Relief Association is a United Kingdom based
organization dedicated to providing relief and development
assistance to individuals and communities within Eritrea, as well
as providing resources to Eritreans in the United Kingdom.
Ethiopian Community Development Council
901 South Highland Street
Arlington, VA 22204
Tel: (703) 685-0510
Fax: (703) 685-0529
www.ecdcinternational.org
info@ecdeinternational.org
President: Tseheye Teferra, Ph.D.
The Ethiopian Community Development Council’s goal is to facili-
tate the integration of Ethiopian refugees into the United States.
They provide educational and social programs to assist refugees
in acculturation, resettlement, and healing from past traumas.
European Council on Refugees and Exiles
ECRE Brussels Ofﬁce Secretariat
Rue Royale 146
2nd Floor 1000
Brussels, Belgium
Tel: +32 (0) 2 234 3800
226
Directory of Organizations

Fax: +32 (0) 2 514 5922
www.ecre.org
ecre@ecre.org
The ECRE is a diverse network composed of 69 non-proﬁt, non-
governmental organizations dedicated to assisting refugees and
advocating for the improvement of European asylum policies.
European Refugee Fund
European Commission
DG Justice, Freedom, and Security
B-1049
Brussels
Belgium
Tel: +32 2.299.96.96
http://ec.europa.eu/justice_home/funding/refugee/funding
_refugee_en.htm
Created in 2000 to help member states of the European Union
share the costs of reception and integration of refugees, the
European Refugee Fund supports and improves the efforts of
European Member States to apply fair and effective asylum
procedures and good practices in their reception of refugees.
Exodus World Service
P.O. Box 620
Itasca, IL 60143-0620
Tel: (630) 307-1400
Fax: (630) 307-1430
www.e-w-s.org
Director: Heidi Moll Schoedel
Exodus World Service trains volunteers in the Chicago area, pro-
viding them with the necessary information to intervene for and
assist newly arrived refugees. They also provide tools and train-
ing for local refugee organizations to help with resettlement and
other service projects.
Georgetown University Institute for the Study
of International Migration
Georgetown University
Harris Building
3300 Whitehaven Street, N.W.
Directory of Organizations
227

Third Floor
Washington, DC 20007
Tel: (202) 687-2258
Fax: (207) 687-2541
www.isim.georgetown.edu
Executive Director: Susan Martin
The Institute for the Study of International Migration is part of the
Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service at Georgetown Uni-
versity. They conduct research and provide analysis on all aspects
of international migration, including the causes of and potential
responses to migration, immigration and refugee law and policy,
comparative migration studies, and the effects of migration on
national and international concerns.
Grassroots International
179 Boylston Street, Fourth Floor
Boston, MA 02130
Tel: (617) 524-1400
Fax: (617) 524-5525
www.grassrootsonline.org
info@GrassrootsOnline.org
Director of Global Programs: Maria Aguiar
Grassroots International is a development and human rights
organization that builds alliances between social movements
and progressive organizations. Their goal is to support a global
movement for social justice through advocacy, education, and
the support of community led initiatives.
HealthRight International
80 Maiden Lane, Suite 607
New York, NY 10038
Tel: (212) 226-9890
Fax: (212) 226-7026
www.healthright.org
info@healthright.org
Executive Director: Mila Rosenthal, Ph.D.
HealthRight International was founded in 1990 to be a global
health and human rights organization, addressing health and
social crises, and working to create permanent access to health
228
Directory of Organizations

care for marginalized communities. They take a rights-based
approach aimed at improving conditions in impoverished
and marginalized areas, aiming to create projects that enable
communities to advocate for themselves.
Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society
333 Seventh Avenue, 16th Floor
New York, NY 10001-5019
Tel: (212) 967-4100
www.hias.org
President: Gideon Aronoff
As the international migration agency of the American Jewish
community, the Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society provides assis-
tance to refugees and endangered communities worldwide
regardless of their ethnic or religious background, and advocates
for fair refugee and immigration policies in the United States.
Holt International Children’s Services
1195 City View
Eugene, OR 97402
Tel: (541) 687-2202
Fax: (541) 683-6175
www.holtintl.org
info@holtinternational.org
President: Kim Brown
Holt International is an international adoption and child-care
agency, focused on protecting the rights of children, as well as
both the birth and adoptive parents. They also run facilities and
programs overseas to ensure safe and nurturing environments
for children at risk.
Human Rights Documentation Exchange
P.O. Box 2327
Austin, TX 78768
Tel: (512) 476-9841
Fax: (512) 476-0130
www.handplant.com/mockups/hrde/default.htm
mail@hrde.org
Executive Director: Rebecca Hall
Directory of Organizations
229

The Human Rights Documentation Exchange provides information
on human rights abuses and country speciﬁc conditions to persons
applying for asylum and in the United States, assisting them to
verify their claim of reasonable fear of persecution in his or her
own country.
Human Rights First
333 Seventh Avenue, 13th Floor
New York, NY 10001-5108
Tel: (212) 845-5200
Fax: (212) 845-5299
www.humanrightsﬁrst.org
feedback@humanrightsﬁrst.org
President: Elisa Massimino
Human Rights First was founded in 1978 as a non-proﬁt organiza-
tion dedicated to promoting human rights and respect for the rule
of law. They work to ensure the rights and dignity of persons
through advocacy, litigation, coalition-building, and research.
Human Rights Internet
1 Nicholas Street, Suite 1105
Ottawa, ON K1N 7B7
Canada
Tel: (613) 789-7407
Fax: (613) 789-7414
www.hri.ca
info@hri.ca
Executive Director: Dr. Corinne Packer
Human Rights Internet is committed to the advancement of social
justice and human rights. They work with governmental,
international, and non-governmental actors and organizations to
support marginalized groups, provide research and information,
and to push for policy changes, good governance, and institu-
tional development.
Human Rights Watch
350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor
New York, NY 10118-3299
Tel: (212) 290-4700
230
Directory of Organizations

Fax: (212) 736-1300
www.hrw.org
hrwnyc@hrw.org
Executive Director: Kenneth Roth
Human Rights Watch has been one of the world’s principal
organizations devoted to protecting and advancing human rights
for 30 years. They investigate and expose human rights viola-
tions, employing a “naming and shaming” approach, and work
to bring perpetrators of violations to justice through the use of
international law.
Immigrant and Refugee Community Organization
Central Ofﬁce
10301 N.E. Glisan Street
Portland, OR 97220
Tel: (503) 234-1541
Fax: (503) 234-1259
www.irco.org
Executive Director: Mr. Sokhom Tauch
The Immigrant and Refugee Community Organization is a Port-
land, Oregon-based service provider for newly arrived immigrants
and refugees. Their goal is to promote the integration of immi-
grants, refugees, and their adopted community.
Immigrant and Refugee Rights Project
Washington Lawyers’ Committee
Attn: Immigrant and Refugee Rights Project
11 Dupont Circle, N.W., Suite 400
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: (202) 319-1000 ext. 120
www.washlaw.org/projects/immigrants_refugees_eng/
default.htm
immigrant@washlaw.org
Director: Laura E. Varela
The Washington Lawyers’ Committee Immigrant and Refugee
Rights Project works to protect and support the rights of immi-
grants and refugees who are discriminated against in violation
of state and federal law.
Directory of Organizations
231

InterAction
1400 16th Street N.W., Suite 210
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: (202)667-8227
www.interaction.org
ia@interaction.org
President: Samuel Worthington
InterAction is a coalition of more than 180 member organizations
working to assist the poorest individuals and communities in the
world. They promote an agenda, focused on development and
humanitarian assistance, to United States and international policy
makers, as well as creating a forum for leading NGO’s and other lead-
ers in various ﬁelds to share expertise and ideas on poverty reduction.
Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre
Chemin de Balexert, 7–9
1219 Chatelaine
Geneva, Switzerland
Tel: +41 (22) 799 07 00
Fax: +41 (22) 799 07 01
www.internal-displacement.org
Head: Kate Halff
The Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre was established by
the Norwegian Refugee Council in 1998, and has evolved into the
leading international organization monitoring conﬂict-induced
internal displacement around the world. They run an online data-
base at the request of the United Nations that provides informa-
tion and analysis on internal displacement and use the data they
gather to effectively advocate on an international level for lasting
solutions to the needs of internally displaced persons in accor-
dance with international law.
International Alert
346 Clapham Road
London SW9 9AP
United Kingdom
Tel: 44 (0) 20 7627 6800
Fax: 44 (0) 20 7627 6900
www.international-alert.org
Secretary General: Dan Smith, OBE
232
Directory of Organizations

International Alert is a non-proﬁt organization committed to the
prevention and end of violent conﬂict worldwide. Based in
London, International Alert works in over 20 countries. They
combine local work with persons directly affected by violence
with advocacy at governmental and international levels to
support the creation of sustainable peace.
International Catholic Migration Commission
1, Rue de Varembe
P.O. Box 96
CH 1211 Geneva 20
Switzerland
Tel: 41 (0) 22 919 10 20
Fax: 41 (0) 22 919 10 48
www.icmc.net
info@icmc.net
President: John Klink
The International Catholic Migration Commission was estab-
lished in 1951 to serve the needs and protect the rights of refu-
gees, internally displaced persons, and migrants worldwide.
They have 172 member organizations in 30 countries around the
world, with expertise in refugee resettlement, local integration,
emergency response, and advocacy.
International Center for Migration and Health
11, Route du Nant d’Avril
CH-1214 Geneva
Switzerland
Tel: 41 (22) 783 10 80
Fax: 41 (22) 783 10 87
www.icmh.ch
admin@icmh.ch
President: Dr. Eamon Kelly
Established in 1995, the International Center for Migration and
Health’s mission is to work for the protection of health and wel-
fare of refugees, internally displaced persons, and migrants. They
collaborate with the World Health Organization by generating
research and advocating for international public policy in all
areas related to migration and health.
Directory of Organizations
233

International Committee of the Red Cross
19 avenue de la Paix
CH 1202 Geneva
Switzerland
Tel: 41 (22) 733 20 57
Fax: 41 (22) 734 60 01
www.icrc.org
President: Jakob Kellenberger, Ph.D.
Established in 1863, the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) is a non-political organization working to ensure humani-
tarian protection and assistance for victims of conﬂict. The ICRC
has a legal mandate from the international community, sourced
from both the Geneva Convention and the Statutes of the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement. This
mandate tasks the ICRC with working impartially for prisoners,
wounded, and civilians affected by both armed conﬂicts and
situations of internal violence.
International Council of Voluntary Agencies
26-28 avenue Giuseppe Motta 1202
Geneva
Switzerland
Tel: 41 (0) 22 956 9600
Fax: 41 (0)22 950 9609
www.icva.ch
secretariat@icva.ch
Coordinator: Ed Schenkenberg van Mierop
The International Council of Voluntary Agencies (ICVA) is a
network of organizations focused on humanitarian, human
rights, and refugee policy issues. As an advocacy alliance,
the ICVA provides a means for both extensive collaboration
between NGOs and for the improvement of individual
organizations.
International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies
P.O. Box 372
CH-1211 Geneva 19
Switzerland
Tel: 41 22 730 42 22
234
Directory of Organizations

Fax: 41 22 733 03 95
www.ifrc.org
Secretary General: Bekele Geleta
With 186 member societies, the International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies is the largest humanitarian
organization in the world, carrying out relief operations to assist
victims of conﬂict and natural disaster, and providing develop-
ment assistance to strengthen the abilities of its national societies.
International Organization for Migration
17 Route des Morillons
Ch-1211 Geneva 19
Switzerland
Tel: 41 22 717 9111
Fax: 41 22 798 6150
www.iom.int
info@iom.int
Director General: William Lacy Swing
Established in 1951 as the Intergovernmental Committee for
European Migration, the International Organization for Migra-
tion is the leading organization specializing in migration issues.
By collaborating with the international community to advance
understanding of migration issues, they assist in meeting the
challenges posed by migration in the 21st century, and work for
the protection of the rights and well-being of migrants.
International Refugee Rights Initiative
866 United Nations Plaza, Suite 4018
New York, NY 10017
Tel: (212) 453 5853
Fax: (212) 310 0100
www.refugee-rights.org
info@refugee-rights.org
Co-Directors: De´irdre Clancy and Dismas Nkunda
The International Refugee Rights Initiative is a non-proﬁt, non-
governmental organization that is committed to the protection of
human rights in conﬂict situations and of the rights of displaced
individuals. They are an advocacy organization, focused on
Africa, which conducts research on the effects of national and
Directory of Organizations
235

international policy on affected groups and brings their ﬁndings
to policy makers with the aim of improving and creating laws
and policies that best guarantee human rights.
International Rescue Committee
122 East 42nd Street
New York, NY 10168-1289
Tel: (212) 551-3000
Fax: (212) 551-3179
www.theirc.org
President: George Rupp
The International Rescue Committee is a global network of indi-
viduals and organizations working in 42 countries to provide
emergency relief, refugee relocation and resettlement, and
post-conﬂict development. They assist individuals uprooted by
violence and conﬂict, as well as those ﬂeeing racial, ethnic, or
religious persecution.
International Social Service—United States of America
Branch, Inc.
200 E. Lexington Street, Suite 1700
Baltimore, MD 21202
Tel: (443) 451-1200
Fax: (443) 451-1220
www.iss-usa.org
iss-usa@iss-usa.org
Executive Director: Julie Gilbert Rosicky
An international network composed of 150 national branches, the
International Social Service provides assistance to individuals
who encounter socio-legal problems worldwide. They are a non-
proﬁt, non-religious organization, with each national branch
operating autonomously.
Iraqi Refugee Assistance Project
www.iraqirefugee.us
iraqi.refugee.assistance@gmail.com
Founded by students in 2008, the Iraqi Refugee Assistance Project
is student-run organization working to facilitate the resettlement
of refugees and advocating for improved U.S. refugee policies.
236
Directory of Organizations

Jesuit Refugee Service
National Headquarters
1016 16th Street, N.W., Suite 500
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: (202) 462-0400
Fax: (202) 328-9212
www.jrs.net
The Jesuit Relief Service is an international Catholic organization
with programs in over 50 countries. Their mandate is to provide
assistance to, and defend the rights of, refugees and internally
displaced persons (IDP). They also contribute to research on refu-
gee issues at Oxford University and advocate internationally for
greater international protection for refugees and IDPs.
Lutheran Immigration and Refugee Service
Headquarters
700 Light Street
Baltimore, MD 21230
Tel: (410) 230-2700
Fax: (410) 230-2890
www.lirs.org
lirs@lirs.org
President: Linda Hartke
Advocacy
122 C Street, N.W., Suite 125
Washington, DC 20001
Tel: (202) 783-7509
Fax: (202) 783-7502
dc@lirs.org
Lutheran Immigration and Refugee Service works with churches
across the United States to assist in refugee resettlement. They
work within the community receiving the refugees to create a
welcoming and compassionate environment. The organization
also advocates for improved U.S. policies concerning immigra-
tion and refugees.
Lutheran World Relief
700 Light Street
Baltimore, MD 21230
Tel: (410) 230-2800
Directory of Organizations
237

Fax: (410) 230-2882
www.lwr.org
President: John Arthur Nunes
Lutheran World Relief works with churches in the United States
and partners around the world to facilitate international relief
and development programs.
Mapendo International Inc
689 Massachusetts Avenue, Second Floor
Cambridge, MA 02139
Tel: (617) 864-7800
Fax: (617) 864-7802
www.mapendo.org
info@mapendo.org
Executive Director: Sasha Chanoff
Mapendo International works to provide assistance to the
refugees that the UNHCR is unable to help, those that live in
urban areas, often illegally, rather than in refugee camps. They
are an independently funded organization that targets those
individuals that have been largely unnoticed by the international
community.
Mennonite Central Committee
21 S. 12th Street
P.O. Box 500
Akron, PA 17501-0500
1-888-563-4676
Tel: (717) 859-1151
www.mcc.org
mailbox@mcc.org
Executive Director: Arli Klassen
Mennonite Central Committee is a worldwide ministry of
Anabaptist churches, dedicated to addressing basic human needs
such as food, water, and shelter. They work with local churches
internationally to build peace and provide disaster relief and
sustainable community development.
Minnesota Advocates for Human Rights
650 3rd Avenue South, Suite 1240
Minneapolis, MN 55402-1940
238
Directory of Organizations

Tel: (612) 341-3302
Fax: (612) 341-2971
www.mnadvocates.org
hrights@advrights.org
Executive Director: Robin Phillips
The Minnesota Advocates for Human Rights works to promote
and support a movement to protect human rights, nationally
and internationally. Their work with refugees and immigrants is
based in advocacy and research, as well as the provision of free
legal assistance to refugees and immigrants in need.
Minority Rights Group International
54 Commercial Street
London E1 6LT
United Kingdom
Tel: 44 (0) 20 7422 4200
Fax: 44 (0) 20 7422 4201
www.minorityrights.org
minority.rights@mrgmail.org
Executive Director: Mark Lattimer
The Minority Rights Group International mounts campaigns that
target governments and communities in which discriminatory
attitudes against disadvantaged minorities. The group seeks to
eradicate such attitudes, and works with around 130 partner
organizations in over 60 countries, utilizing education, legal
cases, publications, and the media to secure equal opportunities
and rights to minorities.
Muslim Aid
PO Box 3
London E1 1WP
United Kingdom
Tel: +44 (0)20 7377 4200
Fax: +44 (0)20 7377 4201
www.muslimaid.org
CEO: Syed Sharfuddin
Committed to poverty eradication and community empowerment,
Muslim Aid works with its partners in over 70 countries around
the world. They provide assistance to individuals and communities
Directory of Organizations
239

after natural disasters and conﬂict situations, and implement devel-
opment programs focused on education, sanitation, health care,
and skill development.
National Immigration Forum
50 F Street, N.W., Suite 300
Washington, DC 20001
Tel: (202) 347-0040
Fax: (202) 347-0058
www.immigrationforum.org
Executive Director: Ali Noorani
The National Immigration Forum is the leading immigrant
advocacy organization in the United States. Established over
25 years ago, the Forum emphasizes the value of immigrants
and immigration to American society, and advocates for immi-
gration policies that protect the rights and dignity of immigrants
and refugees, while at the same time upholding American
ideals.
Nationalities Service Center
1216 Arch Street
Fourth Floor
Philadelphia, PA 19107
Tel: (215) 893-8400
Fax: (215) 735-9718
www.nationalitiesservice.org
Executive Director: Dennis Mulligan
The Nationalities Service Center (NSC), located in Philadelphia, is
a non-proﬁt organization that assists approximately 4,000 area
refugees and immigrants per year. The NSC focuses on the provi-
sion of services such as legal assistance, translation and interpre-
tation, and educational assistance.
Norwegian Refugee Council
P.O. Box 6758
St Olavs plass
0130 Oslo
Norway
Tel: (47) 23 10 98 00
240
Directory of Organizations

Fax: (47) 23 10 98 01
www.nrc.no
nrc@nrc.no
Secretary General: Elisabeth Rasmusson
The NRC is an independent, non-proﬁt organization focused on
the international promotion and protection of the rights of refu-
gees and internally displaced persons and returning refugees.
They are the only organization of this kind in Norway, and they
operate with about 2,600 staff members in over 20 countries. They
provide humanitarian assistance in the form of education, distri-
bution of food, water, and other necessities, building homes and
schools, and refugee camp management. The NRC also engages
in advocacy on these issues, both in Norway and internationally.
Office of Refugee Resettlement
Administration for Children and Families
Ofﬁce of Refugee Resettlement
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Aerospace Building
901 D Street, S.W.
Washington, DC 20447
Tel: (202) 401-9246
Fax: (202) 401-5487
www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/orr
Director: Eskinder Negash
Part of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the
Ofﬁce of Refugee Resettlement provides assistance and resources
to refugees, with their aim being the successful integration of
these refugees into American society.
Office of United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
Case Postale 2500
CH-1211
Geneva 2 Depot
Switzerland
Tel: 41 22 739 8111
www.unhcr.org
High Commissioner: Anto´nio Guterres
Established by the UN General Assembly in 1950, the Ofﬁce of
the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is tasked with
Directory of Organizations
241

the coordination of international action to protect refugees. Its
mission is to ensure the rights and well-being of refugees, including
the right to seek asylum. It has a staff of over 6,600 individuals in
more than 110 countries. The Ofﬁce of the United Nations High
Commissioner has been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize twice, in
1954 and 1981.
Operation USA
3617 Hayden Avenue, Suite A
Culver City, CA 90232
1-800-678-7255
Tel: (310) 838-3455
Fax: (310) 838-3477
www.opusa.org
info@opusa.org
President: Richard Walden
Operation USA is an international humanitarian agency that works
with local organizations to provide relief, reconstruction, and
development operations. They promote long-term programs such
as education, health services, and leadership development, as well
as support the building of grassroots advocacy movements.
Oxfam America
226 Causeway Street
Fifth Floor
Boston, MA 02114-2206
(617) 728-2594
Tel: 1-800-776-9326
www.oxfamamerica.org
info@oxfamamerica.org
President: Raymond C. Offenheiser
Oxfam America is one of 13 worldwide afﬁliates of Oxfam
International, a relief and development organization that has for
20 years set the standard for the delivery of clean water and sani-
tation supplies in emergency situations. Oxfam responds to every
major refugee crisis, anywhere in the world, and their afﬁliates
come together to provide the most efﬁcient response. Oxfam
International also works for change in international laws and
policies that allow poverty to remain endemic to certain regions
of the world.
242
Directory of Organizations

Project ROSE
SEARAC-Head Ofﬁce
1628 16th Street, N.W., Third Floor
Washington, DC 20009-3099
Tel: (202) 667-4690
Fax: (202) 667-6449
www.searac.org/rose.html
searac@searac.org
Contact: Bach Pham
A collaboration between Mosaica: The Center for Nonproﬁt
Development and Pluralism, and the South East Asia Resource
Action Center (SEARAC), Project Refugee Organization and Ser-
vice Enhancement (ROSE) works to build the capacity of refugee
service agencies and organizations. Project ROSE provides techni-
cal assistance and information resources to international refugee
organizations, as well as conducting regional trainings, to help
new or struggling refugee organizations provide the most effec-
tive and efﬁcient services.
Rav Tov International Jewish Rescue Operation
500 Bedford Avenue
Brooklyn, NY 11211
Tel: (718) 963-1991
www.allbusiness.com/4035145-1.html
Contact: Divid Niederman
Rav Tov is an international network that provides immigration
and resettlement assistance to refugees immigrating to Western
countries. They have ﬁnancial assistance available to bridge the
gap before an immigrant is able to be self-sufﬁcient, and connects
immigrants to educational and employment services.
Refugee Action
The Old Fire Station
150 Waterloo Road
London SE1 8SB
UK
Tel: +44 (0)20 7654 7700
Fax: +44 (0)20 7654 0696
www.refugee-action.org.uk
info@refugee-action.org.uk
Chief Executive: Jill Roberts
Directory of Organizations
243

Founded over 25 years ago in the United Kingdom, Refugee
Action works to create a society where refugees are welcome
and safe in their adopted communities. They seek to empower
refugees through their resettlement and integration services,
independent advice, and advocacy.
Refugee and Migrant Justice
Nelson House
153-157 Commercial Road
London E1 2DA
Tel: 020 7780 3200
Fax: 020 7780 3201
www.refugee-migrant-justice.org.uk
rlc@rmj.org.uk
Chief Executive: Caroline Slocock
Established in 1992 as the Refugee Legal Centre, Refugee and
Migrant Justice is a non-proﬁt UK-based legal organization that
works to procure legal justice for refugees, asylum seekers, and
other migrants in the United Kingdom. They are the largest pro-
vider of advice and representation to these groups in the United
Kingdom, and have built a solid reputation as effective legal
advocates in their area. In 2005, Refugee and Migrant Justice
won the Liberty/Justice Human Rights Award for their work.
Refugee Assistance Project
City Bar Justice Center
42 West 44th Street
New York, NY 10036
Tel: (212) 382-6600
www.nycbar.org/citybarjusticecenter/projects/immigrant-justice/
refugee-assistance-projectinfo@nycbar.org
The Refugee Assistance Project is part of the City Bar Justice
Center in New York City. They recruit and train volunteer attor-
neys to assist refugees seeking political asylum in the United
States.
Refugee Council of Australia
Head Ofﬁce
410 Elizabeth Street, Suite 4 A6
Sury Hills NSW 2010
244
Directory of Organizations

Australia
Tel: 02 9211 9333
Fax: 02 9211 9288
www.refugeecouncil.org.au
info@refugeecouncil.org.au
CEO: Paul Power
The Refugee Council of Australia is a network of 130 Australian
organizations assisting refugees and asylum seekers. As the
umbrella organization, the council conducts research, provides
information, and advocates for the development of improved ref-
ugee and immigration policies.
Refugee Health—Office of Global Health Affairs
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Room 639H
200 Independence Avenue, S.W.
Washington, DC 20201
Tel: (202) 690-6174
Fax: (202) 690-7127
www.globalhealth.gov
Director: Dr. Nils Daulaire
Part of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the
Ofﬁce of Global Health Affairs assists in the coordination of refu-
gee health policies nationally and internationally. Among their
collaborative initiatives is the Refugee Health Promotion and
Disease Prevention Initiative, a project coordinated between
several ofﬁces of Health and Human Services that is intended to
increase refugee health awareness.
Refugee Relief International
2995 Woodside Road # 400–244
Woodside, CA 94062
www.refugeerelief.org
info@refugeerelief.org
Refugee Relief International is an independent humanitarian
relief organization that conducts missions to provide medical
and relief assistance in crisis situations. They are staffed by volun-
teer doctors, nurses, and medics who have experience working in
war zones and emergency environments.
Directory of Organizations
245

Refugee Studies Centre
Oxford Department of International Development
University of Oxford
3 Mansﬁeld Road
Oxford OX1 3TB
United Kingdom
Tel: +44 (1865) 281720
Fax: +44 (1865) 281730
www.rsc.ox.ac.uk
rsc@gch.ox.ac.uk
Established in 1982, the Refugee Studies Centre has earned an
international reputation as the premier center for research on the
causes and consequences of forced migration. The center provides
degrees and individual courses to individuals wishing to gain a
greater understanding of refugee issues.
Refugee Women’s Alliance
4008 Martin Luther King, Jr. Way South
Seattle, WA 98108
Tel: (206) 721-0243
Fax: (206) 721-0282
www.rewa.org
Executive Director: Someireh Amirfaiz
The Refugee Women’s Alliance is an independent, non-proﬁt
organization in the Seattle that provides support services to refu-
gee and immigrant women, including education and vocational
training, family and parenting support classes and counseling,
and domestic violence awareness programs.
Refugee Women’s Network
4151 Memorial Drive
Suite 103F
Decatur, GA 30032
Tel: (404) 299-0180
Fax: (404) 296-9118
www.riwn.org
info@riwn.org
Executive Director: Dr. BryAnn Chen
Founded in 1995 by women who immigrated to the United States
as refugees, the Refugee Women’s Network provides services to
246
Directory of Organizations

support and empower refugee and immigrant women in the
Atlanta area. They provide leadership training, educational assis-
tance, and advocacy to promote independence and self-sufﬁciency.
Refugees International
2001 S Street, N.W., Suite 700
Washington, DC 20009
Tel: (202) 828-0110
Fax: (202) 828-0819
www.refugeesinternational.org
ri@reﬁntl.org
President: Dan Glickman
Refugees International is a leading independent advocacy
organization that makes recommendations to governments,
international organizations such as the United Nations, and aid
organizations to improve the quality of life for refugees and
internally displaced persons. They conduct ﬁeld missions
each year in critical areas of the world to identify the needs of
individuals in crisis situations.
Salvation Army World Service Office
P.O. Box 1428
615 Slaters Lane
Alexandria, VA 22313
Tel: (703) 684-5528
Fax: (703) 684-5536
www.SAWSO.org
sawso@usn.salvationarmy.org
Executive Director: Lt. Colonel Daniel Starrett
The Salvation Army World Service Ofﬁce was established in 1977
to develop permanent solutions to poverty in third world coun-
tries. They work to increase community preparedness for emer-
gency situations, institute development programs, and provide
relief services after a disaster.
SAMHSA–Refugee Mental Health Program
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
Center for Mental Health Services
Refugee Mental Health Program
1 Choke Cherry Road
Directory of Organizations
247

Room 6-1099
Rockville, MD 20857
Tel: (240) 276-1845
Fax: (240) 276-1890
www.refugeewellbeing.samhsa.gov
Director: Captain John J. Tuskan, Jr., USPHS
The Refugee Mental Health Program, part of the National Center
for Mental Health Services, works in cooperation with the Ofﬁce
of Refugee Resettlement to assess the needs of refugees and
migrants in the United States. They provide mental health informa-
tion and technical assistance to federal, state, and other agencies
with programs directed at improving the quality of care and access
to mental health services.
Save the Children Federation
54 Wilton Road
Westport, CT 06880
1-800-728-3843
Tel: (203) 221-4030
www.savethechildren.org
CEO: Jasmine Whitbread
Save the Children Federation is the largest independent organiza-
tion in the world working for children’s rights. It is comprised of
29 national organizations and provides assistance to other organi-
zations working to support children’s health and educational
needs. Save the Children delivers emergency relief after disasters
and implements development programs targeted toward children’s
needs.
Southeast Asia Resource Action Center
1628 16th Street, N.W., 3rd Floor
Washington, DC 20009-3099
Tel: (202) 667-4690
Fax: (202) 667-6449
www.searac.org
searac@searac.org
Executive Director: Doua Thor
Founded in 1979 as an independent organization facilitating the suc-
cessful relocation of Southeast Asian immigrants to the United
States, the Southeast Asia Resource Action Center now serves as an
248
Directory of Organizations

advocate for Southeast Asian Americans at the national level. They
also work to build coalitions of community-based organizations
supporting the needs of Southeast Asian immigrants and refugees.
Tolstoy Foundation
P.O. Box 578
104 Lake Road
Valley Cottage, NY 10989
Tel: (845) 268-6722
Fax: (845) 268-6937
www.tolstoyfoundation.org
info@tolstoyfoundation.org
Executive Director: Victoria Wohlsen
Founded in 1939 to assist individuals ﬂeeing war and political
persecution, the Tolstoy Foundation today provides relief assis-
tance internationally with emphasis on building the capacity of
individuals and communities to be self-reliant.
UN Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
United Nations Secretariat
New York, NY 10017
Tel: (212) 963-1234
Fax: (212) 963-1013
ochaonline.un.org
ochany@un.org
Under Secretary General: John Holmes
The UN Ofﬁce for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is
responsible for the mobilization and coordination of national
and international organizations and other actors to facilitate relief
and development activities internationally.
UNICEF
New York Headquarters
UNICEF House
3 United Nations Plaza
New York, NY 10017
Tel: (212) 326-7000
Fax: (212) 887-7465
www.unicef.org
Executive Director: Anthony Lake
Directory of Organizations
249

UNICEF has a mandate from the United Nations General
Assembly to work for the protection of children’s rights and to
assist in the provision of basic needs such as health care and educa-
tion for children internationally. They have the ability to mobilize
both governmental and non-governmental actors to protect
children in underdeveloped areas and in crises.
UNRWA
Gaza Headquarters
P.O. Box 61
Gaza City
Tel: 972 8 288 7333
Fax: 972 8 288 7555
www.unrwa.org
Commissioner General: Filippo Grandi
New York Ofﬁce
One United Nations Plaza
Room DC1-1265
New York, NY 10017
Tel: (212) 963-2255
Fax: (212) 935-7899
Director: Andrew Whitley
The UN Relief and Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees in the
Near East was established in 1949 to carry out relief programs for
new Palestinian refugees in the aftermath of the 1948 Israeli-Arab
conﬂict. Now, the organization is the primary provider of services
such as education, health care, social services, and relief to
4.6 million Palestinian refugees in the Middle East.
United States Catholic Conference, Migration
and Refugee Services (USCCB)
3211 Fourth Street, N.E.
Washington, DC 20017
Tel: (202) 541-3352
Fax: (202) 722-8755
www.usccb.org/mrs/
mrs@usccb.org
Executive Director: Johnny Young
The United States Catholic Conference Migration and Refugee
Services works with and for the rights of refugees, immigrants,
250
Directory of Organizations

and displaced persons nationally and internationally. They advo-
cate at the national level for improved immigration and refugee
policies, and work to provide information to individuals and
organizations about immigrant and refugee rights.
United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS)
20 Massachusetts Avenue, N.W.
Washington, DC 20529
Tel: 1-800-375-5283
www.uscis.gov
Director: Alejandro Mayorkas
With 250 ofﬁces worldwide, the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration
Services is the government agency that oversees immigration to
the United States. They provide information about immigration,
promote an understanding of citizenship in the United States,
and grant citizenship and immigration beneﬁts.
U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants
2231 Crystal Drive, Suite 350
Arlington, VA 22202-3711
Tel: (703) 310-1130
Fax: (703) 769-4241
www.refugees.org
uscri@uscridc.org
President: Lavinia Limo´n
The U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants provides direct
assistance to refugees ﬂeeing their country as well as supporting
them during relocation and resettlement in a new homeland.
They also advocate for refugee rights and improved immigration
and refugee policies nationally, and work for refugees’ successful
integration into their new communities.
U.S. Department of State—Bureau of Population,
Refugees, and Migration
2201 C Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-4000
www.state.gov/g/prm
Assistant Secretary: Eric P. Schwartz
Directory of Organizations
251

The U.S. State Department’s Bureau of Population, Refugees, and
Migration provides assistance internationally through a multilat-
eral system of organizations including the UNHCR and the
International Committee of the Red Cross. They also provide
solutions for refugees through assistance with repatriation or
resettlement in the United States.
U.S. Fund for UNICEF
125 Maiden Lane
New York, NY 10038
Tel: 1-800-486-4233
www.unicefusa.org
President: Caryl M. Stern
Utilizing advocacy, fundraising, and education in the United
States, the U.S. Fund for UNICEF supports UNICEF’s mission to
provide for and protect children worldwide.
U.S. House Judiciary Committee
Subcommittee on Immigration, Citizenship, Refugees, Border
Security, and International Law Membership
2138 Rayburn House Ofﬁce Building
Washington, DC 20515
Tel: (202) 225-3951
www.judiciary.house.gov/about/subimmigration.html
Chairman: Zoe Lofgren
The U.S. House Judiciary Committee Subcommittee studies and
makes recommendations on immigration, citizenship, refugees,
border security, treaties, conventions and international agree-
ments, and other relevant matters.
U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee
Subcommittee on Immigration, Refugees, and Border Security
224 Dirksen Senate Ofﬁce Building
Washington, DC 20510
Tel: (202) 224-8352
Fax: (202) 228-2260
www.judiciary.senate.gov/about/subcommittees/
immigration.cfm
Chairman: Chuck Schumer
252
Directory of Organizations

The U.S. Senate Subcommittee on Immigration, Refugees, and
Border Security has jurisdiction over immigration, citizenship,
and refugee laws nationally, as well as over international laws
and policy concerning international migration, internally
displaced persons, and refugees.
Women’s Refugee Commission
122 East 42nd Street
New York, NY 10168
Tel: (212) 551-3115
www.womensrefugeecommission.org
info@wrcommission.org
Executive Director: Carolyn Makinson
The Women’s Refugee Commission is an independent advocacy
organization, working nationally and internationally for improved
laws and policies for refugees and internally displaced persons.
They conduct research and fact-ﬁnding missions to identify both
the critical problems facing refugee women and children as well
as successful policies and practices.
World Concern International
International Headquarters
19303 Freemont Avenue North
Seattle, WA 98133
Tel: 1-800-755-5022
Fax: (206) 546-7269
www.worldconcern.org
info@worldconcern.org
President: David Eller
World Concern is an international non-proﬁt organization work-
ing to relieve poverty through development programs and to
assist in the provision of health care and social services through
better community organization and preparation.
World Food Programme
Via CG Viola 68
Parco dei Midici
00148 Rome
Italy
Directory of Organizations
253

Tel: +39 06 65131
Fax: +39 06 6590632
Executive Director: Josette Sheeran
As the world’s largest humanitarian organization ﬁghting hunger,
the World Food Programme provides food and services during
and after emergencies to ensure that every individual has access
to food. They also work to prevent hunger in the future by imple-
menting programs the help communities become more food
secure. The World Food Programme is part of the United Nations
system.
World Learning
P.O. Box 676
1 Kipling Road
Brattleboro, VT 05302-0676
1-800-257-7751
Tel: (802) 257-7751
Fax: (802) 258-3248
www.worldlearning.org
info@worldlearning.org
President: Adam Weinberg
World Learning is a non-proﬁt organization that works in 75
countries creating international education programs to strengthen
cross-cultural understanding, collaboration, and global citizen-
ship. They both teach and implement community-driven
international development and exchange projects.
World Relief
7 East Baltimore Street
Baltimore, MD 21202
Tel: 1-800-535-5433
www.worldrelief.org
worldrelief@wr.org
President: Sammy Mah
World Relief is an international faith-based organization that
provides training, education, and resources to local churches in
impoverished and volatile areas. They create grassroots develop-
ment and relief programs that are community centered and
directed.
254
Directory of Organizations

World Vision
P.O. Box 9716, Dept W
Federal Way, WA 98063-9716
Tel: 1-888-511-6548
www.worldvision.org
info@worldvision.org
President: Richard Stearns
Founded in 1950 to help children orphaned in the Korean War,
World Vision is a Christian international aid organization that
now primarily works to protect children in any region of the
world where their health and safety are jeopardized. They also
equip teams to provide disaster and emergency relief in crisis
situations.
Young Professionals in Foreign Policy—Refugee
Assistance Program
1800 K Street, N.W., Suite 400
Washington, DC 20006
www.ypfp.org/rap
info@ypfp.org
President: Joshua Marcuse
The Young Professionals in Foreign Policy Refugee Assistance
Program recruits and trains volunteers to work with resettled ref-
ugee families for six months to assist them in integrating into
American society. They partner with the International Rescue
Committee, The List Project, and Lutheran Social Services. Since
2007, the Refugee Assistance Program has assisted over 250 indi-
viduals in the greater Washington, DC, area.
Directory of Organizations
255

This page intentionally left blank

8
Resources
Print Resources
There are thousands of publications on refugees, and the number
is rapidly expanding. In this chapter we offer a brief annotated
bibliography of the leading journals, major references, books,
and reports in the ﬁeld and non-print sources so that readers can
quickly identify the sources most important and useful to them.
Journals
There are many periodicals that carry material related to refugees,
a highly interdisciplinary topic. Below, we provide information
on those that are either speciﬁcally dedicated to those purposes
or those that quite often carry stories on the topic.
AWR Bulletin
Association for the Study of the World Refugee Problem
Wilhelm Braumu¨ller
Universita¨ts-Verlagsbuchandlung
A-1092 Vienna
Servite-casse 5
Austria
www.awr-int.de
This quarterly publication is devoted to the study of refugee
problems. It includes articles, speeches, book reviews, legislative
materials, and other writings of concern to refugees.
257

Human Rights Quarterly
The Johns Hopkins University Press
2715 North Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218-4363
(410) 516-6900
Fax: (410) 516-6968
http://www.press.jhu.edu/journals/human_rights_quarterly/
This quarterly journal specializes in human rights, including
refugee issues.
Immigrants and Minorities
Taylor & Francis Group
Mortimer House
37–41 Mortimer Street
London W1T 3JH
United Kingdom
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/ﬁmm
Immigrants and Minorities is a British quarterly that focuses on
immigrant minorities in Western societies.
International Journal of Refugee Law
Human Rights Centre
University of Essex
Wivenhoe Park
Colchester
Essex CO4 3SQ
United Kingdom
http://ijrl.oxfordjournals.org
This quarterly journal publishes articles about refugee law and
policy. It also includes legislation, documentation, and abstracts
of recent publications in the ﬁeld.
International Migration
International Organization for Migration
17, Route des Morillons
CH-1211 Geneva 19
Switzerland
http://www.iom.int/jahia/jsp/index.jsp
This intergovernmental quarterly includes documents, conference
reports, and articles.
258
Resources

International Migration Review
Center for Migration Studies
27 Carmine Street
New York, NY 10014-4423
http://www.wiley.com/bw/journal.asp?ref=0197-9183
The leading quarterly journal in the ﬁeld of migration, Inter-
national Migration Review contains current research articles, book
reviews, documents, and bibliographies.
International Review of the Red Cross
International Committee of the Red Cross
19 Avenue de la Paix
CH-1201 Geneva
Switzerland
http://www.icrc.org/Web/eng/siteeng0.nsf/htmlall/review?
OpenDocument
This journal, published six times a year, contains articles on
international humanitarian law.
Journal of Refugee Studies
Refugee Studies Programme
Oxford University Press
Walton Street
Oxford OX2 6DP
England
http://jrs.oxfordjournals.org
The quarterly Journal of Refugee Studies covers all aspects of refu-
gee issues from a multidisciplinary perspective.
Netherlands Quarterly of Human Rights
Netherlands Institute of Human Rights
Drift 15
3512 BR Utrecht
The Netherlands
http://www.nqhr.net
This quarterly journal covers refugees and other human rights
issues and problems.
Refuge
Room 845, Centre for Refugee Studies
York Research Tower
Print Resources
259

4700 Keele Street
Toronto, ON M3J 1P3
Canada
http://pi.library.yorku.ca/ojs/index.php/refuge/index
This publication discusses Canadian refugee policy and reviews
recent developments in refugee problems around the world.
Refugee Reports
U.S. Committee for Refugees
2231 Crystal Drive, Suite 350
Arlington, VA 22202-3711
http://www.refugees.org/article.aspx?id=1175&rid=1178
Refugee Reports is an essential monthly source of information and
documentation about refugees and legislation and programs
affecting them. A special year-end statistical issue is published
every December.
Revue Europe´enne des Migrations Internationales
MSH
Baˆtiment A5–5, rue The´odore Lefebvre
86000 Poitiers
France
http://remi.revues.org/
Issues of this biannual publication, published by the university’s
geography department, focus on subjects such as Antilleans in
Europe and immigration in the Americas.
World Disasters Report
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
P.O. Box 372
CH-1211 Geneva 19
Switzerland
http://www.ifrc.org/publicat/wdr2009/index.asp
This report is the only annual report focusing on disasters—from
earthquakes to epidemics and conﬂict to economic crises—and on
the millions of people affected by them.
World Refugee Survey
U.S. Committee for Refugees
2231 Crystal Drive, Suite 350
260
Resources

Arlington, VA 22202-3711
http://www.wiley.com/bw/journal.asp?ref=0197-9183
World Refugee Survey is an indispensable annual survey that iden-
tiﬁes and reviews refugee problems in the world and provides
authoritative statistics.
Important Document Sources
International Migration Outlook
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
2 rue Andre´-Pascal, 75116
Paris
France
http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/30/13/41275373.pdf
This annual publication has articles and important statistical
information on migration ﬂows into the industrialized states of
the world.
Refugee Report
Bureau for Refugee Resettlement
Administration for Children and Families
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Aerospace Building
901 D Street, S.W.
Washington, DC 20447
http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/orr/data/arc.htm
This is the ofﬁcial annual report to Congress concerning the world
refugee situation.
Refugee Survey Quarterly
Center for Documentation on Refugees
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
Case Postale 2500
1211-Geneva 2 De´poˆt
Switzerland
http://rsq.oxfordjournals.org
This quarterly lists the abstracts of many of the publications
about refugees. In addition, it contains a selection of country
reports and a section on refugee- or human rights-related legal
documentation.
Print Resources
261

Sri Lanka Monitor
The Refugee Council
3 Bondway
London SW8 1SJ
England
http://brcslproject.gn.apc.org
Sri Lanka Monitor contains information about Tamil refugees and
developments in Sri Lanka affecting refugee ﬂows.
The State of World Population
UN Population Fund
220 East 42nd Street
New York, NY 10017
http://www.unfpa.org/swp
This annual publication discusses world population growth and
related problems, and it contains useful statistics. UN Population
Fund also publishes: World Population Trends, Reports, World
Foreign-Born Populations, and World Migration Studies.
Reference Works
This section provides a select listing of key reference resources
that are useful in the study of refugees. Although some of the titles
may not deal speciﬁcally with refugees, they are included here
because they have sections on refugees or are valuable introduc-
tions to refugee-related issues.
Aitchison, Jean. International Thesaurus of Refugee Terminology.
Dordrecht, Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff, 1989. 476 p. ISBN
0-7923-0504-3.
This thesaurus covers a wide range of subjects central to or
impinging on the ﬁeld of refugees. It is intended for use by organ-
izations that are active in documentation work concerning
refugees.
American Immigrant Lawyers Association. The Law of Asylum:
A Manual for Practitioners and Adjudicators. Washington, DC:
American Immigrant Lawyers Association, 1989. 81 p.
An indispensable resource for lawyers involved in asylum work,
this resource analyzes and explains the legal basis for asylum,
262
Resources

the withholding of deportation and application processes, cessa-
tion of asylum status, the rights of applicants, and the handling
of persecution claims.
Refugees in Africa. Berlin: Edition Parabolis, 1993. 140 p.
This bibliography includes the major works on refugee move-
ments in Africa.
Refugees in Asia and Australia/Oceania. Berlin: Edition Parabo-
lis, 1992. 144 p.
This is a listing of 1,283 titles covering refugee movements in Asia
and Australasia since the end of World War II.
Refugees in Latin America and the Caribbean. Berlin: Edition
Parabolis, 1993. 140 p.
This is a bibliography of the research on refugees in Latin
America and the Caribbean.
Refugees in Northern America. Berlin: Edition Parabolis, 1993.
300 p.
This listing of books, articles, research reports, dissertations, and
reports of aid agencies on refugee issues covers all of North
America.
Refugees in Western Europe. Berlin: Edition Parabolis, 1992.
176 p.
Refugees in Western Europe lists the literature on the refugee and
asylum issue in Western Europe, excluding Germany. It includes
studies on refugee movements, immigration and asylum policy,
the social situation of refugees, and their integration and legal
status.
Boyer, Laura M. The Older Generation of Southeast Asian Refu-
gees, An Annotated Bibliography. Minneapolis, MN: Southeast
Asian Refugee Studies Project, Center for Urban and Regional
Affairs, University of Minnesota, 1991. 61 p.
This is an annotated listing of sources on older Southeast Asian
refugees.
Print Resources
263

Center for Human Rights, United Nations. Human Rights
Bibliography: United Nations Documents and Publications,
1980–1990. New York: United Nations, 1993. 5 volumes. ISBN
92-1-100377-6.
This bibliography presents all UN instruments, documents, and
publications on human rights.
Center for the Study of Human Rights, Columbia University,
New York. Human Rights: A Topical Bibliography. Boulder, CO:
Westview Press, 1983. 297 p. ISBN 0-86531-571-X.
A bibliography consisting of scholarly books and articles on human
rights, Human Rights draws primarily from the disciplines of law,
the social sciences, and philosophy. It includes a list of the agencies
that provide documentary resource materials on a continuing basis.
Central America Refugee Policy Research Project. Sourcebook
on Central American Refugee Policy: A Bibliography. Austin,
TX: Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs, University of
Texas, 1985. 68 p.
This bibliography contains almost 800 items, including books,
articles, newsletters, and other reports and resources on Central
American refugees.
Davies, Julian, and Refugee Studies Programme, University of
Oxford. Displaced Peoples and Refugee Studies, A Resource Guide.
London: Hans Zell Publishers, 1990. 219 p. ISBN 0-905450-76-0.
This resource guide includes a comprehensive and well-
annotated list of manuals, reference works, periodicals, disserta-
tions, and books. There are also useful directories of libraries,
documentation centers, research and teaching centers, and organ-
izations concerned with all aspects of the refugee issue, arranged
alphabetically by country of location.
Enrostat. Asylum Seekers and Refugees: A Statistical Report.
Luxembourg: Ofﬁce for Ofﬁcial Publications of the European
Communities, 1994. 157 p. ISBN 92-826-7623-4.
This publication is an important resource of statistics providing
up-to-date ﬁgures on asylum-seekers and refugees for the Euro-
pean Union and European Free Trade Association countries.
264
Resources

Fenton, Thomas, and Mary Heffron, eds. Third World Resource
Directory. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 1984. 283 p. ISBN 0-
88344-509-3.
This comprehensive resource guide is divided into geographical
areas and themes. It covers resources, organizations, and printed
and audiovisual materials.
Hammond, Ruth E., and Glenn L. Hendricks, eds. Southeast
Asian Refugee Youth: An Annotated Bibliography. Minneapolis,
MN: Southeast Asian Refugee Studies Project, Center for Urban
and Regional Affairs, University of Minnesota, 1988. 143 p.
Publication No. CURA 88-2.
This annotated bibliography lists 372 works about Southeast
Asian young people who are refugees in the United States.
Human Rights Internet. Africa: Human Rights Directory and
Bibliography. Ottawa: Human Rights Internet, University of
Ottawa, 1989. 304 p. ISBN 0-939338-04-1.
This directory of human rights organizations in Africa is con-
cerned with human rights and social justice.
Human Rights Directory: Eastern Europe. Ottawa: Human
Rights Internet, University of Ottawa, 1987. 210 p. ISBN
0-939338-03-3.
This resource lists organizations in Eastern Europe that are work-
ing on human rights and social justice.
Human Rights Directory: Latin America and the Caribbean.
Ottawa: Human Rights Internet, University of Ottawa, 1990.
526 p. ISBN 0-939338-05-X.
This directory describes nearly 800 organizations concerned with
human rights and humanitarian issues in Latin America and the
Caribbean. Available in English and Spanish, it is an excellent
source for networking, research, and policymaking.
Human Rights Directory: North America. Ottawa: Human Rights
Internet, University of Ottawa, 1984. 300 p. ISBN 0-939338-02-5.
This directory lists organizations in North America concerned
with human rights and social justice.
Print Resources
265

Human Rights Directory: Western Europe. Ottawa: Human
Rights Internet, University of Ottawa, 1982. 335 p. ISBN
0-939338-01-7.
This directory focuses on organizations in Western Europe that
deal with human rights and social justice issues.
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). Bibliography
of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Con-
ﬂicts. Geneva: ICRC and Henry Dunant Institute, 1987. 605 p.
ISBN 2-88044-017-3.
An indispensable bibliography, this book covers international
humanitarian law, international armed conﬂicts, non-international
armed conﬂicts, and protection of noncombatants in warfare.
International Refugee Integration Resource Centre. Inter-
national Bibliography of Refugee Literature. Geneva: IRIRC,
1985. 152 p.
This bibliography includes 850 titles covering refugee situations
according to the following categories: international organizations,
exodus, asylum, resettlement, and integration.
Newman, Frank, and David Weissbrodt, eds. Selected
International Human Rights Instruments. Cincinnati: Anderson
Publishing Co., 1990. 812 p. ISBN 0-87084-368-0.
This handbook lists and describes the principal international
human rights instruments.
Refugee Studies Programme, University of Oxford. The
Directory of Research on Refugees and Other Forced Migrants.
3d ed. Oxford, UK: Refugee Studies Programme, 1993. 184 p.
ISBN 0-9512260-0-2.
This directory contains information on the research and publi-
cations of about 400 scholars working in the refugee ﬁeld. It gives
the cultural origin, discipline, and research topic for each entry
and provides telephone and fax numbers where applicable.
Cross-referencing is facilitated by lists based on geographical area
and discipline of each person listed.
266
Resources

Segal, Aaron. An Atlas of International Migration. London:
Hans Zell, 1993. 233 p. ISBN 1-873836-30-9.
This atlas details various kinds of migration patterns and their
effects on sending and receiving countries. It contains much use-
ful documentation.
Schorr, Alan. Refugee and Immigrant Resource Directory,
1990–1991. Juneau, AK: Denali Press, 1990. 349 p. ISBN
0-938737-19-8.
This invaluable resource includes information on 958 local,
regional, and national organizations, research centers, academic
programs, foundations, museums, government agencies, and
other groups in the United States that offer services or provide
information about refugees and immigrants.
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
Collection of International Instruments concerning Refugees.
Geneva: UNHCR, 1979. 335 p.
This is a collection of the international legal instruments (concern-
ing refugees, stateless persons, and human rights), regional legal
instruments (for Africa, Europe, and the Americas), and other
instruments.
UNHCR. Conclusions on the International Protection of Refugees
Adopted by the Executive Committee on International Protection
of Refugees of the UNHCR Program. Geneva: UNHCR, 1980. 91 p.
This compendium comprises the conclusions on the international
protection of refugees as adopted by UNHCR’s Executive Com-
mittee up to 1980.
UNHCR Centre for Documentation on Refugees and Refugee
Policy Group. Bibliography on Refugee Children. Geneva:
UNHCR, 1987. 138 p.
This is an annotated bibliography on refugee children categorized
under protection and assistance; national policies; refugee camps;
placement and fostering; integration; education; health; and
psychological problems.
Print Resources
267

UNHCR. Bibliography on Refugee Women. Geneva: UNHCR,
1989. 122 p.
This annotated bibliography focuses on current research on refu-
gee women and is arranged geographically.
UNHCR. Bibliography Prepared for the Excom Working Group
on Solutions and Protection. Geneva: UNHCR, 1990. 85 p.
This is an annotated bibliography of literature on refugees di-
vided into four sections: (1) refugee and related migratory move-
ments; (2) solutions; (3) early warning and prevention; and (4)
refugee law and policies.
UNHCR Liaison Section with Non-Governmental Organiza-
tions. Directory of Non-Governmental Organizations. Geneva:
UNHCR, 1992. 240 p.
This directory contains the names and addresses of over 500 insti-
tutions working with refugees and asylum-seekers.
Williams, Carolyn. An Annotated Bibliography on Refugee Men-
tal Health. Washington, DC: Department of Health and Human
Services, 1987. 335 p. DHHS Publication No. (ADM) 87-1517.
This bibliography of 666 items is organized under four main head-
ings: (1) understanding refugees in context; (2) speciﬁc mental
health issues and refugees; (3) concerns of selected subgroups of
refugees; and (4) other bibliographies on refugees or related topics.
Books
Adelman, Howard, ed. 1991. Refugee Policy: Canada and the
United States. Toronto: York Lanes Press.
This book, a collection of papers presented at a conference at York
University in 1990, compares the refugee policies of Canada and
the United States. It includes contributions by many of the lead-
ing North American researchers in refugee studies and has chap-
ters on the normative and political aspects of refugee policy, root
causes, refugee relief and development assistance, refugee law
and practice, and resettlement policies.
Agier, Michel. 2008. On the Margins of the World: The Refugee
Experience Today. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
268
Resources

This provides a look at the refugee phenomenon from the vantage
point of an anthropologist who has long studied exiled peoples.
Alborzi, M. R. 2006. Evaluating the Effectiveness of International
Refuge Law: The Protection of Iraqi Refugees. Leiden, Netherlands:
Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.
This book uses the current refugee crisis in Iraq to analyze the
effectiveness (or ineffectiveness) of the 1951 Refugee Convention.
Baines, Erin K. 2004. Vulnerable Bodies: Gender, the UN, and the
Global Refugee Crisis. Burlington, VT: Ashgate Publishing
Company.
Employing a comparative analysis of Bosnia, Rwanda, and Gua-
temala, Baines explores the ravages of the refugee experience
from an international, national, and local level.
Baker, Ron, ed. 1983. The Psychological Problems of Refugees.
London: The British Refugee Council.
As the title indicates, this book provides important data and
analysis on the myriad of mental health problems experienced
by almost every single refugee.
Bariagaber, Assefaw. 2006. Conﬂict and the Refugee Experience:
Flight, Exile, and Repatriation in the Horn of Africa. Burlington,
VT: Ashgate Publishing Company.
This book uses the conﬂicts in the Horn of Africa to provide an
important analysis of the seemingly never-ending mass migra-
tions in this part of the world.
Basoglu, Metin. 1992. Torture and Its Consequences. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Basoglu gives an account of victims of torture, many of whom are
refugees, and the challenges of providing treatment for these indi-
viduals.
Beatrice, Marie, and Umutesi Madison. 2000. Surviving the
Slaughter: the Ordeal of a Rwandan Refugee in Zaire. Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press.
Surviving the Slaughter: The Ordeal of a Rwandan Refugee in Zaire
provide an important micro-level analysis of the horriﬁc
Print Resources
269

experience of Marie Be´atrice Umutesi, a Hutu woman from
Rwanda who had ﬂed to a refugee camp in Zaire.
Bixler, Mark. 2005. The Lost Boys of Sudan: an American Story of
the Refugee Experience. Athens, GA: University of Georgia
Press.
The author provides a ﬁrst hand account of a group of the “Lost
Boys” who land in Atlanta, as they attempt to make a new life
for themselves in their new homeland.
Black, Richard, and Khalid Koser, eds. 1999. The End of the Ref-
ugee Cycle?: Refugee Repatriation and Reconstruction. New
York: Berghahn Books.
With the fall of communism in Eastern Europe in the late 1980s
and early 1990s, there was renewed enthusiasm for a “new world
order” that would translate into greatly reduced refugee ﬂows.
The reality, however, has been something altogether different
and this volume explains how and why this is.
Bookman, Milica Zarkovic. 2002. After Involuntary Migration:
The Political Economy of Refugee Encampments. Lanham, MD:
Lexington Books.
As increasing numbers of refugees are being “warehoused,”
scholars such as Bookman are beginning to study the inner work-
ings of these new refugee communities.
Bramwell, Anna, ed. 1987. Refugees in the Age of Total War:
Twentieth Century Case-Studies of Refugees in Europe and the
Middle East. London: Unwin Hyman.
These 20 chapters analyze refugee movements in Europe and the
Middle East generated by the two world wars and their after-
maths. They also examine the responses of international organiza-
tions and governments to the movements.
Bread for the World Institute on Hunger and Development.
1992. Hunger 1993: Uprooted People. Washington, DC: Bread for
the World Institute on Hunger and Development.
This book focuses on the special circumstances of refugees and
displaced people and the problems of hunger and malnutrition.
270
Resources

It is a useful overview of the issues and contains many helpful
tables and graphs, as well as a bibliography.
Byrne, Rosemary, Gregor Noll, and Jens Vedsted-Hansen, eds.
New Asylum Countries?: Migration Control and Refugee Protec-
tion in an Enlarged European Union.
The book focuses on the rapid expansion of the European Union
and analyzes how this might transform the nature of refugee pro-
tection throughout Europe.
Cahill, Kevin, ed. 1993. A Framework for Survival: Health,
Human Rights, and Humanitarian Assistance in Conﬂicts and
Disasters. New York: Basic Books and the Council on Foreign
Relations.
This book, with 20 chapters by practitioners, focuses on legal and
economic issues, health issues, and the responses of private vol-
untary agencies and the United Nations to humanitarian crises.
It illustrates the interdependence of conﬂict, famine, health care,
and refugee crises and underscores the importance of a compre-
hensive approach to these problems.
Cohen, Roberta and Frances Deng. 1998. Masses in Flight: The
Global Crisis of Internal Displacement. Washington DC: Brook-
ings Institute.
Masses in Flight was one of the earliest treatments of the IDP phe-
nomenon and it remains a seminal text on the subject.
Collinson, Sarah. 1993. Beyond Borders: West European Migra-
tion Policy towards the 21st Century. London: Royal Institute
of International Affairs and Wyndham Place Trust.
This book focuses on some of the major policy challenges con-
fronting European governments: immigrant integration, immi-
gration controls, proposals to alleviate the root causes of
migration, and refugee and asylum policies.
Collinson, Sarah. 1993. Europe and International Migration.
London: Pinter Publishers.
This book highlights elements of continuity and change in
European states’ involvement in migration policies. It places the
Print Resources
271

problem of migration within an international, historical process
and focuses on the integration of immigrant and ethnic minor-
ities. Finally, it discusses Europe’s efforts to harmonize their
asylum and migration policies.
Crew, Linda. 1991. Children of the River. New York: Dell
Publishing.
Children of the River is a novel for young adults about Sundra, a teen-
age Cambodian refugee, who is torn between her loyalty to her
family and cultural traditions and her love for an American boy.
Damrosch, Lori. 1993. Enforcing Restraint: Collective Interven-
tion in Internal Conﬂicts. New York: Council on Foreign
Relations Press.
This is a collection of case studies—from the former Yugoslavia,
Somalia, Haiti, Liberia, and Cambodia—that examines the efforts
by the international community to intervene to end political con-
ﬂict and provide humanitarian relief in the post-Cold War era.
Deng, Francis. 1993. Protecting the Dispossessed: A Challenge for
the International Community. Washington, DC: The Brookings
Institution.
This book details the difﬁculties the international community
confronts trying to protect the approximately 25 million internally
displaced people in the world today. It includes case studies from
the former Yugoslavia, Russia, Somalia, Sudan, El Salvador, and
Cambodia.
Dowty, Alan. 1987. Closed Borders: The Contemporary Assault on
Freedom of Movement. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Dowty traces how different governments throughout history
have dealt with populations both entering and exiting their coun-
tries and explores the reasons for past and present government
policies designed to restrict entry. He also analyzes the political
and economic consequences of such policies and argues for a
policy of open borders that would allow individuals to emigrate
or immigrate at will.
Druke, Louise. 1990. Preventive Action for Refugee-Producing
Situations. Frankfurt: Peter Lang.
272
Resources

Preventive Action for Refugee-Producing Situations examines situa-
tions where refugees are exploited as a weapon for political pur-
poses and suggests ways to prevent situations that lead to
refugee ﬂows.
Ebadi, Shirin. 2008. Refugee Rights in Iran. Berkeley: University
of California Press.
Ebadi is the winner of the 2003 Nobel Peace Prize and her book
chronicles the lack of refugee protection for Afghan refugees in Iran.
Feller, Erika, Volker Turk, and Frances Nicholson, eds. 2003.
Refugee Protection in International Law: UNHCR’s Global Con-
sultations on International Protection. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
The book provides some of the expert opinions that are part of the
UNHCR’s Global Consultations on International Protection.
Ferris, Elizabeth. 1993. Beyond Borders: Refugees, Migrants and
Human Rights in the Post–Cold War Era. Geneva: World Coun-
cil of Churches Publications.
This book examines the international context within which forced
migration occurs and discusses the role of international organiza-
tions, governments, and nongovernmental organizations in
assisting and protecting refugees.
Forbes Martin, Susan. 2004. Refugee Women. 2nd edition.
Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
This book focuses on the particular circumstances of refugee
women and shows how they have to cope with additional trau-
mas, such as rape.
Foster, Michelle. 2007. International Refugee Law and Socio-
economic Rights: Refuge from Deprivation. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
This book questions the theoretical justiﬁcations for making such
a sharp distinction between civil and political rights and
economic, social and cultural rights and questions the manner in
which the Refugee Convention applies to the former but not the
latter.
Print Resources
273

Frank, Anne. 1990. The Diary of a Young Girl. New York:
Random House.
This is the remarkable story of a young Jewish girl and two fami-
lies who hid from the Nazis in a house in Amsterdam from 1942
to 1944. It is a poignant account of the thoughts and expressions
of a young teenager living under extraordinarily difﬁcult
conditions.
Gallagher, Dennis, ed. 1986. Refugees: Issues and Directions.
International Migration Review. Volume 20. New York: Center
for Migration Studies.
This is a special edition of the International Migration Review deal-
ing with refugees. Eighteen essays by refugee specialists analyze
the causes and characteristics of refugee movements worldwide,
asylum and protection issues, refugee issues in developing coun-
tries, and adjustment and resettlement matters.
Gammeltoft-Hansen, Thomas. 2009. Access to Asylum:
International Refugee Law and the Offshoring and Outsourcing
of Migration Control. Ph.D. thesis, Aarhus University.
The author examines the manner in which Western states have
continued to move the asylum experience further and further
from their own national borders and it analyzes the legal implica-
tions of this.
Gibney, Mark. Strangers or Friends: Principles for a New Alien
Admission Policy. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
This book provides an analysis of the normative basis for a coun-
try’s alien admission policy—both immigration and refugee—and
argues that refugee admissions should be promoted over other
national ends such as family reuniﬁcation and employment-
related migration.
Gibney, Mark, ed. 1988. Open Borders? Closed Societies? The
Ethical and Political Questions. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
This collection of essays addresses many of the legal and ethical
questions regarding policy on immigration and refugee admis-
sions. Although these issues are of concern to most states, the
focus of the authors in this volume is U.S. policy.
274
Resources

Gibney, Mark, and Sigrun Skogly, eds. 2010. Universal Human
Rights and Extraterritorial Obligations. Philadelphia: University
of Pennsylvania Press.
This edited volume examines the extraterritorial application of
several areas of human rights including refugee protection.
Gibney, Matthew. 2004. The Politics and Ethics of Asylum:
Liberal Democracy and the Response to Refugees. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Matthew Gibney provides the most thorough theoretical exami-
nation of the moral basis for refugee protection and this is greatly
informed by his case studies of state practice in Germany, the
United Kingdom, the United States, and Australia.
Gondek, Michal. 2009. The Reach of Human Rights in a Global-
ising World: Extraterritorial Application of Human Rights Trea-
ties. Antwerp: Intersentia.
Gondek provides a detailed and intelligent examination of the
geographic scope of the leading international human rights treaties.
Goodwin-Gill, Guy. 1996. The Refugee in International Law. 2nd
Edition. Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press.
This is a classic sourcebook for international refugee law. It
describes the framework of refugee law and covers the deﬁnitions
of terms such as refugee, refoulement, refugee asylum, and refugee
protection. The author examines the evolution and effectiveness of
treaties and organizations, state policies, and responsibilities, and
he includes an appendix of key texts.
Gordenker, Leon. 1987. Refugees in International Politics. New
York: Columbia University Press.
This study explores the nature of forced migration and sets forth
a framework that examines the causes of refugee movements.
The author also covers the responses of states and international
organizations to refugee ﬂows and examines the traditional
solutions—repatriation, local resettlement, and third-country
resettlement—to refugee incidents. The study concludes with
recommendations regarding early warning and a preventive
framework for dealing with future refugee ﬂows.
Print Resources
275

Gorman, R. F. 1987. Coping with Africa’s Refugee Burden: A Time
for Solutions. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff.
This book focuses on the recommendations of the Second
International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa
(ICARA II). The author analyzes the policies, organizational
constraints, and roles of international agencies, governments,
and nongovernmental organizations in responding to the refu-
gee crisis, as well as the related development needs of host
countries.
Grahl-Madsen, Atle. 1966. The Status of Refugees in International
Law. Leyden, Netherlands: A. W. Sijthoff.
This two-volume work investigates the international framework
of refugee law. It examines refugee status determination, refugee
deﬁnitions, refugee rights and obligations, and international and
national law.
Haddad, Emma. 2008. The Refugee in International Society:
Between Sovereigns. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Emma Haddam employs an historical analysis to analyze the
depiction of the “refugee” and to explore the whole notion of the
“refugee problem.”
Hakovirta, H. 1986. Third World Conﬂicts and Refugeeism:
Dimensions, Dynamics and Trends of the World Refugee Problem.
Helsinki: Finnish Society of Science and Letters.
This study attempts to develop a social science model for analyz-
ing the causes, dimensions, trends, and consequences of contem-
porary refugee movements.
Hannum, H. 1987. The Right To Leave and Return in International
Law and Practice. Leyden, Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff.
This study examines the international formulation, historical evo-
lution, and jurisprudence of the right to leave and return. The
author also analyzes state practice toward the right to movement
in various countries throughout the world.
Hansen, Art, and A. Oliver-Smith, eds. 1982. Involuntary Migra-
tion and Resettlement: The Problems and Responses of Dislocated
People. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
276
Resources

This volume examines a number of migration and resettlement
schemes. The authors look at individual, group, and state reac-
tions to the stresses of involuntary dislocation and resettlement
and compare these to the stresses of voluntary migration.
Harrell-Bond, Barbara. 1986. Imposing Aid: Emergency Assis-
tance to Refugees. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
This study appraises the assistance program mounted by
international agencies in response to an emergency inﬂux of
Ugandan refugees into Sudan starting in early 1982. Using the
ﬁndings of this case study, the author questions the effectiveness
of current refugee assistance strategies. In particular, the book
argues that relief workers easily become part of the problem they
set out to solve and ﬁnds that in the search for solutions, the needs
and skills of refugees are often overlooked.
Hathaway, James. 1991. The Law of Refugee Status. Toronto:
Butterworths.
This book explains the scope of the deﬁnition of the term refugee
as embodied in the United Nations Convention Relating to the
Status of Refugees (1951) and as it has evolved in practice. This
is an excellent resource for international refugee law and is par-
ticularly useful to those concerned about the legal determination
of refugee status.
Hathaway, James. 2005. The Rights of Refugees Under
International Law. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
This work immediately gained its status as one of the leading
treaties on international refugee law.
Hitchcox, Linda. 1990. Refugees. New York: Franklin Watts.
One of the “Issues” series on current problems, this work is aimed
at primary school children. It uses text, maps, and photographs to
present the subject and includes a section on refugee children, a
page of useful facts and statistics, and an index.
Holborn, Louise W. 1956. The International Refugee Organiza-
tion: A Specialized Agency of the United Nations, Its History
and Work, 1946–1952. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Print Resources
277

This book details the history and activities of the United Nations’
ﬁrst refugee organization, the International Refugee Organiza-
tion, between 1946 and 1952.
Holborn, Louise. 1975. Refugees: A Problem of Our Time: The
Work of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press.
These two volumes detail the history of the ﬁrst 20 years of the
Ofﬁce of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR). Considered to be the ofﬁcial history of the early devel-
opment of UNHCR, it contains extensive country-by-country case
studies and provides useful historical documentation.
Holm, Anne. 1965. North to Freedom. San Diego, CA: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich.
This novel for young adults recounts the story of David, a 12-
year-old boy, who escapes from a prison camp in Eastern Europe
during the Cold War and makes his way on foot across Europe
until he ﬁnds freedom.
Independent Commission on International Humanitarian Issues.
1986. Refugees: Dynamics of Displacement. London: Zed Books.
This is the ofﬁcial report on refugees from the Independent Com-
mission on International Humanitarian Issues. The report focuses
on mass expulsion, forcible relocation programs, and internally
displaced people. It also highlights the increasingly restrictive
policies of Western governments toward asylum-seekers, the
responsibilities of governments worldwide in causing involun-
tary migration, and the inadequacy of international law in the
prevention and resolution of problems of involuntary migration.
Joly, Daniele, Clive Nettleton, and H. Poulton. 1992. Refugees:
Asylum in Europe? London: Minority Rights Publications.
This book examines the causes of refugee ﬂight in both Western
and Eastern Europe, the acceptance and settlement of refugees,
international conventions and state legislation, and the racist
backlash against refugees. It suggests how individuals, organiza-
tions, and governments can protect and assist refugees.
278
Resources

Kent, Randolph. 1987. The Anatomy of Disaster Relief: The
International Network in Action. London: Pinter Publishers.
This study analyzes the causes and consequences of disasters,
including man-made ones, and investigates the structure of the
international disaster relief process. The author discusses speciﬁ-
cally the role of international organizations and governments.
He argues that some disaster relief aid is ineffective because many
aid workers have skills unsuited to the disaster environment, pay
little attention to the culture and traditions of aid recipients, and
fail to learn from earlier mistakes.
Kibreab, Gaim. 1985. African Refugees: Reﬂections on the
African Refugee Problem. Trenton, NJ: Red Sea Press.
This work critically examines assumptions about refugee rehabili-
tation in African host countries and suggests the adoption of mea-
sures to make refugees active and useful participants in the
development process.
Kidd, Diana. 1989. Onion Tears. New York: Orchard Books.
This novel for young readers tells the story of Nam-Houng, a
Vietnamese refugee, and the difﬁcult adjustments she has to make
integrating into her new homeland in the United States.
Koehn, Peter. 1991. Refugees from Revolution: U.S. Policy
and Third World Migration. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
This study examines the causes of recent refugee migrations to
the United States and the underlying connections between U.S.
foreign and domestic policies regarding immigration, refugee
resettlement, and human rights. The author focuses on Cuban,
Indochinese, Ethiopian, Eritrean, and Iranian exile communities
in the United States and examines their treatment under U.S.
policy, their social and economic adaptation, and the factors that
inﬂuence their decisions to return home.
Kourula, Pirkko. 1997. Broadening the Edges: Refugee Deﬁnition
and International Protection Revisited. The Hague: Martinus
Nijhoff Publishers.
Print Resources
279

Broadening the Edge attempts to place international refugee law
and protection within the broader realm of international law and
international relations.
Kritz, Mary, ed. 1983. U.S. Immigration and Refugee Policy:
Global and Domestic Issues. Lexington, MA: D. C. Heath.
This book is an anthology of many theoretical and policy issues
that confront scholars concerned with international migration.
The editor stresses the importance of identifying the causes of
population ﬂows.
Kunz, Egon F. 1988. Displaced Persons: Calwell’s New Austral-
ians. Sydney: Australian National University Press.
This history details Australia’s immigration policy during and after
World War II, when displaced Estonians, Latvians, Lithuanians,
Poles, Ukranians, Russians, Czechs, Slovaks, Hungarians, Croats,
Serbs, and Bulgarians were transported to Australia to increase its
population and work force.
Lake, Anthony, et al., eds. 1991. After the Wars: Reconstruction in
Afghanistan, Indochina, Central America, Southern Africa and the
Horn of Africa. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Five policy analysts examine the political and economic costs of
rebuilding the regions that experienced geopolitical rivalries and
long-standing and destructive wars during the 1980s. Policy sug-
gestions include creating an international fund to ﬁnance the
reconstruction of war-torn areas of the Third World.
Larkin, Mary Ann, Frederick Cuny, and Barry Stein. 1991. Repa-
triation under Conﬂict in Central America. Washington, DC, and
Dallas: Georgetown University and Intertecht.
This multi-authored volume examines the issue of repatriation in
Central America. Experts examine the motivations of Salvadoran,
Guatemalan, and Nicaraguan refugees from their initial ﬂight
through repatriation. Conditions in exile and at home, as well as
assistance policies, are analyzed in light of their inﬂuence on the
repatriation decision.
Lawless, Richard, and Laila Monahan, eds. 1987. War and Refu-
gees: The Western Sahara Conﬂict. London: Pinter Publishers.
280
Resources

This is a study of the Western Sahara conﬂict and the long-
standing refugee problem it created. The book analyzes the eco-
nomic and political interests behind the war and the legal basis
for occupation by Morocco, and it describes the life of a largely
forgotten group of refugees.
Lischer, Sarah Kenyon. 2005. Dangerous Sanctuaries: Refugee
Camps, Civil War, and the Dilemmas of Humanitarian Aid.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
One of the things that hinders refugee protection is the concern
that aid and assistance is being provided to so-called “refugee
warriors.” Sarah Kenyon Lischer’s book is an attempt to system-
atically study this phenomenon.
Loescher, Gil. 1993. Beyond Charity: International Cooperation
and the Global Refugee Crisis. New York: Oxford University Press.
This book is an extensive overview of the global refugee situation
in the post-Cold War era. The author presents the contemporary
crisis in a historical framework, examining both the rise of refugee
problems in the last 70 years and the roles of international agen-
cies, particularly the UNHCR, in responding to those problems.
The book concludes with short- and long-term measures that
might help address various aspects of the refugee problem.
Loescher, Gil. 1992. Refugee Movements and International Secu-
rity. Adelphi Paper 268. London: Brassey’s for International
Institute for Strategic Studies.
This study examines the relationship between refugee move-
ments and national and international security in the post-Cold
War period. The author offers an overview of the contemporary
refugee situation, outlines the political and strategic causes and
consequences of refugee ﬂows, and suggests a policy framework
for dealing with the global refugee problem.
Loescher, Gil, ed. 1992. Refugees and the Asylum Dilemma in the
West. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press.
This book examines the historical background and contemporary
signiﬁcance of the asylum and refugee issue confronting Western
governments and draws lessons for future policymaking. Seven
Print Resources
281

experts look at asylum policy in the United States, Canada, and
Western Europe and the development of an international
response to the global refugee problem.
Loescher, Gil, Alexander Betts, and James Milner. 2008. The
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR): The
Politics and Practice of Refugee Protection into the Twenty-
First Century. New York: Routledge.
Written by a group of refugee experts, this book examines the
relationship between states, international relations, and the
United Nations, especially the Ofﬁce of the High Commissioner
for Refugees.
Loescher, Gil, and Ann Loescher. 1982. The World’s Refugees, A
Test of Humanity. San Diego, CA: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Written for high school students and the uninitiated, this book
provides an insightful introduction to the world refugee problem.
It looks at what life is like for refugees in different regions of the
world and at the international response to the problem. It also
includes useful appendixes.
Loescher, Gil, and James H. S. Milner. 2005. Protracted Refugee
Situations: Domestic and International Security Implications.
New York: Routledge.
This book is one of the ﬁrst systematic studies of “warehousing”
of refugees and all the social, political, and security dislocations
that this has brought about.
Loescher, Gil, and Laila Monahan, eds. 1989. Refugees and
International Relations. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
This study contains 17 essays by experts in the ﬁeld of refugee
protection and assistance. It examines the international context
and the political, legal, and economic dimensions of the global
refugee problem, as well as the search for appropriate policy
responses to this growing problem. Among the speciﬁc subjects
addressed are military attacks on refugee camps, voluntary
repatriation, restrictionism in Europe, women refugees, the role
of the churches, the future of third-country settlement, and the
problems of development and repatriation.
282
Resources

Loescher, Gil, and John Scanlan. 1986. Calculated Kindness: Ref-
ugee and America’s Half-Open Door 1945–Present. New York:
Free Press.
This study documents the political history of American refugee
policy from 1945 until 1986. The authors focus on the factors that
have inﬂuenced the refugee admissions policy of the United
States: Cold War foreign policy that views refugees as symbols
and instruments of anti-communism, restrictionist forces that
contend that refugees are difﬁcult to assimilate and that they take
jobs away from Americans, religious and ethnic groups that lobby
for displaced persons and co-ethnics abroad, and humanitarian
interests that advocate admission for persecuted groups and indi-
viduals abroad.
Loescher, Gil, and John Scanlan, eds. 1983. The Global Refugee
Problem: U.S. and World Response. Special Issue of the Annals
of American Academy of Political and Social Science 467.
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
This collection of 13 essays by leading experts in the ﬁeld addresses
the causes and consequences of refugee movements in the United
States and the world as they appeared in the early 1980s. Chapters
focus on the scope of the problem, the international framework,
the politics of refugee ﬂows, and legal and resettlement issues.
Macalister-Smith, Peter. 1985. International Humanitarian
Assistance: Disaster Relief Action in International Law and
Organisation. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff.
This book details the legal principles and instruments applied in
historical and contemporary relief operations, with particular
reference to the operations of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, the Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Soci-
eties, and various agencies of the United Nations, including the
UNHCR. It also offers suggestions about how to improve the
implementation of international humanitarian norms.
Marrus, Michael R. 1985. The Unwanted: European Refugees
in the Twentieth Century. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
This book tells the story of the refugee problem throughout the
twentieth century, particularly during the Nazi era. It examines the
impact of refugee movements on the conduct of international
Print Resources
283

relations and diplomacy, outlines the growth of international
agencies designed to help refugees, and assesses the work of those
agencies.
Martin, David A., ed. 1989. The New Asylum-Seekers: Refugee
Law in the 1980s. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff.
This book addresses the legal and political issues raised by grow-
ing numbers of asylum-seekers and the increasingly restrictive
measures introduced by Western governments during the 1980s.
Martin, Susan F., Patricia Weiss Fagen, Kari Jorgensen, Lydia
Mann-Bondat, and Andrew Schoenholtz. 2005. The Uprooted:
Improving Humanitarian Responses to Forced Migration. Lanham,
MD: Lexington Books.
The Uprooted seeks to provide a broader conception of the forces of
forced migration to go beyond the narrow political conﬁnes of the
international refugee law and it does so through the use of ﬁve case
studies: Burundi, Colombia, East Timor, Georgia, and Sri Lanka.
Mason, Linda, and Roger Brown. 1983. Rice, Rivalry and Poli-
tics. South Bend, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
The Khmer Rouge reign of terror and the subsequent invasion of
Cambodia by Vietnam generated hundreds of thousands of refu-
gees. This book tells the story of the international relief effort for
these people, focusing in particular on the Thai-Cambodian border.
McAdam, Jane. 2007. Complementary Protection in International
Refugee Law. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
This book represents one of the ﬁrst attempts to systematically
study “other” ﬁrms of protection short of being granted refugee
status under the 1951 Convention.
Mertus, Julie, Jasmina Tesanovic, Habiba Metikos, and Rada
Boric, eds. 1997. The Suitcase: Refugee Voices from Bosnia and
Croatia. Berkeley: University of California Press.
This book gives voice to voiceless refugees by simply asking them
about themselves, their lives, their suffering—and their aspirations.
Minear, Larry. 1993. Humanitarian Action in Times of War.
Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.
284
Resources

This is a handbook for practitioners providing humanitarian
relief in armed conﬂict situations around the world.
Morgan, Scott, and Elizabeth Colson, eds. 1987. People in
Upheaval. Staten Island, NY: Center for Migration Studies.
This collection of 11 essays addresses the issue of displaced
people. Key topics include the ambiguity between involuntary
and voluntary migration, the interaction of refugees and
host communities, the growth of national and international agen-
cies, the support of kin and community, and the effects of resettle-
ment.
Morris, Benny. 1987. The Birth of the Palestinian Refugee Prob-
lem, 1947–1949. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Palestinian refugees constitute one of the oldest continuous refu-
gee problems in the world. This book examines the roots of the
Palestinian refugee problem by examining the exodus of 1947 to
1949 in the context of the ﬁrst Arab-Israeli War. The author ana-
lyzes the reasons behind the Palestinian ﬂight and uncovers some
new views about it.
Morsink, Johannes. 1999. The Universal Declaration of Human
Rights: Origins, Drafting, and Intent. Philadelphia: University
of Pennsylvania Press.
Johannes Morsink’s book provides the deﬁnitive study of the
drafting of the UDHR, which was the genesis of the present-day
human rights revolution.
Muntarbhorn, Vitit. 1992. The Status of Refugees in Asia.
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
This work is an analysis of the national laws and regulations con-
cerning the admission and treatment of refugees and aliens in
Asia. It provides useful documentation.
Musalo, Karen, Jennifer Moore, and Richard A. Boswell. 2007.
Refugee Law and Policy: A Comparative and International
Approach. 3rd Edition. Durham, NC: Carolina Academic Press.
This is one of the law school texts commonly used in the United
States (and elsewhere) on immigration law.
Print Resources
285

Naidoo, Beverley, and Kate Holt, eds. 2004. Making It Home:
A Childs Eye of Life As a Refugee. London: Pufﬁn Books.
These stories are written by refugee children, providing some
insight into what the refugee experience is like for the young
and the seemingly powerless. What emerges from these stories
of both lives of ordinariness but also courage and conviction.
Nichols, Bruce. 1988. The Uneasy Alliance: Religion, Refugee
Work and U.S. Foreign Policy. New York: Oxford University
Press.
U.S. refugee policy has always relied on the successful co-
operation of government and voluntary agencies, especially reli-
gious groups. This study traces the history of cooperation and
conﬂict between government policy and religious agencies
regarding refugee work.
Nichols, Bruce, and Gil Loescher, eds. 1989. The Moral Nation:
Humanitarianism and U.S. Foreign Policy Today. South Bend,
IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
This book critically examines the roles of U.S. government and
private agencies in providing relief to human rights victims, refu-
gees, and famine victims. Contributors examine the moral and
political philosophy of humanitarianism and its relationship to
the conduct of U.S. foreign policy, the political and legal factors
involved in the formulation of humanitarian policy, and case
studies involving asylum, sanctuary, and famine relief in Central
America and the Horn of Africa.
Nicholson, Frances, and Patrick M. Twomey, eds. 1999. Refugee
Rights and Realities: Evolving International Concepts and
Regimes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
This edited collection brings together a number of academics,
representatives of NGOs, and policymakers as they systematically
analyze the gap between the promise of the 1951 Refugee Conven-
tion and the reality of state practice.
Ogata, Sadako N. 2005. The Turbulent Decade: Confronting the
Refugee Crises of the 1990s. New York: W. W. Norton and
Company.
286
Resources

Ogata is the former High Commissioner for Refugees and her
book seeks to provide insight into the refugee crises that she faced
under her tenure and the rationales for responding as the
UNHCR did.
Plender, Richard, ed. 1988. Basic Documents on International
Migration Law. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff.
This book lists the principal international conventions, declara-
tions, and instruments governing the laws of international migra-
tion. It includes extracts from some of the instruments governing
human rights and full texts of the principal treatises and declara-
tions governing nationality, the protection of refugees, and
migrant labor. There are also texts of the principal items of legis-
lation of the European Communities and the instruments
adopted by the Council of Europe, the Benelux Community, and
the economic communities of West and Central Africa and the
Caribbean.
Plender, Richard. 1988. International Migration Law. Dordrecht,
Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff.
This is a comprehensive review of the rights of aliens under
international law. It not only includes chapters on the rights of ali-
ens but also on the powers of states to restrict aliens. The book
also includes a table of cases, statutes, and other internal instru-
ments regarding migration.
Ressler, Everett, Neil Boothby, and David Steinbeck. 1987.
Unaccompanied Children: Care and Placement in Wars, Natural
Disasters and Refugee Movements. Oxford, UK: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
This book provides a history of unaccompanied children and the
assistance given them in the past. Based upon research conducted
on the Thai-Cambodian border, the authors explain child devel-
opment both within the family and community and outside these
frameworks; the major legal issues involved concerning this
group; and the roles of international and voluntary organizations.
Rogers, Rosemarie, and Emily Copeland. 1993. Forced Migra-
tion: Policy Issues in the Post–Cold War World. Medford, MA:
The Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, Tufts University.
Print Resources
287

This book is a good introduction to many of the policy issues
involved in forced migration. It discusses the international politi-
cal context of population movements and the limitations of tradi-
tional responses to refugee problems. It also proposes a more
comprehensive approach to refugees for the future. The book
has useful tables and references.
Rutter, Jill. 1991. We Left Because We Had To: An Educational
Book for 14–18 Year Olds. London: Refugee Council.
This is an excellent educational resource for teachers offering les-
sons or courses on refugees. It discusses who refugees are, the
causes of refugee movements, and the difﬁculties most refugees
encounter as they resettle into new homelands.
Rutter, Jill. 2003. Supporting Refugee Children in 21st Century
Britain: A Compendium of Essential Information. Staffordshire,
UK: Trentham Books Limited.
Using the United Kingdom as the basis of her study, Jill Rutter pro-
vides an insightful overview of what refugee children experience.
Schuster, Lisa. 2003. The Use and Abuse of Political Asylum in
Britain and Germany. London: Frank Cass Publishers.
Lisa Schuster provides a provocative account of the manner in
which asylum policies have been used as a political tool of
Western states who, she argues, were only interested in uphold-
ing the principle of asylum when and if it meant that few people
could actually ﬁle for refugee status in those countries.
Shawcross, William. 1984. The Quality of Mercy: Cambodia, Hol-
ocaust and Modern Conscience. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Written by a British journalist, this book examines the political dis-
putes surrounding the worldwide relief effort aimed at Cambodia
from the late 1970s to 1983. William Shawcross tells the story of the
workings of major relief agencies such as UNHCR and UNICEF
and the political pressures exerted on them by the Thai, Vietnamese,
and Western governments, as well as by the coalition government
promoted by the various resistance groups within Cambodia.
288
Resources

Simpson, John Hope. 1939. The Refugee Problem. London:
Oxford University Press.
This book is an account written in 1939 of the refugee problems in
Europe during the preceding 20 years and of the international
community’s response to these problems.
Skogly, Sigrun. 2006. Beyond National Borders: States’ Human
Rights Obligations in International Cooperation. Antwerp:
Intersentia.
Sigrun Skogly’s work remains the seminal text on the extraterrito-
rial effect of international human rights law.
Skran, Claudena. 1994. Refugees in Inter-War Europe. Oxford,
UK: Clarendon Press.
An analysis of the refugee problem in Europe from 1921 to 1939,
this volume gives a particularly useful account of the growth
and evolution of the international community’s response to refu-
gees during the interwar period.
Spijkerboer, Thomas. 2000. Gender and Refugee Status. Burling-
ton, VT: Ashgate Publishing Company.
Focusing on law and practice, this represents the ﬁrst comprehen-
sive socio-legal study of the interrelation between gender and the
law of refugee status.
Steiner, Niklaus. 2000. Arguing about Asylum: The Complexity of
Refugee Debates in Europe. New York: St. Martins Press.
Niklaus Steiner offers an insightful comparative analysis of the
legislative debates concerning asylum issues in Switzerland,
Germany, and the United Kingdom.
Steiner, Niklaus. 2009. International Migration and Citizenship
Today. New York: Routledge.
The book offers a very readable and succinct analysis of the
world’s migration issues by focusing on immigrants, refugees,
and citizenship and the rise of nationalism.
Print Resources
289

Steiner, Niklaus, Mark Gibney, and Gil Loescher (ed.). 2003.
Problems of Protection: The UNHCR, Refugees, and Human
Rights. New York: Routledge.
Although the volume touches upon a number of different refugee
issues, many of the contributions focus on the UNHCR itself and
the roles it plays and the obligations it is bound by.
Stoessinger, John. 1956. The Refugee in the World Community.
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
This book is a history of the International Refugee Organization,
which resettled over one million displaced persons between
1947 and 1951, and the motivations of states in accepting large
numbers of refugees as immigrants.
Strom, Margot Stern, and William Parsons. 1982. Facing History
and Ourselves: Holocaust and Human Behavior. Watertown, MA:
Intentional Educations, Inc.
This educational book, aimed at high school and older students,
considers the holocaust of Armenians at the hands of the Ottoman
Empire and of Jews at the hands of the Third Reich. An important
feature of this book is the material on the social and political
attitudes that lead to persecution of minorities and to political
tyranny.
Sutter, Valerie. 1990. The Indochinese Refugee Dilemma. Baton
Rouge: Louisiana State University Press.
Between 1975 and 1990, well over 1.5 million refugees poured out
of Indochina. This book offers a concise history of the complex
national issues surrounding the Indochina refugee problem. It
examines the domestic and foreign policy interests of the Indo-
chinese states, Thailand and other Southeast Asian states, China,
the United States, and the Soviet Union
.
Ung, Loung. 2000. First They Killed My Father: A Daughter of
Cambodia Remembers. New York: HarperCollins Publishers.
The author, a survivor of the Cambodia genocide, reﬂects on the
horrors of her country and her life.
290
Resources

Van Arsdale, Peter, W. 2006. Forced to Flee: Human Rights and
Human Wrongs in Refugee Homelands. Lanham, MD: Lexington
Books.
Peter Van Arsdale puts his longstanding ﬁrst-hand knowledge of
forced migration to good use in this volume that combines ﬁeld
work with a signiﬁcant policy analysis of the world’s refugee sit-
uation.
Van Selm, Joanne, et al., eds. 2003. The Refugee Convention at
Fifty: A View from Forced Migration Studies. Lanham, MD:
Lexington Books.
The book uses the 50th anniversary of the Refugee Convention to
explore what the treaty has achieved, but also where it has not ful-
ﬁlled its mandate. The book offers a nice blend of work by academ-
ics, NGO workers, and international organization professionals.
Vernant, Jacques. 1953. The Refugee in the Post-War World. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
This is an account of the growth of refugee problems in the early
post–World War II period, when large numbers of refugees ﬂed
communist regimes in Europe and the Soviet Union.
Walzer, Michael. 1983. Spheres of Justice: A Defense of Pluralism
and Equality. Oxford, UK: Martin Robertson.
Michael Walzer provides the touchstone for normative analysis of
asylum and immigration policy as he sets forth the moral reason-
ing that should guide the policies of nation-states.
Watters, Charles. 2008. Refugee Children: Towards the Next
Horizon. New York: Routledge.
Nearly half the refugee and IDPs in the world are children and
this book is devoted to providing an in-depth analysis of children
who are caught up in this hell.
Weiner, Myron, ed. 1993. International Migration and Security.
Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
This collection of essays analyzes the security consequences
of international population movements. There are individual
Print Resources
291

chapters on Europe, the former Soviet Union, Asia, Africa, and
Central America.
White, James D., and Anthony J. Marsella, eds. 2007. Fear of Per-
secution: Global Human Rights, International Law, and Human
Well-Being. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
As the title would suggest, this edited collection places refugee
protection within a broader human rights context. Another added
feature to this volume is the manner in which it takes up both
macro-level and micro-level phenomena.
Williams, Carolyn, and Joseph Westermayer, eds. 1986. Refugee
Mental Health in Resettlement Countries. Washington, DC:
Hemisphere Publishing Corporation.
Refugees often suffer trauma and severe psychological problems
as a result of being uprooted and displaced. This work summa-
rizes research literature dealing with refugee health problems
and explains the acculturation process, highlighting the behav-
ioral and mental health problems of refugees. Case studies include
Cambodians, the Falasha of Israel, Laotians, and Cubans. The
book also offers suggestions for treatment and assessment.
Woodbridge, George. 1950. The History of UNRRA. New York:
Columbia University Press.
This is a history of the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation
Administration, which provided relief assistance to war victims
and displaced people in Europe from 1943 to 1947. The book also
recounts the repatriation of East Europeans and Russians after the
end of World War II.
Wyman, David. 1985. The Abandonment of the Jews: America
and the Holocaust, 1941–1945. New York: Pantheon.
This is a critical analysis of the failure of the United States to
rescue more Jews from certain death in the Holocaust from
1941 to 1945.
Wyman, David. 1968. Paper Walls: America and the Refugee
Crisis 1938–1945. Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts
Press.
292
Resources

This is a moving and critical account of the ineffective and harsh
U.S. policy toward Jews in Germany and the rest of Europe
during the early years of World War II.
Zolberg, Aristide, Astri Suhrke, and Sergio Aguayo. 1989.
Escape From Violence: Conﬂict and the Refugee Crisis in the
Developing World. New York: Oxford University Press.
This book is one of the most systematic analyses of refugee move-
ments in the Third World up to the late 1980s. The authors
attempt a comprehensive, theoretically grounded, structural
explanation for refugee movements and highlight the relationship
between social conﬂict and refugee ﬂows. All major regions of the
world are covered, except the Middle East, Eastern Europe, and
the former Soviet Union.
Zucker, Norman, and Naomi Zucker. 1987. The Guarded Gate:
The Reality of American Refugee Policy. San Diego, CA:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
This book tells the story of U.S. refugee and asylum policy up to
the mid-1980s. The authors trace the origins of U.S. refugee policy
to immigration restrictionism in American history and offer con-
structive suggestions for reform in refugee and asylum policy.
Zucker, Norman, and Naomi Zucker. 1996. Desperate Crossings:
Seeking Refuge in America. Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe.
The Zukers provide a rich and in-depth analysis of American
immigration/refugee policy from the beginnings of the Republic.
Selected Articles and Essays
Aleinikoff, T. Alexander. 1991. The Meaning of “Persecution”
in United States Asylum Law. International Journal of Refugee
Law 3: 5–29.
Anker, Deborah E. 2002. Refugee Law, Gender, and the Human
Rights Paradigm. Harvard Human Rights Journal.
Barnes, R. 2008. Refugee Law at Sea. International Journal of
Refugee Law.
Barnett, L. 2002. Global Governance and the Evolution of the
International Refugee Regime. International Journal of Refugee
Law.
Print Resources
293

Carens, Joseph. 1987. The Case for Open Borders. The Review of
Politics 49: 251–73.
Chimni, B. S. 1998. The Geopolitics of Refugee Studies: AView
from the South. Journal of Refugee Studies 4: 350–374.
Gibney, Mark, Vanessa Dalton, and Marc Vockell. 1992. USA
Refugee Policy: A Human Rights Analysis Update. Journal of
Refugee Studies 5: 33–46.
Hailbronner, Kay. 1990. The Right to Asylum and the Future of
Asylum. International Journal of Refugee Law 3: 341–60.
Helton, Arthur. 1984. Political Asylum under the 1980 Refugee
Act: An Unfulﬁlled Promise. University of Michigan Journal of
Law Reform 17: 243–264.
Krenz, F. E. 2008. The Refugee as a Subject of International Law.
International and Comparative Law Quarterly.
Malkki, Lisa H. 1995. Refugees and Exile: From “Refugee Stud-
ies” to the National Order of Things. Annual Review of
Anthropology 24: 495–523.
Martin, David. 1990. Reforming Asylum Adjudication: On Nav-
igating the Coast of Bohemia. University of Pennsylvania Law
Review 138: 1247–1381.
Montes, Segundo. 1988. Migration to the United States as an Index
of the Intensifying Social and Political Crises in El Salvador.
Journal of Refugee Studies 1: 107–126.
Musalo, Karen. 2007. Protecting Victims of Gendered Persecu-
tion: Fear of Floodgates or Call to (Principled) Action? Virginia
Journal of Social Policy 14: 119.
Ramji-Nogales, Jaya, Andrew Schoenholtz, and Philip G.
Schrag. Refugee Roulette: Disparities in Asylum Adjudication.
Stanford Law Review, Vol. 60, 2008.
Shacknove, Andrew. 1985. Who is a Refugee? Ethics 95:274–284.
Stanley, William. 1987. Economic Migrants or Refugees from
Violence? A Time Series Analysis of Salvadoran Migration to
the U.S. The Latin American Research Review 22: 132–154.
294
Resources

Reports
Amnesty International. Amnesty International Report. London:
Amnesty International.
This annual report of worldwide human rights violations is pro-
duced by a prominent human rights monitoring organization.
Amnesty International. 2007. Migration Related Detention.
Burr, Millard. 1993. Sudan 1990–1992: Food Aid, Famine and Fail-
ure. Washington, DC: U.S. Committee for Refugees.
About ﬁve million Sudanese have been internally displaced and
more than half a million are refugees. This report provides a
detailed historical review of Western food relief efforts and diplo-
matic maneuvering toward Sudan and looks at the Sudanese
government policies that have persistently undermined relief
efforts.
Canada Immigration and Refugee Board. 1999. Weighing
Evidence.
Chesnais, Jean-Claude. 1990. Migration from Eastern to Western
Europe, Past (1946–1989) and Future (1990–2000). Strasbourg:
Council of Europe.
This is an analysis of past and future trends of East-West ﬂows.
The main objective of this work is to reduce some of the uncer-
tainty about the potential size of such movements in the future.
It includes tables and documentation.
Childers, Erskine, and Brian Urquhart. 1991. Strengthening
International Response to Humanitarian Emergencies. New
York: Ford Foundation.
Two experienced former UN ofﬁcials propose a comprehensive
set of policy recommendations to expedite and make more effec-
tive the response of international organizations to humanitarian
crises in the post–Cold War era.
Clark, Jeffrey. 1992. Famine in Somalia and the International
Response: Collective Failure. Washington, DC: U.S. Committee
for Refugees.
Print Resources
295

This paper reviews the history of missed opportunities and stra-
tegic and operational blunders in Somalia during 1990–1992.
Cohen, Roberta. 1991. Human Rights Protection for Internally
Displaced Persons. Washington, DC: Refugee Policy Group.
This report analyzes the dimensions of the human rights prob-
lems confronting people displaced within their own countries
and the lack of national and international protection for these
people. It proposes a number of institutional and legal changes
that would improve the protection of the internally displaced.
Cohen, Roberta. 1992. United Nations Human Rights Bodies: An
Agenda for Humanitarian Action. Washington, DC: Refugee Pol-
icy Group.
This is an analysis of the ways in which United Nations human
rights bodies can more effectively respond to the humanitarian
problems of the post–Cold War period.
Forbes Martin, Susan. 1989. Emigration, Immigration and
Changing East-West Relations. Washington, DC: Refugee Policy
Group.
This report examines the massive ﬂow of refugees from Eastern
Europe toward the West in 1989, the policy responses to this situa-
tion by Western countries, the movement of refugees within
Eastern Europe, and the institutional and policy structures avail-
able for dealing with refugee matters.
Frelick, Bill. 1992. Croatia’s Crucible: Providing Asylum for Ref-
ugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina. Washington, DC: U.S. Com-
mittee for Refugees.
This report discusses the failures of the United Nations, the
European Community, and the United States to respond to the
humanitarian challenges in the former Yugoslavia.
Georgetown University Law Center, Human Rights Institute
Fact Finding Group. 2006. Unintended Consequences: Refugee
Victims of the War on Terror.
Human Rights Watch. Human Rights Watch Report. New York:
Human Rights Watch.
296
Resources

This annual report by a prominent human rights organization
documents human rights violations worldwide.
Human Rights Watch. 2009. Jailing Refugees.
Human Rights Watch. 2010. Genocide, War Crimes, and Crimes
Against Humanity.
INS. 1982. Asylum Adjudications: An Evolving Concept for the
Immigration and Naturalization Service.
International Crisis Group. 2008. Failed Responsibility: Iraqi
Refugees in Syria, Jordan, and Lebanon.
International Development Research Centre. 2001. The Respon-
sibility to Protect: Report of the International Commission on
Intervention and State Sovereignty.
International Displacement Monitoring Center. 2006. Displaced
by the Wall: Forced Displacement as a Result of the West Bank
Wall and its Associated Regime.
International Displacement Monitoring Center. 2009. Monitor-
ing Disaster Displacement in the Context of Climate Change.
International Rescue Committee. 2010 A Tough Road Home:
Uprooted Iraqis in Jordan, Syria, and Iraq.
Jacobson, Jodi. 1988. Environmental Refugees: A Yardstick of
Habitability. Washington, DC: World Watch Institute.
Throughout the world, vast areas are becoming unﬁt for human
habitation. This report argues that the growing number of people
ﬂeeing from environmental degradation adds a new dimension to
the global refugee problem.
Joly, Daniele, and Clive Nettleton. 1990. Refugees in Europe.
London: Minority Rights Group.
This report offers a useful outline of some of the issues surround-
ing the current situation faced by refugees in Europe.
Keely, Charles. 1981. Global Refugee Policy: The Case for a
Development Oriented Strategy. New York: Population Council.
This report was one of the ﬁrst accounts that drew attention to the
need to provide refugees with long-term development assistance
rather than short-term relief assistance.
Print Resources
297

Kirk, Robin. 1991. The Decade of Chaqwa: Peru’s Internal Refu-
gees. Washington, DC: U.S. Committee for Refugees.
This report describes the causes of internal displacement in Peru
and the plight of indigenous populations at the center of the ﬁght-
ing between the government and guerrillas.
Kirk, Robin. 1993. Feeding the Tiger: Colombia’s Internally Dis-
placed People. Washington, DC: U.S. Committee for Refugees.
Robin Kirk discusses the plight of internally displaced people in
Colombia, the causes of their ﬂight, and the inadequacies of the
responses by Colombia and the international community.
Lawyers’ Committee for International Human Rights. 1990. The
Implementation of the Refugee Act of 1980: A Decade of Experience.
New York: Lawyers’ Committee for International Human Rights.
This is a critical review of the ﬁrst 10 years of U.S. asylum policy
after the passage of the Refugee Act of 1980.
Lawyers’ Committee for International Human Rights. 1990. Ref-
ugee Refoulement: The Forced Return of Haitians under the U.S.
Haitian Interdiction Agreement. New York: Lawyers’ Committee
for International Human Rights.
This report discusses the U.S. policy of interdicting Haitian boat
people and returning them to Port-au-Prince.
Lawyers’ Committee for International Human Rights. 1991.
Uncertain Haven. New York: Lawyers’ Committee for Inter-
national Human Rights.
A critical assessment of asylum and refugee policy in the 1980s in
Asia, Africa, Latin America, Western Europe, and North America,
this report also discusses the difﬁculties confronting the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in providing
protection.
Lawyers’ Committee for International Human Rights. 1991. The
UNHCR at 40: Refugee Protection at the Crossroads. New York:
Lawyers’ Committee for International Human Rights.
This report examines the work of the Ofﬁce of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) at the time of its 40th
298
Resources

anniversary. It focuses on the 1980s and discusses the institutional
organization of the UNHCR, recent arrangements regarding its
funding and oversight by governments, and efforts to work with
nongovernmental organizations.
Loescher, Gil. 1993. Forced Migration within and from the Former
USSR: The Policy Challenges Ahead. Santa Monica, CA: The
Rand Corporation.
This report examines displacement within the former Soviet
Union and the policy challenges it poses to the West. It sets out
the range of policy responses that the international community
should consider in the future.
Refugees International. 2009. Nationality Rights for All:
A Progress Report and Global Survey on Statelessness.
Ruiz, Hiram. 1992. Left Out in the Cold: The Perilous Homecoming
of Afghan Refugees. Washington, DC: U.S. Committee for Refugees.
This report analyzes the plight of Afghan refugees who have
returned home following the withdrawal of Soviet forces from
their country. It also documents the donor countries’ poor ﬁnan-
cial support, which has left returnees, displaced people, and other
war victims at risk in Afghanistan.
Ruiz, Hiram. 1993. Repatriation: Tackling Protection and Assis-
tance Concerns. Washington, DC: U.S. Committee for Refugees.
This report discusses many of the issues surrounding the return
home of refugees, in particular the problems of assisting and pro-
tecting them.
Ruiz, Hiram. 1993. El Retorno: Guatemalans’ Risky Repatriation
Begins. Washington, DC: U.S. Committee for Refugees.
This documents the problems and risks associated with the repa-
triation of Guatemalan refugees during a time of continued con-
ﬂict and political uncertainty in Guatemala.
Ruiz, Hiram. 1992. Uprooted Liberians: Casualties of a Brutal
War. Washington, DC: U.S. Committee for Refugees.
This report reviews and analyzes the situation of Liberian refu-
gees both inside their home country and in neighboring Sierra
Leone, Guinea, and the Ivory Coast.
Print Resources
299

Select Commission on Immigration and Refugee Policy. 1981.
U.S. Immigration Policy and the National Interest.
Tamari, Salim. 1996. Institute for Palestinian Studies. Palestinian
Refugee Negotiations: From Madrid to Oslo II.
UNHCR. 1993. Note on International Protection.
UNHCR. 1998. Note on Burden and Standard of Proof in Refugee
Claims.
UNHCR. Annual. The State of the World’s Refugees.
UNHCR. 2006. Note on HIV and AIDS and the Protection of Ref-
ugees, IDPs, and Other Persons of Concern.
UNHCR. 2007. The Protection of Internally Displaced Persons
and the Role of UNHCR.
Wasem, Rush Ellen and Karma Ester. Congressional Research
Service. 2008. Temporary Protected Status: Current Immigration
Policy and Issues.
Women’s Commission for Refugee Women and Children. 1992.
Balkan Trail of Tears Revisited: Living with the Nightmare.
New York: International Rescue Committee.
This report on former Yugoslavia focuses on the use of rape as a
weapon of war and on the current needs of refugee and internally
displaced women and children.
Women’s Commission for Refugee Women and Children. 1992.
Going Home: the Prospect of Repatriation for Refugee Women
and Children. New York: International Rescue Committee.
This report contains the proceedings of a conference held to
investigate the problems that refugee women and children face
when returning home after years, or sometimes decades, of war.
Cases and Administrative Decisions
Bankovic et al. v. Belgium et al., App. No. 52207/99 Eur. Ct. H.R.
(2001) (Dec. on admissibility).
Chahal v. United Kingdom, 108 ILR 385 (2007).
General Accounting Ofﬁce, “Asylum: Approval Rates for
Selected Applicants,” (Washington DC: GAO 1987).
300
Resources

Human Rights Committee, Concluding observations of the
Human Rights Committee: Canada. (2006) CCPR/C/CAN/CO/5
20 April 2006.
INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421 (1987).
INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421 (1987).
INS v. Elias-Zacarias, 502 U.S. 478 (1992).
Issa v. Turkey, App. No. 31821/96 Eur. Ct. H.R. (2000) (Dec. on
admissibility).
Matter of Pula, 19 I. & N. Dec. 467 (BIA 1987).
Ocalan v. Turkey, App. No. 46221/99 Eur. Ct. H.R. (2000) (Dec. on
admissibility).
Soering v. United Kingdom, App. No. 4038/88 [1989] ECHR 14
(July 7, 1989).
Suresh v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
[2002] 1 S.C.R. 3, 2002 SCC 1.
Selected Non-Print Resources
Online Resources
European Council on Refugees and Exiles
http://www.ecre.org/
The Political Terror Scale 1976–2008
www.politicalterrorscale.org
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
The UN Refugee Agency
www.unhcr.org
The U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants
http://www.refugees.org/
U.S. Department of State
Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration
http://www.state.gov/g/prm/
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Ofﬁce of Refugee Resettlement
http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/orr/
Selected Non-Print Resources
301

DVD Resources
El Norte (Gregory Nava 1983). This ﬁlm from the 1980s is not a
“refugee” ﬁlm as such—but it should be. At the outset, the movie
depicts a small community in Guatemala where a small group of
Mayan peasants are attempting to organize themselves. The
government responds by carrying out a massacre in the village
and two teenagers, a brother and a sister, are among the only sur-
vivors. Their hope for survival hinges on being able to travel to
the United States: El Norte. The two are able to overcome a host
of obstacles, but their short-lived happiness comes to a tragic end.
14 Kilometers (Gerardo Olivares 2007). What is the meaning of the
title? At its shortest point, the distance between North Africa and
the southern part of Spain—between the Third World and the
First World—is only 14 kilometers. Following a group of teen-
agers hoping to make the journey, what the ﬁlm effectively shows
is how close these two worlds are, but also how far away they
remain.
In this World (Michael Winterbottom 2002). This documentary-style
ﬁlm follows the journey of two young Afghan boys who abandon
their refugee camp in Pakistan and attempt to make their way to
another world: the United Kingdom. What follows is a harrowing
ﬂight that gives a strong sense of the enormous dangers facing
those who make such a ﬂight, but also the reasons propelling other-
wise hopeless people to do so.
Mrs. Goundo’s Daughter (Barbara Attie and Janet Goldwater 2009).
Mrs. Goundo is from Mali and she and her daughter face the
specter of being sent back to Mali. Her fear is not war but the very
real likelihood that her daughter will be subjected to female geni-
tal mutilation (FGM). In this documentary the viewer is not only
given privy to Mrs. Goundo attempt to gain refugee status in the
United States, but it also depicts the FGM ceremony itself and
those who perform it.
Sierra Leone Refugee All-Stars (Zach Niles and Banker White 2007).
This documentary follows a group of musicians from Sierra
Leone who have been living in various refugee camps in the
Republic of Guinea, and what helps them cope with their lives is
their music. What the viewer gets is a sense of the horrors these
302
Resources

individuals have lived through, but also the enormous will to
move forward. The music alone is reason to see this documentary.
Well-Founded Fear (Michael Camerini and Shari Robertson 2000).
The refugee standard is that the applicant must prove a “well-
founded fear” of persecution and this absorbing documentary
gives an in-depth and emotional portrayal of the obstacles and
difﬁculties that asylum seekers must overcome. What is so effec-
tive about this documentary is that the human-side of the asylum
process comes fully to life, and the individuals who the viewer
meets will remain with them for a long period of time. One of
the subjects is an elegant Chinese poet who is forced to recount
the horrible torture that he was repeatedly subjected to. Another
is an East European engineer who when he ﬁrst arrived in the
United States was relegated to folding newspapers—but now that
he has advanced himself and achieved the American Dream, he is
on the verge of being sent back home. Another story involves a
pregnant young woman from Algeria who has led a life of hell
in her home country, but because of translation difﬁculties very
little of this is conveyed to the hearing examiner. Without ques-
tion, this is the single best portrayal of what the asylum process
looks like. But perhaps the most startling, but also most satisfy-
ing, moment in the entire ﬁlm occurs as the credits are rolling at
the end.
Selected Non-Print Resources
303

This page intentionally left blank

Glossary
1951 Refugee Convention
As of September 1, 2007, there were 144 state
parties to this treaty, which governs international treaty law. The Refugee
Convention is the key document setting forth the rights of refugees and
asylum seekers as well as obligations for member states. The Convention
is reproduced in Chapter 6.
1965 Immigration Act (U.S.)
Established for the ﬁrst time under U.S.
law a permanent category for refugee admissions. However, the act
restricted admission to refugees ﬂeeing from communist or Middle
Eastern states.
1967 Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees
This treaty eliminated
the geographic (Europe) and temporal (before 1951) elements in 1951 Ref-
ugee Convention. The Protocol is reproduced in Chapter 6.
1980 Refugee Act (U.S.)
The Act reformed U.S. law and made it conso-
nant with international law. Most notably, it removed ideological and
geographic restrictions in the previous law.
Alien
A term commonly used for foreign nationals.
Asylum
The protection given by one country to refugees from another.
First-country asylum refers to a country granting a refugee ﬁrst or tempo-
rary asylum. Third-country asylum refers to a country granting perma-
nent asylum to a refugee transferring or resettling from a ﬁrst country
of asylum.
Asylum-seeker
Someone who has ﬂed from his or her home country
and is seeking refugee status in another country.
B-status
Used in Scandinavian and some other European countries to
grant a form of temporary asylum. See also, Complementary protection.
Boat people
Haitians, Vietnamese, Somalis, Albanians, Afghanis, and
so on, who have attempted to rely on ocean voyages in small boats to
emigrate. Frequently such people are denied asylum.
Border camp
A refugee camp or settlement situated along the borders
between a host country and country of origin.
305

Brain drain
Emigration of highly qualiﬁed persons, also known as
reverse transfer of technology and transfer of talent.
Burden-sharing
Sharing of responsibilities by states in funding refugee
programs or admitting refugees for resettlement.
Carrier sanctions
Fines or other sanctions inﬂicted on airlines or other
transport ﬁrms for knowingly carrying international passengers lacking
visas or other documentation.
Cartegena Declaration
The refugee convention for Latin America that
extends the meaning of “refugee” to include broader societal violence.
The Declaration is reproduced in Chapter 6.
Cessation clauses
Under the Refugee Convention, an individual ceases
to be a “refugee” if he or she has availed himself or herself of protection
in some other state (including the former state of nationality), or because
of improved conditions in the country of former habitual residence.
Citizenship
Legal granted status as a member of a particular national-
ity, obtained through birth and registration or through a procedure of
nationalization prescribed by national authorities.
Complementary protection
A form of protection for those who are
determined not to meet the “refugee” standard under the 1951 Conven-
tion. See also B-status.
Convention on the Rights of the Child
The most widely adopted
international human rights treaty, it serves to protect all children—
including refugee children.
Credibility determination
Such a determination is often used to test
whether an asylum seeker can prove the subjective component of having
a “well-founded fear.”
Credible fear
Under U.S. law, those who arrive at the country’s borders
either with no documents or forged documents must ﬁrst go through a
“credible fear” hearing before being allowed proceed with asylum claim.
Deportation
Act of sending people back home or to another country
against their will.
Detention
Increasingly, states are resorting to detaining asylum seekers
during refugee proceedings, often as a way of trying to prevent further
ﬂows.
Durable solution
Permanent settlement of refugees, whether through
repatriation to their homeland, resettlement in a third country, or settle-
ment in the ﬁrst country of asylum.
Early warning
Attempts and methods to detect a possible refugee
exodus and to take appropriate measures to avoid or minimize it.
Economic migrant
Someone who has left his or her home to look for
better work and a higher standard of living in another place.
306
Glossary

Emigration
Act of leaving one country or region to settle in another.
Environmental refugee
Person displaced by natural disaster, such as
drought, deforestation, or other environmental degradation.
Ethnic cleansing
Forcible expulsion of one ethnic group from an area
and their replacement by another ethnic group.
Ethnic minority
A group of people who share a distinctive culture,
usually different from the culture of the majority of people in a region.
Exilic bias
Term used to describe efforts by Western states to encour-
age refugee ﬂows, especially from communist countries, in 1970s and
1980.
Expatriate
Person who leaves his or her homeland and establishes
temporary residence in another country.
Expedited removal
U.S. law allows for an expedited removal of those
who fail to convince administrative ofﬁcials of having a “credible fear”
of persecution.
Expulsion
Forced removal of legal and undocumented foreigners.
Extraterritorial obligations
The human rights obligations that states
have outside their own territorial borders.
Family reuniﬁcation
Highest preference in many countries for legal
immigration of divided spouses, siblings, or other family members.
Forced migration
Compelling refugees or other persons to migrate by
massive coercion. May also refer to internally displaced persons moving
as a result of political violence or natural disasters. Also referred to as
involuntary migration.
Genocide
The deliberate and systematic murder of one ethnic or reli-
gious group.
Humanitarian concern
Under U.S. law, preference in terms of refugee
admissions given to those who meet this standard.
Illegal immigrant
A person who has entered a country without the
proper legal documentation or permission.
Immigration
The act of entering a country with the intention of settling
there.
Immigration preferences
Criteria used to select immigrants by host
countries, eg, family reuniﬁcation, skills.
Integration policy
Policy to provide immigrants with equal status as
citizens without their having to relinquish previous ethnic or other
identities.
Interdiction
The act of intercepting boatloads of refugees and returning
them to their homeland. One example is the U.S. Coast Guard program
against Haitian boat people in the 1990s.
Glossary
307

Intergovernmental organization
An international organization
containing representatives of national governments.
Internal conﬂict
A war or dispute that takes place within the borders of
a country.
Internally displaced person
Someone who is forcibly displaced from
his or her place of residence but remains within the country.
International Flight Alternative (IFA)
Refugee status might be denied
if it can be proven that there were other locales in this person’s country
of nationality where safety could have been sought.
International conﬂict
A war that takes place between two or more
countries.
International humanitarian law
The laws and conventions that regu-
late the conduct of parties at war, including the treatment of prisoners
of war and noncombatants or civilians. Also known as the Geneva Con-
ventions, international humanitarian law is implemented by the
International Committee of the Red Cross.
International migration
The movement of people across national bor-
ders, usually for economic reasons.
International refugee law
The laws and conventions that regulate the
treatment and protection of refugees. They are implemented by the ofﬁce
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Irregular migration
A population movement, not regulated by agree-
ments between governments, that occurs outside of the normal state-to-
state migration.
Local settlement
The integration of refugees in the societies and econo-
mies of host countries.
Manifestly unfounded asylum application
An application for political
asylum in which there is no credible evidence of persecution against the
applicant.
Man-made disaster
A disaster that occurs as a result of the actions of
man, such as war, persecution, human rights abuses, and sometimes
famines.
Mass expulsion
The sudden forced displacement of large numbers of
people across borders, usually as a result of war or persecution.
Migrant worker
A person, sometimes recruited, who is seeking
employment for temporary periods in another country. Known also as
guest workers, contract workers, temporary workers, and braceros (the
Spanish term for unskilled workers).
Migration
The permanent movement of people from one place to another.
Natural disaster
A disaster that occurs as a result of natural causes,
such as hurricanes, earthquakes, ﬂoods, and typhoons.
308
Glossary

Naturalization
Procedure whereby the foreign-born can acquire the
nationality and citizenship of another country.
Nexus requirement
Under the 1951 Refugee Convention, in order to
qualify as a refugee, there must be a nexus between the feared persecu-
tion and one of ﬁve listed factors.
Nongovernmental organization (NGO)
A private rather than govern-
mental organization. A number of NGOs, such as the International
Committee of the Red Cross and Oxfam, work with refugees.
Nonrefoulement
From the French word refouler, this is a policy of the
1951 UN Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees that commits con-
tracting states to not expel or return a refugee whose life or freedom
would be threatened due to race, religion, membership of a social group,
or political opinion.
Organization of African Unity (OAU)
Like the Cartagena Declaration,
the OAU Convention governing the speciﬁc aspects of refugee problems
in Africa extends the meaning of “refugee” under the 1951 Refugee Con-
vention to include those ﬂeeing from wars and generalized political vio-
lence. The OAU Convention is reproduced in Chapter 6.
Overseas Refugee Program
Under this program, the United States
admits tens of thousands of refugees each year, some from refugee camps
while others come directly from their country of nationality.
Parole authority
This administrative procedure was frequently used by
the Attorney General in the United States to admit hundreds of thou-
sands of refugees, primarily from Cuba and Vietnam.
Persecution
Unjust harassment, including threats of death or imprison-
ment, usually used for political, religious, or racial reasons.
Preference system
Under U.S. law, preference for refugee admissions is
given to certain refugees, particularly those with some pre-existing con-
nection to American citizens or U.S. business interests.
Pull factors
Forces in a country of destination, such as a higher stan-
dard of living, jobs, or freer communities, that attract people to the coun-
try. Pull factors are sometimes regarded as the variables that explain
international voluntary migration.
Push factors
Negative forces, such as conﬂict, political instability, social
inequalities, or poor economic opportunities, which compel people to
leave their countries.
Quota
Number of immigrants, refugees, or asylum-seekers allowed in
by a receiving state under their immigration policies.
Receiving country
A country that receives incoming refugees.
Reception policy
State policy regarding the admission and integration
of incoming refugees.
Glossary
309

Refugee
Person who has left his or her country of origin and has a well-
founded fear of persecution if they return (according to the 1951 UN Con-
vention Relating to the Status of Refugees and the 1967 Protocol Relating
to the Status of Refugees).
Refugee camp
A temporary settlement established to receive and
house refugees, frequently along the borders of the state from which they
have ﬂed.
Refugee in transit
Refugee who is still in the process of ﬂight from a
home country to a country of asylum.
Refugee-warrior
Armed guerrilla who lives in or close to a refugee
camp, eg, Afghans in Pakistan or Cambodians in Thailand.
Refugees in orbit
Term used to describe asylum seekers who are sent
from one country to the next on the grounds that they should have
applied for refugee status in the ﬁrst safe country that they passed
through.
Repatriation
Returning a person to his or her home country. People can
be forced to go against their will (forcible repatriation) or they can go
voluntarily.
Resettlement
The transfer of refugees from a ﬁrst country of asylum to
a third country of permanent resettlement, eg, Laotians from Thailand to
the United States.
Return migration
The voluntary return of immigrants, migrant workers,
or other persons to their country of origin.
Root causes
The underlying causes of refugee ﬂight, such as political
persecution or conﬂict.
Safe areas
Policy adopted by the UNHCR as an alternative to offering
refugee protection, this consists of creating “safe areas” in a country
experiencing gross and systematic human rights violations.
Safe country of origin
A number of Western states have compiled lists
of countries considered “safe,” from which asylum seekers will either be
denied the ability to ﬁle a refugee claim altogether or will be subject to
expedited proceedings.
Safe haven
Temporary asylum subject to restrictions, e.g., Temporary
Protected Status in the United States. Safe haven asylum may or may
not allow persons to seek employment, housing, and welfare beneﬁts.
Safe third country
A number of Western states will either deny the
ability of asylum seekers to ﬁle a claim or subject an asylum seeker to
expedited procedures if they had ﬁrst passed through a country consid-
ered “safe.”
Self-determination
The act of a national group deciding its own politi-
cal future.
310
Glossary

Stateless persons
Individuals who have been denied national identity
documents or have had them removed. After World War I, the League
of Nations created special passports, called Nansen passports, for such
persons.
Third World
The developing countries of Africa, Asia, and Latin
America.
Torture Convention
An international treaty that proscribes torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment and punishment. Like the
Refugee Convention, the Torture Convention also has a nonrefoulement
provision.
Travel documents
Passports and visas.
Undocumented alien
Person whose status does not meet a host coun-
try’s legal conditions for immigration. Undocumented aliens are also
known as illegal aliens, illegals, and irregular migrants.
UNHCR Handbook
This document provides an in-depth analysis of the
1951 Refugee Convention and it has had an enormous inﬂuence in terms
of how states have interpreted their obligations under the treaty.
United National High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
This is
the principal ofﬁcer in the United Nations dealing with international ref-
ugee issues.
Visa
A stamp on a passport that allows a person to enter a particular
country.
Well-founded fear
The standard by which refugee determinations are
made. There remains debate whether both a subjective and objective
element are needed.
Withholding of deportation
Under U.S. law, a person who can prove
that his or her life or freedom would be threatened in another state will
not be sent there. This is considered mandatory while those who only
meet the lower “refugee” standard might be returned.
Glossary
311

This page intentionally left blank

Index
Page numbers followed by t indicate table
Absurd anomaly, 56
Afﬁrmative applications, asylum
and, 105
Afghan Bureau for Reconstruction
and Development, 215
Afghanistan, 113, 127, 136
asylum applicants in Western
countries, 200–213t
asylum claims ﬁled
in Sweden, 48t
asylum claims ﬁled in the
Netherlands, 2008, 47t
asylum claims ﬁled in the United
Kingdom, 2008, 45t, 46
asylum seekers to United Kingdom
in 2008, 45t
political terror scale, 43
refugee arrivals in 1999–2008, 100t
as refugee producing state, 43t
refugees in 2008, 2t
U.S. refugee practices in, 95–96
Afkhami, Mahnaz, 137
Africa
IDP population in, 4t
refugee admissions ceilings from
2006–2008, 102t
Africare Inc., 215–216
Agreement(s)
between Australia and Papua
New-Guinea and Nauru, 66
of Italy with Libya, 66
of Spain with Senegal and
Mauritania, 66
of United Stated with Haiti, 53
Aho, Sonya, 138
Albright, Madeleine, 138–139
Alien, deﬁned, 305
Alien admission practices, in the U.S.,
84–90
Alien Enemies Act, 84
Alien Friends Act, 84
Alienage, 13–14
Allende, Isabel, 139
Amendments to U.S. Law, 1980.
See 1980 Amendments
to U.S. Law
American Friends Service
Committee, 216
American Jewish Joint Distribution
Committee, 217
American-led humanitarian
intervention in Somalia, 74
American Near East Refugee Aid
(ANERA), 218
American Red Cross, 217
American Refugee Committee,
217–218
Americas, IDP population in, 4t
Amnesty International, 218
Amnesty International’s Annual
Report, 42, 43
ANERA. See American Near East
Refugee Aid (ANERA)
Annan, Koﬁ, 74
Arendt, Hannah, 139–140
Armenian Assembly of
America, 219
Arnothy, Christine, 140
313

Article 33 of Refugee Convention, 12
Blackmun on language of, 60–61
description of, 174–175
drafting history of, 61–63
on nonrefoulement, 23, 25, 28
prohibition of expulsion or return
“refoulement,” 55–59
Arulpragasam, Mathangi Maya
(a.k.a. M.I.A.), 141
Asia, central
IDP population in, 4t
refugee admissions ceilings from
2006–2008, 102t
Asylum. See also Asylum claims;
Asylum hearings
Asylum claims
ﬁled in Sweden, 2008, 48t
ﬁled in the Netherlands, 2008, 47t
ﬁled in the United Kingdom, 2008, 45t
ﬁled in the United States in 2008, 49t
Asylum countries, 10
Asylum hearings
abuse of, 40–45
accelerated procedures of, 33–35
applicants for Western states
2008/1998/1988, 200–214t
changes to U.S. Asylum law 1996,
106–107
by country of nationality in
2006–2008, 106t
deﬁned, 305
denial of, 33–35
detention of, 110–111
disqualiﬁcations, 109–110
refugee status in U.S., 105
and withholding of deportation,
107–109
Asylum seekers, 6
deﬁned, 305
in 2008, 45t
Australia’s Paciﬁc Solution, 66–67
Azerbaijan, IDPs as percentage
of population, 6t
Bankovic et al. v. Belgium et al., 70–71
BHRHA. See Bureau of Human Rights
and Humanitarian Affairs
(BHRHA)
BIA. See Board of Immigration
Appeals (BIA)
Biographical sketches, 137–161
Blackmun, Harry (Justice), 59–61, 62,
63, 64
Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA),
107–108
Boat people, 305
Boat People S.O.S., Inc., 219
Bolshevik Revolution, 7, 87
Border camp, 305
Bosnia, 80
ethnic cleansing in, 74
humanitarian intervention in, 10
Brain drain, 306
Brecht, Bertolt, 142
Bridging Refugee Youth and
Children’s Services, 219–220
British Refugee Council, 220
B-status, 305
Burden-sharing, 306
Bureau of Human Rights and
Humanitarian Affairs
(BHRHA), 94
Burundi, 208t
as country designated with TPS
or DED status, 112t
number of refugees in 2008, 2t
refugee arrivals from 1999–2008, 100t
as refugee producing state, 43t
refugee resettlement in U.S. 2008, 51t
Calculated Kindness: Refugees and
America’s Half-Open Door
1945–Present (Loescher and
Scanlan), 89
California State Senate’s Special
Committee on Chinese
Immigration, 85
Canadian Council for Refugees, 220
CARE-International, 220–221
Caribbean, refugee admissions ceilings
from 2006–2008, 102t
Carrier sanctions, 44, 306
Cartagena Declaration of Refugee
in 1984, 13, 124, 189–199, 306
Catholic Relief Services, 221
Cefored Institute of Relief and
Development, 221
Center for Applied Linguistics, 222
Center for Migration Studies, 222–223
Center for Victims of Torture, 223
314
Index

Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 222
Central American refugees, 93–94
CERD. See Elimination of Racial
Discrimination (CERD)
Cessation clause
deﬁned, 306
in 1951 Refugee Convention, 24–25
Chad, 113, 122
as hosting country of refugee, 3f
political terror scale, 43
Chahal v. United Kingdom, 30
Children’s Rights, 31–32
China, 121
asylum claims ﬁled in the United
States in 2008, 49t
as hosting country of refugee, 3f
Chinese Exclusion Act, 85–86
Chronology, 115–136
Church World Service Immigration
and Refugee Program, 223–224
Citizenship, 306
Civil and political rights (CPR), 9
Closed Borders: The Contemporary
Assault on Freedom of Movement
(Dowty), 88
Cohen, Roberta, 2, 5
Cold War
IDPs at end of, 2–3
U.S. and, 90–96
Western states at end of, 10
Colombia, 42, 48, 136
asylees from 2006–2008, 106t
asylum claims ﬁled in the U.S.
in 2008, 49t
IDPs as percentage of population, 6t
IDPS in, 3, 6t
refugee arrivals in 1999–2008, 101t
as refugee producing state, 43t
refugees in 2008, 2t
Comaneci, Nadia, 142–143
Committee Against Torture, 29
Communist states, refugees from, 90
Compassion fatigue, 2
Complementary protection, 13, 111
deﬁned, 306
Convention against Torture, 69, 79
Convention Against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment (CAT), 28
Convention on the Rights of the Child
(CRC), 31, 306
Convention Relating to the Status of
Refugees Adopted on July 28,
1951, 163–182
Council for Assisting Refugee
Academics, 224
CPR. See Civil and political rights (CPR)
CRC. See Convention on the Rights
of the Child (CRC)
Credibility determination, 306
Credible fear, 306
Cuban Adjustment Act, 95
Cubans, American refugee policy
for, 91, 95, 102, 110
Cultural rights, 31
Cultural Survival, 224
“Culture of prevention,” 77
“Culture of reaction,” 77
Cyprus, IDPs in, 6t
Danish Refugee Council, 224–225
Daoud, Zohra, 143
Declaration of Territorial Asylum, 119
DED. See Deferred Enforced Departure
(DED)
Defensive applications, asylum
and, 105
Deferred Enforced Departure (DED),
111, 112t
Democratic Republic of Congo, 80
IDPs in, 3
political terror scale, 43
refugees in 2008, 2t
Deportation
deﬁned, 306
withholding of deportation, 311
Despouy, Leandro, 143–144
Detention, 30–31, 306
Dillingham, William, 86
Dillingham Commission, 86
Direct Aid Iraq, 225
Direct Relief International, 225
Displaced Persons Act (DP Act), 1948,
89–90
Domestic procedures
denial of asylum hearings and
accelerated procedures, 33–35
establishing eligibility, 32–33
returned refugees, 35–36
Index
315

Dongala, Emmanuel, 144
Dorfman, Ariel, 145
Dowty, Alan, 88
DP Act. See Displaced Persons
Act (DP Act), 1948
Drobny, Jaroslav, 145–146
Durable solution, 306
Early warning, 306
East Asia, refugee admissions ceilings
from 2006–2008, 102t
ECHR. See European Court of Human
Rights (ECHR)
Economic migrant, 306
Economic rights, 31
Einstein, Albert, 146
Elimination of Racial Discrimination
(CERD), 30
El Saadawi, Nawal, 147
El Salvador, 93–94
asylum applications on 1980, 105
asylum claims ﬁled in the U.S.
in 2008, 49t
TPS and DED in, 112t
Emeagwali, Philip, 147
Emigration, 307
Enemy combatants, 69
Environmental refugee, 307
Episcopal Migration Ministries, 225–226
Eritrean Relief Association, 226
Ethiopian Community Development
Council, 226
Ethnic cleansing, 307
Ethnic cleansing in Bosnia, 74
Ethnic minority, 307
ETO Consortium. See Extraterritorial
Obligations (ETO) Consortium
Europe, IDP population in, 4t
Europe, refugee admissions ceilings
from 2006–2008, 102t
European Convention, 30, 52
Article 1, 70–71
Article 2, 72–73
European Council on Refugees and
Exiles, 226–227
European Court of Human Rights
(ECHR), 30
European Refugee Fund, 227
EVD. See Extended Voluntary
Departure (EVD)
E´vian Conference, 88
Exilic bias, 307
Exodus World Service, 227
Expatriate, deﬁned, 307
Expedited removal, 307
Expulsion, 307
Expulsion, Swiss Government and, 57
Extended Voluntary Departure
(EVD), 111
Extraterritorial obligations, 307
Extraterritorial Obligations (ETO)
Consortium, 73, 78–79
Family reuniﬁcation, 307
Fermi, Enrico, 148
“First country of asylum,” 33
Forced migration, 307
Foreign policy, U.S. and, 90–96
Frelick, Bill, 9, 10, 11
GAO. See General Accounting
Ofﬁce (GAO)
General Accounting Ofﬁce (GAO),
94–95
Genocide, 307
Georgetown University Institute for
the Study of International
Migration, 227–228
Georgia, IDPs as percentage
of population, 6t
Globalization, 71
Glossary, 305–311
Golden door imagery, 84
Goodwin-Gill, Guy, 21
Grahl-Madsen, Atle, 15
Grassroots International, 228
Gyatso, Tenzin, 148
Haiti
agreement with U.S., 53
humanitarian intervention in, 10
U.S. refugee policy and, 92–93,
105, 110
Haitian interdiction program, 52, 65,
66, 92, 123
Hanh, Thich Nhat, 148–149
HealthRight International, 228–229
Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society, 229
High Commissioner for Russian
Refugees, 7
316
Index

Holt International Children’s
Services, 229
Horta, Jo´se Ramos, 149
HRC. See Human Rights
Committee (HRC)
Human rights
International law of, 68–69, 71
post-war revolution, 8–11
re-conceptualizing, refugee
protection and, 67–73
Human Rights Committee (HRC), 8,
28–29, 30
Human Rights Documentation
Exchange, 229–230
Human Rights First, 230
Human rights instruments, interface
with, 27–32
Human Rights Internet, 230
Human rights violations, 35, 40, 41,
42, 80
Human Rights Watch, 230–231
Humanitarian concern, 307
Humanitarian corridors, 10
Humanitarian disasters, 77
Humanitarian intervention, 73–77, 80
Hurricane Katrina, victims of, 1
ICCPR. See International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)
ICESCR. See International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights (ICESCR)
IDPs. See Internally Displaced
Persons (IDPs)
IFA. See Internal ﬂight alternative
(IFA); International Flight
Alternative (IFA)
Illegal immigrant, 307
Illegal Trafﬁckers, prosecution of, 53
Immigrant and Refugee Community
Organization, 231
Immigrant and Refugee Rights
Project, 231
Immigration, 307
Immigration Act, 1965, 91, 104, 119, 305
Immigration and Nationality Act
(INA), 54, 108–109
Immigration and Naturalization
Service (INS), 93
Immigration preferences, 307
INA. See Immigration and Nationality
Act (INA)
India’s intervention in Bangladesh, 73
INS. See Immigration and
Naturalization Service (INS)
INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, 15, 107, 109
INS v. Elias-Zacarias, 19
Integration policy, 307
InterAction, 232
Interdiction, 44, 69, 71, 298, 307
Intergovernmental organization, 308
Internal conﬂict, 308
Internal Displacement Monitoring
Centre, 232
Internal ﬂight alternative (IFA), 16
Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs)
breakdown of populations by
continent, 3, 4t
deﬁned, 308
Kurds as, 5
as percentage of countries’
population, 6, 6t
phenomenon of, 2–3
population in 1989–2007, 4f
International Alert, 232–233
International and Regional Human
Rights Instruments, interface
with, 27–32
Nonrefoulement, 28–30
International and regional treaties,
163–199
Cartagena Declaration on Refugees,
189–199
Convention relating to Status
of Refugees on 1951, 163–188
International Bill of Rights, 9
International Catholic Migration
Commission, 233
International Center for Migration
and Health, 233
International Commission on
Intervention and State
Sovereignty, 74–75
International Commission on
Intervention Sovereignty, 74–75
International Committee of the Red
Cross, 234
International conﬂict, 308
International Council of Voluntary
Agencies, 234
Index
317

International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (ICCPR), 8, 29, 31,
52, 69
International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights
(ICESCR), 8, 31, 72
International Covenant on the
Elimination of all Forms of Racial
Discrimination (ICERD);
deﬁnition of race in, 19
International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies,
234–235
International Flight Alternative
(IFA), 308
International human rights law,
68–69, 71
International humanitarian law, 308
International Journal of Refugee Law, 125
International migration, 308
International Organization for
Migration, 235
International refugee law, 308
International Refugee Organization
(IRO), 117
International refugee protection, 6
International Refugee Rights Initiative,
235–236
International Rescue Committee, 236
International Social Service—United
States of America Branch,
Inc., 236
Iran, 122
Afghan refugee in, 121
asylum seekers to United Kingdom
in 2008, 45t
refugee arrivals by region and
country of nationality in
1999–2008, 101t
Iraq, 34, 106t
asylum claims ﬁled in the United
Kingdom, 2008, 45t
asylum claims ﬁled in United States,
49t
asylum seekers to Netherlands in
2008, 46
asylum seekers to Sweden in 2008,
47, 47t
humanitarian intervention in, 10
IDPs as percentage of population, 6t
IDPs in, 3
Kurds in, 5
political terror scale, 43
refugee arrivals by region and
country, 1999–2008, 101t
as refugee producing state, 43t
refugee resettlement in U.S.,
2008, 51t
refugees and IDPs from, 68
refugees and political violence, 41
refugees in 2008, 2t
U.S. refugee practices in, 95–96
Iraqi Refugee Assistance Project, 236
IRO. See International Refugee
Organization (IRO)
Irregular migration, 308
Islamic Republic of Iran, as hosting
country of refugee, 3f
Isolationism, 87
Israel
creation of, 117
political terror scale, 43
signing of Declaration of
Principles, 129
Issa v. Turkey, 71
Japan, Gentleman’s agreement with
U.S., 86
Jesuit Refugee Service, 237
Job discrimination, religious beliefs
and, 41
Jordan, as hosting country of
refugee, 3f
Journal of Refugee Studies, 125
Justice Blackmun’s dissent, 59–65
Kandinsky, Wassily, 150
Kassindja, Gauziya, 111
Kawani, Fazil, 151
Keﬂezighi, Mebrahtom, 151
Khurasani, Akbar, 151–152
Know-Nothing Party, 85
Kosovo, humanitarian intervention
in, 74
Lam, Walter, 152
Latin America, refugee admissions
ceilings from 2006–2008, 102t
Lazarus, Emma, 83
League of Nations, 7, 87, 115
318
Index

Lebanon, IDPs as percentage of
population, 6t
Lemkin, Raphael, 152–153
Local settlement, 308
Loescher, Gil, 89
Lutheran Immigration and Refugee
Service, 237
Lutheran World Relief, 237–238
Makeba, Miriam, 153
Mamonova, Tatyana, 154
Manifestly unfounded asylum
application, 308
Man-made disaster, 308
Mapendo International Inc., 238
Mariel boatlift, 91, 105
Mass expulsion, 308
Matter of Pula, 107, 108
Matvejevic, Predrag, 154
Mbeki, Thabo, 155
McCarran-Walter Act, 87
Meir, Golda, 155
Membership of a particular group, as
nexus requirement, 20–22
Mennonite Central Committee, 238
Michao¨lle, Jean, 149–150
Middle East, IDP population in, 4t
Migrant worker, 308
Migration, 308
Migration Act, 66
Migration zone, 67
Millennium Summit, 74
Minnesota Advocates for Human
Rights, 238–239
Minority Rights Group
International, 239
Montes, Segundo, 93
Murray v. Schooner Charming
Betsy, 64
Musalo, Karen, 111
Muslim Aid, 239–240
Mutua, Makau, 156
Nansen, Fridtjof, 7
Nansen passports, 7
Nation of immigrants, 83
Nation of immigrants, 83
National Immigration Forum, 240
National Origins Quota system, 87
Nationalities Service Center, 140
Nationality
as nexus requirement, 10
re-acquisition of, 24
NATO bombing in 1999, 70
Natural disaster, 308
Naturalization, 84, 309
Naturalization Act, 84
Navratilova, Martina, 156–157
Near East, refugee admissions ceilings
from 2006–2008, 102t
Netherlands, 46, 47t
Nexus requirement
deﬁned, 309
membership of a particular group
as, 20–22
nationality as, 20
political opinion as, 19–20
race as, 18–19
religion as, 20
NGO. See Nongovernmental
organization (NGO)
Nhon, Le Thanh, 157
1980 Amendments to U.S. Law, 63–64
1980 Refugee Act, 52, 55, 63, 64, 91
deﬁned, 305
deﬁnition of refugee in, 97
procedures to meet the refugee
deﬁnition, 97
refugees admitted through ORP, 103
1951 Refugee Convention, 1, 7, 9, 11
Alienage, 13–14
Article 33 of, 55–59
cessations, 24–25
chapters one to seven, 163–179
data and documents on, 163–189
deﬁned, 305
exceptions to nonrefoulement, 23–24
exclusions, 22–23
the Nexus requirement, 18–22
persecution, 16–18
purpose and meaning of, 64
refugee in the, 12
rights to refugees under, 68
“well founded fear,” 14–16
1966 U.S. asylum law, 107–109
1967 Protocol Relating to the Status
of Refugees, 305
Non-entre´e policy, 35
Nongovernmental organization
(NGO), 309
Index
319

Nonrefoulement, 25, 28–30
deﬁned, 309
exceptions to, 23–24
prohibition application, 52
sale decision and, 66–67
North Korea, 43, 135
Norwegian Refugee Council, 240–241
Norwegian ship MV Tampa, 66
Nureyev, Rudolf, 157–158
OAU. See Organization of African
Unity (OAU)
Ocalan v. Turkey, 71
Occupied Palestinian Authority,
number of refugees in 2008, 2t
Occupied Territories, 43, 113
Ofﬁce of Refugee Resettlement, 241
Ofﬁce of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), 7–8, 16, 118–120, 129,
241–242
on nonrefoulement, 25
Ofﬁce of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) Handbook, 311
deﬁnition of nationality, 20
deﬁnition of race, 18
on establishing eligibility, 32
on refugee’s renewal of
passport, 24
Off-shore refugee protection, 67
Operation Restore Hope, 74
Operation USA, 242
Organization of African Unity (OAU),
13, 119, 182–189, 309
Organizations, directory of, 215–255
ORP. See Overseas Refugee
Program (ORP)
Overseas Refugee Program (ORP),
49, 50
criticism of, 103–104
deﬁned, 309
description of, 97–103
refugee admissions ceilings
2006–2008, 102t
refugee arrivals 1980–2008, 98t
refugee arrivals by region and
country of nationality 1999–2008,
100–101t
Oxfam America, 242
Pakistan, 117, 120–121, 136
asylum applicants in Western
countries 2008/1998/1988,
200–212t
asylum claims ﬁled in the United
Kingdom, 45t
as hosting country of refugee, 3f
Palmer, Mitchell, 87
Paper walls, 88
Parole authority, 309
PEP. See President’s Escapee
Program (PEP)
Perry, Michael, 8
Persecution, 16–18
deﬁned, 309
as deﬁned by Goodwin-Gill, 41
probability of, 40–41
severity of, 40
Political opinion, as nexus
requirement, 19–20
Political Terror Scale, 112
Political Terror Scale (PTS), 41–42
asylum claims ﬁled in Netherlands,
2008, 47t
asylum claims ﬁled in Sweden,
2008, 48t
asylum claims ﬁled in the United
Kingdom, 2008, 45t
asylum claims ﬁled in the United
States, 2008, 49t
refugee resettlement in U.S.,
2008, 51t
Political violence, 12–13, 42, 43
asylum abuse and, 40–41
refugee ﬂows and, 41
Preference system, 309
President’s Escapee Program (PEP), 90
Project ROSE, 243
Protocol relating to status of refugees,
606 U.N.T.S. 267, 179–189
PTS. See Political Terror Scale (PTS)
Pull factors, 309
Push factors, 309
Quota, 309
Race, as nexus requirement, 18–19
Racism, 30
Rav Tov International Jewish Rescue
Operation, 243
320
Index

Reagan, Ronald, 53
Receiving country, 309
Reception policy, 309
Refoulement, 57–58, 60–61
Refugee Action, 243–244
Refugee admissions ceilings
for 2006–2008, 102t
Refugee and Migrant Justice, 244
Refugee Assistance Project, 244
Refugee camps, 1, 104, 310
Refugee Convention, 1951. See 1951
Refugee Convention
Refugee Council of Australia, 244–245
Refugee Health—Ofﬁce of Global
Health Affairs, 245
Refugee in transit, 310
Refugee protection
British proposal for new vision for, 66
categories undeserving, 22–23
history of, 6–8
implications for, 80–81
international, 6
off-shore, 66–67
re-conceptualizing human rights
and, 67–73
state sovereignty and, 67–68
statutes under U.S. law governing,
54–55
U.S. and, 90–96
Refugee Relief Act (RRA), 90
Refugee Relief International, 245
Refugee rights
nonrefoulement, 25
to refugees lawfully in the
contracting state, 26–27
to refugees lawfully physically
present in the receiving state, 26
to refugees lawfully residing in the
contracting state, 27
to refugees lawfully staying in the
contracting state, 27
Refugees
U.S. Refugee/asylum law and
practice: according to Article 1 of
Refugee Convention, 12
at the aftermath of World War II, 7
deﬁned, 1, 310
as deﬁned on 1980 Refugee Act, 97
deﬁnition adopted in 1969
Organization of African Unity, 13
disqualiﬁcation for status, 109–110
history of protecting, 6–8
hosting countries at end of 2007, 3f
IDPs v., 2
in orbit, 34
paradigms, 9–11
PTS scores of states, 43t
returned, 35–36
top ten producing states of, 2t, 43t
worldwide refugees in 1989–2007, 4f
See also Overseas refugee program
(ORP); Refugee protection;
Refugee Rights; Refugee rights;
Refugees in orbit, 310
Refugees International, 247
Refugees sur Place, 14
Refugee Studies Center, 123, 246
Refugee-warrior, 310
Refugee Women’s Alliance, 246
Refugee Women’s Network, 246–247
Religion, as nexus requirement, 20
Repatriation, 36, 117, 120, 186, 310
Resettlement, 51t, 90, 310
Resources, 257–300
books, 268–293
cases and administrative decisions,
300–301
DVD resources, 302–303
important document sources,
261–262
Journals, 257–261
online resources, 301
reference works, 262–268
reports, 295–300
selected articles and essays, 293–294
Responsibility to Protect, The (Report), 75
Responsibility to Protect (R2P), 73–78
Restrictionism, 87
Return migration, 310
Rights of the Child, 31–32
Root causes, 310
Ross, Edward, 86
R2P. See Responsibility to Protect (R2P)
RRA. See Refugee Relief Act (RRA)
Rwanda, 10, 74, 80, 92, 101t
Sacco, Ferdinando, 87
Safe areas, 310
Safe country of origin, 310
Safe haven, 310
Index
321

Safe third country, 35, 310
Said, Edward, 158
Sale decision, 66–67, 69
Sale v. Haitian Centers Council, 39,
52–59
Salvation Army World Service
Ofﬁce, 247
SAMHSA–Refugee Mental Health
Program, 247–248
Save the Children Federation, 248
Scanlan, John, 89
Secret Order of the Star Spangled
Banner, 85
Section 243 of Immigration and
Nationality Act, 55, 63–64
Self-determination, 311
Shacknove, Andrew, 80–81
Skjetne, Nolvia Dominguez, 158–159
Skogly, Sigrun, 72
Social group, 20–22
Social rights, 31
Soering v. United Kingdom, 30
Solzhenitsyn, Aleksandr, 159
Somalia
American-led humanitarian
intervention in, 74
asylum seekers to Netherlands in
2008, 46
asylum seekers to Sweden
in 2008, 47
IDPs as percentage of
population, 6t
number of IDPs in, 3
number of refugees in 2008, 2t
political terror scale, 43
Soros, George, 159–160
South and South-East Asia, 4t
South Asia, 102t
Southeast Asia Resource Action
Center, 248–249
Southeast Asians, 4t, 81
Soviet Union, 42
refugee numbers in early 1990s, 99
U.S. refugee policy and, 91–92, 95
Sri Lanka, political terror scale, 43
Stanley, William, 93
Stateless persons, 311
State sovereignty
notion of, 67
refugee protection and, 67–68
Sudan, 80
IDPs as percentage of
population, 6t
number of IDPs in, 3
number of refugees in 2008, 2t
Suresh v. Canada, 28, 29, 30
Sweden, 47–48, 48t
Swiss Federal Government, 57
Syrian Arab Republic, as hosting
country of refugee, 3f
Tanzania’s intervention in Uganda, 73
Temporary Protected Status (TPS),
111–113, 112t
Territorial obligations, 68–69
Territory, in Article 1 of European
Convention, 70
The AMAR International Charitable
Foundation, 216
The New Colossus (Lazarus), 83
The Responsibility to Protect (Report),
75–78
Third World, 2, 149, 311
Timor, humanitarian intervention in, 74
Tolstoy Foundation, 249
Tonton Macoutes, 53
Torture Convention, 79, 106, 311
Torture of death, 41
TPS. See Temporary Protected
Status (TPS)
Travel documents, 186, 311
Treaty of Versailles, 87
Turkey, 2t, 43t, 70–71, 122, 202t, 203t,
205t, 206t, 207t, 208t, 210t,
211t, 212t
2001 Border Protection Act, 66
UDHR. See Universal Declaration of
Human Rights (UDHR)
Undocumented alien, 311
Ung, Loung, 160
UNHCR. See Ofﬁce of the United
Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR)
UNICEF, 249–250
United Kingdom, 45–46
asylum claims ﬁled in, 45t
as hosting country of refugee, 3f
proposal for new vision for refugee
protection, 66
322
Index

United Nations
creation of, 8, 117
number of refugee in 2008 in the
world, 1
United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR), 62, 189,
190–192, 193, 311
United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA), 7,
117, 250
United Republic of Tanzania, as
hosting country of refugee, 3f
United States, 49–50
agreement with Haiti, 53
asylum claims ﬁled in 2008, 49t
as hosting country of refugee, 3f
refugee resettlement in 2008, 51t
United States Catholic Conference,
Migration and Refugee Services,
250–251
United States Citizenship and
Immigration Services, 251
United States law, 305, 307, 309, 311
1980 amendments to, 63–64
statutes protecting refugee,
54–55
Universal Declaration of Human
Rights (UDHR), 8
UN Ofﬁce for Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, 249
UNRWA. See United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA)
UN Security Council, 75, 78
UN World Summit, 2005, 75
U.S. alien admission practices,
historical survey of, 84–90
U.S. Committee for Refugees and
Immigrants, 251
U.S. Department of State—Bureau of
Population, Refugees, and
Migration, 251–252
U.S. Department of State’s Country
Reports on Human Rights Practices,
42, 43
U.S. foreign policy, 90–96
U.S. Fund for UNICEF, 252
U.S. House Judiciary Committee, 252
U.S. Refugee/asylum law and practice,
96–97
U.S. Refugee protection, 90–96
U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee,
252–253
U.S. special issues
alien admission practices, 84–90
asylum, 105–106
asylum and withholding of
deportation, 107–109
changes in asylum law, 106–107
Cold War, foreign policy, and
refugee protection, 90–96
criticisms of ORP, 103–104
current refugee/asylum law and
practice, 95–97
detention, 110–111
immigration and refugee protection
issues, 83–84
overseas refugee Program, 97–103
overview of, 83–84
refugee disqualiﬁcations, 109–110
temporary protection, 111–113
van Boetzelaer, Baron, 58–59,
62–63
Vanzetti, Bartolomeo, 87
Vietnam
intervention in Cambodia, 73
number of refugees in 2008, 2t
refugee numbers in early
1990s, 99
Visa, 311
Visa restrictions, 44
Voluntary repatriation, 7, 36, 186
Wek, Alek, 160–161
Well-founded fear, 14–16, 311
Withholding of deportation, 311
Women’s Refugee
Commission, 253
World Concern International, 253
World Food Programme, 253–254
World Learning, 254
World Relief, 254
World Vision, 255
World War II
beginning of, 116
refugees at aftermath of, 7
Wyman, David, 88, 89
Index
323

Xingjian, Gao, 161
Young Professionals in Foreign
Policy—Refugee Assistance
Program, 255
Zimbabwe
asylum seekers to United Kingdom
in 2008, 45t
IDPs as percentage of population, 6t
political terror scale, 43
Zucker, Naomi, 87
Zucker, Norm, 87
Zutter, Philippe, 57–58
324
Index

About the Author
Mark Gibney is the Belk Distinguished Professor at the University
of North Carolina-Asheville. His most recent book publications
include the edited volume (Gibney & Skogly) Universal Human
Rights and Extraterritorial Obligations (University of Pennsylvania
Press) and International Human Rights Law: Returning to Universal
Principles (Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2008). He also has a forthcoming
book (with Sabine Carey and Steve Poe) entitled The Politics of
Human Rights: The Quest for Dignity (Cambridge University Press).
Since 1984, Gibney has directed the Political Terror Scale (PTS),
one of the world’s most widely used human rights datasets
(www.politicalterrorscale.org).
325

