
Advancements in Applied 
Metaheuristic Computing
Nilanjan Dey
Techno India College of Technology, India
A volume in the Advances in Data 
Mining and Database Management 
(ADMDM) Book Series 

Published in the United States of America by
IGI Global
Engineering Science Reference (an imprint of IGI Global)
701 E. Chocolate Avenue
Hershey PA, USA 17033
Tel: 717-533-8845
Fax:  717-533-8661 
E-mail: cust@igi-global.com
Web site: http://www.igi-global.com
Copyright © 2018 by IGI Global.  All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be 
reproduced, stored or distributed in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopying, without written permission from the publisher.
Product or company names used in this set are for identification purposes only. Inclusion of the 
names of the products or companies does not indicate a claim of ownership by IGI Global of the 
trademark or registered trademark.
	
	
	
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
British Cataloguing in Publication Data
A Cataloguing in Publication record for this book is available from the British Library.
All work contributed to this book is new, previously-unpublished material.
The views expressed in this book are those of the authors, but not necessarily of the publisher.
For electronic access to this publication, please contact: eresources@igi-global.com.
Names: Dey, Nilanjan, 1984- editor.
Title: Advancements in applied metaheuristic computing / Nilanjan Dey, editor. 
Description: Hershey, PA : Engineering Science Reference, [2018] | Includes  
   bibliographical references and index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2017028945| ISBN 9781522541516 (hardcover) | ISBN  
   9781522541523 (ebook) 
Subjects: LCSH: Systems engineering--Data processing. | Heuristic algorithms.  
   | Mathematical optimization. | Artificial intelligence. 
Classification: LCC TA168 .A286 2018 | DDC 006.3--dc23 LC record available at https://lccn.loc.
gov/2017028945 
 
This book is published in the IGI Global book series Advances in Data Mining and Database 
Management (ADMDM) (ISSN: 2327-1981; eISSN: 2327-199X)

Advances in Data Mining 
and Database Management 
(ADMDM) Book Series
Editor-in-Chief: David Taniar, Monash University, Australia
Mission
ISSN:2327-1981 
 EISSN:2327-199X
With the large amounts of information available to organizations in today’s digital 
world, there is a need for continual research surrounding emerging methods and 
tools for collecting, analyzing, and storing data.
The Advances in Data Mining & Database Management (ADMDM) series aims 
to bring together research in information retrieval, data analysis, data warehousing, 
and related areas in order to become an ideal resource for those working and studying 
in these fields. IT professionals, software engineers, academicians and upper-level 
students will find titles within the ADMDM book series particularly useful for 
staying up-to-date on emerging research, theories, and applications in the fields of 
data mining and database management.
•	Database Testing
•	Association Rule Learning
•	Enterprise systems
•	Quantitative Structure–Activity Relationship
•	Profiling Practices
•	Decision Support Systems
•	Sequence analysis
•	Data warehousing
•	Database Security
•	Customer Analytics
Coverage
IGI Global is currently accepting 
manuscripts for publication within this 
series. To submit a proposal for a volume in 
this series, please contact our Acquisition 
Editors at Acquisitions@igi-global.com or 
visit: http://www.igi-global.com/publish/.
The Advances in Data Mining and Database Management  (ADMDM) Book Series (ISSN 2327-1981) is published 
by IGI Global, 701 E. Chocolate Avenue, Hershey, PA 17033-1240, USA, www.igi-global.com. This series is composed 
of titles available for purchase individually; each title is edited to be contextually exclusive from any other title within the 
series. For pricing and ordering information please visit http://www.igi-global.com/book-series/advances-data-mining-
database-management/37146. Postmaster: Send all address changes to above address. ©© 2018 IGI Global. All rights, 
including translation in other languages reserved by the publisher. No part of this series may be reproduced or used in any 
form or by any means – graphics, electronic, or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, taping, or information and 
retrieval systems – without written permission from the publisher, except for non commercial, educational use, including 
classroom teaching purposes. The views expressed in this series are those of the authors, but not necessarily of IGI Global.

701 East Chocolate Avenue, Hershey, PA 17033, USA
Tel: 717-533-8845 x100 • Fax: 717-533-8661
E-Mail: cust@igi-global.com • www.igi-global.com
Deep Learning Innovations and Their Convergence Wih Big Data
S. Karthik (SNS College of Technology, Anna University, India) Anand Paul (Kyungpook 
National University, South Korea) and N. Karthikeyan (Mizan-Tepi University, Ethiopia) 
Information Science Reference • ©2018 • 265pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781522530152) • US $205.00
Modern Technologies for Big Data Classification and Clustering
Hari Seetha (Vellore Institute of Technology-Andhra Pradesh, India) M. Narasimha Murty 
(Indian Institute of Science, India) and B. K. Tripathy (VIT University, India) 
Information Science Reference • ©2018 • 360pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781522528050) • US $215.00
Data Visualization and Statistical Literacy for Open and Big Data
Theodosia Prodromou (University of New England, Australia) 
Information Science Reference • ©2017 • 365pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781522525127) • US $205.00
Web Semantics for Textual and Visual Information Retrieval
Aarti Singh (Guru Nanak Girls College, Yamuna Nagar, India) Nilanjan Dey (Techno India 
College of Technology, India) Amira S. Ashour (Tanta University, Egypt & Taif University, 
Saudi Arabia) and V. Santhi (VIT University, India) 
Information Science Reference • ©2017 • 290pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781522524830) • US $185.00
Advancing Cloud Database Systems and Capacity Planning With Dynamic Applications
Narendra Kumar Kamila (C.V. Raman College of Engineering, India) 
Information Science Reference • ©2017 • 430pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781522520139) • US $210.00
Web Data Mining and the Development of Knowledge-Based Decision Support Systems
G. Sreedhar (Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidyapeetha (Deemed University), India) 
Information Science Reference • ©2017 • 409pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781522518778) • US $165.00
Intelligent Multidimensional Data Clustering and Analysis
Siddhartha Bhattacharyya (RCC Institute of Information Technology, India) Sourav De (Cooch 
Behar Government Engineering College, India) Indrajit Pan (RCC Institute of Information 
Technology, India) and Paramartha Dutta (Visva-Bharati University, India) 
Information Science Reference • ©2017 • 450pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781522517764) • US $210.00
For an enitre list of titles in this series, please visit:
https://www.igi-global.com/book-series/advances-data-mining-database-management/37146
Titles in this Series
For a list of additional titles in this series, please visit: 
https://www.igi-global.com/book-series/advances-data-mining-database-management/37146

Table of Contents
Preface.................................................................................................................xvi
Acknowledgment................................................................................................xxi
Section 1
Meta-Heuristic Optimization-Algorithms-Based Advanced 
Applications
Chapter 1
Multi-Objective Optimal Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Optimization 
Algorithms With Unified Power Flow Controller to Enhance the Power 
System Performance...............................................................................................1
G. V. Nagesh Kumar, Vignans Institute of Information Technology 
(Autonomous), India
B. Venkateswara Rao, V. R. Siddhartha Engineering College 
(Autonomous), India
D. Deepak Chowdary, Dr. L. Bullayya College of Engineering, India
Polamraju V. S. Sobhan, Vignan’s Foundation for Science, Technology, 
and Research University, India
Chapter 2
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network Using 
Gene Expression Programming............................................................................34
J. Sangeetha, PES University, India
Keerthiraj Nagaraj, University of Florida, USA
K. N. Balasubramanya Murthy, PES University, India
Ram P. Rustagi, PES University, India
Chapter 3
Chaotic Differential-Evolution-Based Fuzzy Contrast Stretching Method...........71
Krishna Gopal Dhal, Midnapore College (Autonomous), India
Sanjoy Das, University of Kalyani, India

﻿
Chapter 4
Protein Motif Comparator Using Bio-Inspired Two-Way K-Means.....................95
R. Gowri, Periyar University, India
R. Rathipriya, Periyar University, India
Chapter 5
Metaheuristics in Manufacturing: Predictive Modeling of Tool Wear in 
Machining Using Genetic Programming............................................................118
Mohammad Zadshakoyan, University of Tabriz, Iran
Vahid Pourmostaghimi, University of Tabriz, Iran
Chapter 6
Intelligent Computing in Medical Imaging: A Study.........................................143
Shouvik Chakraborty, University of Kalyani, India
Sankhadeep Chatterjee, University of Calcutta, India
Amira S. Ashour, Tanta University, Egypt
Kalyani Mali, University of Kalyani, India
Nilanjan Dey, Techno India College of Technology, India
Chapter 7
Effect of SMES Unit in AGC of an Interconnected Multi-Area Thermal 
Power System With ACO-Tuned PID Controller................................................164
K. Jagatheesan, Paavai Engineering College, India
B. Anand, Hindusthan College of Engineering and Technology, India
Nilanjan Dey, Techno India College of Technology, India
Amira S. Ashour, Tanta University, Egypt
Chapter 8
Meta-Heuristic Algorithms in Medical Image Segmentation: A Review...........185
Nilanjan Dey, Techno India College of Technology, India
Amira S. Ashour, Tanta University, Egypt
Section 2
Genetic Algorithm Applications
Chapter 9
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing 
Problems: A Crossover Survey and Enhancement..............................................205
Hicham El Hassani, ENSEM Casablanca, Morocco
Said Benkachcha, ENSEM Casablanca, Morocco
Jamal Benhra, ENSEM Casablanca, Morocco

﻿
Chapter 10
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order 
Neural Network With GA-Based Training (ASONN-GA) for Financial Time 
Series Prediction.................................................................................................231
Sarat Chandra Nayak, Kommuri Pratap Reddy Institute of Technology, 
India
Bijan Bihari Misra, Silicon Institute of Technology, India
Himansu Sekhar Behera, Veer Surendra Sai University of Technology, 
India
Chapter 11
Hybrid Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm: II-Neural Network 
Approach.............................................................................................................264
Sankhadeep Chatterjee, University of Calcutta, India
Sarbartha Sarkar, Indian Institute of Technology Dhanbad, India
Nilanjan Dey, Techno India College of Technology, India
Amira S. Ashour, Tanta University, Egypt
Soumya Sen, University of Calcutta, India
Compilation of References............................................................................... 287
About the Contributors.................................................................................... 325
Index................................................................................................................... 333

Detailed Table of Contents
Preface.................................................................................................................xvi
Acknowledgment................................................................................................xxi
Section 1
Meta-Heuristic Optimization-Algorithms-Based Advanced 
Applications
Chapter 1
Multi-Objective Optimal Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Optimization 
Algorithms With Unified Power Flow Controller to Enhance the Power 
System Performance...............................................................................................1
G. V. Nagesh Kumar, Vignans Institute of Information Technology 
(Autonomous), India
B. Venkateswara Rao, V. R. Siddhartha Engineering College 
(Autonomous), India
D. Deepak Chowdary, Dr. L. Bullayya College of Engineering, India
Polamraju V. S. Sobhan, Vignan’s Foundation for Science, Technology, 
and Research University, India
In this chapter a multi objective optimal power flow (OPF) is obtained by using 
latest Metaheuristic optimization techniques BAT search algorithm (BAT), cuckoo 
search algorithm (CSA) and firefly algorithm (FA) with Unified power flow controller 
(UPFC). UPFC is a voltage source converter type Flexible Alternating Current 
Transmission System (FACTS) device. It is able to control the voltage magnitudes, 
voltage angles and line impedances individually or simultaneously. To enhance the 
power system performance, the optimal power flow has been incorporated UPFC 
along with BAT algorithm, cuckoo search algorithm and firefly algorithm based 
multi objective function comprising of two objectives those are total real power loss 
and the fuel cost of total real power generation. The BAT algorithm, cuckoo search 

﻿
algorithm and firefly algorithm based OPF has been examined and tested on a 5 bus 
test system and modified IEEE 30 bus system without and with UPFC. The results 
obtained with BAT algorithm, cuckoo search algorithm and firefly algorithms are 
compared with Differential Evaluation (DE).
Chapter 2
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network Using 
Gene Expression Programming............................................................................34
J. Sangeetha, PES University, India
Keerthiraj Nagaraj, University of Florida, USA
K. N. Balasubramanya Murthy, PES University, India
Ram P. Rustagi, PES University, India
The WiMAX network provides an efficient QoS to the large number of users. The 
real time and non-real time multimedia applications are gaining importance in 
the WiMAX network. To support such applications, there is a need to propose an 
efficient QoS of traffic prediction mechanism for the WiMAX networks. To address 
this, the authors have applied Gene Expression Programming technique for CBR 
based traffic and file transfer applications in the WiMAX network. The main focus 
of this chapter is to develop the mathematical expressions for throughput of the 
network by considering bandwidth, average end-to-end delay and average jitter as 
inputs for CBR based traffic and file transfer applications. This expression helps to 
analyze and predict the QoS of traffic of a given network. The simulation results 
show that the model values and the target values match with better approximation. 
Experimentally GEP performs better than other existing algorithms. Furthermore, 
sensitivity analysis has been carried out for both the applications
Chapter 3
Chaotic Differential-Evolution-Based Fuzzy Contrast Stretching Method...........71
Krishna Gopal Dhal, Midnapore College (Autonomous), India
Sanjoy Das, University of Kalyani, India
This study concentrates to develop one novel parameterized Bi-Histogram Fuzzy 
Contrast Stretching (BHFCS) method for enhancing the contrast of the grey level as 
well as color images properly. The parameters of this method have been optimized 
by employing one modified Chaotic Differential Evolution (CDE) with the combined 
assistance of Fractal Dimension (FD) and Quality Index based on Local Variance 
(QILV) as objective function. Experimental results prove that the modified DE gives 
better result than particle swarm optimization (PSO), genetic algorithm (GA) and 
traditional DE in this enhancement domain and the used objective function is also 
very useful to preserve the image’s original brightness which is the one of the main 
criterion of the consumer electronics field.

﻿
Chapter 4
Protein Motif Comparator Using Bio-Inspired Two-Way K-Means.....................95
R. Gowri, Periyar University, India
R. Rathipriya, Periyar University, India
In this scientific world, the evolution of the disease is predominantly higher than 
the medicines. The diagnosis and prognosis of such diseases will differ from patient 
to patient. In this scenario, the protein motifs are very useful for understanding 
the functionality and lethality of the disease. Most of the existing techniques are 
supervised approaches which require prior knowledge of the data. As the protein 
sequences are unsupervised data, the unsupervised data mining techniques like 
Clustering and 2-way Clustering are chosen to mine the homologous protein motifs. 
The quality of the results is refined further using the bio-inspired computing models 
like Particle Swarm Optimization, Genetic Algorithm and Venus Flytrap Optimization 
in this research work. The existing approaches can mine homologous patterns with 
structure similarity of 75 percent which is increased in this proposed approach. 
The results from these three different approaches show that the bio-inspired based 
2-way Clustering approaches can mine more homologous motifs than the clustering 
approaches.
Chapter 5
Metaheuristics in Manufacturing: Predictive Modeling of Tool Wear in 
Machining Using Genetic Programming............................................................118
Mohammad Zadshakoyan, University of Tabriz, Iran
Vahid Pourmostaghimi, University of Tabriz, Iran
The state of a cutting tool is an important factor in any metal cutting process as 
additional costs in terms of scrapped components, machine tool breakage and 
unscheduled downtime result from worn tool usage. Therefore, tool wear prediction 
plays an important role in industry automation for higher productivity and acceptable 
product quality. Therefore, in order to increase the productivity of turning process, 
various researches have been made recently for tool wear estimation and classification 
in turning process. Chip form is one of the most important factors commonly 
considered in evaluating the performance of machining process. On account of the 
effect of the progressive tool wear on the shape and geometrical features of produced 
chip, it is possible to predict some measurable machining outputs such as crater 
wear. According to experimentally performed researches, cutting speed and cutting 
time are two extremely effective parameters which contribute to the development 
of the crater wear on the tool rake face. As a result, these parameters will change 
the chip radius and geometry. This chapter presents the development of the genetic 
equation for the tool wear using occurred changes in chip radius in turning process. 

﻿
The development of the equation combines different methods and technologies like 
evolutionary methods, manufacturing technology, measuring and control technology 
with the adequate hardware and software support. The results obtained from genetic 
equation and experiments showed that obtained genetic equations are correlated well 
with the experimental data. Furthermore, it can be used for tool wear estimation 
during cutting process and because of its parametric form, genetic equation enables 
us to analyze the effect of input parameters on the crater wear parameters.
Chapter 6
Intelligent Computing in Medical Imaging: A Study.........................................143
Shouvik Chakraborty, University of Kalyani, India
Sankhadeep Chatterjee, University of Calcutta, India
Amira S. Ashour, Tanta University, Egypt
Kalyani Mali, University of Kalyani, India
Nilanjan Dey, Techno India College of Technology, India
Biomedical imaging is considered main procedure to acquire valuable physical 
information about the human body and some other biological species. It produces 
specialized images of different parts of the biological species for clinical analysis. 
It assimilates various specialized domains including nuclear medicine, radiological 
imaging, Positron emission tomography (PET), and microscopy. From the early 
discovery of X-rays, progress in biomedical imaging continued resulting in highly 
sophisticated medical imaging modalities, such as magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI), ultrasound, Computed Tomography (CT), and lungs monitoring. These 
biomedical imaging techniques assist physicians for faster and accurate analysis and 
treatment. The present chapter discussed the impact of intelligent computing methods 
for biomedical image analysis and healthcare. Different Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
based automated biomedical image analysis are considered. Different approaches are 
discussed including the AI ability to resolve various medical imaging problems. It also 
introduced the popular AI procedures that employed to solve some special problems 
in medicine. Artificial Neural Network (ANN) and support vector machine (SVM) 
are active to classify different types of images from various imaging modalities. 
Different diagnostic analysis, such as mammogram analysis, MRI brain image analysis, 
CT images, PET images, and bone/retinal analysis using ANN, feed-forward back 
propagation ANN, probabilistic ANN, and extreme learning machine continuously. 
Various optimization techniques of ant colony optimization (ACO), genetic algorithm 
(GA), particle swarm optimization (PSO) and other bio-inspired procedures are 
also frequently conducted for feature extraction/selection and classification. The 
advantages and disadvantages of some AI approaches are discussed in the present 
chapter along with some suggested future research perspectives.

﻿
Chapter 7
Effect of SMES Unit in AGC of an Interconnected Multi-Area Thermal 
Power System With ACO-Tuned PID Controller................................................164
K. Jagatheesan, Paavai Engineering College, India
B. Anand, Hindusthan College of Engineering and Technology, India
Nilanjan Dey, Techno India College of Technology, India
Amira S. Ashour, Tanta University, Egypt
Load changes in any one of interconnected power system that influence the system 
response from their nominal values. The Proportional–Integral- Derivative (PID) 
controller is employed to mitigate this issue as a secondary controller in addition to 
the Superconducting Magnetic Energy Storage (SMES) unit. In Automatic Generation 
Control (AGC), the current work proposed an Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) 
technique to tune PID controller gain values of multi-area interconnected thermal 
power system. The gain value of PID controller is tuned by using the ACO techniques. 
The system response is compared with and without considering SMES unit in the 
system. The comparative results clearly established that the system response with 
SMES unit improve the performance of system during sudden load disturbance.
Chapter 8
Meta-Heuristic Algorithms in Medical Image Segmentation: A Review...........185
Nilanjan Dey, Techno India College of Technology, India
Amira S. Ashour, Tanta University, Egypt
Artificial intelligence is the outlet of computer science apprehensive with creating 
computers that perform as humans. It compromises expert systems, playing games, 
natural language, and robotics. However, soft computing (SC) varies from the hard 
(conventional) computing in its tolerant of partial truth, uncertainty, imprecision, and 
approximation, thus, it models the human mind. The most common SC techniques 
include neural networks, fuzzy systems, machine learning, and the meta-heuristic 
stochastic algorithms (e.g., Cellular automata, ant colony optimization, Memetic 
algorithms, particle swarms, Tabu search, evolutionary computation and simulated 
annealing. Due to the required accurate diseases analysis, magnetic resonance 
imaging, computed tomography images and images of other modalities segmentation 
remains a challenging problem. Over the past years, soft computing approaches attract 
attention of several researchers for problems solving in medical data applications. 
Image segmentation is the process that partitioned an image into some groups based 
on similarity measures. This process is employed for abnormalities volumetric 
analysis in medical images to identify the disease nature. Recently, meta-heuristic 
algorithms are conducted to support the segmentation techniques. In the current 
chapter, different segmentation procedures are addressed. Several meta-heuristic 
approaches are reported with highlights on their procedures. Finally, several medical 
applications using meta-heuristic based-approaches for segmentation are discussed.

﻿
Section 2
Genetic Algorithm Applications
Chapter 9
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing 
Problems: A Crossover Survey and Enhancement..............................................205
Hicham El Hassani, ENSEM Casablanca, Morocco
Said Benkachcha, ENSEM Casablanca, Morocco
Jamal Benhra, ENSEM Casablanca, Morocco
Inspired by nature, genetic algorithms (GA) are among the greatest meta-heuristics 
optimization methods that have proved their effectiveness to conventional NP-hard 
problems, especially the traveling salesman problem (TSP) which is one of the most 
studied Supply chain management problems. This paper proposes a new crossover 
operator called Jump Crossover (JMPX) for solving the travelling salesmen problem 
using a genetic algorithm (GA) for near-optimal solutions, to conclude on its 
efficiency compared to solutions quality given by other conventional operators to 
the same problem, namely, Partially matched crossover (PMX), Edge recombination 
Crossover (ERX) and r-opt heuristic with consideration of computational overload. 
We adopt the path representation technique for our chromosome which is the most 
direct representation and a low mutation rate to isolate the search space exploration 
ability of each crossover. The experimental results show that in most cases JMPX 
can remarkably improve the solution quality of the GA compared to the two existing 
classic crossover approaches and the r-opt heuristic.
Chapter 10
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order 
Neural Network With GA-Based Training (ASONN-GA) for Financial Time 
Series Prediction.................................................................................................231
Sarat Chandra Nayak, Kommuri Pratap Reddy Institute of Technology, 
India
Bijan Bihari Misra, Silicon Institute of Technology, India
Himansu Sekhar Behera, Veer Surendra Sai University of Technology, 
India
Financial time series forecasting has been regarded as a challenging issue because 
of successful prediction could yield significant profit, hence require an efficient 
prediction system. Conventional ANN based models are not competent systems. 
Higher order neural networks have several advantages over traditional neural 
networks such as stronger approximation, higher fault tolerance capacity and faster 

﻿
convergence. With the aim of achieving improved forecasting accuracy, this article 
develops and evaluates the performance of an adaptive single layer second order 
neural network with GA based training (ASONN-GA). The global search ability of 
GA has been incorporated with the better generalization ability of a second order 
neural network and the model is found quite capable in handling the uncertainties 
and nonlinearities associated with the financial time series. The model takes minimal 
input data and considered the partially optimized weight set from previous training, 
hence a significant reduction in training time. The efficiency of the model has been 
evaluated by forecasting one-step-ahead closing prices and exchange rates of five 
real stock markets and it is revealed that the ASONN-GA model achieves better 
forecasting accuracy over other state of the art models.
Chapter 11
Hybrid Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm: II-Neural Network 
Approach.............................................................................................................264
Sankhadeep Chatterjee, University of Calcutta, India
Sarbartha Sarkar, Indian Institute of Technology Dhanbad, India
Nilanjan Dey, Techno India College of Technology, India
Amira S. Ashour, Tanta University, Egypt
Soumya Sen, University of Calcutta, India
Water pollution due to industrial and domestic reasons is highly affecting the water 
quality. In undeveloped and developed countries, it has become a major reason 
behind a number of water borne diseases. Poor public health is putting an extra 
economic liability in order to deploy precautionary measures against these diseases. 
Recent research works have been directed toward more sustainable solutions to 
this problem. It has been revealed that good quality of water supply can not only 
improve the public health, it also accelerates economic growth of a geographical 
location as well. Water quality prediction using machine learning methods is still 
at its primitive stage. Besides, most of the studies did not follow any national or 
international standard for water quality prediction. In the current work, both the 
problems have been addressed. First, advanced machine learning methods, namely 
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) supported by a well-known multi-objective 
optimization algorithm called the Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm-II 
(NSGA-II) has been used to classify the water samples into two different classes. 
Secondly, Indian national standard for water quality (IS 10500:2012) has been utilized 
for this classification task. The hybrid NN-NSGA-II model is compared with another 
two well-known meta-heuristic supported ANN classifiers, namely ANN trained 
by Genetic Algorithm (NN-GA) and by Particle Swarm Optimization (NN-PSO). 

﻿
Apart from that, the support vector machine (SVM) has also been included in the 
comparative study. Besides analysing the performance based on several performance 
measuring methods, the statistical significance of the results obtained by NN-NSGA-
II has been judged by performing Wilcoxon rank sum test with 5% confidence level. 
Results have indicated the ingenuity of the proposed NN-NSGA-II model over the 
other classifiers under current study.
Compilation of References............................................................................... 287
About the Contributors.................................................................................... 325
Index................................................................................................................... 333

Preface
INTRODUCTION
Recently, researchers have attracted to study the nature laws as a good source for 
inspiration of effective meta-heuristic algorithms to provide optimal solutions to 
develop intelligent systems and complicated problems. Meta-heuristic algorithms 
have long history back to evolutionary computing and genetic algorithms. Natural 
phenomena as well as animal behaviors inspired nature-inspired algorithms, such 
as genetic algorithms, particle swarm optimization algorithms, artificial bee colony 
algorithms, ant colony optimization algorithms and differential evolution algorithms 
that have been widely applied in various domains. The living creatures’ ways, 
such as interaction, movement, and adaption to their environments offer ideas for 
meta-heuristic designs. Due to their established competence and merits in realizing 
novel and optimal solutions for complex problems, nature-inspired algorithms have 
fascinated engineers’ and researchers’ attention in numerous engineering fields.
The meta-heuristic algorithms prevalence is established in several applications 
for different domains, such as financial optimisation, engineering design, computer 
network routing and scheduling. These applications are carried out to solve several 
types of problems, including large-scaled, continuous/discrete/ mixed, combinatorial, 
multimodal optimisation problems. Different concepts and components in different 
meta-heuristics algorithms in order to analyze their similarities and differences 
are considered in this book. In addition, this book includes up-to-date approaches 
in the domain of nature-inspired algorithms and their engineering applications. It 
intends a set of high-quality and leading contributions on proposed algorithms, 
technologies and concepts that use meta-heuristic algorithm algorithms in several 
research areas. The book focuses on exploring different applications for the meta-
heuristics optimization algorithms in several applications.
xvi

Preface
OBJECTIVE OF THE BOOK
This book considers the foremost optimization algorithms in several applications. 
It deals primarily with methods and approaches that include meta-heuristics for 
further systems improvements. This book grants substantial frameworks and the most 
contemporary empirical research outcomes in employing optimization algorithms. 
It is edited for researchers, academicians, advanced-level students, and technology 
developers and professionals working in various disciplines.
ORGANIZATION OF THE BOOK
The book contains 11 chapters that are organized in two sections as shown below. 
The first eight chapters outline the various meta-heuristic optimization algorithms 
in different applications. The second section includes three chapters focusing on 
the genetic algorithms concept and applications in several domains.
Section 1: Meta-Heuristic Optimization-Algorithms-
Based Advanced Applications (Chapters 1-8)
This section elaborated different meta-heuristic algorithms for solving multi-objective 
problems. Another context is introduced related to predicting the traffic quality 
of services in WiMAX network supported by optimization algorithms. Contrast 
enhancement is also proposed using modified Chaotic Differential Evolution along 
with Fractal Dimension and Quality Index based on Local Variance objective function. 
In the medical domain, the role of the intelligent computing and the optimization 
algorithms is also covered.
Chapter 1
This chapter included meta-heuristic optimization algorithms have been conducted 
to solve multi- objective optimal power flow problem in the presence of Unified 
power flow controller. The results demonstrated the proposed approach robustness 
with the Unified power flow controller. Firefly algorithm, BAT algorithm, and 
cuckoo search algorithm provided less total generation cost compared to differential 
evaluation algorithm based optimal power flow.
xvii

Preface
Chapter 2
The real and non-real time multimedia applications have a significant role in the 
WiMAX network. This chapter is carried out to develop a mathematical expression 
for the network throughput by considering average end-to-end delay, bandwidth, 
and average jitter. An efficient traffic QoS prediction mechanism for the WiMAX 
networks is proposed based on Gene Expression Programming technique.
Chapter 3
This current chapter introduced parameterized Bi-histogram fuzzy contrast stretching 
method to enhance the image crucially by preserving its original brightness based 
on associated three parameters with diverse ranges.
Chapter 4
In biological systems, protein motifs have a significant role to study their characteristics. 
For the unsupervised protein sequences data, clustering approaches are proposed for 
protein motif prediction in this chapter. The bio-inspired computing models, such as 
the particle swarm optimization and genetic algorithms based k-means are proposed.
Chapter 5
In industry automation, tool wear prediction is imperative to achieve higher 
productivity and acceptable product quality. This chapter developed the genetic 
equation in machining process, where the variation of chip radius at different stages 
of progressive tool wear for the inter-relationships is measured. The chip radius 
reduction with tool wear progression shows a consistent pattern for the flat faced 
tool under all used cutting conditions.
Chapter 6
Intelligent computing methods have great impact in the biomedical image analysis 
and healthcare. In this chapter, different artificial intelligence based automated 
biomedical image analysis. Different diagnostic analysis using feed-forward back 
propagation neural network are considered. Various optimization techniques, such 
as ant colony optimization, genetic algorithm, particle swarm optimization and 
other bio-inspired procedures are also frequently conducted for feature extraction/
selection and classification.
xviii

Preface
Chapter 7
The Proportional-Integral-Derivative (PID) controller is used as a secondary 
controller in addition to the Superconducting Magnetic Energy Storage (SMES) unit. 
This chapter proposed an Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) algorithm to tune PID 
controller gain values of multi-interconnected thermal power system. A comparative 
study is conducted to compare the system response with and without considering 
SMES unit in the system.
Chapter 8
Artificial intelligence is the core of computer science apprehensive with creating 
computers that perform as humans. Accurate diseases analysis, magnetic resonance 
imaging, computed tomography images and images of other modalities segmentation 
remains a challenging problem. Image segmentation is employed for abnormalities 
volumetric analysis in medical images to identify the disease nature. Recently, 
meta-heuristic algorithms are conducted to support the segmentation techniques. 
This chapter addresses different segmentation procedures. Several meta-heuristic 
approaches are reported with highlights on their procedures. Finally, several medical 
applications using meta-heuristic based-approaches for segmentation are discussed.
Section 2: Genetic Algorithm Applications (Chapters 9-11)
Genetic algorithms have various applications in several domains. This section 
reports the Genetic algorithms fundamental algorithm as applied in several real-
life applications. It highlights the use of multi-objective genetic algorithm as well 
for water quality prediction. In addition, this section discussed the financial time 
series prediction using the genetic algorithm to support the adaptive second order 
neural network.
Chapter 9
This chapter proposed a new crossover operator called Jump Crossover (JMPX) to 
solve the travelling salesmen problem using a genetic algorithm for near-optimal 
solutions. The path representation technique for the chromosome which is the most 
direct representation and a low mutation rate to isolate the search space exploration 
ability of each crossover is adopted.
xix

Preface
Chapter 10
Financial time series forecasting is a challenging issue that requires efficient prediction 
system. In this chapter, the performance of an adaptive single layer second order 
neural network based on the genetic algorithm is evaluated. The efficiency of the 
propose model is evaluated by forecasting one-step-ahead closing prices.
Chapter 11
Polluted water is a major reason behind several community diseases, mainly in 
undeveloped and developing countries. Measuring and detecting the drinking water 
quality can prevent such scenarios prior to the critical stage. In this chapter, a multi-
objective genetic algorithm is used to train the artificial neural network to improve 
its performance over its traditional counterparts. The proposed model gradually 
minimizes two different objective functions; namely root mean square error and 
maximum error in order for finding the optimal weight vector for the neural network.
Nilanjan Dey
Techno India College of Technology, India
xx

Acknowledgment
I am prominently grateful to my parents, to my daughter, to my wife and to my 
family for their boundless support, and love. I commit this book to all of them 
as well as to all peoples who read, support, share and offered comments through 
the book journey. Furthermore, I am obliged to all the authors who offer in time 
seamless knowledge and skills.
Special thanks to Prof. Peng-Yeng Yin the Editor-in-Chief of the International 
Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing for recommending my name as a book 
editor under the large volume summation project.
Lastly, I appreciate the IGI Global team for their continuous support. My gratitude 
is extended to the readers, who gave me their trust, and I hope this work guides and 
inspires them.
Nilanjan Dey
Techno India College of Technology, India
xxi

Section 1
Meta-Heuristic 
Optimization-
Algorithms-Based 
Advanced Applications

Copyright © 2018, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  1
1
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-4151-6.ch001
ABSTRACT
In this chapter a multi objective optimal power flow (OPF) is obtained by using 
latest Metaheuristic optimization techniques BAT search algorithm (BAT), cuckoo 
search algorithm (CSA) and firefly algorithm (FA) with Unified power flow controller 
(UPFC). UPFC is a voltage source converter type Flexible Alternating Current 
Transmission System (FACTS) device. It is able to control the voltage magnitudes, 
voltage angles and line impedances individually or simultaneously. To enhance the 
power system performance, the optimal power flow has been incorporated UPFC 
Multi-Objective Optimal Power 
Flow Using Metaheuristic 
Optimization Algorithms 
With Unified Power Flow 
Controller to Enhance the 
Power System Performance
G. V. Nagesh Kumar
Vignans Institute of Information Technology (Autonomous), India
B. Venkateswara Rao
V. R. Siddhartha Engineering College (Autonomous), India
D. Deepak Chowdary
Dr. L. Bullayya College of Engineering, India
Polamraju V. S. Sobhan
Vignan’s Foundation for Science, Technology, and Research University, India

2
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
INTRODUCTION
Due to economic growth the demand of electric power has been increased drastically 
which needs optimal operation in Power systems. Optimal power flow is the one 
strategy for minimizing the real power generation cost and losses in transmission 
lines. The transmission line losses can be further reduced by installing FACTS 
controllers. The variables and parameter of the transmission line, which include line 
reactance, voltage magnitude, and phase angle are able to be controlled using FACTS 
controllers in a fast and effective way. Controlling power flows is the main function 
of FACTS controllers (Acha et al., 2004; Jirapong, 2013). According to the IEEE 
definition, FACTS is defined as “The Flexible AC Transmission System(FACTS) is 
a new technology based on power electronic devices which offers an opportunity to 
enhance controllability, stability and power transfer capability of AC Transmission 
Systems” (Hingorani, 2000; Edris, 2000).
The Flexible AC Transmission System (FACTS) is a transmission system 
which use reliable high-speed thyristor based controllable elements such as SVC, 
TCSC, and UPFC etc. are designed based on state of the art developments in power 
semiconductor devices. Issues include increased utilization of existing facilities such 
as secure system operation at higher power transfers across existing transmission 
lines which are limited by stability constraints, the development of control designs 
for FACTS devices, and determination of functional performance requirements for 
FACTS components. The reactive power compensation of AC transmission systems 
using fixed series or shunt capacitors can solve some of the problems associated 
with AC networks. However the slow nature of control using mechanical switches 
(circuit breaker) and limits on the frequency of switching imply that faster dynamic 
controls are required to overcome the above mentioned problems. (Hammons and 
Lim, 1997) presented a review literature, which addresses the application of FACTS, 
concepts for the improvement of power system utilization and performance. Recent 
developments involving deregulation and restructuring of the power industry is feasible 
only if the operation of AC transmission systems is made flexible by introducing 
along with BAT algorithm, cuckoo search algorithm and firefly algorithm based 
multi objective function comprising of two objectives those are total real power loss 
and the fuel cost of total real power generation. The BAT algorithm, cuckoo search 
algorithm and firefly algorithm based OPF has been examined and tested on a 5 bus 
test system and modified IEEE 30 bus system without and with UPFC. The results 
obtained with BAT algorithm, cuckoo search algorithm and firefly algorithms are 
compared with Differential Evaluation (DE).

3
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
FACTS devices. In view of increased power demand, power engineers are looking 
for ways to better utilize their existing transmission systems. The system loadability 
and stability margins also need to be improved. In recent years, advances in the 
power electronic devices, have led to the development of controllers that provide 
controllability and flexibility for power transmission. Flexible AC Transmission 
System controllers have been developed and their usage in controlling power 
transmission is seen to be increasing now a days. Among FACTS controllers, UPFC 
is a versatile device that plays the vital function of controlling all power system 
parameters simultaneously. The primary function of the UPFC device is to control 
the load flow of the power system.
Optimal power flow (OPF) is an important tool for power system operation, 
control and planning. It was first introduced by (Dommel and Tinney, 1968). The 
main purpose of an OPF program is calculating the optimal operating point of a 
power system and setting the variables that optimize a certain objective function 
while satisfying power flow equations, inequality and equality constraints. The 
optimal power flow (OPF) is a power flow problem in which certain variables 
are adjusted to minimize an objective function such as cost of the active power 
generation and the real power losses explained in (Tinney, 1968). Over the last 
three decades, many successful OPF techniques have been developed such as, the 
generalized reduced gradient method (Stagg, 1968), linear programming solution, 
quadratic programming, the Newton method (Carpentier, 1979), the Interior Point 
Method (IPM), Genetic Algorithm (GA), Evolutionary Programming, Differential 
Evolutionary algorithm etc. After obtaining the OPF solution (Sun, 1984 ; Kumar 
Roy, 2013), the implementation of the optimal control variables will bring the 
system to the “optimum” state (Kundur P,1993 ; Chung, T. S., & Li, Y. Z, 2001).
In recent past so many authors use the meta heuristic algorithms for various 
applications like medical, image processing, wireless sensor networks to optimize 
their parameters. In this (Dey, N., Samanta, S., Chakraborty, S., Das, A., Chaudhuri, 
S. S., & Suri, J. S., 2014) presents, the use of firefly algorithm in medical applications, 
it is one of the modern nature-inspired meta-heuristic algorithm. This algorithm is 
used to find the best possible scaling factors for embedding of manifold medical 
information. In this (Dey, N., Samanta, S., Yang, X. S., Das, A., & Chaudhuri, S. S., 
2013), propose a new approach to design a robust biomedical content authentication 
system by embedding logo of the hospital within the electrocardiogram signal by 
means of both discrete wavelet transformation and cuckoo search (CS). An adaptive 
meta-heuristic cuckoo search is used to find the optimal scaling factor settings for 
logo embedding. For the purpose of overcome the difficulties in Wireless Sensor 
Networks (Binh, H. T. T., Hanh, N. T., & Dey, N.,2016) proposed two nature-based 
algorithms, namely Improved Cuckoo Search (ICS) and Chaotic Flower Pollination 
algorithm (CFPA). Those two algorithms are able to improve their performance of 

4
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
the Wireless Sensor Network . In this (Samantaa, S., Dey, N., Das, P., Acharjee, S., 
& Chaudhuri, S. S., 2013) proposed, multilevel thresholding technique has been 
used for image segmentation. A new approach of Cuckoo Search (CS) is used for 
selection of optimal threshold value. In 2015 (Ashour, A. S., Samanta, S., Dey, N., 
Kausar, N., Abdessalemkaraa, W. B., & Hassanien, A. E., 2015) says to achieve 
accurate diagnosis, medical image enhancement is a must for noise removal and 
sharp/clear images. In this work, a well-known meta-heuristic algorithm, namely: 
Cuckoo search (CS) algorithm is used to determine the optimal parameter settings 
for log transform. (Dey, N., Chakraborty, S., & Samanta, S., 2014) The author has 
used embedding of watermark within biomedical signal as the optimization problem, 
which is solved using Particle Swarm Optimization and Genetic Algorithm based 
techniques. (Hore, S., Chatterjee, S., Santhi, V., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Balas, V. E., 
& Shi, F., 2017) recently use three novel methods to solve the problem of recognition 
of ISL gestures effectively by combining Neural Network (NN) with Genetic 
Algorithm (GA), Evolutionary algorithm (EA) and Particle Swarm Optimization 
(PSO) separately to attain novel NN-GA, NN-EA and NN-PSO methods; respectively. 
In 2015, the authors (Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Beagum, S., Pistola, D. S., Gospodinov, 
M., Gospodinova, Е. P., & Tavares, J. M. R., 2015) proposed a novel technique for 
parameter optimization of LPA-ICI filter using genetic algorithm (GA) for brain 
MR images de-noising. From the above literature it is indicate that cuckoo search 
algorithm and firefly algorithm are used for various applications effectively as 
compared to other algorithms like PSO and genetic algorithm. .
In (H. Am briz-Perez E.Acha C.R. Fuerte-Esquivel A.De la Torre, 1998), has 
been showed the issue of UPFC modeling within the context of OPF solutions. The 
nonlinear optimization problem is solved by newton’s method leading to highly robust 
iterative solutions even for cases of large scale power networks, where hundreds of 
variables are to be optimized is presented in literature. It is presented the literature 
that networks modified to include several UPFCs are solved with equal reliability. 
The UPFC model itself is very flexible; it allows the control of active and reactive 
powers and voltage magnitude simultaneously. It can also be set to control one or 
more of these parameters in any combination or to control none of them. Considerable 
progress has been achieved in UPFC modeling intended for conventional load flow 
studies but this is the first time that the more complex issue of UPFC modeling 
intended for OPF solutions has been addressed in literature. (RR Aparna, 2016), 
explains the use of swarm intelligence techniques for different applications. In 2016 
(Dung A. Le & Dieu N. Vo, 2016), uses a cuckoo search algorithm (CSA) to solve 
the optimal reactive power dispatch (ORPD) problem in power system operation 
considering the power loss and voltage deviation. The advantages of the CSA 
method are few control parameters and high optimal solution quality. The objective 
of the ORPD problem is to minimize real power losses or bus voltage deviation 

5
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
satisfying equality and inequality constraints of real and reactive power balance. In 
this the authors use the single objective function for solving ORPD problem. Static 
synchronous series compensator (SSSC) is one of the most effective flexible AC 
transmission systems (FACTS) devices used for enhancing power system security. 
Optimal location and sizing of SSSC are investigated for solving the optimal reactive 
power dispatch (ORPD) problem in order to minimize the active power loss in the 
transmission networks. Optimal reactive power dispatch (ORPD), a sub problem of 
optimal power flow (OPF), has significant influence on the economic and secure 
operation of power systems. (Susanta Dutta, Provas Kumar Roy & Debashis Nandi, 
2016) use chemical reaction optimization (CRO) to solve the above problem with 
minimization of single objective function.
(Aparajita Mukherjee, Sourav Paul & Provas Kumar Roy, 2015) solve the Transient 
stability constrained optimal power flow (TSC-OPF) is a non-linear optimization 
problem which is not easy to deal directly because of its huge dimension. In order 
to solve the TSC-OPF problem efficiently, a relatively new optimization technique 
named teaching learning based optimization (TLBO) is proposed. TLBO algorithm 
simulates the teaching–learning phenomenon of a classroom to solve multi-
dimensional, linear and nonlinear problems with appreciable efficiency. In 2014 the 
authors (Samiksha Goel, Arpita Sharma and V. K. Panchal, 2014), use Anticipatory 
Multi objective Cuckoo Search (AMOCS) algorithm to identify the best probable 
location for deployment of enemy forces. For the second phase a hybrid CS-ACO 
algorithm is developed for obtaining the most suitable path to the location identified 
in the first phase. Results demonstrate that the system makes accurate predictions 
with multi objective cuckoo search algorithm.
The UPFC is an advanced power systems device capable of providing 
simultaneous control of voltage magnitude and active and reactive power flows, 
all this in adaptive fashion. Owing to its almost instantaneous speed of response 
and unrivalled functionality, it is well placed to solve most issues relating to power 
flow control while enhancing considerably transient and dynamic stability.Multi-
objective Evolutionary Algorithms (MOEAs) have started receiving attention from 
researchers to handle Multi-objective Problems (MOPs). Although the first MOEA 
was published in the mid-eighties (Schaffer, 1985), a substantial progress has been 
observed in the past decade. In case of a multi-objective optimization problem 
with conflicting objective, instead of a single optimal solution that satisfies all the 
objectives, a number of solutions, which indicate the trade-off between the multiple 
objectives, exist. (Rahul Khandelwal, J. Senthilnath, S. N. Omkar and Narendra 
Shivanath, 2016). So this indicates that the multi objective function give better results 
than single objective function. Nature inspired algorithms are used over the past 
decade that provide efficient methods to resolve optimization problem that were not 
possible with the conventional methods. The main advantage with these algorithms 

6
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
is that they perform iterative searches efficiently in this context present comparative 
analysis of three metaheuristic algorithms namely –Firefly, Bat, and Cuckoo search 
are presented in this chapter. Out of these algorithms firefly algorithm has High 
convergences rate, robust rate. Finds good optimum solutions in less number of 
iterations, Bat algorithm is accurate and efficient and cuckoo search algorithm is 
simpler in implementation.
In this chapter Meta heuristic optimization algorithm has been used for solving 
multi objective OPF problem incorporating UPFC. The aims of this chapter choose 
the best values for all the generator buses and the impact of UPFC on generation 
reallocation. To minimize the real power generation cost and active power losses 
in the system, multi objective function is considered and it is minimized subject 
to power balance constraint, active and reactive power generation limits, voltage 
limits, transmission line limits and UPFC parameter limits. A comprehensive UPFC 
model suitable for Meta heuristic optimization algorithm based OPF solutions is 
presented and analyzed in this chapter. Computer simulations using MATLAB were 
done for 5 bus test system and modified IEEE 30 bus system. The obtained results 
are compared with Differential Evolution (DE).
The remaining organization of the chapter is as follows. Section 2 presents 
the UPFC; Section 3 presents multi objective OPF problem formulation. The 
implementation of Meta heuristic optimization algorithms to the problem is given 
in Section 4. Numerical results and discussion are followed in Section 5. Section 
6 presents’ future research directions finally, the conclusion is given in section 7.
UNIFIED POWER FLOW CONTROLLER
Gyugyi proposed the unified power flow controller (UPFC) concept in 1991 
(Gyugi L, 1991; Lashkar Ara, 2012). UPFC device is used for the real time control 
and dynamic compensation of ac transmission system, providing multifunctional 
flexibility required solving many of the problems facing the delivery industry. 
UPFC provides multifunctional control to solve reactive power compensation and 
voltage stability enhancement problems in the power system. The UPFC is capable 
of controlling multiple aspects of the power systems, viz., voltage magnitude, line 
impedance and phase angle either individually or in combination thus improving 
the performance of the systems. Hence the term ‘unified’ has been designated. The 
device is an amalgamation of a shunt connected Static Synchronous Compensator 
(STATCOM) and a series connected Static Synchronous Series Compensator (SSSC). 
The combination of above two devices is UPFC. In UPFC exchange of real and 
reactive has been obtained through shared DC linkage. It is also capable of generation 
or absorption of controlled reactive power, thus providing autonomous shunt reactive 

7
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
compensation. The UPFC not only performs the functions of STATCOM, SSSC, 
and the phase angle regulator but also provides additional flexibility by combining 
some of the functions of these controllers (Tiwari, 2012; Gyugyi, 1995).
The main components of the UPFC are two voltage source inverters (VSIs) 
sharing a common dc storage capacitor, and connected to the power system through 
coupling transformers. One VSI is connected in shunt to the transmission system via 
a shunt transformer and it is used for voltage regulation at the point of connection 
injecting required reactive power flow into the line and to balance the real power 
flow exchanged between the series inverter and the transmission line, while the other 
one is connected in series through a series transformer and it can be used to control 
the real and reactive line power flow inserting required voltage with controllable 
magnitude and phase in series with the transmission line (Padiyar., 1998; Padiyar K.R 
et.al 1999). Thereby, the UPFC can fulfill functions of reactive shunt compensation, 
series compensation and phase shifting. This arrangement functions as an ideal ac 
to ac power converter in which the real power can freely flow in either direction 
between the ac terminals of two converters and each converter can independently 
generate or absorb reactive power at its own ac output terminals.
Figure 1. Block diagram of FACTS controllers

8
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
The concept of UPFC makes it possible to handle practically all the power flow 
control and transmission lines compensation problems using solid-state controllers 
that provide functional flexibility which are generally not obtained by thyristor-
controlled controllers (Sanbao Zheng, 2000).
UPFC voltage sources are written in equations 1 & 2
V
j
vR
vR
vR
(cos
sin
)
δ
δ
+
	
(1)
Figure 2. Basic circuit arrangement of Unified Power Flow controller
Figure 3. Basic scheme of UPFC

9
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
V
j
cR
cR
cR
(cos
sin
)
δ
δ
+
	
(2)
Where VvR and δ vR are the controllable voltage magnitude and phase angle of 
the voltage source representing the shunt converter. Similarly, VcR and δ cR are the 
controllable voltage magnitude and phase angle of the voltage source representing 
the series converter. The source impedance is considered to be resistance less.
The active and reactive power equations are
At bus k
P
VV B
VV B
VV B
k
k
m
km
k
m
k
cR
km
k
cR
k
vR
vR
=
−
+
−
+
[
sin(
)]
[
sin(
)]
[
sin(
θ
θ
θ
δ
θ
δ
k
vR
−
)]
	
(3)
Q
V
B
VV B
VV B
V
k
k
kk
k
m
km
k
m
k
cR
km
k
cR
= −
−
−
−
−
^2 
- [
cos(
)]
[
cos(
)]
[
θ
θ
θ
δ
k
vR
vR
k
vR
V B
cos(
)]
θ
δ
−
	
(4)
Figure 4. Equivalent circuit of the Unified Power Flow Controller

10
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
At bus m
P
V V B
V V B
m
m
k
mk
m
k
m
cR
mm
m
cR
=
−
+
−
[
sin(
)]
[
sin(
)]
θ
θ
θ
δ
	
(5)
Q
V
B
V V B
V V B
m
m
mm
m
k
mk
m
k
m
cR
mm
m
cR
= −
−
−
−
^2 
- [
cos(
)]
[
cos(
)]
θ
θ
θ
δ
	
(6)
At Series converter:
P
V V B
V V B
cR
cR
k
km
cR
k
m
cR
mm
cR
m
=
−
+
−
[
sin(
)]
[
sin(
)]
δ
θ
δ
θ
	
(7)
Q
V
B
VV B
V V B
cR
cR
mm
k
cR
km
k
cR
m
cR
mm
m
cR
= −
−
−
−
^2 
- [
cos(
)]
[
cos(
)
θ
δ
θ
δ
]	
(8)
At Shunt converter:
P
V V B
vR
vR
k
vR
nR
k
=
−
[
sin(
)]
δ
θ
	
(9)
Q
V
B
V V B
vR
vR
vR
vR
k
vR
vR
k
=
−
^2 
- [
cos(
)]
δ
θ
	
(10)
The starting values of the UPFC voltage sources are taken to be Vcr =0.06 p.u, δcr 
=900, Vvr =1 p.u. and δvr = 00. The source impedances are taken as Zcr =Zvr = 0.1 p.u.
PROBLEM FORMULATION
Objective Function
For a given system load, find the best configuration of UPFC device and real power 
generation of the generating stations based on the minimizing the multi objective 
function consisting of total real power generation fuel cost and total real power 
losses. The objective function that is used in OPF problem formulation consists of 
minimization of real power generation cost and minimization of real power losses. 
Mathematically, the objective function can be written as:

11
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
Min F
Min W *FC
W *FPLoss
=
+
(
)
1
2
	
(11)
Where w1, w2 are the weighting factors,   
W
W
1
2
1
+
=
	
(12)
W1=W2= 0.5	
•	
Fuel cost of Total Real Power Generation:
The objective function considering the minimization of total real power generation 
cost can be represented by following quadratic equation
FC
a P
b P
c
i
Gi
i
Gi
i
i
ng
=
+
+
=∑
min(
)
2
1
	
(13)
Where ng= no of generator busesa, b, c are the fuel cost coefficients of a 
generator unit
•	
Total Real Power Loss:
This objective consists of minimizing the real power losses in the transmission 
lines. It can be expressed as
F
P
real S
S
PLoss
Loss
k
ntl
ij
k
ji
k
=
(
) =
+






=∑
min
min
(
)
1
	
(14)
Where ntl=no. Of transmission lines
Sij is the total complex power flow from bus i to bus j in line k.
•	
Equality constraints:
P
P
P
Gi
i
N
Di
L
i
N
=
=
∑
∑
=
+
1
1
	
(15)

12
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
•	
Inequality constraints:
V
V
V
Gi
Gi
Gi
min
max
≤
≤
	
(16)
P
P
P
Gi
Gi
Gi
min
max
≤
≤
	
(17)
Q
Q
Q
Gi
Gi
Gi
min
max
≤
≤
	
(18)
•	
UPFC device limits:
V
V
V
vr
min
vr
vr
max
≤
≤
	
(19)
Vvr is the shunt converter voltage magnitude (p.u)
V
V
V
cr
min
cr
cr
max
≤
≤
	
(20)
Vcr is the series converter voltage magnitude (p.u)
Where PL is the real power loss in the system, PGi is the real power generation 
at bus i, PDi is the power demand at bus i, N and Ng are the number of buses and 
number of generator buses in the system respectively.
META HEURISTIC OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHMS
Bat Algorithm
In this paper we use a nature inspired metaheuristic method based on the echolocation 
behavior of bats. That is called BAT algorithm which is developed by Xin-She Yang 
in 2010. Bats are fascinating animals. They are the only mammals with wings and 
they also have advanced capability of echolocation. Most of bats use echolocation 
to a certain degree; the capability of echolocation of micro bats is fascinating as 
these bats can find their prey and discriminate different types of insects even in 
complete darkness. Among all the species, micro bats are famous example as micro 
bats use echolocation extensively, while mega bats do not. Micro bats use a type of 
sonar, called echolocation, avoid obstacles, to detect prey, and locate their roosting 

13
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
crevices in the dark. We will first formulate The BAT algorithm by idealizing the 
echolocation behavior of bats. These bats emit a very loud sound pulse and listen for 
the echo that bounces back from surrounding objects. Bat algorithm is developed by 
idealizing some of the characteristics of micro bats. The approximated or idealized 
rules are (Yang, 2008):
1. 	
All bats use echolocation to sense distance and they also know the difference 
between food/prey and barriers in some magical way.
2. 	
Bats fly randomly with velocity vi at position xi with a fixed frequency fmin, 
varying wavelength λ and loudness A0 to search for prey. They can automatically 
adjust the wavelength (or frequency) of their emitted pulses and the rate of 
pulse emission r ϵ [0,1] depending on the proximity of the target.
3. 	
Loudness varies from a large positive A0 to a minimum constant value Amin.
Population
The initial population i.e., number of virtual bats for BAT algorithm is generated 
randomly. The number of bats can be anywhere between 10 and 40. After finding the 
initial fitness of the population for given objective function, the values are updated 
based on movement, loudness and pulse rate.
Movement of Virtual Bats
The rules for updating the positions xi and velocities vi of the virtual bats are given 
as (22)
f
f
f
f
i =
+
−
min
max
min
(
)β 	
(21)
v
v
x
x
f
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
=
+
−
−
∗
1
(
) 	
(22)
x
x
v
i
t
i
t
i
t
=
+
−1
	
(23)
Where, β  ∈ [0, 1] is a random vector drawn from a uniform distribution. Here 
x* is the current global best location (solution) which is located after comparing all 
the solutions among all the n bats. A new solution for each bat is generated locally 
using random walk given by equation (24)

14
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
x
x
A
new
old
t
=
+ ε
	
(24)
Where ε∈ [−1, 1] is a random number, while At =<Ait > is the average loudness 
of all the bats at this time step. Based on these approximations and idealization, the 
basic steps of the Bat Algorithm can be summarized as the pseudo code shown here. 
(Venkateswara Rao B et.al, 2014; Yang, X.-S, 2010)
Bat Algorithm
Objective function f(x), x = (x1,x2, ..., xd)T
Initialize the bat population xii (ii = 1, 2, ..., n) and vii
Define pulse frequency fii at xii
Initialize pulse rates rii and the loudness Aii
while (t <Max number of iterations)
Generate a new solution by changing frequency,
And modifying velocities and solutions
if (rand > rii)
Select a best solution in the available solutions
Create a local solution around the selected best solution
end if
Create a new solution by flying randomly
if (rand < Aii & f(xii) < f(xo))
Accept the new solutions
Increase rii and reduce Aii
end if
Rank the bats and find the current best xo
End while
Post process results and visualization
Pseudo code of the BAT algorithm.
Loudness and Pulse Emission
The loudness Ai and the rate of pulse emission ri are updated accordingly as the 
iterations proceed. The loudness decreases and rate of pulse emission increases as 
the bat closes on its prey i.e., the equations for convergence can be taken as (25)
A
A
i
t
i
t
+ =
1
α
	
(25)

15
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
R
r
t
i
t
i
+ =
−
−
1
0 1[
exp(
)]
γ
	
(26)
Where α and γ are constants.
The initial loudness A0 can typically be (1, 2), while the initial emission rate 
ri
0 can be (0, 1).
Firefly Algorithm
The Firefly algorithm was developed by Dr Xin-She Yang at Cambridge University 
in 2007. FA is based on natural behaviour of the firefly, developed for solving the 
multimodal optimization problem [Yang, 2009; X. S. Yang, 2010]. Fireflies called 
as lighting bugs, are one of the most special and fascinating creatures in nature. 
For simplicity, the following three ideal rules are introduced in FA development 
those are 1) All the fireflies are gender-free that is every firefly will attract the 
other firefly substantive of their sex, 2) Attractiveness depend on their brightness. 
The less bright one will move towards the brighter one, 3) the landscape of the 
objective function affects the firefly brightness [Dey, N., Samanta, S., Chakraborty, 
S., Das, A., Chaudhuri, S. S., & Suri, J. S. (2014)]. Let us consider the continuous 
constrained optimization problem where the task is to minimize multi objective 
function f(x). Firefly algorithm is a dynamic converging algorithm. The solution 
for the algorithm depends on the selection of swarm size, maximum attractiveness 
value, the absorption coefficient value and the iteration limit. The basic steps of the 
FA can be summarized by the pseudo code [Lukasik S and Zak, 2009].
Firefly Algorithm
Objective function f(x), x = (x1,…,xd)T
Generate initial population of fireflies xii (i=1, 2…, n)
Light intensity Iii at xii is determined by f(xii)
Define light absorption coefficient γ
while (t < MaxGeneration)
for ii = 1: n all n fireflies
for jj = 1: ii all n fireflies
if (Ijj > Iii), More firefly ii towards jj in d-dimension; end if
Attractiveness varies with distance r
Evaluate new solutions and modify the light intensity
end for jj
end for ii
Rank all the fireflies and find the current best firefly

16
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
end while
Post process results and visualization
Pseudo code of the FA.
Cuckoo Search Algorithm
Yang and Deb developed a population-based optimization algorithm, based on the 
brood parasitism of some cuckoo species in nature and named as a Cuckoo search 
algorithm. This method simulates the actions of the female Cuckoo bird to lay her 
egg into the neighbour’s nest. This method also considers the probability that the 
host bird finds out and abandons the Cuckoo egg. A recent study says that Cuckoo 
search algorithm gives better results as compared to other meta heuristics methods 
(Dey, N., Samanta, S., Yang, X. S., Das, A., & Chaudhuri, S. S., 2013).
The pseudo code of the cuckoo search algorithm is presented in (Dung A. Le & 
Dieu N. Vo, 2016) based on three main stages as below:
•	
Initialization: There is a population of Np host nests generated. This stage 
is corresponding to the phenomenon that cuckoo bird lays its eggs in nests of 
other species.
•	
The First New Solution Generation: This stage is to generate the first new 
solutions via Levy Flights corresponding to the case that host birds do not 
discover alien eggs in their nest and Cuckoo eggs will be hatched and carried 
over to the next generation.
•	
The Second New Solution Generation: This stage aims to generate the 
second new solutions corresponding to the case that the host birds discover 
Cuckoo eggs as alien ones in their nest and host bird will throw Cuckoo eggs 
away the nest or forsake both Cuckoo eggs and their nest.
A random set of solution is generated using Levy flight algorithm:
i
t
i
t
x
x
Levy y
+ =
+
⊕
1
α
( )	
(27)
Above equation is the stochastic equation of a random walk whose next step 
depends on current location (the first term) and the transition probability (the second 
term). α is the step size, the product means entry wise multiplications. Levy flight 
provides a random walk whose random step length is drawn from Levy distribution:
Levy
t
≠
<
<
_ ,(
)
λ
λ
1
3 	
(28)

17
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
Steps form a random walk process with a power-law step length distribution with 
a heavy tail. Objective function with this new set is also evaluated. If new objective 
function is better than old one, a portion Pa of new set is replaces an equivalent 
random set of the initial solution. The process is repeated until the maximum number 
of epochs is reached. Initial set of nests (n nests) may vary from 15 to 40 and Pa 
of 0.25 are suitable values for most optimization problems [Samantaa, S., Dey, N., 
Das, P., Acharjee, S., & Chaudhuri, S. S. (2013)].
Overall Procedure
The overall procedure of the CSA for solving the optimization problem is described 
in detail as follows.
Step 1: Read the power system bus data and line data for power flow calculations.
Step 2: Select the real power generation of all the PV buses and UPFC parameters 
as a control variables also select the number of nests Np, the maximum number 
of iterations Itermax and probability pa. Initialize a population of host nests.
Step 3: Get a cuckoo randomly/ generate solution by Levy flights algorithm and 
evaluate its objective function.
Step 4: Perform bound by best solution mechanism as described in algorithm to 
repair solutions violating upper or lower limitation.
Step 5: Generate the new solutions thank to the action of alien eggs to be abandoned 
and replace the old solution by the new one.
Step 6: Get the best nest Gbest for the current iteration.
Step 7: If the best nest Gbest at the current iteration is not better than that of the 
previous iteration, obtain the new value of the one rank ratio. Otherwise, retain 
the old value.
Step 8: If Iter < Itermax, Iter = Iter + 1 and return to Step 3. Otherwise, stop the 
procedure.
Step 9: If termination criterion is satisfied, then find the best solution in the search 
space.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this chapter, a 5-bus test system and modified IEEE 30 bus system have been 
considered to demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of BAT algorithm, cuckoo 
search algorithm and firefly algorithm without and with UPFC.

18
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
For 5-Bus System
In 5-bus test system, bus 1 is considered as slack bus, bus 2 is taken as PV bus and 
buses 3, 4, 5 are PQ buses. To include a unified power flow controller an additional 
bus 6 placed in between buses 3 and 4 in the network. It maintains the active and 
reactive powers leaving the UPFC towards the bus 4. The UPFC shunt converter 
is set to regulate bus 3 nodal voltage magnitude at 1 p.u. A MATLAB program 
is implemented for the test system. Twenty runs have been performed for the test 
system. The optimal solution results over these twenty runs have been tabulated. The 
input parameters of BAT algorithm, cuckoo search algorithm and firefly algorithm 
are given in Table 1, Table 2 and Table 3 respectively and the input parameters of 
Differential evaluation are given in Table 4.
Table 1. Input parameters of BAT algorithm
S.No
Parameters
Quantity
1
Population size
20
2
Number of generations
50
3
Loudness
0.5
4
Pulse rate
0.5
Table 2. Input parameters of CSA
S.No
Variable
Value
1
Number of nests
20
2
Iterations Count
50
3
Discovery rate of alien eggs/solutions
0.5
Table 3. Input parameters of Firefly Algorithm
S.No
Parameters
Quantity
1
Number of fireflies
20
2
Max Generation
50
3
Alpha
0.5
4
Beta
0.5
5
Gama
1

19
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
Initially, the optimal power flow solution i.e. active power generation cost and 
power loss for 5-bus system are calculated using proposed BAT algorithm, cuckoo 
search algorithm and firefly algorithm method without UPFC. Next, for the same 
system the optimal power flow solution is obtained using proposed BAT algorithm, 
cuckoo search algorithm and firefly algorithm method with UPFC. The results 
obtained with BAT algorithm, cuckoo search algorithm and firefly algorithm are 
compared with Differential evaluation. The active power generation cost and power 
loss for 5 bus test system without UPFC is shown in Table 5 and Table 6 represents 
the same as above with UPFC. From Table 5 and 6, it can be seen that total active 
power generation required is reduced to 150.0192 MW from 151.3557 MW and 
power loss has been reduced to 5.0192 MW from 6.3557 MW because of UPFC. 
Further, it is observed that there is a significant reduction in the cost because of 
UPFC. From Table 7, it is clear that the voltage profiles has been improved for most 
of buses because of UPFC and The UPFC shunt converter is set to regulate bus 3 
nodal voltage magnitude at 1 p.u.
From the Figure 5 it is observed that by incorporating UPFC in Power flow 
calculations voltage profile has been improved. By placing the UPFC between bus 
no 3 and bus no 4 its voltage at bus no 3 has been increased from 0.9519 to 1 p.u. 
From the Table 8 it is observed that the active power losses are 5.0192 MW when 
the UPFC is placed between bus no 3 and bus no 4 which is the less as compared 
Table 4. Input parameters of differential evaluation
S.No
Parameters
Quantity
1
Population size
20
2
Number of generations
50
3
DE-step size
0.8
4
Crossover probability constant
0.8
Table 5. Comparison in case of OPF without UPFC
Variables
DE-OPF
BAT-OPF
CSA-OPF
FA-OPF
PG1(MW)
139.0764
109.1800
91.0192
57.5634
PG2(MW)
12.8518
42.1757
60.00
93.4171
Total real power 
generation(MW)
151.9282
151.3557
151.0192
150.9805
Total real power generation 
cost ($/hr)
1893.3
1726.4
1769.3
1689.8
Total real power Loss (MW)
6.9282
6.3557
6.0192
5.9805

20
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
to UPFC placed in other locations. Figure 6 indicates that real power losses are less 
when the UPFC placed between bus no. 3 and bus no.4. Comparison of real power 
generation cost after incorporation of UPFC at different locations in BAT algorithm 
based optimal power flow shown in Fig.7.
For 30 Bus System
In modified IEEE 30 bus system bus no 1 is consider as a slack bus and bus no’s 
2,5,8,11,13 are consider as a PV buses all other buses are consider as PQ buses. 
Table 6. Comparison in case of OPF with UPFC
Variables
DE-OPF
BAT-OPF
CSA-OPF
FA-OPF
PG1(MW)
133.8120
90.0192
60.456
62.5170
PG2(MW)
16.8338
60.0000
89.6312
88.3601
UPFC(p.u.) VcR 
VvR
0.0400 
1.0759
0.0370 
1.0436
0.038 
1.042
0.029 
1.012
UPFC θcr 
(angle in degrees) θvr
-87.1236 
-15.2311
-86.1393 
-12.3421
-86.9576 
-13.1258
-85.456 
-10.632
Total real power 
generation(MW)
150.6458
150.0192
150.0872
149.8771
Total real power generation 
cost ($/hr)
1814.804
1684.3
1688.71
1672.56
Total real power Loss (MW)
5.6458
5.0192
5.0872
4.8771
Table 7. Comparison of bus voltages and its angles for 5 bus system using Bat OPF 
without and with UPFC
Bus 
No.
DE-OPF with UPFC
BAT-OPF with 
UPFC
CSA-OPF with UPFC
FA-OPF with UPFC
Voltage 
magnitude 
(volts)
Voltage 
angle 
(rad)
Voltage 
magnitude 
(volts)
Voltage 
angle 
(rad)
Voltage 
magnitude 
(volts)
Voltage 
angle 
(rad)
Voltage 
magnitude 
(volts)
Voltage 
angle 
(rad)
1
1.06
0
1.06
0
1.0600
0
1.0600
0
2
1
-0.83
1
-0.74
1.0000
-2.0356
1.0000
-1.0356
3
1
-3.32
1
-4.21
1.0000
-4.6213
1
-3.6213
4
0.9536
-3.67
0.9753
-3.59
0.9720
-3.3370
0.9863
-4.3370
5
0.9622
-4.52
0.9806
-4.37
0.9786
-5.6541
0.9929
-4.2555
UPFC 
Node
0.9785
-4.567
0.9806
-3.17
0.9689
-4.5254
0.995
-3.0524

21
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
Figure 5. Comparision of voltage profile with and without UPFC
Table 8. Incorporation of UPFC in OPF with bat Algorithm in 5 different locations
UPFC Placed 
Between 
Bus No
Total Real Power 
Generation 
(MW)
Total Load 
(MW)
Total Real Power Loss 
(MW)
2-3
150.663
145
5.663
2-4
150.9119
145
5.9119
2-5
151.3845
145
6.3845
3-4
150.0192
145
5.0192
4-5
150.8784
145
5.8784
Table 9. Incorporation of UPFC in OPF with cuckoo search Algorithm in 5 different 
locations
UPFC Placed 
Between 
Bus No
Total Real Power 
Generation 
(MW)
Total Load 
(MW)
Total Real Power Loss 
(MW)
2-3
150.7829
145
5. 7829
2-4
150.9829
145
5. 9829
2-5
151.8653
145
6. 8653
3-4
150.0872
145
5.0872
4-5
150.9489
145
5. 9489

22
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
This system has 24 load buses with 41 interconnected lines. By simulating the 
optimal power flow with BAT algorithm in MATLAB it is observed that voltage 
magnitude at bus no 26 is 0.8159p.u which is less as compared to other buses. So 
for the purpose of improve the voltage profile at that bus it is required to place the 
UPFC between bus no 25 and bus no 26. To include a unified power flow controller 
an additional node 31 placed in between bus no 25 and bus no 26 in the network. 
It maintains the active and reactive powers leaving the UPFC towards the bus 25. 
The UPFC shunt converter is set to regulate bus 26 nodal voltage magnitude at 1 
p.u. similarly simulating the optimal power flow with cuckoo search algorithm 
and firefly algorithm in MATLAB it is observed that voltage magnitude at bus no 
26 is less as compared to other buses. So for the purpose of improve the voltage 
Table 10. Incorporation of UPFC in OPF with firefly Algorithm in 5 Different 
Locations
UPFC placed 
between 
Bus No
Total real power generation 
(MW)
Total load 
(MW)
Total real power loss 
(MW)
2-3
150.4531
145
5. 4531
2-4
150.0123
145
5. 0123
2-5
150.8562
145
5.8562
3-4
149.8771
145
4.8771
4-5
150.4854
145
5. 4854
Figure 6. Incorporation of UPFC at different locations in Optimal Power Flow 
with BAT Algorithm

23
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
profile at that bus it is required to place the shunt converter of UPFC at that bus. 
A MATLAB program is implemented for the test system. Twenty runs have been 
performed for the test system. The optimal solution results over these twenty runs 
have been tabulated.
Figure 7. Comparison of real power generation cost after incorporation of UPFC 
at different locations in BAT-OPF.
Table 11. Comparison in case of OPF without UPFC
Variables
DE-OPF
BAT-OPF
CSA-OPF
FA-OPF
PG1(MW)
169
170.1571
170.6130
173.8325
PG2(MW)
48.2537
50
50.3422
49.8952
PG5(MW)
19
25.2113
21.960
22.6231
PG8(MW)
30.5948
19.1717
24.1619
22.0648
PG11(MW)
15.4692
16
13.8316
11.5357
PG13(MW)
12
12.0396
13.1734
12.0871
Total real power 
generation(MW)
294.3177
292.5795
294.0821
292.0384
Total real power 
generation cost ($/hr)
810.5345
804.0134
808.4652
800.0942
Total real power Loss 
(MW)
10.9177
9.1795
10.6821
8.64

24
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
The total real power generation, total real power generation cost and real power 
loss for modified IEEE 30 bus system are obtained with BAT algorithm, cuckoo 
search algorithm, firefly algorithm and differential evaluation considering without 
and with UPFC are shown in Table 11 and Table 12. From Table 11 and 12, it can 
be seen that total active power generation required is reduced to 289.4415 MW 
from 292.5795 MW and power loss has been reduced to 6.0415 MW from 9.1795 
MW because of UPFC with BAT algorithm. By incorporating UPFC in cuckoo 
search algorithm losses has been reduced to 8.709MW from 10.68MW, in firefly 
algorithm losses are reduced to 5.96MW from 8.64MW, which indicates that latest 
firefly algorithm gives better results compared to all other optimization algorithms.
Further, it is observed that there is a significant reduction in the cost because 
of UPFC. From the Figure 8 it is observed that active power losses are reduced to 
6.0415 MW from 10.9177MW by placing the UPFC in BAT algorithm based optimal 
power flow. Figure 9 indicates the real power generation cost is less in BAT-OPF 
as compared to DE-OPF. From Table 12 it can be observed that Firefly algorithm 
gives better results when compare to other optimization algorithms in OPF problem 
with UPFC on the modified IEEE 30 bus test system.
Table 13 represents the bus voltage of the network without UPFC and with 
UPFC. From Table 13, it is clear that the voltage profiles has been improved for 
most of buses because of UPFC and The UPFC shunt converter is set to regulate 
Table 12. Comparison in case of OPF with UPFC
Variables
DE-OPF
BAT-OPF
CSA-OPF
FA-OPF
PG1(MW)
166.722
175.4891
174.6537
205.7251
PG2(MW)
50.2537
46.9756
49.9251
31.8026
PG5(MW)
16
21.2113
22.0305
17.0127
PG8(MW)
28.7395
20.1717
21.6118
11.8741
PG11(MW)
17.4692
13.5542
11.8879
10.2405
PG13(MW)
12
12.0396
12.0
12.7050
UPFC(p.u.) VcR 
VvR
0.0540 
1.0545
0.0410 
1.0368
0.11 
1.0176
0.0945 
1.0176
UPFC θcr 
(angle in degrees) θvr
-92.4571 
-14.3387
-104.178 
-10.3848
-98.5673 
-12.856
-87.515 
-11.649
Total real power 
generation(MW)
291.1849
289.4415
292.109
289.36
Total real power 
generation cost ($/hr)
801.7493
794.5704
799.9800
793.162
Total real power Loss 
(MW)
7.7849
6.0415
8.7090
5.96

25
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
bus 26 nodal voltage magnitude at 1 p.u. From the Figure 10 it is observed that 
by incorporating UPFC in BAT algorithm based optimal Power flow calculations 
voltage profile has been improved. By placing the UPFC between bus no 25 and bus 
no 26 its voltage at bus no 26 has been increased from 0.8159 p.u to 1 p.u. Table 
14 represents the total Active power losses when the bus no26 is loaded. From the 
table it is observed that losses are increased by increasing load. From the Figure 11 
it is observed that by placing the UPFC in BAT algorithm based optimal power flow 
the losses are less. Similarly from Figure 12 it is observed that by placing the UPFC 
in BAT algorithm based optimal power flow real power generation cost is less and 
by increasing the load at particular bus real power generation cost is also increased.
Figure 8. Comparison of Active power losses for different conditions
Figure 9. Comparison of real power generation cost for different conditions

26
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
Table 13. Comparison of bus VOLTAGES FOR 30bus system using Bat OPF without 
and with UPFC
Bus 
No.
Newton Raphson 
Method
DE-OPF with 
UPFC(UPFC 
placed between bus 
25 and bus26)
BAT-OPF with 
UPFC(UPFC 
placed between bus 
25 and bus26)
CSA-OPF with 
UPFC(UPFC placed 
between bus 25 and 
bus26)
FA-OPF with 
UPFC(UPFC 
placed between 
bus 25 and bus26)
Voltage 
magnitude(volts)
Voltage magnitude 
(volts)
Voltage magnitude 
(volts)
Voltage magnitude 
(volts)
Voltage 
magnitude 
(volts)
1
1.0600
1.06
1.06
1.06
1.06
2
1.0430
1.0430
1.0430
1.0430
1.0430
3
0.9568
0.9641
0.9660
0.95660
0.9710
4
0.9756
0.9836
0.9869
0.9989
0.9962
5
1.01
1.0100
1.0100
1.0100
1.01
6
1.008
1.0118
1.0142
1.012
1.01
7
0.9967
0.9985
0.9997
0.997
0.999
8
1.01
1.0100
1.0100
1.0100
1.0100
9
0.9536
0.9637
0.9697
0.9978
0.9789
10
0.893
0.9045
0.9199
0.9099
0.9389
11
1.082
1.0820
1.0820
1.0820
1.0820
12
0.9179
0.9288
0.9396
0.9299
0.9468
13
1.071
1.0710
1.0710
1.0710
1.0710
14
0.8588
0.8707
0.8872
0.8842
0.8986
15
0.8521
0.8641
0.8851
0.8765
0.8982
16
0.8803
0.8920
0.9049
0.9095
0.9493
17
0.87
0.8821
0.8966
0.8912
0.8999
18
0.8207
0.8335
0.8544
0.8444
0.8964
19
0.8136
0.8267
0.8468
0.8348
0.8685
20
0.8374
0.8501
0.8682
0.8620
0.8827
21
0.8599
0.8717
0.8943
0.8848
0.8993
22
0.8529
0.8644
0.8933
0.8736
0.8993
23
0.8298
0.8415
0.8764
0.8664
0.8974
24
0.8349
0.8455
0.8927
0.8887
0.8978
25
0.8532
0.8610
0.9360
0.9160
0.9603
26
0.8075
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
27
0.9449
0.9480
0.9720
0.9567
0.9956
28
0.9824
0.9847
0.9934
0.9899
0.9974
29
0.9617
0.9633
0.9755
0.9711
0.9877
30
0.95
0.963
0.972
0.9700
0.9889
31
-----
0.9562
0.9678
0.9469
0.9789

27
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
A combination of these optimization techniques as hybrid optimization techniques 
can be implemented for future work and better results. In this chapter power system 
performance has been enhanced by using single FACTS device that is UPFC only 
Figure 10. Comparison of Voltage Profile with and without UPFC
Table 14. Total Active Power Losses comparison with bus 26 loaded
S No
Bus 26 
Loaded 
(Load in 
MW)
Active Power 
losses in MW 
(DE OPF with 
UPFC placed 
between bus 25 
and bus26)
Active Power 
losses in MW 
(BAT OPF with 
UPFC placed 
between bus 25 
and bus26)
Active Power 
losses in MW 
(CSA OPF with 
UPFC placed 
between bus 25 
and bus26)
Active Power 
losses in MW (FA 
OPF with UPFC 
placed between 
bus 25 and bus26)
1
10
22.123
20.9837
21.0972
20.3217
2
20
24.692
22.2221
23.234
21.6546
3
30
28.654
27.4585
28.4298
26.9856
4
40
32.996
31.6879
32.8691
30.8978
5
50
39.578
37.6059
38.9562
36.9746

28
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
it can be implemented with multi type FACTS devices for future work and better 
performance. Here optimization planning is done for static environment. For future 
work this can be a challenging topic for planning for dynamic environment.
Figure 11. Total Losses comparison with bus 26 loaded
Figure 12. Total real power generation cost comparison with bus 26 loaded

29
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
CONCLUSION
In this chapter, Meta heuristic optimization algorithms have been implemented 
to solve multi objective optimal power flow problem in the presence of Unified 
power flow controller. The results demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of 
the proposed methods with Unified power flow controller. The results obtained for 
5 bus test system and modified IEEE 30 bus system using the proposed methods 
without and with UPFC are compared and observations reveal that the losses are 
less with UPFC. In 5 bus test system UPFC is placed between bus 3 and bus 4 and 
in modified IEEE 30 bus system UPFC is placed between bus 25 and bus 26 the 
simulation results were taken and it was observed that the active power losses has 
been decreased because of generation reallocation. Simulation results show that 
UPFC device in the test systems can further minimize total real power generation 
cost and real power loss. BAT algorithm, CSA and firefly algorithm based optimal 
power flow with UPFC gives less total generation cost and real power losses as 
compared to differential evaluation algorithm based optimal power flow. While 
comparing BAT algorithm, cuckoo search algorithm and firefly algorithm, cuckoo 
search algorithm is simple in implementation, BAT algorithm gives accurate and 
efficient results, fire fly algorithm has robust, high convergence rate and gives best 
optimal solution in less number of iterations.
REFERENCES
Acha, E., Fuerte-Esquivel, C., Ambriz-Perez, H., & Angeles, C. (2004). 
FACTS: Modelling and Simulation in Power Networks. John Wiley & Sons; 
doi:10.1002/0470020164
Ambriz-Perez, Acha, Fuerte-Esquivel, & De la Torre. (1998). Incorporation of 
a UPFC model in an Optimal Power Flow Using Newton’s method. IEE Proc.-
Generation Transmission Distribution, 145(3).
Aparna, R. R. (2016). Swarm Intelligence for Automatic Video Image Contrast 
Adjustment. International Journal of Rough Sets and Data Analysis, 3(3), 21–37. 
doi:10.4018/IJRSDA.2016070102
Ashour, A. S., Samanta, S., Dey, N., Kausar, N., Abdessalemkaraa, W. B., & Hassanien, 
A. E. (2015). Computed tomography image enhancement using cuckoo search: A 
log transform based approach. Journal of Signal and Information Processing, 6(03), 
244–257. doi:10.4236/jsip.2015.63023

30
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
Binh, H. T. T., Hanh, N. T., & Dey, N. (2016). Improved Cuckoo Search and Chaotic 
Flower Pollination optimization algorithm for maximizing area coverage in Wireless 
Sensor Networks. Neural Computing & Applications, 1–13.
Carpentier. (1979). Optimal Power Flows. Electrical Power and Energy Systems, 
1, 959-972.
Chung, T. S., & Li, Y. Z. (2001). A hybrid CA approach for OPF with 
consideration of FACTS devices. IEEE Power Engineering Review, 21(2), 47–50. 
doi:10.1109/39.896822
Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Beagum, S., Pistola, D. S., Gospodinov, M., Gospodinova, 
E. P., & Tavares, J. M. R. (2015). Parameter optimization for local polynomial 
approximation based intersection confidence interval filter using genetic algorithm: 
An application for brain MRI image de-noising. Journal of Imaging, 1(1), 60–84. 
doi:10.3390/jimaging1010060
Dey, N., Chakraborty, S., & Samanta, S. (2014). Optimization of watermarking in 
biomedical signal. Lambert Publication. Heinrich-Böcking-Straße, 6, 66121.
Dey, N., Samanta, S., Chakraborty, S., Das, A., Chaudhuri, S. S., & Suri, J. S. (2014). 
Firefly algorithm for optimization of scaling factors during embedding of manifold 
medical information: An application in ophthalmology imaging. Journal of Medical 
Imaging and Health Informatics, 4(3), 384–394. doi:10.1166/jmihi.2014.1265
Dey, N., Samanta, S., Yang, X. S., Das, A., & Chaudhuri, S. S. (2013). Optimisation 
of scaling factors in electrocardiogram signal watermarking using cuckoo search. 
International Journal of Bio-inspired Computation, 5(5), 315–326. doi:10.1504/
IJBIC.2013.057193
Dutta, S. (2016). Optimal Allocation of Static Synchronous. Academic Press.
Dutta, S., Roy, P. K., & Nandi, D. (2016). Series Compensator Controllers using 
Chemical Reaction Optimization for Reactive Power Dispatch. International 
Journal of Energy Optimization and Engineering, 5(3), 43–62. doi:10.4018/
IJEOE.2016070103
Edris, A. (2000, March). FACTS Technology Development: An Update. IEEE 
Power Engineering Review.
Goel, S., Sharma, A., & Panchal, V. K. (2014). Multiobjective Cuckoo Search for 
Anticipating the Enemys Movements in the Battleground. International Journal 
of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 5(4), 26–46. doi:10.4018/ijamc.2014100102

31
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
Gyugi, L. (1992, July). A Unified Power Control Concept for Flexible AC Transmission 
Systems. IEE Procedings-C, 139(4), 323–332.
Gyugyi, Schauder, Williams, Rictman, Torgerson, & Edris. (1995). The Unified 
Power Flow Controller: A New Approach to Power Transmission Control. IEEE 
Trans. on Power Delivery, 10(2), 1085-1097.
Hingorani, N. G., & Gyugyi, L. (2000). Understanding FACTS: Concepts and 
Technology of Flexible AC Transmission System. IEEE Press.
Hore, S., Chatterjee, S., Santhi, V., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Balas, V. E., & Shi, F. 
(2017). Indian Sign Language Recognition Using Optimized Neural Networks. 
In Information Technology and Intelligent Transportation Systems (pp. 553–563). 
Springer International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-38771-0_54
Hsmmns, T. J., & Lim, S. K. (1997). Flexible AC Transmission System (FACTS). 
Electric Machines & Power System, 25, 73–85.
Jirapong, P. (2013, April-June). FACTS Devices Allocation for Power Transfer 
Capability Enhancement and Power System Losses Reduction. International Journal 
of Energy Optimization and Engineering, 2(2), 1–14. doi:10.4018/ijeoe.2013040101
Kaur, P., & Kaur, T. (2014). A Comparative Study of Various Metaheuristic 
Algorithms. International Journal of Computer Science and Information 
Technologies, 5(5), 6701–6704.
Kumar Roy, P. (2013, July-September). Hybridization of Biogeography Based 
Optimization with Differential Evolution for solving Optimal Power Flow Problems. 
International Journal of Energy Optimization and Engineering, 2(3), 86–101. 
doi:10.4018/ijeoe.2013070106
Kundur, P. (1993). Power System Stability and Control. New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc.
Lashkar Ara, Kazemi, & Nabavi Niaki. (2012). Multi objective Optimal Location 
of FACTS Shunt-Series Controllers for Power System Operation Planning. IEEE 
Transactions on Power Delivery, 27(2), 481-490.
Le, D. A., & Vo, D. N. (2016, January-March). Cuckoo Search Algorithm for 
Minimization of Power Loss and Voltage Deviation. International Journal of Energy 
Optimization and Engineering, 5(1), 23–34. doi:10.4018/IJEOE.2016010102
Mukherjee, A., Paul, S., & Roy, P. K. (2015). Transient Stability Constrained Optimal 
Power Flow Using Teaching Learning Based Optimization. International Journal of 
Energy Optimization and Engineering, 4(1), 18–35. doi:10.4018/ijeoe.2015010102

32
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
Padiyar & Uma Rao. (1999). Modeling and Control of Unified Power Flow Controller 
For Transient Stability. Electrical Power and Energy Systems, 21.
Padiyar, K. R., & Kulakarni, A. M. (1998). Control Design and Simulation of 
Unified Power Flow Controller. IEEE Trans. on Power Delivery, 13(4), 1348-1354.
Rahul Khandelwal, J. (2016). A Novel Multiobjective Optimization for Cement 
Stabilized Soft Soil based on Artificial Bee Colony. International Journal of Applied 
Metaheuristic Computing, 7(4), 1–17. doi:10.4018/IJAMC.2016100101
Samantaa, S., Dey, N., Das, P., Acharjee, S., & Chaudhuri, S. S. (2013). Multilevel 
threshold based gray scale image segmentation using cuckoo search. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1307.0277
Stagg, G. W., & El-Abid, A. H. (1968). Computer Methods in Power System Analysis. 
McGraw-Hill Book Co.
Sun, D. I., Ashley, B., Brewer, B., Hughes, A., & Tinney, W. F. (1984). Optimal 
Power Flow by Newton Approach. IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and 
Systems, 103(10), pp2864–pp2880. doi:10.1109/TPAS.1984.318284
Tinney, W. F., & Hart, C. E. (1967, November). Power Flow-Solution by Newton’s 
Method. IEEE Transactions, 86, 1449.
Tiwari, P. K., & Sood, Y. R. (2012). Efficient and optimal approach for location and 
parameter setting of multiple unified power flow controllers for a deregulated power 
sector. IET Gener. Transm. Distrib, 6(10), 958–967. doi:10.1049/iet-gtd.2011.0722
Venkateswara Rao, B., & Nagesh Kumar, G. V. (2014). Optimal Location of Thyristor 
Controlled Series Capacitor for reduction of Transmission Line losses using BAT 
Search Algorithm. WSEAS Transactions on Power Systems, 9, 459–470.
Yang, X.-S. (2008). Nature-Inspired Metaheuristic Algorithms. Luniver Press.
Yang, X.-S. (2010). A new metaheuristic bat-inspired algorithm. In Nature Inspired 
Cooperative Strategies for Optimization. Springer Berlin. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-
12538-6_6
Zheng & Tan. (2000). Dynamic Character Study of UPFC Based on Detailed 
Simulation Model. IEEE Power Conference 2000.

33
Power Flow Using Metaheuristic Algorithms to Enhance Performance
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
BAT Algorithm: BAT algorithm was developed by X S Yang in 2010, which 
works based on echo location behavior of micro bats.
CSA: Cuckoo search algorithm was developed by X S Yang and Suash Deb in 
2009, which works based on obligate brood parasitism of cuckoo.
DE: Differential Evolution (DE) is a method that optimizes a problem by iteratively 
trying to improve a candidate solution with regard to a given measure of quality.
FA: Firefly algorithm was developed by X S Yang in 2008, which works based 
on flashing behavior of fire fly.
FACTS: Alternating current transmission systems incorporating power electronic-
based and other static controllers to enhance controllability and increase power 
transfer capability.
FACTS Devices or FACTS Controllers: A power electronic-based system and 
other static equipment that provide control of one or more AC transmission system 
parameters.
OPF: Optimal power flow (OPF) is an important tool for power system operation, 
control and planning. It was first introduced by (Dommel and Tinney, 1968). The 
main purpose of an OPF program is calculating the optimal operating point of a 
power system and setting the variables that optimize a certain objective function 
while satisfying power flow equations, equality and inequality constraints.
Optimization: It is the action of making the best or most effective use of a 
situation or resource.
UPFC: A combination of static synchronous compensator (STATCOM) and a 
static series compensator (SSSC) which are coupled via a common dc link, to allow 
bidirectional flow of real power between the series output terminals of the SSSC 
and the shunt output terminals of the STATCOM, and are controlled to provide 
concurrent real and reactive series line compensation without an external electric 
energy source.

34
Copyright © 2018, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  2
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-4151-6.ch002
ABSTRACT
The WiMAX network provides an efficient QoS to the large number of users. The 
real time and non-real time multimedia applications are gaining importance in 
the WiMAX network. To support such applications, there is a need to propose an 
efficient QoS of traffic prediction mechanism for the WiMAX networks. To address 
this, the authors have applied Gene Expression Programming technique for CBR 
based traffic and file transfer applications in the WiMAX network. The main focus 
of this chapter is to develop the mathematical expressions for throughput of the 
network by considering bandwidth, average end-to-end delay and average jitter as 
inputs for CBR based traffic and file transfer applications. This expression helps 
to analyze and predict the QoS of traffic of a given network. The simulation results 
show that the model values and the target values match with better approximation. 
Experimentally GEP performs better than other existing algorithms. Furthermore, 
sensitivity analysis has been carried out for both the applications
Analyzing and Predicting 
the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX 
Network Using Gene 
Expression Programming
J. Sangeetha
PES University, India
Keerthiraj Nagaraj
University of Florida, USA
K. N. Balasubramanya Murthy
PES University, India
Ram P. Rustagi
PES University, India

35
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
INTRODUCTION
IEEE 802.16 air interface standard (Jeffrey et al., 2007) provides the details of 
physical layer and Media Access Control (MAC) layer of wireless communication 
system, which aims to build a multi-service network with Worldwide Interoperability 
for Microwave Access (WiMAX) technology. The different standards of WiMAX 
networks are IEEE 802.16a, IEEE 802.16d, IEEE 802.16e and IEEE 802.16j. There 
is a constant evolution of different standards, along with the demand for real-time 
multimedia applications such as Constant Bit Rate (CBR) based traffic, video stream 
and Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) and non-real-time multimedia applications 
such as file transfer, web browsing and email. To support these multimedia 
applications, the standards must be sensitive to the need for bandwidth with high 
speed access, large network coverage and the provision of good Quality of Services 
(QoS) to a large number of users.
The basic topology of a WiMAX network consists of two participating entities, 
called Base Station (BS) and Subscriber Station (SS). The BS is the central node, 
responsible for coordinating all the communication and providing connectivity to the 
SSs. The BS is the station that provides access to the public network. This network 
can be categorized into two operating modes: a mandatory Point-to-Multipoint 
(PMP) mode and an optional mesh mode. In PMP mode (Akashdeep et al., 2014; 
Ali et al., 2009), all SSs are only one-hop away from the BS and communicate to 
the BS directly in a centralized manner and not through other neighboring SSs. 
Akashdeep et al. (2014) have investigated on design issues for the development of 
schedulers and also ensured QoS support in WiMAX networks.I n optional mesh 
mode (Akyildiz et al., 2005; Kas et al., 2010), all SSs are one hop or more than 
one hop away from the BS and so the SSs communicates with the BS directly or 
indirectly (i.e. with other SSs) in a distributed manner. In literature (Sharma et al., 
2014; Sharma et al., 2017), many researchers have worked on wireless mesh network. 
Due to the dynamic behavior of the wireless mesh network, handling routing is a 
critical issue. Sharma et al. (2017) have applied a nature inspired technique called 
Termite Colony Optimization (TCO) on this network. The TCO algorithm is used 
to find an optimal route based on the link cost. In this chapter, the researchers focus 
on a centralized PMP mode, which provides better QoS performance compared to 
distributed mesh mode (Ni et al., 2007).
There are two ways of providing QoS (Sekercioglu et al., 2009), they are user-
centric QoS and network-centric QoS. The user-centric QoS comprises the degree of 
satisfaction of a user for the service. The network-centric QoS comprises the ability 
to control the mix of bandwidth, average end-to-end delay and average jitter in the 
network in order to deliver a network service such as CBR based traffic, file transfer 

36
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
application and VoIP. This chapter is primarily concerned with the network-centric 
QoS. The QoS parameters such as bandwidth, packet delivery ratio, average end-
to-end delay, average jitter and throughput are generally used to measure the effect 
of multimedia streams on the level of QoS. These QoS parameters are considered 
only for the network-centric QoS, but not on the user-centric QoS. The WiMAX 
network (Carvalho et al., 2013) mainly depends on parameters such as bandwidth, 
delay, jitter, and throughput for efficient communication. This influences the QoS 
with a certain level of end-to-end quality for multimedia applications through the 
management of MAC and network layer for the provision of better QoS services.
QoS (Cicconetti et al., 2006; Grewal et al., 2010; Liu et al., 2006) plays a major 
role in IEEE 802.16 MAC layer. The MAC layer uses connection oriented approach. 
For performing the data transmissions over the particular link, the downlink (from 
BS to SS) and uplink (from SS to BS) connections are controlled by the particular 
BS. Each connection is identified by a connection identifier (CID) and the connection 
in the network is associated with a Service Flow Identifier (SFID) that is composed 
of a set of QoS parameters namely bandwidth, average end-to-end delay, average 
jitter and throughput. The BS performs the functionality of issuing the SFID and 
mapping it to unique CIDs and sending the packet to the appropriate SS.
To support real-time and non-real-time multimedia applications, WiMAX 
network defines five scheduling service classes (Kuran et al., 2007; Li et al., 2007; 
Sekercioglu et al., 2009). The five scheduling service classes are Unsolicited Grant 
Service (UGS), Real Time Polling Service (rtPS), Non-Real Time Polling Service 
(nrtPS), Best Effort (BE) and Extended Real Time Polling Service (ertPS). These 
scheduling service classes define the nature of the data service supported and the 
following are its detail description:
•	
The UGS scheduling service class supports real-time service flow that 
generate a fixed-size data packets on a periodic basis and hence it is used 
to carry Constant Bit Rate (CBR) based traffic such as VoIP without silence 
suppression.
•	
The rtPS scheduling service class supports real-time service flow that generate 
variable-size data packets on a periodic basis and hence it is used to carry 
real-time Variable Bit Rate (VBR) traffic such as streaming audio and video.
•	
The nrtPS scheduling service class supports non-real-time service flow that 
generates variable-size data packets on a periodic basis and hence it is used 
to carry non-real-time Variable Bit Rate (VBR) traffic such as file transfer. 
This service class is the most appropriate for the delay tolerant applications.
•	
The BE scheduling service class supports non-real-time service flow that 
generate average-size data packets on a periodic basis and hence it is used 

37
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
to carry non-real-time Average Bit Rate (ABR) traffic such as Data transfer, 
Web browsing and Email. This service class is applicable only for services 
that do not have strict QoS requirements.
•	
The ertPS scheduling service class (introduced by IEEE 802.16e) supports 
real-time service flow that generate variable size data packets on a periodic 
basis and hence it is used to carry real-time Variable Bit Rate (VBR) traffic 
such as VoIP with silence suppression.
These scheduling service classes can only be used in the PMP mode. The 
performance of these scheduling services is evaluated in the work of Cicconetti et al. 
(2006). Application layer services use the most appropriate of these five scheduling 
service classes for the given service. Hence, QoS provisioning is not devoted to 
single layer functionality, but requires the joint effort of all the layers. Hence, there 
is a need for network engineers using the existing resources to implement a network 
that can provide efficient QoS.
The objective of this chapter is to analyze and predict the QoS of traffic prediction 
mechanism for the WiMAX network. This is important and challenging problem and 
thus it requires trustable tools. In this chapter, the authors provide nature inspired 
techniques as one such alternative for efficient analysis. Here, the authors have used 
GEP techniques. They have also considered some of the conventional methods such 
as Artificial Neural Network.
BACKGROUND
Recently, many researchers are focusing on various nature inspired techniques (Binh et 
al., 2016; Dey et. al., 2014; Hore et. al., 2017) to solve the problems in different fields. 
One such nature inspired technique called Gene Expression Programming (GEP) 
developed by Ferreira (2001) is applied to solve the function approximation problem. 
The GEP technique (Ferreira, 2001; Ferreira, 2002) brings out the relationship between 
the future and the historical data directly. This technique is the computational model; 
it discovers knowledge from data and expresses as a mathematical expression. The 
nature of the populations of the individuals is encoded as linear strings of fixed length 
called chromosomes which are afterwards expressed as nonlinear entities of different 
sizes and shapes called expression trees. Senthilnath et al. (2014) has proposed an 
approach for river mapping and flood evaluation to aid multi-temporal time series 
analysis of satellite images using GEP technique. In their study, the results show 
that the use of image classification and region-based segmentation is an accurate 
and reliable for the extraction of water-covered region. Finally, the performance 
of the Artificial Neural Network (ANN) and GEP techniques are evaluated and 

38
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
compared. Omkar et al. (2013) has proposed a precise classification of agricultural 
crops that provides vital information on the crop type and its extent cultivated in 
a particular area. In their study, the results show that the GEP technique is used to 
classify the crop data obtained from the satellite images. This technique provides 
an efficient method for obtaining classification rules in the form of a mathematical 
expression for a given data set containing input and output variables. Kubusada et 
al. (2013) has proposed an efficient QoS aware routing protocol for Mobile Ad hoc 
Network (MANET) network based on GEP technique. Lee et al. (2013) has proposed 
a prediction approach called GEP prediction to tackle the queue variation during 
waiting times as well as to reduce the high-priority packet delay in Ethernet Passive 
Optical Network (EPON). In their study, the results show that the GEP prediction 
in dynamic bandwidth allocation can reduce the packet delay, shorten the queue 
length, enhance the quality of services and maintain the fairness among the optical 
network units. Xu et al. (2017) has introduced an effective function mining algorithm, 
Gene Expression Programming algorithm. They have improved the efficiency of 
GEP in big data for processing large-scale classification tasks. Sabar et al. (2015) 
has employed GEP to design a framework for hyper-heuristic in order to solve the 
combinatorial optimization problems. Their result shows that the proposed work 
solves the combinatorial optimization problems. For the risk assessment of cyber 
physical power system, Deng et al. (2015) has proposed GEP algorithm. Their study 
shows that the security risk levels of cyber physical power system are predicted and 
analyzed by using the proposed algorithm.
From the literature (Nayak et al., 2016; Chatterjee et al., 2016; Bag et al., 2017; 
Manogaran et al., 2017; Acharjya et al., 2017), it has been revealed that many 
researchers from diverse fields are working on prediction based system. An efficient 
prediction based system is required in the stock market world to generate significant 
profit. Hence, Nayak et al. (2016) has proposed an adaptive single layer second order 
neural network with genetic algorithm (ASONN-GA) and also compared the result 
with recurrent neural network (RNN) and a Multilayer Perceptron Neural Network 
(MLP-NN). Prediction based system is also applied in the structural failure of the 
multistory reinforced concrete (RC) buildings. Chatterjee et al. (2016) has proposed 
Neural Network-Particle Swarm Optimization (NN-PSO) classifier to tackle the 
problem of predicting and detecting the failure possibility of the multistoried RC 
building structure in the future. The NN-PSO model was compared with NN (Neural 
Network) and Multi Layer Perceptron Feed Forward Neural Network (MLP-FFN) 
classifier to find its ingenuity.
In this chapter, the authors propose an efficient QoS of traffic prediction mechanism 
for the WiMAX network using the GEP technique. Also, the authors are analyzing the 
throughput of the WiMAX network with respect to real time services such as CBR 
based traffic and non-real-time services such as file transfer. To perform this study, 

39
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
the authors have generated two datasets using QUALNET 7.1 network simulator 
one for CBR based traffic and other for file transfer applications. From the literature 
(Kubusada et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2013), it is observed that GEP technique is more 
efficient in predicting the future values of QoS parameters when compared to other 
nature inspired techniques by generating mathematical expression.
The GEP technique is applied to the CBR based traffic and file transfer application 
datasets obtained from the network simulator to formulate the mathematical 
expressions for throughput in terms of bandwidth, average end-to-end delay and 
average jitter. The performance evaluation of the obtained results from the CBR 
based traffic and file transfer applications are compared with the conventional 
method Multi-Layer Perceptron Neural Network (MLP-NN) (Marchant et al., 2003).
Further, in this chapter the author also focuses on sensitivity analysis. The 
sensitivity analysis is carried out for checking whether the throughput is sensitive to 
considered input parameters in both CBR based traffic and file transfer applications. 
This study helps researchers and network engineers to analyze the performance of 
the network.
Wimax Network Topology
The authors have considered a WiMAX network scenario, using QUALNET® 7.1 
network simulator. Here, 100 mobile nodes are randomly distributed in an area 
of 1500m x 1500m as shown in Figure 1. The list of parameters used during the 
simulation is shown in Table 1. In this chapter, the researchers have considered two 
scheduling service classes such as Unsolicited Grant Service (UGS) and Non-Real 
Time Polling Service (nrtPS) (Kuran et al., 2007; Li, et al., 2007). The UGS service 
class supports real time services such as CBR based traffic, which generates a fixed-
size data packet on a periodic basis. The nrtPS scheduling service class supports 
non-real-time services such as file transfer applications, which generate variable-size 
data packets on a periodic basis. Here, the authors have considered two applications 
namely, CBR based traffic and file transfer.
In (Carvalho et al., 2013; Kubusada et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2013), researchers 
have focused on analyzing the performance of the network. To provide better 
performance, the selection of QoS parameters plays a major role. To the best of the 
authors’ knowledge, the QoS parameters often used in the literature are bandwidth, 
average end-to-end delay, average jitter and throughput. These QoS parameters are 
generally used to measure the effect of multimedia streams on the level of QoS. 
The WiMAX network (Jeffrey et al., 2007; Carvalho et al., 2013) mainly depends 
on these parameters for efficient communication and providing the good QoS to 
a large number of users. Hence, the authors have analyzed the performance of the 

40
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
WiMAX network by considering the dependent/output parameter such as throughput 
and the independent/input parameters such as bandwidth, average end-to-end delay 
and average jitter. The effects of these parameters are as follows:
1. 	
Throughput: It is the rate of successful data delivery over a communication 
channel. Throughput is usually measured in bits per second (bit/s or bps).
2. 	
Bandwidth: It is the measure of dataflow rate in a given network. This is 
usually measured in MHz.
3. 	
Average end-to-end delay: It refers to the average time taken for data to 
be transmitted across a network from source to destination. This is usually 
measured in seconds.
4. 	
Average jitter: It is the average of the all the time differences between 
transmission delay of a packet and transmission delay of its previous packet. 
Jitter can be calculated only if at least two packets have been received. This is 
usually measured in seconds.
Figure 1. WiMAX network scenario 
Table 1. Parameters used in the network simulator 
Simulation Area
1500m x 1500m
Number of Mobile Nodes
100
Transmission Power
20dB
Simulation Time
150 seconds
Scheduling Service Class
UGS, nrtPS

41
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
Initially, the researchers have generated two datasets (i.e. training and testing 
datasets) using network simulator for CBR based traffic and file transfer applications. 
In both these applications, the datasets have been generated by considering three 
input parameters (i.e. bandwidth, average end-to-end delay and average jitter) and 
one output parameter (i.e. throughput). The training dataset is subjected to symbolic 
regression technique using the Gene Expression Programming (GEP) technique. 
The authors employ this technique to analyze and predict the QoS of traffic in both 
CBR based traffic and file transfer applications.
Gene Expression Programming
Gene Expression Programming (GEP) is a population based method, which was 
introduced and developed by Candida Ferreira (2001). The GEP is a nature inspired 
technique as the likes of Genetic Algorithm (GA) (Goldberg, 1989; Hamdan et al., 
2016; El Hassani et al., 2017; Hore et. al., 2017; Dey et. al., 2015) and Genetic 
Programming (GP) (Koza, 1994; Zadshakoyan et al., 2015), which is used for the 
creation of computer programs to solve the problems such as symbolic regression 
(Kubusada et al., 2013), sequence induction, block stacking and density classification 
(Omkar et al., 2013; Omkar et al., 2012; Omkar et al., 2015), function mining (Xu 
et al., 2017), combinatorial optimization (Sabar et al., 2015), security risks (Deng 
et al., 2015).
The GEP technique is different from other adaptive techniques in the terms that it 
considers the individuals to be linear strings of fixed length at first but then encodes 
them to non-linear entities of different length and structure. The fixed length linear 
strings are considered as chromosomes or genomes and variable length non-linear 
strings are considered as Expression Trees (ETs) or phenotype. The GEP technique (Hu 
et al., 2007; Song et al., 2010) ensures modification in the individuals in successive 
generations by modifying its rate of mutation, transposition and recombination.
One of the most useful applications of GEP technique (Bakhshaii et al., 2009; 
Zuo et al., 2002) is symbolic regression or function finding. Symbolic regression 
mainly deals with formulating a new symbolic expression for an output variable that 
satisfies the fitness values for a given set of input variables. Different parameters 
like fitness function, function set {+, -, *, /, Q, sin, cos…}, population size, number 
of generations, linking function, number of genes, mutation rate, transposition rate 
and recombination rate has to be fixed to carry out this problem. The general steps 
of the GEP algorithm are explained below:
Step 1: Initial populations are randomly distributed.
Step 2: At each generation, the fitness value of each individual is evaluated.

42
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
Step 3: Individual with best fitness value is selected along with other individuals 
in the defined range of fitness value.
Step 4: The selected individuals are then subjected to the effects like mutation, 
transposition and recombination to give rise to the individuals for next generation.
In this chapter, the authors apply GEP technique to generate an expression tree for 
the QoS parameter throughput in terms of bandwidth, average end-to-end delay and 
average jitter in the WiMAX network. The steps involved in GEP implementation 
for prediction of QoS of traffic in the WiMAX network are as follows:
Step 1: For the training dataset, chromosomes of initial population that represent 
three input parameters (i.e. bandwidth, average end-to-end delay and average 
jitter) are randomly distributed.
Step 2: At each generation, fitness values of all these chromosomes are evaluated 
and are compared to the target throughput values.
Step 3: Evaluate the chromosomes of input parameters that are mapped to their 
respective output parameter to obtain best fitness value (i.e. minimum relative 
Mean Squared Error value).
Step 4: In successive generations, apply the genetic operators such as mutation, 
recombination and transposition to alter the characters of chromosomes to 
yield the throughput values that have better approximation to target values. 
The ways in which the different genetic operators in our problem are carried 
out are as follows:
◦◦
Mutation: The authors considered this genetic operator to account for 
sudden and drastic changes in values of bandwidth, average end-to-end 
delay and average jitter in the network.
◦◦
Recombination: This genetic operator was considered to account for 
random changes in individual input parameters while building the 
model for throughput of the network.
◦◦
Transposition: This operator plays a major role in maintaining genetic 
variation and evolvability as they induce necessary modifications in 
successive iterations. This iterative process results in better models for 
throughput in all the iterations than its previous one.
Step 5: The above-mentioned steps are repeated for considerably large number of 
generations and the chromosomes of bandwidth, average end-to-end delay and 
average jitter at the final generation are considered for finding the values of 
throughput of the network.

43
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
Illustrative Example for Symbolic Regression
To understand, let us consider a very simple training and testing datasets as shown 
in Table 2 and 3. The researchers have applied the symbolic regression problem 
for this dataset to obtain the expression for output (Y) in terms of input (d0) using 
the GEP technique.
The GEP parameters such as mutation rate, recombination rate, transposition 
rate, number of generations, linking function, population size (i.e. number of 
chromosomes), number of genes per chromosome and fitness function have to be 
Table 2. Training dataset for an illustrative example
d0
Y
1
2
3
12
5
30
7
56
9
90
11
132
13
182
15
240
17
306
19
380
Table 3. Testing dataset for an illustrative example
d0
Y
2
6
4
20
6
42
8
72
10
110
12
156
14
210
16
272
18
342
20
420

44
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
fixed to carry out the symbolic regression. The authors have empirically analyzed 
the values of these parameters after executing the GEP for different runs. The most 
favorable values of genetic operators after different runs is as shown in Table 4, by 
considering least rMSE values for a given dataset.
For the considered datasets, the researchers have assumed two genes per 
chromosome and one constant per gene; hence two sub-Expression Trees (i.e. two 
genes) are obtained and it is as shown in Figure 2 and two numerical constants as 
shown in Table 5.
In this example, the authors have considered 30 chromosomes and 2 genes per 
chromosome. Hence, there are 60 genes. The 60 genes gets evolved (i.e. undergoes 
mutation, recombination and transposition) over 1000 generations and best 2 genes 
(i.e. model values matching with the target values) are selected. The best 2 genes 
result in the following equations:
Table 4. GEP parameters for an illustrative example
GEP parameter
Value
Number of generations
1000
Population size
30
Mutation rate
0.044
Recombination rate
0.1
Transposition rate
0.1
Linking function
+
Number of genes
2
Fitness function
relative Mean Squared Error (rMSE)
Function set
+,-,*,/
Figure 2. Sub expression trees for an illustrative example

45
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
Y
d
d
d
d
C
G C
G C
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
=
×
(
) +
(
)−
×
−
(
)





	
(1)
Y
d
d
d
d
G C
d
G C
G C
2
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
2
0
2
0
=
+
(
)−
+
(
)
×
(
) +
+
(
)
(
)






	
(2)
where d0 is the input parameter, G1C0 is the first constant of Gene 1 and G2C0 is the 
first constant of Gene 2. Y1 and Y2 are Gene 1 and Gene 2 respectively.
The authors have assumed ‘addition’ as the linking function for the two genes. 
Hence the expression for Y (i.e. chromosome) in terms of d0 is obtained by adding 
Y1 (i.e. Gene 1) with Y2(i.e. Gene 2) as shown in Figure 3.
Y
Y
Y
=
+
1
2 	
Table 5. Values of constants used in expression
Constant
Value
Explanation of the Constant
G1C0
-1.640137
1st constant of Gene 1
G2C0
-1.640137
1st constant of Gene 2
Figure 3. Expression tree for an illustrative example

46
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
Y
d
d
d
=
×
(
) +
(
)
0
0
0 	
(3)
The Equation 3 (i.e. chromosome) is validated using the testing dataset as given 
in Table 3; the values obtained using this Equation proved to be matching exactly 
with the target values.
Artificial Neural Network
The Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) (Anderson, 1972; Bashiri et al., 2011; 
Hore et. al., 2017) technique is mainly used in the problems such as function 
approximation where the function depends on large number of inputs (Marchant 
et al., 2003). This technique is also used to solve the prediction based problems. 
For better approximation ANN needs training data to map the input data with their 
respective output by generating optimal weights. The ANN is interconnected by a 
group of artificial neurons.
In most cases an ANN adapts non-linear function approximation (i.e. learns to 
perform a function from data). This neural network is trained by adjusting the values 
of the weights between processing elements (i.e. input with their respective output 
sample). After training the neural network, when a particular input is given the 
expected output is achieved. ANN parameters such as the number of hidden layers 
and the learning rate are selected empirically (Bashiri et al., 2011). The optimal 
weight obtained during training phase can be used for the testing phase.
The ANN method used in this chapter is Multi-Layer Perceptron Neural Network 
(MLPNN) (Senthilnath et al., 2012; Marchant et al., 2003; Omkar et al., 2010). This 
is also used to solve the prediction based problem. MLP-NN is an adaptive non-
linear system that formulates a function for output from the observed values of input 
parameters. MLP-NN uses the back-propagation algorithm. The number of input 
neurons represents the number of input parameters or independent variables (in this 
chapter it is bandwidth, average end-to-end delay and average jitter) and the output 
neurons represent the response (in this chapter its throughput). Using MLP-NN 
technique, the authors predicted the values of throughput considering bandwidth, 
average end-to-end delay and average jitter as input parameters.
From the literature (Senthilnath et al., 2014; Omkar et al., 2015), we have 
understood that the MLP-NN technique converge to only local optima. Hence, in 
this chapterto the considered prediction based problem the authors have applied 
GEP technique, which converges to global optima.

47
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
MAIN FOCUS OF THE CHAPTER
In this chapter, the authors have proposed an efficient QoS of traffic prediction 
mechanism for the WiMAX network using GEP technique. Here, the throughput 
analysis of the WiMAX network is done with respect to real time services such 
as CBR based traffic and non-real-time services such as file transfer application. 
Further, this study also focuses on the QoS of traffic prediction of the network. To 
perform this study, the researchers have generated two datasets using QUALNET® 
7.1 network simulator for CBR based traffic and file transfer applications.
The considered QoS parameters are bandwidth, average end-to-end delay and 
average jitter as input parameters and throughput as the output parameter. The GEP 
techniques have been applied to analyze and predict the QoS of traffic in both CBR 
based traffic and file transfer applications. From the literature (Senthilnath et al. 
2014; Omkar et al., 2013; Kubusada et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2013), it is observed that 
GEP technique is more efficient in predicting the future values of QoS parameters 
when compared with other nature inspired techniques by generating mathematical 
expression. The GEP technique is applied to the CBR based traffic and file transfer 
datasets obtained from the network simulator to formulate the mathematical 
expressions for throughput in terms of bandwidth, average end-to-end delay and 
average jitter. The performance evaluation of the obtained results from the CBR 
based traffic and file transfer applications are compared with the MLP-NN technique.
Further, this study also focuses on sensitivity analysis. The sensitivity analysis is 
carried out with GEP technique for checking whether the throughput is sensitive to 
considered input parameters in both CBR based traffic and file transfer applications. 
To the best of our knowledge, the GEP technique has not been previously used to 
solve the QoS of traffic prediction mechanism in WiMAX networks. This study was 
identified as being importance to researchers and network engineers in providing them 
the necessary background for their works.The principal advantages of this chapter are: 
efficient utilization of networks, proper monitoring of network, efficiently routing 
the packets in the network and providing the good QoS to a large number of users.
SOLUTIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
In this chapter, the authors are focusing on analyzing the throughput performance 
of the WiMAX network, by considering bandwidth, average end-to-end delay and 
average jitter as input parameters. Using these, the QoS of traffic of the given 
network is predicted. To solve these issues, the Gene Expression Programming 
(GEP) technique is used. The GEP technique is applied on CBR based traffic and 

48
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
file transfer applications. The results obtained from GEP are compared with the 
MLP-NN technique. Further, the sensitivity analysis for the both CBR based traffic 
and file transfer applications are carried out.
Dataset Preparation Using Network Simulator
The datasets are generated using QUALNET® 7.1 network simulator for WiMAX 
network by considering two applications namely CBR based traffic and file transfer. 
These datasets are segregated into 69 training samples and 71 testing samples. 
These samples contain one output parameter: throughput and a set of three input 
parameters: bandwidth, average end-to-end delay and average jitter. The training 
samples are used in GEP technique to generate expression tree. The performance 
of the expression tree is analyzed by using the testing samples.
Gene Expression Programming for WiMAX Network
The GEP technique (Sangeetha et al., 2016) is applied on the datasets to obtain the 
mathematical expressions for throughput in terms of bandwidth, average end-to-
end delay and average jitter. To employ the GEP technique, the fitness function is 
defined. The authors have considered the most preferred fitness function known as 
relative Mean Squared Error (rMSE) (Kubusada et al., 2013) for the function finding 
problem. The rMSE fitness function Ei of an individual program i is evaluated by 
the Equation 4.
E
n
P
T
T
i
ij
j
j
j
n
=
−






=∑
1
2
1
( )
	
(4)
where P(ij) is the value predicted by the individual program i for fitness case j (out 
of n fitness cases) and Tj is the target value for fitness case j.
The considered rMSE fitness function gives more weight to higher errors as 
square term is used. This function helps to arrive at more accurate model which 
predicts throughput values much closer to target values. This function also helps 
to calculate error relative to the target values, hence when the target values are low 
even the low errors in prediction results in high rMSE value. Minimum the rMSE 
value; better is the expression tree obtained.
The other parameters such as mutation rate, transposition rate and recombination 
rate, number of generations, linking function, population size (i.e. number of 
chromosomes), number of genes and fitness function have to be fixed to carry out 

49
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
the symbolic regression using GEP technique. The researchers have empirically 
analyzed the values of these parameters after executing the GEP for different runs. 
Here, the authors have observed the most favorable values of genetic operators after 
several runs and this is as shown in Table 6, by considering least rMSE values for 
a given dataset.
If the number of genes is less, then the variation in the successive generation is 
less and so it takes more number of generations to arrive at the favorable result. If the 
number of genes is more, then the chances of variation over successive generation 
will be very high and hence the chances of getting unfavorable results are high. From 
the trial and error method and after several runs the authors conclude three genes 
per chromosome and two constants per gene as the favorable result. Hence, three 
Sub-expression trees (i.e. 3 genes) with six numerical constants in the Expression 
Tree (ET)of both CBR based traffic and file transfer applications are obtained.
CBR Based Traffic
In this case, a total of 100 data items, each of 512 bytes is transferred using CBR 
based traffic. The GEP technique is applied on training datasets of CBR based traffic. 
From Figure 4, it is observed that, for five different runs carried out, the best run is 
selected by comparing the mean and standard deviation values of rMSE in each run. 
The 3rd run resulted in minimum rMSE values compared to all other runs. Hence, 
the mean and standard deviation of rMSE values for the training dataset are 68.21 
and 50.50 respectively and for the testing dataset the mean and standard deviation 
values are 71.12 and 48.66 respectively.
Table 6. Values of the GEP parameters 
GEP Parameter
Value
Number of generations
2000
Population size
30
Mutation rate
0.044
Recombination rate
0.1
Transposition rate
0.1
Linking function
+
Number of genes
3
Fitness function
rMSE
Function set
+, -, *, /, sqrt, x2, x3, natural logarithm

50
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
Sub-expression trees, mathematical expressions and numerical constant values 
obtained from 3rdrun for throughput (TCBR) evaluated using training dataset of CBR 
based traffic in terms of bandwidth (b), average end-to-end delay (d) and average jitter 
(j). The Sub-expression trees are shown in Figure 5. The mathematical expressions 
are shown in Equations 5, 6, 7 and 8.
The authors have considered 30 chromosomes and 3 genes per chromosome. 
Hence, totally 90 genes are generated randomly. The 90 genes get evolved (undergo 
mutation, recombination and transposition) over the assumed 2000 generations. The 
best 3 genes are selected based on the model and target values matching with the 
least rMSE value and are shown below in the Equations:
T
G C
G C
G C
d
G C
d
CBR1
1
1
1
0
1
1
2
1
1
= (
) +
×
(
) +
−












	
(5)
Figure 4. Mean and standard deviation of rMSE values in CBR based traffic using 
the GEP technique for the training and testing dataset
Figure 5. Sub-expression trees for the CBR based traffic

51
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
T
G C
b
G C
G C
d
CBR2
2
0
2
2
0
2
1
= (
)






×
(
)
(
) +
×
(
)
(
)
ln
	
(6)
T
d
d
d
CBR3
2
2 2
=
×
×
(
)











	
(7)
where b is bandwidth and d is average end-to-end delay are the input parameters, 
the numerical constant values such as G1C0, G1C1, G2C0, G2C1, G3C0, G3C1 are given 
in Table 7.
The ‘addition’ as the linking function is used in GEP; the expression tree obtained 
is as shown in Figure 6. The mathematical expression for throughput of the given 
network for CBR based traffic is given below:
T
T
T
T
CBR
CBR
CBR
CBR
=
+
+
1
2
3 	
(8)
From Figure 7, it is shown, the variation of model throughput values (obtained 
using GEP technique) and target throughput values (obtained from QUALNET 7.1 
network simulator) in the CBR based traffic. It is observable that model and target 
values match very closely. During approximation, the GEP technique generates 
mathematical expression by mapping input parameter with the respective output 
parameter using training dataset. The mathematical expression (i.e. Equation 8) 
is validated with the testing dataset. Similarly, from the Figure 8 we observe that 
model values match with target values with better approximation for testing dataset.
Table 7. Values of constants used in expression for throughput in CBR based traffic
Constant
Value
Explanation of the constant
G1C0
7.223358
1stconstant of Gene 1
G1C1
9.026275
2ndconstant of Gene 1
G2C0
7.223358
1stconstant of Gene 2
G2C1
6.719025
2ndconstant of Gene 2
G3C0
0.125396
1stconstant of Gene 3
G3C1
7.150665
2ndconstant of Gene 3

52
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
Figure 6. Expression tree for the CBR based traffic
Figure 7. Network throughput for training samples in CBR based traffic

53
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
Comparison Between GEP and ANN 
Techniques for CBR Based Traffic
The authors have compared the proposed GEP technique with Multi-Layer Perceptron 
Neural Network (MLP-NN) (Omkar et al., 2010; Senthilnath et al., 2012). Under 
CBR based traffic using the GEP technique, for the training dataset, the mean and 
standard deviation values are 68.21 and 50.50 respectively and for the testing dataset 
the mean and standard deviation values are 71.12 and 48.66 respectively. Using the 
MLP-NN technique, the values for mean and standard deviation for the training and 
testing dataset is computed and given in Figure 9.
From Figure 9, it is observed that, for five different runs carried out, the best 
run is selected by comparing the mean and standard deviation values of rMSE in 
each run. The 3rdrun resulted in minimum rMSE values compared to all other runs. 
Hence, for the training dataset the mean and standard deviation values are 58.42 
and 68.36 respectively and for the testing dataset the mean and standard deviation 
values are 66.92 and 67.22respectively.
Figure 8. Network throughput for testing samples in CBR based traffic

54
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
The throughput values obtained using MLP-NN are compared with throughput 
values obtained using the GEP technique. From the comparison, it is noticed that 
using the GEP technique we can generate a model which has better approximation 
with target values of throughput. Table 8 shows the mean and standard deviation 
of error between model and target values of throughput obtained through GEP and 
MLP-NN techniques.
From Table 8, the values of mean for MLP-NN technique is lower compared 
to values for GEP technique but MLP-NN has larger standard deviation values in 
comparison with the GEP technique. This suggests that MLP-NN is not appropriate 
to provide consistent model values for the throughput when compared to the GEP 
for the CBR based traffic. From the obtained result, it is noticed that the MLP-NN 
technique converge to only local optima. Hence, for the considered problem the 
authors conclude that the GEP has better performance than the MLP-NN.
File Transfer Application
Similar to the CBR based traffic, a total of 100 data items, each of 512 bytes 
is transferred. Apply the GEP technique for the training datasets of file transfer 
Figure 9. Mean and Standard deviation of rMSE values in CBR based traffic using 
the MLP-NN technique for the training and testing dataset
Table 8. Comparison between GEP and MLP-NN techniques for CBR based traffic
Technique
Training
Testing
Mean
Standard Deviation
Mean
Standard Deviation
GEP
68.21
50.50
71.12
48.66
MLP-NN
58.42
68.36
66.92
67.22

55
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
application. From Figure 10, it is noticeable that for five different runs carried out, 
the best run is selected by comparing the mean and standard deviation values of 
rMSE in each run. The 1st run resulted in minimum error values compared to all 
other runs. Hence, the mean and standard deviation of rMSE values for the training 
dataset are 2.1393e003 and 2.1690e003 respectively and for the testing dataset the 
mean and standard deviation values are 1.9023e003 and 2.0748e003 respectively.
The Sub-expression trees obtained from 1strun for throughput (TFT) evaluated 
using training dataset of file transfer applications in terms of bandwidth (b), average 
end-to-end delay (d) and average jitter (j). The Sub-expression trees are shown in 
Figure 11.
Figure 10. Mean and Standard deviation of rMSE values in file transfer application 
using the GEP technique for the training and testing dataset
Figure 11. Sub-expression trees for the file transfer application

56
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
Similar to the CBR based traffic, the authors have selected the best 3 genes (i.e. 
mathematical expressions) are shown in the below Equations 9, 10, 11 and 12.
T
j
b
d
FT1
3
2
=
+











	
(9)
T
d
G C
G C
G C
FT 2
2
2
1
2
0
2
1
3
=
×
×
−
(
)



	
(10)
T
G C
j
FT 3
3
0
2
3
=
+
( )
(
)






ln
	
(11)
where b (i.e. bandwidth), d (i.e. average end-to-end delay) and j (i.e. average jitter) 
are the input parameters, the numerical constant values such as G1C0, G1C1, G2C0, 
G2C1, G3C0, G3C1are given in Table 9.
Here also the ‘addition’ as the linking function is used; the expression tree 
obtained is as shown in Figure 12. The mathematical expression for throughput of 
the given network for file transfer application is:
T
T
T
T
FT
FT
FT
FT
=
+
+
1
2
3 	
(12)
In the file transfer application, from the Figure 13the model and target values 
match with better approximation. The GEP technique generates mathematical 
Table 9. Values of constants used in expression for throughput in file transfer 
application
Constant
Value
Explanation of the Constant
G1C0
-6.524719
1stconstant of Gene 1
G1C1
3.18808
2ndconstant of Gene 1
G2C0
2.508759
1stconstant of Gene 2
G2C1
-6.651825
2ndconstant of Gene 2
G3C0
-4.350281
1stconstant of Gene 3
G3C1
-7.314789
2ndconstant of Gene 3

57
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
expression (i.e. Equation 12) by mapping input parameter with the respective output 
parameter using the training dataset. This expression is validated with the testing 
dataset. Similarly, for the testing dataset from Figure 14, it is observed that the model 
and target values almost match.
Comparison Between GEP and ANN Techniques 
for File Transfer Application
The authors have similarly compared the GEP technique with MLP-NN for the file 
transfer application. Under file transfer application using the GEP technique, for 
the training dataset the mean and standard deviation values are 2.1393e003 and 
2.1690e003 respectively and for the testing dataset the mean and standard deviation 
values are 1.9023e003 and 2.0748e003 respectively. The values of mean and standard 
deviation for this training and testing dataset using the MLP-NN techniques is 
computed and shown in Figure 15. From Figure 15, we find that the 4thrun resulted 
in least rMSE values. Hence, for the training dataset the mean and standard deviation 
values using the MLP-NN technique are 2.7355e004 and1.5944e004 respectively 
and for the testing dataset the mean and standard deviation values are 2.9672e004 
and 1.6232e004 respectively.
From the comparison, the authors have found that the GEP technique generates 
model which has better approximation with target values of throughput. From Table 
10, it is noticed that the values of mean and standard deviation for error obtained 
Figure 12. Expression tree for the file transfer application

58
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
through GEP technique is lower than the values obtained through MLP-NN. From 
the obtained result, here also it is observed that the MLP-NN technique converge 
to only local optima. Hence, here also the authors conclude that the GEP perform 
better than the MLP-NN technique.
Sensitivity Analysis
In the previous cases, the researchers tried to obtain the mathematical expression 
by mapping input parameters (i.e. bandwidth, average end-to-end delay and average 
jitter) with output parameter (i.e. throughput) for CBR based traffic and file transfer 
applications. From the Equations 5, 6, 7 and 8, it is observed that the mathematical 
expressions are independent of average jitter (i.e. the throughput in the CBR based 
traffic is least sensitive to average jitter compared to the other parameters).
Hence, the sensitivity analysis is carried out with GEP technique by training the 
samples considering bandwidth and average end-to-end delay (i.e. ignoring average 
jitter) as input parameters with their output parameter to obtain the expression trees. 
Figure 13. Network throughput for training samples in file transfer application 

59
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
Figure 14. Network throughput for testing samples in file transfer application 
Figure 15. Mean and Standard deviation of rMSE values in file transfer application 
using the MLP-NN technique for the training and testing dataset

60
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
The authors conducted this experiment for several runs and the best run is selected 
and this is compared to the CBR based traffic with all input parameters. From Table 
11, it is observed that CBR based traffic with two input parameters (i.e. bandwidth 
and average end-to-end delay) has lower rMSE values.
The Sub-expression trees are as shown in Figure 16 and the mathematical 
expressions are shown in Equations 13, 14, 15 and 16.
Similar to other applications (i.e. CBR based traffic and file transfer), here also 
the authors have selected the best 3 genes which are shown below:
Table 10. Comparison between GEP and MLP-NN techniques for file transfer 
application
Technique
Training
Testing
Mean
Standard Deviation
Mean
Standard Deviation
GEP
2.1393x103
2.1690x103
1.9023x103
2.0748x103
MLP-NN
2.7355x104
1.5944x104
2.9672x104
1.6232x104
Table 11. Mean and Standard deviation of rMSE values in CBR based traffic
Case
Training
Testing
Mean
Standard Deviation
Mean
Standard Deviation
CBR application with 
all input parameters
68.21
50.50
71.12
48.66
CBR application with 
two input parameters 
(i.e. bandwidth and 
average end-to-end 
delay)
66.30
49.44
69.36
48.82
Figure 16. Sub-Expression trees for the CBR based traffic with two input parameters

61
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
T
b
e
G C
d
b
d
CBR
SA
b
_
1
2
1
0
=
+
(
)×
×
(
)−
+
(
)
(
)	
(13)
T
G C
G C
G C
G C
G C
CBR
SA
_
2
2
1
2
0
2
0
2
1
2
0
=
+
(
)×
×
(
)
(
)×
(
)	
(14)
T
G C
CBR
SA
_
3
3
0
=
	
(15)
where b (bandwidth) and d (average end-to-end delay) are the input parameters, the 
numerical constant values such as G1C0, G1C1, G2C0, G2C1, G3C0, G3C1 are given 
and explained in Table 12.
Here also the linking function (i.e. addition) is used in GEP. The obtained expression 
tree is as shown in Figure 17. The mathematical expression for throughput is:
T
T
T
T
CBR
SA
CBR
SA
CBR
SA
CBR
SA
_
_
_
_
=
+
+
1
2
3 	
(16)
Here also from the Figure 18, it can be concluded that model and target values 
match with better approximation. Using the training dataset, here also the mathematical 
expression (i.e. Equation 16) is generated and is validated with the testing dataset. 
For the testing dataset also it is found that the model values match with the target 
with better approximation and this is shown in Figure 19.
From the sensitivity analysis, the authors conclude that in the CBR based traffic, 
after ignoring the average jitter parameter from both training and testing dataset, the 
value of rMSE decreased and the throughput values obtained from the mathematical 
expression matched better with target values. Hence, throughput is least sensitive to 
Table 12. Values of constants used in expression for throughput in CBR based traffic
Constant
Value
Explanation of the Constant
G1C0
5.814789
1stconstant of Gene 1
G1C1
-0.279754
2ndconstant of Gene 1
G2C0
-8.953431
1stconstant of Gene 2
G2C1
-4.159057
2ndconstant of Gene 2
G3C0
5.814789
1stconstant of Gene 3
G3C1
-0.279754
2ndconstant of Gene 3

62
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
Figure 17. Expression tree for the CBR based traffic with two input parameters
Figure 18. Network throughput for training samples in CBR based traffic with two 
input parameters

63
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
the average jitter parameter. Further, from the Equations 9, 10 and 11 it is observed, 
in the file transfer application the throughput is sensitive to all the input parameters 
(i.e. bandwidth, average end-to-end delay and average jitter).
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
This chapter mainly focuses on predicting QoS of traffic for the given WiMAX 
network. The mathematical equations obtained using GEP technique can also be 
used in decision making. The throughput values which can be predicted using the 
formulated mathematical equations can be used as reference while making the 
decisions in scenarios such as network management and QoS monitoring. This 
technique can be implemented in diverse field of networks such as MANETs, 
Cognitive networks and EPONs.
Figure 19. Network throughput for testing samples in CBR based traffic with two 
input parameters

64
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
CONCLUSION
In this chapter, the authors have proposed an efficient QoS of traffic prediction 
mechanism for the WiMAX network using a nature inspired technique such as 
Gene Expression Programming (GEP). Here, the authors analyze the throughput 
performance of the network by predicting the QoS of traffic. The two datasets have 
been generated, one in CBR based traffic and the other in file transfer applications 
using QUALNET® 7.1 network simulator. The datasets consist of 69 training 
samples and 71 testing samples, totally 140 samples in each dataset. The generated 
datasets contain the throughput as the output parameter for the several values of 
input parameters such as bandwidth, average end-to-end delay and average jitter in 
both CBR based traffic and file transfer applications. This dataset is subjected to 
symbolic regression using GEP technique. The key point in using GEP technique 
is the future prediction that it offers.
The proposed technique is used to obtain the mathematical expressions for the 
QoS defining parameters such as bandwidth, average end-to-end delay, average 
jitter and throughput in both CBR based traffic and file transfer applications. The 
experimental results show that the model values (i.e. obtained from mathematical 
expressions) are almost matching with the target values (i.e. the generated data set) 
with the low rMSE value. The low rMSE values indicate that the model which is 
obtained from the proposed technique for throughput of both CBR based traffic 
and file transfer applications is efficient. The results from GEP technique are also 
compared with artificial neural network technique, namely multi-layer perceptron 
neural network for both CBR based traffic and file transfer applications and it is 
found that GEP technique provides model values which have better approximation 
with target values.
Further, this study also focuses on sensitivity analysis in both CBR based traffic 
and file transfer applications. The sensitivity analysis is carried out with the GEP 
technique. In CBR based traffic, throughput is least sensitive to the average jitter 
parameter and in file transfer application the throughput is sensitive to all the input 
parameters (i.e. bandwidth, average end-to-end delay and average jitter). From the 
obtained results, the authors conclude that the proposed technique is efficient and 
reliable, for analyzing the performance of the WiMAX networks by the QoS of 
traffic prediction mechanism.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are profoundly grateful to Prof. V. Mani, Department of Aerospace 
Engineering, IISC, Bangalore for providing the honorable opportunity to work 

65
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
in their Evolutionary Computations Lab. The authors would like to thank PES 
University for providing the resource to complete this work. Author J. Sangeetha, 
would like to express her sincere gratitude to Dr. Shylaja. S. S, HOD, Department of 
Information Science & Engineering, PESIT, Bangalore for her extensive support in 
the completion of the proposed work. This research received no specific grant from 
any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
REFERENCES
Acharjya, D., & Anitha, A. (2017). A Comparative Study of Statistical and Rough 
Computing Models in Predictive Data Analysis. International Journal of Ambient 
Computing and Intelligence, 8(2), 32–51. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2017040103
Akashdeep, K., Kahlon, K. S., & Kumar, H. (2014). Survey of scheduling algorithms 
in IEEE 802.16 PMP networks. Egyptian Informatics Journal, 15(1), 25–36. 
doi:10.1016/j.eij.2013.12.001
Akyildiz, I. F., Wang, X., & Wang, W. (2005). Wireless mesh networks: A 
survey. Computer Networks Journal (Elsevier), 47(4), 445–487. doi:10.1016/j.
comnet.2004.12.001
Ali, N. A., Dhrona, P., & Hassanein, H. (2009). A performance study of uplink 
scheduling algorithms in point-to-multipoint WiMAX networks. Computer 
Communications, 32(3), 511–521. doi:10.1016/j.comcom.2008.09.015
Anderson, J. A. (1972). A simple neural network generating an interactive memory. 
Mathematical Biosciences, 14(3-4), 197–200. doi:10.1016/0025-5564(72)90075-2
Bag, V., & Kulkarni, U. V. (2017). Stock Price Trend Prediction and Recommendation 
using Cognitive Process. International Journal of Rough Sets and Data Analysis, 
4(2), 36–48. doi:10.4018/IJRSDA.2017040103
Bakhshaii, A., & Stull, R. (2009). Deterministic ensemble forecasts using 
gene-expression programming. Weather and Forecasting, 24(5), 1431–1451. 
doi:10.1175/2009WAF2222192.1
Bashiri, M., & Geranmayeh, A. F. (2011). Tuning the parameters of an artificial 
neural network using central composite design and genetic algorithm. Scientia 
Iranica, 18(6), 1600–1608. doi:10.1016/j.scient.2011.08.031
Binh, H. T. T., Hanh, N. T., & Dey, N. (2016). Improved Cuckoo Search and Chaotic 
Flower Pollination optimization algorithm for maximizing area coverage in Wireless 
Sensor Networks. Neural Computing & Applications, 1–13.

66
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
Carvalho, T., Junior, J. J., Valente, W., Natalino, C., Francês, R., & Dias, K. L. 
(2013). A Mobile WiMAX Mesh Network with Routing Techniques and Quality of 
Service Mechanisms. In Selected Topics in WiMAX (pp. 61–84). InTech.
Chatterjee, S., Sarkar, S., Hore, S., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., & Balas, V. E. (2016). 
Particle swarm optimization trained neural network for structural failure prediction 
of multistoried RC buildings. Neural Computing & Applications, 1–12.
Cicconetti, C., Lenzini, L., Mingozzi, E., & Eklund, C. (2006). Quality of Service 
Support in IEEE 802.16 Networks. IEEE Network, 20(2), 50–55. doi:10.1109/
MNET.2006.1607896
Deng, S., Yue, D., Fu, X., & Zhou, A. (2015). Security risk assessment of cyber 
physical power system based on rough set and gene expression programming. IEEE/
CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica, 2(4), 431-439.
Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Beagum, S., Pistola, D. S., Gospodinov, M., Gospodinova, 
E. P., & Tavares, J. M. R. (2015). Parameter optimization for local polynomial 
approximation based intersection confidence interval filter using genetic algorithm: 
An application for brain MRI image de-noising. Journal of Imaging, 1(1), 60–84. 
doi:10.3390/jimaging1010060
Dey, N., Samanta, S., Chakraborty, S., Das, A., Chaudhuri, S. S., & Suri, J. S. (2014). 
Firefly algorithm for optimization of scaling factors during embedding of manifold 
medical information: An application in ophthalmology imaging. Journal of Medical 
Imaging and Health Informatics, 4(3), 384–394. doi:10.1166/jmihi.2014.1265
El Hassani, H., Benkachcha, S., & Benhra, J. (2017). New genetic operator (jump 
crossover) for the traveling salesman problem. In Nature-Inspired Computing: 
Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and Applications (pp. 1739-1752). IGI Global.
Ferreira, C. (2001). Gene Expression Programming: A New Adaptive Algorithm 
for Solving Problems. Complex Systems, 13(2), 87–129.
Ferreira, C. (2002). Gene Expression Programming: Mathematical Modeling by an 
Artificial Intelligence. Angra do Heroismo.
Goldberg, D. E. (1989). Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization and Machine 
Learning. Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.
Grewal, V., & Sharma, A, K. (2010). On Performance Evaluation of Different 
QoS Mechanisms and AMC scheme for an IEEE 802.16 based WiMAX Network. 
International Journal of Computer Applications, 6(7), 12 – 17.

67
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
Hamdan, M., & Abderrazzaq, M. H. (2016). Optimization of Small Wind Turbines 
using Genetic Algorithms. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 
7(4), 50–65. doi:10.4018/IJAMC.2016100104
Hore, S., Chatterjee, S., Santhi, V., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Balas, V. E., & Shi, F. 
(2017). Indian Sign Language Recognition Using Optimized Neural Networks. 
In Information Technology and Intelligent Transportation Systems (pp. 553–563). 
Springer International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-38771-0_54
Hu, J. J., Tang, C. J., Duan, L., Zuo, J., Peng, J., & Yuan, C. A. (2007). The strategy 
for diversifying initial population of gene expression programming. Chinese Journal 
of Computers-Chinese Edition, 30(2), 305.
Jeffrey, G. A., Ghosh, A., & Muhamed, R. (2007). Fundamentals of WiMAX: 
Understanding Broadband Wireless Networking. Prentice-Hall.
Kas, M., Yargicoglu, B., Korpeoglu, I., & Karasan, E. (2010). A survey on scheduling 
in IEEE 802.16 mesh mode. IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, 12(2), 
205–221. doi:10.1109/SURV.2010.021110.00053
Koza, J. R. (1994In press). Genetic programming II: automatic discovery of reusable 
programs. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kubusada, Y., Mohan, G., Manjappa, K., & Reddy, G. R. M. (2013). A Gene 
Expression Based Quality of Service Aware Routing Protocol for Mobile Ad Hoc 
Networks. In Computer Networks & Communications (pp. 283–290). NetCom.
Kuran, M. S., & Tugcu, T. (2007). A survey on emerging broadband wireless 
access technologies. Computer Networks, 51(11), 3013–3046. doi:10.1016/j.
comnet.2006.12.009
Lee, J. Y., Hwang, I. S., Liem, A. T., Lai, K. R., & Nikoukar, A. (2013). Genetic 
expression programming: A new approach for QoS traffic prediction in EPONs. 
Photonic Network Communications, 25(3), 156–165. doi:10.1007/s11107-013-0399-x
Li, B., Qin, Y., Low, C. P., & Gwee, C. L. (2007). Wireless Broadband Access: A 
survey on Mobile WiMAX. IEEE Communications Magazine, 70–75. doi:10.1109/
MCOM.2007.4395368
Liu, Q., Wang, X., & Giannakis, G. B. (2006). A Cross-Layer Scheduling Algorithm 
with QoS Support in Wireless Networks. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 
55(3), 839–846. doi:10.1109/TVT.2006.873832

68
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
Manogaran, G., & Lopez, D. (2017). Disease Surveillance System for Big Climate 
Data Processing and Dengue Transmission. International Journal of Ambient 
Computing and Intelligence, 8(2), 88–105. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2017040106
Marchant, J. A., & Onyango, C. M. (2003). Comparison of a Bayesian classifier 
with a multilayer feed-forward neural network using the example of plant/weed/soil 
discrimination. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 39(1), 3–22. doi:10.1016/
S0168-1699(02)00223-5
Nayak, S. C., Misra, B. B., & Behera, H. S. (2016). An Adaptive Second Order Neural 
Network with Genetic-Algorithm-based Training (ASONN-GA) to Forecast the 
Closing Prices of the Stock Market. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic 
Computing, 7(2), 39–57. doi:10.4018/IJAMC.2016040103
Ni, Q., Vinel, A., Xiao, Y., Turlikov, A., & Jiang, T. (2007). Wireless Broadband 
Access: WiMax and Beyond - Investigation of bandwidth request mechanisms under 
point-to-multipoint mode of WiMax networks. IEEE Communications Magazine, 
45(5), 132–138. doi:10.1109/MCOM.2007.358860
Omkar, S. N., John, R. L., Choudhry, N., Kubusada, Y & Bhageshpur, G. (2013). 
Crop Classification using Gene Expression Programming Technique. Springer-
Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
Omkar, S. N., Mudigere, D., Senthilnath, J., & Kumar, M. V. (2015). Identification 
of Helicopter Dynamics based on Flight Data using Nature Inspired Techniques. 
International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 6(3), 15. doi:10.4018/
ijamc.2015070102
Omkar, S. N., Ramaswamy, N., Senthilnath, J., Bharath, S., & Anuradha, N. S. (2012). 
Gene expression programming-fuzzy logic method for crop type classification. In 
Genetic and Evolutionary Computing (ICGEC), 2012 Sixth International Conference 
on (pp. 136-139). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ICGEC.2012.97
Omkar, S. N., Sivaranjani, V., Senthilnath, J., & Mukherjee, S. (2010). Dimensionality 
Reduction and Classification of Hyperspectral Data. International Journal of 
Aerospace Innovations Multi-Science, 2(3), 157–163.
Sabar, N. R., Ayob, M., Kendall, G., & Qu, R. (2015). Automatic design of a 
hyper-heuristic framework with gene expression programming for combinatorial 
optimization problems. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 19(3), 
309–325. doi:10.1109/TEVC.2014.2319051

69
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
Sangeetha, J., Nagaraj, K., Murthy, K. B., & Rustagi, R. P. (2016). A New Approach for 
Analyzing the Performance of the WiMAX Networks based on QoS Traffic Prediction 
Routing Protocol using Gene Expression Programming. International Journal of 
Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 7(2), 16–38. doi:10.4018/IJAMC.2016040102
Sekercioglu, Y. A., Ivanovich, M., & Yegin, A. (2009). A survey of MAC based QoS 
implementations for WiMAX networks. Computer Networks, 53(14), 2517–2536. 
doi:10.1016/j.comnet.2009.05.001
Senthilnath, J., Bajpai, S., Omkar, S. N., Diwakar, P. G., & Mani, V. (2012). An 
approach to multi-temporal MODIS image analysis using image classification 
and segmentation. Advances in Space Research, Elsevier, 50(9), 1274–1287. 
doi:10.1016/j.asr.2012.07.003
Senthilnath, J., Omkar, S. N., Mani, V., Vanjare, A., & Diwakar, P. G. (2014). 
Multi-Temporal Satellite Image Analysis Using Gene Expression Programming. 
Proceedings of Second International Conference on Soft Computing for Problem 
Solving, 236, 1039 – 1045. doi:10.1007/978-81-322-1602-5_109
Sharma, S., Kumar, S., & Singh, B. (2014). AntMeshNet: An ant colony optimization 
based routing approach to wireless mesh networks. International Journal of Applied 
Metaheuristic Computing, 5(1), 20–45. doi:10.4018/ijamc.2014010102
Sharma, S., & Malik, A. (2017). Routing in Wireless Mesh Networks based on 
Termites Intelligence. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 
8(2), 1–21. doi:10.4018/IJAMC.2017040101
Song, D., Ru-Chuan, W., Xiong, F., & Le-Chan, Y. (2010). Gene expression 
programming for attribution reduction in rough set. International Journal of Computers 
and Applications, 32(2), 226–231. doi:10.2316/Journal.202.2010.2.202-2842
Xu, L., Huang, Y., Shen, X., & Liu, Y. (2017). Parallelizing Gene Expression 
Programming Algorithm in Enabling Large-Scale Classification. Scientific 
Programming, 2017.
Zadshakoyan, M., & Pourmostaghimi, V. (2015). Cutting tool crater wear measurement 
in turning using chip geometry and genetic programming. International Journal 
of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 6(1), 47–60. doi:10.4018/ijamc.2015010104
Zuo, J., Tang, C., Li, C., Yuan, C., & Chen, A. (2002). Time series prediction based 
on gene expression programming. International Conference on Advances in WebAge 
Information & Management, 3129(1), 55–56.

70
Analyzing and Predicting the QoS of Traffic in WiMAX Network
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Constant Bit Rate Based Traffic: A real time multimedia application in which 
the bit rate must be maintained same throughout the entire data transfer. It is useful 
for multimedia streaming.
Empirical Value: Values that are obtained by observation, experience, and 
experimentation rather than by scientific proof.
Expression Tree: Tree structures which contains the variables at the leaves, 
mathematical functions at other branches, and a linking function at the root and 
which can be converted into mathematical expressions.
File Transfer Application: A non-real-time multimedia application which 
supports the transfer of data without the need to maintain constant data rate and is 
used to transfer multimedia files between network nodes.
Linking Function: A mathematical function such as addition, subtraction or 
multiplication that is used to connect various sub-branches of an expression tree.
Mutation Rate: The rate at which random and drastic changes occur in 
chromosomes during the process of evolution.
Recombination Rate: The rate at which the parent genetic material re-arranges 
due to crossover between chromosomes that might result in traits for offspring 
completely different from parents.
Sensitivity Analysis: A study of understanding the dependence of mathematical 
model’s output uncertainty on uncertainty of its input parameters.
Symbolic Regression: A type of regression analysis in which initially 
mathematical expressions are randomly generated and are improved successively 
in an iterative process to best fit a given dataset.
Transposition Rate: The rate at which a part of chromosome changes its position 
resulting in chromosomes of different genetic property.
WiMAX: WiMAX stands for Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access 
which is a point-to-multipoint broadband wireless technology concentrated mainly 
around IEEE 802.16e standard and aims at providing high speed data access over 
a wide area.

Copyright © 2018, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  3
71
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-4151-6.ch003
ABSTRACT
This study concentrates to develop one novel parameterized Bi-Histogram Fuzzy 
Contrast Stretching (BHFCS) method for enhancing the contrast of the grey level as 
well as color images properly. The parameters of this method have been optimized 
by employing one modified Chaotic Differential Evolution (CDE) with the combined 
assistance of Fractal Dimension (FD) and Quality Index based on Local Variance 
(QILV) as objective function. Experimental results prove that the modified DE gives 
better result than particle swarm optimization (PSO), genetic algorithm (GA) and 
traditional DE in this enhancement domain and the used objective function is also 
very useful to preserve the image’s original brightness which is the one of the main 
criterion of the consumer electronics field.
INTRODUCTION
In the realm of digital image processing all the indigenous algorithms must be cognizant 
of the two main aspects viz. contrast enhancement and brightness preservation of the 
images experimented. The endeavour of the enhancement algorithms is to achieve 
an optimal condition using an objective function where the image attains a state 
Chaotic Differential-
Evolution-Based Fuzzy 
Contrast Stretching Method
Krishna Gopal Dhal
Midnapore College (Autonomous), India
Sanjoy Das
University of Kalyani, India

72
Chaotic Differentia-Evolution-Based Fuzzy Contrast Stretching Method
of maximum clarity such that it can have a good visual analysis. Then only it can 
be differentiated from the original image having poor contrast and other technical 
anomalies.
The first ever approach is to achieve contrast enhancement was Histogram 
Equalization (HE) technique (Gonzalez, R.C., Woods, R.E. (2002)). HE based 
techniques have been used in medical image processing, satellite image processing 
etc. Basically HE procedure flattens the histogram of the original image. Theoretically 
the entire grey levels are distributed with uniform distribution. As a result of this it 
improves the contrast of the image, maximizes the image entropy. As the histogram 
of the output image is uniformly distributed the mean brightness is approximately 
changed to the middle of the grey level regardless of the mean of the input image 
(Chen, S. D., Ramli, A. R. (2004), Kim, Y.T. (1997)). To overcome the flattering 
effect of the histogram in HE method which sometimes results in giving washed-out 
images, unnatural enhancement and also some undesirable artefacts a new procedure 
was put forward by Kim (Kim, Y.T. (1997)) known as Brightness Preserving Bi-
Histogram Equalization (BBHE). In BBHE, histogram of the image was separated 
around its mean and then the two divided parts were equalized separately (Chen, S. 
D., Ramli, A. R. (2004), Shanmugavadivu, P., Balasubramanian, K., Muruganandam, 
A. (2014)). In Dualistic Sub-Image Histogram Equalization (DSIHE) proposed by 
Wan (Chen, S. D., Ramli, A. R. (2004), Shanmugavadivu, P., Balasubramanian, K., 
Muruganandam, A. (2014)), the procedure was same as BBHE, but the histogram 
was separated by median instead of mean (Chen, S. D., Ramli, A. R. (2004), 
Shanmugavadivu, P., Balasubramanian, K., Muruganandam, A. (2014), Chen, S. D., 
Ramli, A. R. (2003), Chen, S. D., Ramli, A. R. (2003)). Chen and Ramli proposed 
Minimum Mean Brightness Error Bi-Histogram Equalization (MMBEBHE) method 
(Chen, S. D., Ramli, A. R. (2004), Chen, S. D., Ramli, A. R. (2003)), in which the 
histogram was separated using a specified threshold which preserved the minimum 
mean brightness error between input and output images and then the two parts 
were equalized independently. This technique was better than BBHE and DSIHE, 
but it still suffered from deficiency of contrast and brightness (Shanmugavadivu, 
P., Balasubramanian, K., Muruganandam, A. (2014)). In literature, parameterized 
contrast stretching function was also reported for image enhancement and produced 
better result than traditional HE (Gorai, A., Ghosh, A. (2009), Gorai, A., Ghosh, 
A. (2011), Barik, M., Sheta, A., Ayesh, A. (2007), Dhal, K.G, Quraishi, I. M., 
Das, S. (2015), Dhal, K., G., Das, S. (2015), Dhal, K.G, Quraishi, I. M., Das, S. 
(2015), Dhal, K.G, Quraishi, I. M., Das, S. (2015)) . The optimal values of these 
parameters had been found by employing different metaheuristic algorithms with 
the assistance of properly selected objective function (Gorai, A., Ghosh, A. (2009), 
Gorai, A., Ghosh, A. (2011), Barik, M., Sheta, A., Ayesh, A. (2007), Dhal, K.G, 

73
Chaotic Differentia-Evolution-Based Fuzzy Contrast Stretching Method
Quraishi, I. M., Das, S. (2015), Dhal, K., G., Das, S. (2015), Dhal, K.G, Quraishi, 
I. M., Das, S. (2015), Dhal, K.G, Quraishi, I. M., Das, S. (2015)) . In this study, one 
novel parameterized fuzzy based bi-histogram contrast stretching function has been 
employed for enhancing the grey as well as color images and optimal parameters 
are computed by formulating the enhancement problem as optimization problem.
Recently nature inspired optimization algorithms are widely employed in different 
fields such as in finance (VijayalakshmiPai, G. A., Michel, T. (2017)), clustering 
(Benmounah, Z., Meshoul, S., Batouche, M. (2017), NizarBanu, P.K., Andrews, 
S. (2015), Hamou, R. M., Bouarara, H. A., Amine, A. (2015)), networking (Binh 
(2016)), medical field (Dey (2013), Dey (2014a), Dey (2014b), Dey (2015)), image 
processing (Pal, S.,K., Bhandari, D., Kundu, M., K. (1994), Hashemi, S. (2010), 
Coelho, L. D. S., Sauer, J.G., Rudek, M. (2009), Samantaa et. al. (2013), Dhal, K.G, 
Quraishi, I. M., Das, S. (2015), Gorai, A., Ghosh, A.(2009), Ashour (2015)), Neural 
network field (Hore (2017)) etc. In image enhancement field, optimal parameters of 
different parameterized transformation functions are optimized by minimizing or 
maximizing the proper objective functions. Evolutionary algorithms such as Genetic 
Algorithm (GA) (Pal, S.,K., Bhandari, D., Kundu, M., K. (1994), Hashemi, S., et. al. 
(2010)) and Differential Evolution (DE) (Coelho, L. D. S., Sauer, J.G., Rudek, M. 
(2009), Dhal, K.G, Quraishi, I. M., Das, S. (2015)) had been applied successfully in 
this domain. Pal et al. developed one GA based image enhancement procedure by 
considering entropy, compactness, index area coverage and their combinations as 
objective functions (Pal, S.,K., Bhandari, D., Kundu, M., K. (1994)). Hashemi et. 
al. also proposed one GA based method but the objective function was developed 
based on edge information (Hashemi, S. (2010)). Coelho et. al. proposed one variant 
of DE algorithm by modifying the crossover rate (CR) and mutation factor (MF) 
with the help of chaotic sequence which outperformed the traditional DE (Coelho, 
L. D. S., Sauer, J.G., Rudek, M. (2009)). Dhal et. al. proposed two variants of DE 
algorithms by incorporating Lévy flight, chaotic sequence and population diversity 
information and the modified DEs outperform the traditional one (Dhal, K.G, 
Quraishi, I. M., Das, S. (2015)). Both authors considered the combination of entropy 
and edge information as objective function. Swarm optimization algorithms like 
PSO have also been widely applied in image enhancement field (Gorai, A., Ghosh, 
A.(2009), Gorai, A., Ghosh, A. (2011), Barik, M., Sheta, A., Ayesh, A.(2007), 
Quraishi, I. M. (2014), Quraishi, I. M. (2013), Dhal, K, G.(2015), Eutamene, A. 
(2017)). PSO based brightness preserving enhancement model with entropy as an 
objective function had been proposed by Shanmugavadivu et. al. (Shanmugavadivu, 
P. (2014)). Chaotic sequence, Lévy flight and population making mechanism had 
been incorporated in Firefly Algorithm (FA) to increase its efficiency in image 
enhancement field (Dhal, K.G, Quraishi, I. M., Das, S. (2015)). The modified 

74
Chaotic Differentia-Evolution-Based Fuzzy Contrast Stretching Method
FA outperformed the FA via Lévy flight algorithm, PSO and GA by maximizing 
the combination of entropy, energy and contrast as objective function. Artificial 
Bee Colony (ABC) algorithm based edge image enhancement model had been 
proposed by Benala et. al. and ABC outperformed GA in this field (Benala, T., R. 
et. al. (2009)). Chaotic sequence based ABC algorithm had also been applied for 
brightness preserving image enhancement domain (Dhal, K., G., Das, S. (2015)). 
The proposed ABC outperformed the traditional ABC and PSO by considering 
the efficiency of the used objective function. CS algorithms with Lévy flight and 
chaotic sequence had been employed in image enhancement field (Dhal, K.G, 
Quraishi, I. M., Das, S. (2017), Dhal, K. G., Sen, M., Das, S. (2017), Dhal, K. G., 
Das, S. (2017), Bhandaria, A. K. (2014)). A chaotic version of Bat algorithm was 
presented by the authors (Dhal, K.G, Quraishi, I. M., Das, S. (2015), Dhal, K.G, 
Quraishi, I. M., Das, S. (2015)) which outperformed the chaotic CS algorithm and 
chaotic version of FA in image enhancement field. The next section describes the 
proposed image enhancement method.
PROPOSED BI-HISTOGRAM FUZZY CONTRAST 
STRETCHING (BHFCS) METHOD
This paper demonstrates a new parameterized Bi-Histogram Fuzzy Contrast Stretching 
model (BHFCS) for image enhancement which is discussed below:
1. 	
Find the histogram of the corresponding image.
2. 	
Divide the histogram based on threshold XT   which yields minimum brightness 
error between input and output images (Chen, S. D., Ramli, A. R. (2004), 
Chen, S. D., Ramli, A. R. (2003)). It is proved that this threshold helps to 
preserve the original brightness of the image (Dhal, K. G., Sen, S., Sarkar, K., 
Das, S. (2016), Dhal, K. G., Das, S.(2017a)).
3. 	
If any pixel i.e. X
X
i
T
≤
  then X
C
i ∈
1  and if X
X
i
T
≥
  then X
C
i ∈
2  where 
C C
1
2
,
 are classes corresponding to background and foreground respectively. 
Therefore, the fuzzy membership for the pixels corresponding to the classes 
C1  and C2  have been computed as follows
µc
i
T
i
T
X
X
X
X
1
1
(
) =
−
−
, µc
i
i
T
X
E
X
E
X
2
1
(
) =
−
−
−
	
(1)

75
Chaotic Differentia-Evolution-Based Fuzzy Contrast Stretching Method
Where, E ≤255  and it is set by optimization. µc1 and µc2  are fuzzy memberships 
for classes C1  and C2  respectively and membership values lie between 
0
1
1
2
≤
(
)
(
)




≤
µ
µ
c
i
c
i
X
X
4. 	
The enhanced pixel values for classes C1  i.e. X 
ie
c1  and C2 i.e. X 
ie
c2  have 
been computed as follows
X
X
X
K
ie
c
c
i
1
1
1
=
+
(
)
µ
.
,	
X
X
X
E
X
K
ie
c
i
c
i
c
i
2
2
2
2
=
(
) +
−
(
)
.
(
.
µ
µ
	
(2)
if X
or X
then normalization has been perfo
ie
c
ie
c
1
2
255
>
(
)
rmed.
Here Xie
c1  and Xie
c2  are the enhanced pixel values which are crucially depended 
on the parameters K1  and K2  which are belongs to [0, 255] and optimized by 
modified DE algorithm.
5. 	
Combine both Xie
c1  and Xie
c2 component and get the enhanced image.
Therefore, the proposed enhancement method clearly reveals that the proper 
enhancement significantly depends on the associated three parameters which are 
E K
,
1  and K2  with diverse ranges. The optimal values of these parameters are 
computed by employing one modified DE algorithm with the help of the combination 
of FD and QILV as objective function which is discussed in the next section.
OBJECTIVE FUNCTION
This paper also concentrates on finding one proper objective function to preserve 
the original brightness of the image. In this study one novel objective function has 
been proposed to accomplish that necessity. The proposed objective function is the 
combination of Fractal Dimension (FD) (Al-Kadi, O., S., Watson, D. (2008)) and 
Quality Index based Local Variance (QILV) (Aja-Fern´andez, S. (2006)).

76
Chaotic Differentia-Evolution-Based Fuzzy Contrast Stretching Method
Fractal Dimension (FD)
The fractal is based on the self-similarity and the fractal dimension is the quantitative 
expression of the inherent dimension of the images (Al-Kadi, O., S., Watson, D. 
(2008)). The basic method of deriving fractal dimension is box-counting method. 
Box counting is making the whole dimension by Figure uring out the points within 
determined box or grid. Mathematically, FD is computed using the following formula:
D
r
=






logN
log
r
1
	
(3)
Where, D is the fractal dimension. Maximum and minimum intensity for each 
box (2×2) are obtained to sum their difference, which gives the N and r as follows:
r
M
= s Where, M= min (R, C)	
(4)
where s denotes scale factor, R and C denote the number of rows and number of 
columns respectively when the grid size gets doubled, R and C reduces to half of its 
original value and above procedure is repeated iteratively until max(R,C) is greater 
than 2. Linear regression model uses to fit the line from plot log (N) vs. log (1/r) 
and the slope gives the FD as:
logN
D
r
r =






log 1 	
(5)
Quality Index Based on Local Variance (QILV)
QILV is used to measure the structural information of the image (Aja-Fern´andez, 
S. (2006)). A great amount of the structural information of an image is coded in its 
local variance distribution. Local variances features of an image can help to compare 
two images properly. The local variance of an image I is defined as 
Var I
E
I
I
i j
i j
i j
,
,
,
(
) =
−
(
)






2
, being I
E I
i j
i j
,
,
=
(
) the local mean of the image. It 
may be estimated using a weighted neighbourhood ηi j,  pixel under analysis with 
respective weights ωp  as:

77
Chaotic Differentia-Evolution-Based Fuzzy Contrast Stretching Method
Var I
I
I
I
i j
p
i j
p
i j
i j
p
i j
p
i j
p
i j
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
;
(
) =
−
(
)
=
∈
∈
∈
∑
∑
η
η
η
ω
ω
2
∑
∑∈
ω
ω
η
p
p
p
i j
p
I
,
	
(6)
The estimated local-variance of the image will be used as a quality measure of 
the structural similarity between two images. The mean of the local variance µVI is 
estimated as:
µV
i
M
j
N
i j
I
MN
Var I
=
(
)
=
=
∑∑

,
1
1
1
	
(7)
The (global) standard deviation of the local variance is defined as:
σ
µ
V
i
M
j
N
i j
V
I
I
MN
Var I
=
−
(
)−
(
)






=
=
∑∑
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
,
	
(8)
Finally, the covariance between the variances of two images I and J is defined as:
σ
µ
µ
V V
I
J =
−
(
)−
(
)
(
)−
(
)
=
=
∑∑

,
,
1
1
1
1
MN
Var I
Var J
i
M
j
N
i j
V
i j
V
I
J 	
(9)
Quality Index based on Local Variance (QILV) between two images I and J as 
follows:
QILV I J
,
(
) =
+
⋅
+
⋅
2
2
2
2
2
2
µ µ
µ
µ
σ σ
σ
σ
σ
σ σ
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V V
V
V
I
J
I
J
I
J
I
J
I
J
I
J
	
(10)
Where, 0
1
<
≤
QILV
The first term of QILV equation carries out a comparison betweenthe mean of the 
local variance distributions of both images. The second one compares the standard 
deviation of then local variances. The third term is the one to introducespatial 
coherence. To avoid some computational problemswith small values, some constants 
may be added to every term in equation.

78
Chaotic Differentia-Evolution-Based Fuzzy Contrast Stretching Method
Fractal Dimension (FD) measures the roughness of the image. It was reported 
that local variance distribution gives the information about the structure of the 
image (Dhal, K. G., Sen, M., Das, S. (2017)). If QILV increases then the structural 
information of the enhanced image is preserved. Therefore, In order to perform the 
proper enhancement, the combination of FD and QILV is taken as objective function.
The Objective Function is defined as:
Fit E K
K
FD
QILV
,
,
exp
1
2

exp
(
) =
(
) +
(
)
{
}	
(11)
Where, Fit .( ) is the objective function. FD  and QILV  represent the fractal 
dimension and quality index based on local variance of the corresponding image 
respectively. exp is the exponential operator. Therefore, from the definition of the 
objective function it can be easily verified that if the proposed objective function 
is maximized then the FD and QILV of the corresponding image are maximized 
i.e. the structural information and original brightness of the images are preserved. 
So, the optimization problem has been defined as:
E K
K
Fit E K
K
E K
K
0
10
20
1
2
1
2
,
,
arg[max
{
,
,
}
,
,
{
} =
(
)


	
(12)
This maximization problem has been solved by employing the modified Chaotic 
DE which is discussed in the next section.
CHAOTIC DIFFERENTIAL EVOLUTION (CDE)
In this study one new step size has been employed to control the mutation factor 
of the Differential Evolution. The methodology behind this step size has been 
discussed below
Step Size (
)
,
SS
Fit X
Fit
X
Fit X
Fit
X
i
t
gbest
t
i
gbest
t
i
=
(
)−
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
max
	
(13)
Where, Fit Xgbest
(
)  is the fitness value of global best solution up to generation 
number t. Fit
X
t
i
(
) is the fitness value of ith individual at generation number t. It 
is easily understood that 0
1
≤
≤
(
)
SS
. It is also clear that SS performs the main 

79
Chaotic Differentia-Evolution-Based Fuzzy Contrast Stretching Method
criteria of any metaheuristic algorithm that the step size be decreased or increased 
depending upon whether the solution is good or bad very well. Hence SS may be 
called as Fitness-based Step-size.
Chaotic Sequence
Recently, chaotic sequence has been incorporated with nature inspired algorithms 
to enhance their capability (Dhal, K.G, Quraishi, I. M., Das, S. (2017), Dhal, K.G, 
Quraishi, I. M., Das, S. (2015), Dhal, K., G., Das, S. (2015), Leandro, C., S., d., 
Viviana, C., M. (2009), Sheikholeslami, R., Kaveh, A. (2013), Coelho, L. d. S., Mariani, 
V. C. (2008), Caponetto, R. (2003)). Chaotic sequences are used in metaheuristic 
algorithms for three purposes 1. To generate random numbers 2.To generate inertia 
weight 3. To perform the local search. In this study the chaotic sequence has been 
successfully applied to update the mutation factor and crossover rate of the DE 
algorithm which are responsible for controlling the trade-off between exploration 
and exploitation. There are several chaotic generators like logistic map, tent map, 
gauss map, sinusoidal iterator, lozi map, chua’s oscillator etc (Dhal, K.G, Quraishi, 
I. M., Das, S. (2017), Sheikholeslami, R., Kaveh, A. (2013)). Among those logistic 
equation is used in this paper as it carries greater variance and outperforms others 
(Dhal, K.G, Quraishi, I. M., Das, S. (2017), Dhal, K. G., Das, S. (2017), Dhal, K., 
G., Das, S. (2015)). The equation of logistic map is given below:
L
aL
L
m
m
m
+ =
−
(
)
1
1
	
(14)
a is a control parameter and 0<a ≤ 4, Lm  is the chaotic value at mth iteration. The 
behaviour of the system mostly depends on the variation of a. Value of a is set to 4 
and L0  does not belong to {0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1} otherwise the logistic equation 
does not show chaotic behaviour (Coelho, L. D. S., Sauer, J.G., Rudek, M. (2009)).
Initial Population Generation
The initial population is usually created randomly. The equation of standard method 
is given below:
x
low
up
low
i =
+
−
(
)×∂	
(15)
xi  is the ith individual. up &low  are the upper and lower bound of the search space 
of objective function. ∂ is the random variable that belongs to [0,1].

80
Chaotic Differentia-Evolution-Based Fuzzy Contrast Stretching Method
If the initial population carries a great variance then it helps to restrict the 
premature convergence of the algorithm. Average population diversity is good when 
∂ is generated using logistic equation (Dhal, K.G, Quraishi, I. M., Das, S. (2017), 
Dhal, K., G., Das, S. (2015)). In this study, logistic equation based initial population 
has been used.
The algorithm of the Chaotic Differential Evolution is as follows
Step 1: Initialize the population by using the logistic equation.
Step 2: Take the Objective function Fit  as per Equation 11
Step 3: initialize the mutation factor F  and Crossover rate CR  by the logistic 
equation based chaotic sequence.
Step 4: Mutation step: For every enhanced image, take any three randomly chosen 
images i.e. X
X
r
t
r
t
1
2
( )
( )
,
 and Xr
t
3
( ).
Now, for every parameter, get a new parameter by
V
X
F
SS
X
X
i
t
r
t
i
t
r
t
r
t
+
(
)
( )
( )
( )
=
+
×
−
(
)
1
3
1
2
.
	
(16)
Where r1≠r2≠r3, SSi
t  is the step size at tth iteration.
F = mutation factor which controls the amplification of the difference between two 
individuals so as to avoid search stagnation.	
Step 5 Crossover: Crossover increases the diversity of the population.
H
V
if rand
CR
i
t
i
t
+
(
)
+
(
)
=

≤
1
1
0 1
,
,	
=

>
( )
X
if rand
CR
i
t
0 1
,
. 	
(17)
Step 6: Selection: Using parameter Hi create new enhanced image
X
H
if H
Fit X
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
t
+
(
)
+
(
)
+
(
)
( )
=
>
(
)
1
1
1
,	
=
≤
(
)
( )
+
(
)
( )
X
if H
Fit X
i
t
i
t
i
t
1
. 	
(18)

81
Chaotic Differentia-Evolution-Based Fuzzy Contrast Stretching Method
It means if modified parameters create an enhanced image which fitness value 
is greater than previous one replace it otherwise not.
Step 7: Update CR  and F  using logistic equation based chaotic sequence and find 
the global best solution.
Step 8: Repeat steps 4 to 7 until stopping criterion.
Stopping Conditions
Find the optimal stopping condition is a challenging matter. It has been chosen 
experimentally. It stopping conditions are:
1. 	
When the fitness value of the global best solution does not change for continuous 
10 iterations for a specific image.
2. 	
But the maximum limit of iterations number is 150 to find the optimal parameters.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The experiment has been performed over 100 grey level images and 50 color images 
and the computed experimental results have been given below:
Quality Assessment Parameters
Quantitative performance measurements are significant to compare between different 
image enhancements techniques and employed models. The well-known original 
brightness preserving quality measurement metrics for grey level as well as for color 
images have been discussed below.
Absolute Mean-Brightness Error (AMBE)
AMBE is basically used to measure the degree of the brightness preservation (Dhal, 
K.G, Quraishi, I. M., Das, S. (2017), Dhal, K., G., Das, S. (2015). Let input image 
is f  and output image is G then the AMBE is calculated as:
AMBE
Mean
Mean
f
G
=
−
	
(19)
Where, Meanf  and MeanG  are the mean of the input and output image respectively. 
If the value of AMBE is low then the brightness preservation is better.

82
Chaotic Differentia-Evolution-Based Fuzzy Contrast Stretching Method
Peak-Signal to Noise Ratio (PSNR)
This statistical metric is also used to measure the performance of the image 
enhancement methods. PSNR is the ratio between the maximum possible power of 
the signal and the power of the noise (Dhal, K.G, Quraishi, I. M., Das, S. (2017), 
Dhal, K., G., Das, S. (2015). It is actually distortion metric which is crucially depends 
on Mean-Squared Error (MSE). MSE defined as:
MSE f G
f i j
G i j
M
N
i
N
j
M
,
,
,
(
) =
( )−
( )




×
=
−
=
−
∑
∑
0
1
0
1
2
	
(20)
Where, f  and G  are the input and output image respectively. M and N  are the 
number of rows and columns of the image.
The PSNR is calculated as follows:
PSNR f G
log
L
MSE f G
,
,
(
) =
−
(
)
(
)






10
1
10
2
	
(21)
L is the number discrete grey level. For 8 bit image it is 256.	
If the value of PSNR is increased then contrast of the image is also enhanced and 
Absolute Mean Brightness Error (AMBE) is also reduced to some extent.
Simple popular metrics for gray level image enhancement such as Absolute Mean 
Brightness Error (AMBE) cannot be used in color image domain as each color model 
has their own representation for the brightness component (Kong, N. S. P., Ibrahim, 
H. (2008)). Therefore, apart from the visual results one popular referenced image 
quality assessment metric, PSNR-HVS-M (Ponomarenko N. (2007)) and one well-
known non-referenced quality assessment metric, Cube Root Mean Enhancement 
(CRME) (Gao, C., Panetta, K., Agaian, S. (2013), Panetta, K, Gao, C.,Agaian, S. 
(2013)) have been taken into consideration which are explained as follows:
Cube Root Mean Enhancement (CRME)
CRME is a contrast measurement technique for color image which measures the 
contrast not only within each color plane but also across the color planes (Gao, 
C., Panetta, K., Agaian, S. (2013), Panetta, K, Gao, C.,Agaian, S. (2013)). CRME 
computes the contrast by measuring the relative difference of color cube center and 

83
Chaotic Differentia-Evolution-Based Fuzzy Contrast Stretching Method
all the neighbours in that cube. It is also correlated with HVS property. So, greater 
value of CRME represents greater contrast with natural enhancement (Gao, C., 
Panetta, K., Agaian, S. (2013), Panetta, K, Gao, C., Agaian, S. (2013)).
PSNR-HVS-M
This metric is developed by considering the DCT basis function (Ponomarenko N. 
(2007)). PSNR-HVS-M has been used to evaluate the quality as it represents two 
significant features of HVS. First, it reveals the fact that sensitivity to distortions in 
low spatial frequencies is larger than to distortions in high spatial frequencies. Second, 
masking effect (worse ability of human vision to notice distortions in heterogeneous 
and textural image areas) has been taken into consideration.
Result Section for Grey Level Images
The Chaotic DE algorithm with BHFCS has been applied over 100 grey level 
images and enhanced image are given as Figure 1. The average values of the quality 
parameters over 100 images are presented in Table 1.
The experiment has been done using MATLAB R2012b with x64-based PC 
using 100 images. The average execution times of different methods and Friedman 
rankings (Derrac, J. (2011)) are given in Table 2.
Figure 1. Aircraft Image (a) original (b) Result of CDE (c) Result of DE (d) Result 
of PSO (e) Result of GA (f) Result of BBHE (g) Result of DSIHE (h) Result of 
MMBEBHE (i) Result of HE

84
Chaotic Differentia-Evolution-Based Fuzzy Contrast Stretching Method
Result Section for Color Images
In this study, proposed grey level image enhancement methodology is also applied 
in color image enhancement domain. Chien et.al. proposed exact Hue-Saturation-
Intensity (eHSI) model to enhance the color images (Chien, C. L., Tseng, D. C. 
(2011), Chien, C. L., Tsai, W. H. (2014)). Any gray level contrast enhancement 
method can be successfully employed for color image by using eHSI model. eHSI 
model is a hue preserving model which has the capability to resolve the out-of-gamut 
problem i.e. the pixel values of output RGB image always lie within their respective 
intervals. Traditional HE was applied by the author for enhancement purpose (Chien, 
C. L., Tseng, D. C. (2011)). But in this paper proposed BHFCS with Chaotic DE 
and stated objective function is employed to obtain a natural enhanced image. The 
flowchart of the enhancement process is as Figure 2.
Table 1. Values of the quality parameters for grey level image enhancement
Variants
Average Fitness
Average AMBE
Average PSNR
Average QILV
Chaotic DE
8.6799
2.030
26.2767
0.9523
DE
8.6510
2.8706
25.9078
0.9501
PSO
8.6432
2.9892
25.7787
0.9411
GA
8.4770
4.001
25.715
0.9403
Table 2. Friedman ranking and average execution time
Variants
Average 
Fitness 
Over 100 
images
Friedman ranking 
based on Average 
Fitness
Average 
Execution 
time 
(in sec.)
Friedman ranking 
based on Execution 
time
Chaotic DE
8.6799
1
30.21
1
DE
8.6510
2
35.56
2
PSO
8.6432
3
36.01
3
GA
8.4770
4
61.17
4
Figure 2. Block Diagram of the color image enhancement scheme

85
Chaotic Differentia-Evolution-Based Fuzzy Contrast Stretching Method
The enhanced color images are given as Figure 3 and the average values of the 
quality parameters over 50 color images are given as Table 3.
Consistency Analysis of the Employed 
Metaheuristic Algorithms
Consistency of the CDE has been measured by maximizing the proposed objective 
function iteratively. Each variant has been executed 10 times for each image and 
Figure 3. Woman Image (a) original (b) Result of CDE (c) Result of DE (d) Result of 
PSO (e) Result of GA (f) Result of eHSI with HE (g) Result of Naik’s model (Naik, S. 
K., Murthy, C. A. (2003)) (h) Result of Automatic Color Equalization (ACE) method 
(Gatta, C., Rizzi, A., Marini, D. (2002)).

86
Chaotic Differentia-Evolution-Based Fuzzy Contrast Stretching Method
the maximum fitness value (Max Obj.), Minimum fitness value (Min Obj.) and 
difference between Max Obj. and Min Obj. i.e. Diff for those 10 runs are measured. 
Consistency represents the stability or the robustness of the algorithm. Here, it has 
been taken as the difference between Max Obj. and Min Obj..Therefore, the less 
difference represents better consistency. The same methodology has been used for 
100 images. Then the average difference (AD) over 100 images has been computed 
by the following equation:
Average Difference AD
p
Diff X
i
p
i
(
) =
(
)
=∑
1
1
,	
Table 3. Average values of the quality parameters over 50 color images
Parameters
Chaotic 
DE
DE
PSO
GA
eHSI 
with 
HE
Naik’s 
model 
With HE
Automatic Color 
Equalization 
(ACE)
Average CRME
0.8553
0.8401
0.8387
0.8187
0.4007
0.4012
0.6270
Average
PSNR-HVS-M
26.82
26.75
26.71
24.10
21.97
22.01
23.71
Figure 4. Changes of AMBE and PSNR with respect to objective function

87
Chaotic Differentia-Evolution-Based Fuzzy Contrast Stretching Method
Diff X
MaxObj X
MinObj X
p
i
i
i
(
) =
(
)−
(
)




=
;
100 . 	
(22)
where, MaxObj Xi
 
(
) and MinObj Xi
 
(
) are the maximum and minimum objective 
function values over 10 iterations for ith image respectively and Diff Xi
(
) is the 
difference between these two. The values AD for each algorithm have been given 
in table 4 and their ranking is also done based on AD. Chaotic DE gets the best rank 
according to AD and therefore, it can be said that the chaotic DE is also very consistent 
metaheuristic algorithm.
Analysis of the Results
Visual analysis of the Figure 1 reveals that proper brightness preserved enhancement 
of grey level images occurs when proposed BHFCS is applied with metaheuristic 
algorithms and stated objective function. That’s why Figures 1(b)-(e) are far 
better than other enhanced results using existing methods such as BBHE, DSIHE, 
MMBEBHE and HE. But the chaotic DE produces the best enhanced image visually 
and quantitatively as per Table 1 which also states that chaotic DE has the finest 
efficiency of fitness function maximization. Besides that the enhanced images 
with chaotic DE also carry lowest AMBE value and highest PSNR value. Table 2 
represents the Friedman ranking depending upon the efficiency of fitness function 
maximization ability and execution time. Here the chaotic DE also gets the best rank.
The proposed grey level image enhancement model is employed for enhancing 
the color images through eHSI model which produces hue preserving and gamut 
problem free enhanced images. Figure 3 represents the enhanced color images 
using different methods such as well-known Naik’s model (Naik, S. K., Murthy, C. 
A. (2003)) and Automatic Color Equalization (ACE) method (Gatta, C., Rizzi, A., 
Marini, D. (2002)). Visual analysis and quality parameters of Table 3 demonstrate 
that the proposed enhancement model also very fruitful for producing the natural 
enhanced color images. Average CRME and PSNR-HVS-M for chaotic DE based 
model is superior to other metaheuristic based models. According to Tables 2 and 
4, Chaotic DE is very consistent algorithm within less computation time.
Table 4. Ranking based on AD values
Variants
Chaotic DE
DE
PSO
GA
Rank
1
3
2
4
AD
0.1787
0.2063
0.1971
0.2998

88
Chaotic Differentia-Evolution-Based Fuzzy Contrast Stretching Method
The brightness preservation ability of the employed objective function is also 
measured and represented as Figure 4 which states that the AMBE always reduces 
and PSNR increases when value of objective function increases. Therefore, the 
usage of developed objective function is fruitful in brightness preservation image 
enhancement domain which is the main criterion in consumer electronics field.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, one parameterized Bi-Histogram Fuzzy Contrast Stretching (BHFCS) 
method has been proposed where the proper enhancement of the image crucially 
depends on associated three parameters with diverse ranges. Therefore, the 
enhancement model has been formulated as maximization problem and one modified 
Chaotic DE with one novel objective function has been employed for optimizing the 
three parameters within reasonable time. The main aim of this study is to enhance the 
images by preserving its original brightness. Visual analysis and values of the quality 
parameters prove that the proposed enhancement model significantly performed 
very well. In addition to that the proposed grey level image enhancement model 
is also applied for color images through eHSI color model. Here, it also produces 
natural enhanced color images and outperforms some other well-known color image 
enhancement method such as Automatic Color Equalization (ACE) method. It is also 
proved in this study that the employed chaotic DE is very consistent and takes less 
time than the traditional DE algorithm. The chaotic sequence based mutation factor 
and crossover rate with the proposed step size assist the traditional DE to increase its 
efficiency. In the case of metaheuristic algorithm based image enhancement model, 
the proper enhancement also significantly depends on used objective function. 
Here, the brightness preservation ability of the employed objective also measured 
quantitatively in this study which proves that the objective function is very productive 
in the above said field. In future, this enhancement model can be applied in other 
kinds of image enhancement domain and the Chaotic DE can be compared with 
other existing metaheuristic algorithm in different optimization domain.
REFERENCES
Aja-Fern’andez, S., Jos’eEst’epar, R. S., Alberola-L’opez, C., & Westin, C. F. (2006). 
Image Quality Assessment based on Local Variance. 28th IEEE EMBS Annual 
International Conference, 4815-4818.

89
Chaotic Differentia-Evolution-Based Fuzzy Contrast Stretching Method
Al-Kadi, O. S., & Watson, D. (2008). Texture analysis of Aggressive and non-
aggressive lung tumor CE CT images. IEEE Transaction on Biomedical Engineering, 
55, 1822-1830.
Ashour, A. S., Samanta, S., Dey, N., Kausar, N., Abdessalemkaraa, W. B., & Hassanien, 
A. E. (2015). Computed tomography image enhancement using cuckoo search: A 
log transform based approach. Journal of Signal and Information Processing, 6(03), 
244–257. doi:10.4236/jsip.2015.63023
Barik, M., Sheta, A., & Ayesh, A. (2007). Image Enhancement Using Particle Swarm 
Optimization. Proceedings of the World Congress on Engineering.
Benala, T. R., Jampala, S. D., Villa, S. H., & Konathala, B. (2009). A novel Approach 
to Image Edge Enhancement Using Artificial Bee Colony Optimization Algorithm 
for Hybridized Smoothening Filters. World Congress on Nature & Biologically 
Inspired Computing (NaBIC), 1071-1076. doi:10.1109/NABIC.2009.5393866
Benmounah, Z., Meshoul, S., & Batouche, M. (2017). Scalable Differential 
Evolutionary Clustering Algorithm for Big Data Using Map-Reduce Paradigm. Int. 
Jr. Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 8(1).
Bhandaria, A. K., Sonia, V. A., Kumar, A., & Singh, G. K. (2014). Cuckoo search 
algorithm based satellite image contrast and brightness enhancement using DWT–
SVD. ISA Transactions, 53, 1286–1296.
Binh, H. T. T., Hanh, N. T., & Dey, N. (2016). Improved Cuckoo Search and Chaotic 
Flower Pollination optimization algorithm for maximizing area coverage in Wireless 
Sensor Networks. Neural Computing & Applications, 1–13.
Caponetto, R., Fortuna, L., Fazzino, S., & Xibilia, M. G. (2003). Chaotic Sequences 
to Improve the Performance of Evolutionary Algorithms. IEEE Transactions on 
Evolutionary Computation, 7(3), 289–304. doi:10.1109/TEVC.2003.810069
Chen, S. D., & Ramli, A. R. (2003). Minimum Mean Brightness Error Bi-Histogram 
Equalization in Contrast Enhancement. IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, 
49(4), 1310–1319. doi:10.1109/TCE.2003.1261234
Chen, S. D., & Ramli, A. R. (2003). Contrast Enhancement using Recursive Mean 
Separated Histogram Equalization for Scalable Brightness Preservation. Academic 
Press.
Chen, S. D., & Ramli, A. R. (2004). Preserving Brightness in histogram equalization 
based contrast enhancement techniques. Digital Signal Processing, 14(5), 413–428. 
doi:10.1016/j.dsp.2004.04.001

90
Chaotic Differentia-Evolution-Based Fuzzy Contrast Stretching Method
Chien, C. L., & Tsai, W. H. (2014). Image Fusion with no Gamut Problem by Improved 
Nonlinear HIS Transforms for Remote Sensing. IEEE Trans. on Geoscience and 
Remote Sensing, 52, 651-663.
Chien, C. L., & Tseng, D. C. (2011). Color image enhancement with exact HIS color 
model. Int. J. of Innovative Computing, Information and Control, 7, 6691-6710.
Coelho, L. D. S., Sauer, J. G., & Rudek, M. (2009). Differential evolution optimization 
combined with chaotic sequences for image contrast enhancement. Chaos, Solitons, 
and Fractals, 42(1), 522–529. doi:10.1016/j.chaos.2009.01.012
Coelho, L. S., & Mariani, V. C. (2008). Use of chaotic sequences in a biologically 
inspired algorithm for engineering design optimization. Expert Systems with 
Applications, 34(3), 1905–1913. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2007.02.002
Derrac, J., Garcia, S., Molina, D., & Herrera, F. (2011). A practical tutorial on the 
use of nonparametric statistical tests as a methodology for comparing evolutionary 
and swarm intelligence algorithms. Swarm and Evolutionary Computation, 1, 3-18.
Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Beagum, S., Pistola, D. S., Gospodinov, M., Gospodinova, 
E. P., & Tavares, J. M. R. (2015). Parameter optimization for local polynomial 
approximation based intersection confidence interval filter using genetic algorithm: 
An application for brain MRI image de-noising. Journal of Imaging, 1(1), 60–84. 
doi:10.3390/jimaging1010060
Dey, N., Chakraborty, S., & Samanta, S. (2014b). Optimization of watermarking 
in biomedical signal. Lambert Publication. Heinrich-Böcking-Straße, 6, 66121.
Dey, N., Samanta, S., Chakraborty, S., Das, A., Chaudhuri, S. S., & Suri, J. S. (2014a). 
Firefly algorithm for optimization of scaling factors during embedding of manifold 
medical information: An application in ophthalmology imaging. Journal of Medical 
Imaging and Health Informatics, 4(3), 384–394. doi:10.1166/jmihi.2014.1265
Dey, N., Samanta, S., Yang, X. S., Das, A., & Chaudhuri, S. S. (2013). Optimisation 
of scaling factors in electrocardiogram signal watermarking using cuckoo search. 
International Journal of Bio-inspired Computation, 5(5), 315–326. doi:10.1504/
IJBIC.2013.057193
Dhal, K. G., Namtirtha, A., Quraishi, I. M., & Das, S. (n.d.). Gray level image 
enhancement using Particle Swarm Optimization with Lévy Flight: An Eagle Strategy 
Approach. International Journal of Innovative Research in Science, Engineering 
and Technology, 5, 79-86.

91
Chaotic Differentia-Evolution-Based Fuzzy Contrast Stretching Method
Dhal, K. G., & Das, S. (2015). Diversity Conserved Chaotic Artificial Bee Colony 
Algorithm based Brightness Preserved Histogram Equalization and Contrast 
Stretching Method. International Journal of Natural Computing Research, 5, 45-73.
Dhal, K. G., & Das, S. (2017). Cuckoo search with search strategies. Pattern 
Recognition and Image Analysis. (accepted)
Dhal, K. G., & Das, S. (2017a). Combination of Histogram Segmentation and 
Modification to Preserve the Original Brightness of the Images. Pattern Recognition 
and Image Analysis, 27(2), 200–212. doi:10.1134/S1054661817020031
Dhal, K.G, Quraishi, I. M., Das, S.(2015). Performance Enhancement of Differential 
Evolution by Incorporating Lévy Flight and Chaotic Sequence for the Cases of 
Satellite Images. Int. J. of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 6, 69-81.
Dhal, K. G., Quraishi, I. M., & Das, S. (2015). Development of firefly algorithm via 
chaotic sequence and population diversity to enhance the image contrast. Natural 
Computing , 14, 1–12.
Dhal, K. G., Quraishi, I. M., & Das, S. (2015). Performance Analysis of Chaotic 
Lévy Bat Algorithm and Chaotic Cuckoo Search Algorithm for Gray Level Image 
Enhancement. Information Systems Design and Intelligent Applications, 233-244.
Dhal, K. G., Quraishi, I. M., & Das, S. (2015). A Chaotic Lévy flight Approach in 
Bat and Firefly Algorithm for Gray level image Enhancement. I.J. Image, Graphics 
and Signal Processing, 7, 69–76.
Dhal, K. G., Quraishi, I. M., & Das, S. (2017). An improved cuckoo search based 
optimal ranged brightness preserved histogram equalization and contrast stretching 
method. Int. Jr. of Swarm intelligence Research, 8, 1-29.
Dhal, K. G., Sen, M., & Das, S. (2017). Cuckoo search based modified Bi-Histogram 
Equalizationmethod to enhance the cancerous tissues in Mammography images. Int. 
Journal of Medical Engineering and Informatics. (accepted)
Dhal, K. G., Sen, S., Sarkar, K., Das, S. (2016). Entropy based Range Optimized 
Brightness Preserved Histogram-Equalization for Image Contrast Enhancement. 
Int. Jr. of Computer Vision and Image Processing, 6(1), 59-72.
Eutamene, A., Kholladi, M. K., Gaceb, D., & Belhadef, H. (2017). A Dual PSO-
Adaptive Mean Shift for Preprocessing Optimization on Degraded Document Images. 
Int. Jr. Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 8(1).
Gao, C., Panetta, K., & Agaian, S. (2013). No reference color image quality measures. 
2013 Int. Conf. on Cybernetics, 243-248.

92
Chaotic Differentia-Evolution-Based Fuzzy Contrast Stretching Method
Gatta, C., Rizzi, A., & Marini, D. (2002). ACE: An automatic color equalization 
algorithm. Proceedings of the First European Conference on Color in Graphics 
Image and Vision (CGIV02).
Gonzalez, R. C., & Woods, R. E. (2002). Digital Image Processing (2nd ed.). New 
York: Prentice Hall.
Gorai, A., & Ghosh, A. (2009). Gray-level Image Enhancement By Particle Swarm 
Optimization. Proceedings of World Congress on Nature & Biologically Inspired 
Computing. doi:10.1109/NABIC.2009.5393603
Gorai, A., & Ghosh, A. (2011). Hue preserving color Image Enhancement by Particle 
Swarm Optimization. IEEE. doi:10.1109/RAICS.2011.6069375
Hamou, R. M., Bouarara, H. A., & Amine, A. (2015). Bio-Inspired Techniques in the 
Clustering of Texts: Synthesis and Comparative Study. Int. Jr. Applied Metaheuristic 
Computing, 6(4).
Hashemi, S., Kiani, S., Noroozi, N., & Moghaddam, M. E. (2010). An image contrast 
enhancement method based on genetic algorithm. Pattern Recognition Letters, 
31(13), 1816–1824. doi:10.1016/j.patrec.2009.12.006
Hore, S., Chatterjee, S., Santhi, V., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Balas, V. E., & Shi, F. 
(2017). Indian Sign Language Recognition Using Optimized Neural Networks. 
In Information Technology and Intelligent Transportation Systems (pp. 553–563). 
Springer International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-38771-0_54
Kim, Y.T. (1997). Contrast enhancement using brightness preserving bi-histogram 
equalization. IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., 43(1), 1–8.
Kong, N. S. P., & Ibrahim, H. (2008). Color image enhancement using brightness 
preserving dynamic histogram equalization. IEEE Trans. on Consumer Electronics, 
54, 1962-1968.
Leandro, C. (2009). A novel particle swarm optimization approach using Henon 
map and implicit filtering local search for economic load dispatch. Chaos, Solitons, 
and Fractals, 39(2), 510–518. doi:10.1016/j.chaos.2007.01.093
Naik, S. K., & Murthy, C. A. (2003). Hue Preserving Color Image Enhancement 
without Gamut Problem. IEEE Trans. on Image Processing, 12, 1591-1598.
NizarBanu. (2015). Gene Clustering Using Metaheuristic Optimization Algorithms. 
Int. Jr. Applied MetaheuristicComputing, 6(4).

93
Chaotic Differentia-Evolution-Based Fuzzy Contrast Stretching Method
Pal, S. K., Bhandari, D., & Kundu, M. K. (1994). Genetic algorithms for optimal 
image enhancement. Pattern Recognition Letters, 15(3), 261–271. doi:10.1016/0167-
8655(94)90058-2
Panetta, K., Gao, C., & Agaian, S. (2013). No reference color image contrast and 
quality measures. IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, 59, 643-651.
Ponomarenko, N., Silvestri, F., Egiazarian, K., Carli, M., Astola, J., & Lukin, V. 
(2007). On between-coefficient contrast masking of DCT basis functions. Proc. of 
the Third Int. Workshop on Video Proc. and Quality Metrics.
Quraishi, I. M., De, M., Dhal, K.G, Mondal, S., & Das, G. (2013). Novel hybrid 
approach to restore historical degraded documents. IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/
ISSP.2013.6526899
Quraishi, I. M., Dhal, K. G., Paul Chowdhury, J., Pattanayak, K., & De, M. (2012). 
A novel hybrid approach to enhance low resolution images using particle swarm 
optimization. IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/PDGC.2012.6449941
Samantaa, S., Dey, N., Das, P., Acharjee, S., & Chaudhuri, S. S. (2013). Multilevel 
threshold based gray scale image segmentation using cuckoo search. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1307.0277
Shanmugavadivu, P., Balasubramanian, K., & Muruganandam, A. (2014). Particle 
swarm optimized bi-histogram equalization for contrast enhancement and brightness 
preservation of images. The Visual Computer, 30(4), 387–399. doi:10.1007/s00371-
013-0863-8
Sheikholeslami, R., & Kaveh, A. (2013). A Survey of Chaos Embedded Meta-
Heuristic Algorithms. Int. J. Optim. Civil. Eng., 3(4), 617–633.
VijayalakshmiPai, G. A., & Michel, T. (2017). Metaheuristic Optimization of 
Constrained Large Portfolios using Hybrid Particle Swarm Optimization. Int. Jr. 
Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 8(1).
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Chaotic Sequence: Chaos defines the complex behavior of non-linear 
deterministic system which has ergodicity property.
Fractal Dimension: Fractal dimension is the quantitative expression of the 
inherent dimension of the images.

94
Chaotic Differentia-Evolution-Based Fuzzy Contrast Stretching Method
Gamut Problem: The pixels values of the channels of the color space do not 
lie within their respective intervals.
Hue: Hue represents the kind of color i.e. the dominant wavelength that exists 
in mixture of colors.
Image Enhancement: Image enhancement is the technique of transforming one 
image into a better quality image according to the requirements.

Copyright © 2018, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  4
95
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-4151-6.ch004
ABSTRACT
In this scientific world, the evolution of the disease is predominantly higher than 
the medicines. The diagnosis and prognosis of such diseases will differ from patient 
to patient. In this scenario, the protein motifs are very useful for understanding 
the functionality and lethality of the disease. Most of the existing techniques are 
supervised approaches which require prior knowledge of the data. As the protein 
sequences are unsupervised data, the unsupervised data mining techniques like 
Clustering and 2-way Clustering are chosen to mine the homologous protein motifs. 
The quality of the results is refined further using the bio-inspired computing models 
like Particle Swarm Optimization, Genetic Algorithm and Venus Flytrap Optimization 
in this research work. The existing approaches can mine homologous patterns with 
structure similarity of 75 percent which is increased in this proposed approach. 
The results from these three different approaches show that the bio-inspired based 
2-way Clustering approaches can mine more homologous motifs than the clustering 
approaches.
Protein Motif Comparator 
Using Bio-Inspired 
Two-Way K-Means
R. Gowri
Periyar University, India
R. Rathipriya
Periyar University, India

96
Protein Motif Comparator Using Bio-Inspired Two-Way K-Means
INTRODUCTION
Proteins (Y.Vincent, Bernard, & SinanKockara) (Structures of life, 2007) are 
present in every cell of the organisms. They are involved virtually almost in all 
cellular activities. They are responsible for the various metabolic activities, nutrition 
transportation, regulations and etc. They exist as single chain molecule, as a three-
dimensional structures or even in the bundle or complex forms. The protein plays 
a vital role in cellular processes. The protein consists of twenty amino acids. They 
possess different characteristics such as hydrophobic, hydrophilic, polar, non-polar, 
etc. It is the great challenge to the bioinformatics researchers that to find which 
combination of proteins are responsible for what kind of activities. The structure and 
function discovery of proteins in living organisms is vital role in understanding the 
background of various cellular processes. It is helpful in treating various diseases 
and in detecting the drugs to peculiar diseases.
The purpose of this motif comparator is to detect the motif information (Zhaoa-
Xing-Ming, 2005) (Kunik.V, Solan.Z, Edelman.S, Ruppin.E, & Horn.D, 2005) 
from the protein sequences by clustering and 2-way clustering them. K-means is 
the benchmark clustering technique, used to group similar kind of data elements 
(Bapuji Rao, 2017). It is used to discover similar patterns from vast amount of data, 
a toy example is shown in the figure 1. It is widely used in many research areas like 
bioinformatics, pattern recognition, statistics, image analysis and machine learning. 
As all these areas are dealing with the unclassified data, the clustering is well 
suited to these kinds of research areas. The clusters can be found based on various 
similarities among the data such as intra distance and inter distance of the clusters 
(R.Gowri & R.Rathipriya, 2016-c) (Duggirala Raja Kishor, 2016). The quality of 
clusters will be evaluated based on our objective.
Figure 1. Clustering Approach: A toy example

97
Protein Motif Comparator Using Bio-Inspired Two-Way K-Means
2-way clustering (Madeira.S.C & OliveiraA.L., 2004) is one of the data mining 
techniques. It is also named as co-clustering (R.Gowri & R.Rathipriya, 2017), 
biclustering. Biclustering and 2-way clustering are used synonymously in this 
chapter. This approach generates biclusters of different sizes and characteristics as 
shown in the figure 2. The process of grouping data based on both the samples and 
attributes. K-means is used for 2-way clustering in the proposed approach. K-means 
is applied to both rows and columns simultaneously and local patterns (Biclusters) 
are extracted by combining these row and column clusters.
The major difference (Madeira.S.C & OliveiraA.L., 2004) (Berkhin, 2002) 
between the clustering and 2-way clustering are as follows.
•	
Clustering applied to either rows or columns of the dataset, but biclustering 
is applied to both rows and columns.
•	
The size of any one of the dimensions of all the clusters will be same, but 
biclusters are of different size.
•	
2-way clustering groups more similar element than the clustering process.
•	
2-way clustering can predict both global and local models but clustering 
approach predicts global models only.
Normally, the results of the k-means approach are dependent on the initial 
seeds chosen. Thus the result will vary for different runs. So in this proposed 
approach, the bio-inspired optimization models (NizarBanu & Andrews, 2015) are 
used to refine the results based on the intra cluster distance. The Particle Swarm 
Figure 2. 2-way Clustering: A toy example

98
Protein Motif Comparator Using Bio-Inspired Two-Way K-Means
Optimization (PSO) (R.Gowri & R.Rathipriya, 2016-b), Genetic Algorithm (GA) 
(R.Gowri & R.Rathipriya, 2016-d) and Venus Flytrap Optimization (VFO) (R.Gowri 
& R.Rathipriya, 2015-a) (R.Gowri & R.Rathipriya, 2015-b) are attempted in this 
work. The PSO is one of the de-facto optimization techniques but stuck with local 
optimum. The Genetic Algorithm also has local optimum problem but they search 
optimal solution in a randomized scenario. So the local optimal problem is minimal 
than the PSO. Further, VFO algorithm is a recently upcoming optimization technique 
which is free from the local optimal problem is also chosen to refine the results. 
In this current work, the motifs are extracted from the clusters and biclusters that 
are detected using the proposed PSO k-means (R.Gowri & R.Rathipriya, 2016-b), 
GA k-means (R.Gowri & R.Rathipriya, 2016-d) and VFO k-means (R.Gowri & 
R.Rathipriya, 2015-a) approaches. The secondary structure similarity is used to 
measure the biological quality of the results. The quality of motifs extracted from 
clusters and biclusters are compared. There are various database are available for 
the protein sequence and motifs such as BLOCKS (S.Pietrokovski, JG.Henikoff, & 
S.Henikoff, 1996), PROSITE (Bairoch.A, 8ucher.P, & Hofmann.K, 1996), PISCES 
(Wang.G & Dunbrack.R, 2003)and so on. The protein sequence is preprocessed 
for both clustering and 2-way clustering processes. The clusters and biclusters are 
compared based on their secondary structural similarity.
BACKGROUND
In this work (Zhaoa-Xing-Ming, 2005), they have proposed an novel approach for 
extracting features from motif content and protein composition. They have used 
Support Vector Machine (SVM) along with the combination of Genetic Algorithm 
(GA) and Principal Component Analysis (PCA) for extracting the protein motif.
In this work (Y.Fujiwara & A.Konagaya, 2008), they have proposed a methodology 
for protein extraction in their work, they have used the Hidden Markov Model (HMM) 
to detect the protein motifs from the proteins with motifs unidentified. They train 
the HMM with test samples of protein motifs of various categories to detect the 
protein motifs as similar to the trained dataset.
In this work (B.Chen, S.Pellicer, P.C.Tai, R.Harrison, & Y.Pan, 2009), the authors 
have proposed a novel efficient granular computing models for protein sequence 
motif and structure information discovery. The protein sequence motifs are extracted 
using the granular computing with the Fuzzy improved K-Means model and Fuzzy 
greedy K-Means model.
In this work (B.Cheng, C.Hudson, M.Kim, A.Crawford, J.Wright, & D.Che, 
2011), they have defined another method for protein sequence motif extraction using 

99
Protein Motif Comparator Using Bio-Inspired Two-Way K-Means
Decision Forest. They have used the decision forest combined with fuzzy logic and 
granular computing to get more efficient results than their previous work.
In this work (Y.Vincent, Bernard, & SinanKockara)The authors have proposed a 
biclustering algorithm for extracting the protein motifs. They obtained the clusters 
using Fuzzy Greedy K-Means (FGK) model along with the Granular Computing. 
They used Cheng and Church methodology to shrink the clusters in order to get 
high quality biclusters.
In this work (Elayaraja, Thangavel, Ramya, & Chitralegha, 2011), the authors 
have devised a method for motif extraction process using the rough K-Means. 
They have used Rough K-Means to yield the better results than simple K-Means in 
their work, “Extraction of Motif Information from Protein Sequences using Rough 
K-Means” in 2011
In this work (Elayaraja E, 2012), they have further suggested another method for 
motif extraction process using the SVD in addition to the rough K-Means in order 
to attain better results. Their work is “Extraction of Motif Patterns from Protein 
Sequences Using SVD with Rough K-Means Algorithm” in 2011
In this work (Bill.C.H.Chang, 2012), they have suggested a method for Protein 
Motif Extraction Using Neuro-Fuzzy optimization in 2002, they attempted to improve 
the speed and flexibility of protein motif identification. They proposed an algorithm 
to extract both rigid and flexible protein motifs and to detect consensus pattern, or 
motif, from a group of related protein sequences.
In this work (Chen Yi-Cheng, 2011), they have suggested a method for the 
discovery of Protein Phosphorylation Motifs through Exploratory Data Analysis, 
they proposed an F-Motif algorithm for motif extraction using clustering methods 
in 2011.
In this work (R.Gowri & R.Rathipriya, 2015) they have suggested that the 
PSO algorithm can improvise the results further than the existing approaches. The 
biclustering approach can mine more local patterns than the clustering approach 
in 2015.
The various works in the literature show that the different hybrid methods were 
used for extracting the Motif Information. Those methods are any combination of 
Support Vector Machine (SVM), hidden Markov Model (HMM), Neural Networks, 
Fuzzy system, Rough set, Clustering technique and so on. Some authors were used 
optimization technique to improve the extraction process. From the literature, 
it shows the combination of optimization technique can improve the results but 
sometimes they stuck with local optimum. The clustering technique is better suits 
for unidentified data. The biclustering further improves results than the clustering 
process, the combination of bio-inspired models with clustering and 2-way clustering 
on protein sequences is proposed and yield better results. This proposed work is 
further discussed in the following sections.

100
Protein Motif Comparator Using Bio-Inspired Two-Way K-Means
PROTEIN MOTIF COMPARATOR
Objective of Motif Comparator
The objective of the Protein Motif Comparator is to detect Motifs either from the 
clusters are biclusters. The clusters (L.Youcheng, et al., 2012) (AshaGowdaKaregowda 
& SeemaKumari, 2013) and biclusters (Rathipriya, Thangavel, & J.Bagyamani, 2011) 
(Cui Xiaohui, 2005) (Das Shyama, 2010) are obtained by applying Bio-Inspired based 
approaches like Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) k-means, Genetic Algorithm 
(GA) k-means and Venus Flytrap Optimization (VFO) k-means to the preprocessed 
Protein Sequences. 
The main objective of these Bio-Inspired K-Means is to reduce the intra-distance 
and to increase the inter-distance of the clusters/biclusters. The structure similarity 
of the sequences is used to find the highly homologous sequences.
The significant amino acids (Chen Yi-Cheng, 2011) that play vital role in any 
cluster and bicluster can be visualized using sequence logo representation. The 
number of cluster/bicluster that present with selected similarity percentage can be 
detected. The work flow of the motif comparator is shown in the figure 3.
Figure 3. Overview of the Motif Comparator

101
Protein Motif Comparator Using Bio-Inspired Two-Way K-Means
Bio-Inspired Computing Techniques
Genetic Algorithm
The Genetic algorithm (GA) (Holland) (Forrest, 1993) (DE, 1989)is one of the 
benchmark Meta-heuristic optimization technique almost suits for various types 
of problems in many domains. Genetic algorithm is devised by John Holland. The 
pseudo code of genetic algorithm is depicted in figure 4. It is one of the evolutionary 
algorithms, mimics the natural selection process. The individuals (chromosomes) of 
GA are represented as the string of bits generally but other kinds of representation 
are also possible. It is an iterative process starts with initial random population and 
terminates until the maximum generation. The fitness of the individuals is evaluated 
which is based on the objective function of optimization problem being discussed. 
It has various genetic evolution processes like Inheritance, mutation, selection and 
crossover.
Selection Operator is a process of selecting a proportion of individuals to breed 
the new generation in each successive generation (Holland) (Forrest, 1993) (DE, 
1989). It is carried out based on the fitness of the solutions. The fitness function is 
problem dependent. The rate of fitness value is studied and the fitter individuals are 
likely to be selected. There are different selection operators are available.
The crossover and mutation operations are used for generating new generation 
(Holland) (Forrest, 1993) (DE, 1989). A pair of parent individuals is selected to 
generate new child individuals. Similarly, a pool of child individuals is generated. The 
characteristics of both parents are shared by the child individual. There are different 
types of crossover operators like single point crossover, multi-point crossover are 
available. The mutation operator is used to mutate the population for generating 
new traits. These processes ultimately result in the next generation population of 
chromosomes that is different from the initial generation. Although crossover and 
mutation are known as the main genetic operators, it is possible to use other operators 
such as regrouping, colonization-extinction, or migration in genetic algorithms.
This generational process is repeated until a termination condition has been 
reached. Common terminating conditions (Holland) (Forrest, 1993) (DE, 1989) 
are: a solution is found that satisfies minimum criteria, fixed number of generations 
reached, allocated budget (computation time/money) reached, the highest ranking 
solution’s fitness is reaching or has reached a plateau such that successive iterations no 
longer produce better results, manual inspection or combinations of these conditions.
It is a most powerful unbiased optimization technique for sampling a large solution 
space. It is adaptive to any kind of environment with minimal changes. Typical 
optimization techniques require more space and time to mine all feasible solutions.

102
Protein Motif Comparator Using Bio-Inspired Two-Way K-Means
Particle Swarm Optimization
The particle swarm optimization (AshaGowdaKaregowda & SeemaKumari, 2013)is 
one of the swarm intelligence techniques. It is a stochastic optimization technique. It 
is a population based method that is designed based on the birds flocking behavior. 
Selecting the initial population is decided based on the problem criteria. The steps 
involved in PSO algorithm are given in the figure 5. The number of individuals in 
the population is decided based on the objective of the problem. The particle at 
each time interval updates its position and velocity based on its own best position 
achieved so far and the global best position achieved by any one of the particles in 
its swarm. The random terms are used to weigh the acceleration of the particle. The 
best position is evaluated based on the objective function of the problem. The basic 
particle swarm optimization algorithm (PriteshVora, 2013) (P.Riccardo, K.James, 
& B.Tim, 2007) is in 0.
The velocity of the particle is updated based on equation 1, here the first term 
is based on the velocity of the previous iteration t, second term is cognition part, 
based on the local best position of the particle and the third term is social part, based 
on the global best position of the particle. The w represents the inertia weight of 
the previous velocity of the particle; it is calculated using the equation 2. The c1 
and c2 are constant values chosen randomly, the R1 and R2 are random numbers 
where R1, R2 [0, 1].
vel
t
wv
t
c R
pbest
x
t
c R
gbest
x
t
ij
ij
ij
ij
ij
ij
+
(
) =
( ) +
−
( )
(
) +
−
( )
1
1
1
2
2 (
)	
(1)
Figure 4. Pseudo code for Genetic Algorithm

103
Protein Motif Comparator Using Bio-Inspired Two-Way K-Means
Where,
w
W
W
W
iter max
iter x
max
max
min
=
−
−
(
)
−
( )	
(2)
The wmax is the initial weight of the particle and wmin is the final weight of the 
particle. The position of the particle at each iteration is updated using the equation 
3 based on the updated velocity of the particle.
x
t
x
t
v
t
ij
ij
ij
+
(
) =
( ) +
+
(
)
1
1 	
(3)
Venus Flytrap Optimization
The Venus Flytrap Optimization (R.Gowri & R.Rathipriya, 2015-b) is also a meta-
heuristic algorithm that can be applied to any kind of optimization problems. The 
rapid closure behavior of the Venus Flytrap leaves (trap) to capture the prey is 
mimicked in this algorithm. The closure action is triggered through the stimulations 
of trigger hairs on the surface of the lobes, carried out by the prey (objects). The 
pseudo code of the VFO is discussed as in the figure. This algorithm has Initial 
phase, trapping phase and sealing phase. The pseudocode of the VFO algorithm is 
discussed in the figure 6.
Figure 5. Pseudocode of Particle Swarm Optimization

104
Protein Motif Comparator Using Bio-Inspired Two-Way K-Means
The stimulation of trigger hairs generates the action potential required for the 
closure of the leaf. The potential generated is dissipated at a particular rate and 
reaches to zero. It is calculated using the equation (4).
u
e
t
t
t
t
=
≥
<




−
0 15
0
0
0
2000
.
,
,
	
(4)
Where, t is the trigger time at which the trigger hairs are stimulated, t<0 before 
the first stimulation, t=0 for the first stimulation, t>0 for the second stimulation. 
The time between the two successive stimulations will be less than 30 seconds in 
order to initiate the flytrap closure. So the time before first stimulation is taken as 
less than zero, the time at the first stimulation is taken as zero and the time at which 
the trigger is stimulated for the second time is taken as greater than zero. Thus there 
is no action potential for the flytrap before the first stimulation. This is shown in 
the equation (4).
The charge accumulation may relate to the stepwise accumulation of a bioactive 
substance, resulting in ion channel activation by the action potential. It is evaluated 
using the equation (5).
Figure 6. Pseudo Code for VFO

105
Protein Motif Comparator Using Bio-Inspired Two-Way K-Means
C
k C
k u
c
a
t
= −
+
	
(5)
Where, C is the charge accumulated by the lobes for trap shutter. The ka is the 
rate of accumulation of the charge, i.e., the rate at which the charge is builds up 
based on the action potential attained in the stimulation. For the first stimulation 
the dissipation part will be zero because the initial charge of the flytrap before first 
stimulation is zero, it will work for the second stimulation to sum up the previously 
gained charge with it. This is how the charge is calculated in the real flytraps. In these 
computational flytraps, the charge is calculated based on the objective function f(x).
The next parameter is the flytrap status (δ ), used to know the current status of 
the flytraps. The status of the flytrap will be either 0 or 1 or 2(open or close or seal).
δ
δ
ft
C
ft
( ) =
( ) =
( ) =
≤≤
,
,
, 
 
2
1
1
1
0
S
t
T
otherwise
0,





	
(6)
The flytrap will be initially in the opened the (0) state. If the trap closure is 
triggered by the prey (object) then the trap will be in closed (1) state. The time point 
of the first stimulation is taken as zero, here the t represents the second stimulation 
time. The T is the time threshold between two stimulations.
Hybrid Bio-Inspired K-Means
The hybrid bio-inspired k-means represents the k-means algorithm is optimized by 
adapting the bio-inspired optimization techniques (R.Gowri & R.Rathipriya, 2016-
b) like PSO, GA and VFO as discussed in the previous sections. This combination 
of bio-inspired models as PSO k-means (R.Gowri & R.Rathipriya, 2016-a), GA 
k-means and VFO k-means improves the performance of k-means algorithm. These 
stochastic algorithms are used in order to search the optimal Motifs in a randomized 
solution space.
In the PSO k-means (R.Gowri & R.Rathipriya, 2015) algorithm the set of 
centroids are mapped as the position of the particle, the fitness of the particle is 
the intra cluster distance. The velocity of the particle is randomly initialized. The 
number of particles np is chosen as 50, these particles is iterated at the maximum 
of 1000 iterations (maxiter). In the PSO algorithm the particles are influenced by 
the global best and particle best positions so the particles has more possibility to 
stuck at local optimum values.

106
Protein Motif Comparator Using Bio-Inspired Two-Way K-Means
In the GA based k-means the chromosomes are represented as binary strings. 
The membership values of the set clusters are the individuals. The length of string 
is same as the number of residue fragments generated. The intra cluster distance is 
the fitness of the individuals. The crossover probability chosen is 0.7. The genetic 
algorithm has more random search nature compared to PSO. Even though it searches 
solution randomly, sometimes individuals may stuck with local optimum.
To avoid this local optimum problem the VFO is chosen to this approach. In the 
VFO algorithm the best solution is retained until the new best solution is obtained. 
Thus the local optimum problem is avoided in this optimization technique. The intra 
cluster distance is chosen as fitness measure. The charge accumulated (C) maps the 
intra cluster distance. The maximum fitness value is chosen as the charge threshold.
The distance (Elayaraja, K.Thangavel, M.Chitralega, & T.Chandrasekhar, 2012) 
(Y.Vincent, Bernard, & SinanKockara)between the different protein sequences is 
evaluated using the city block distance using equation (1). Vk is kth sequence and 
Vc is the centroid sequence.
Figure 7. Workflow of Hybrid bio-Inspired K-Means

107
Protein Motif Comparator Using Bio-Inspired Two-Way K-Means
city block distance
V
i j
V i j
i
R
j
A
k
c
=
( )−
( )
=
=
∑∑
1
1
,
,
	
(7)
The intra distance of the cluster is chosen as the fitness of all the three bio-inspired 
k-means approaches proposed for Motif Comparator. The distance is calculated using 
the equation (7). The mean of the distances between each sequence in the cluster 
and its centroid is taken as the fitness of the cluster. The fitness (Ahmadyfard.A & 
Modares.H, 2008) is calculated using the equation (8). Here Vk is the sequence in 
cluster k and cent is the centroid of the cluster.
fitness
n
distance V
i
cent
i
n
k
=
( )






=∑
1
1
/
(
,
)	
(8)
The structure similarity (Y.Vincent, Bernard, & SinanKockara) of each cluster 
and bicluster is calculated using the equation (9). Here ws is the window size and 
Pi,H shows the frequency of occurrence of helix among the segments for the cluster 
in position i. Pi,E and Pi,C are defined in a similar way. The motifs are
similarity
max P
P
P
ws
i
ws
i H
i E
i C
=
(
)
=
∑
1
,
,
,
,
,
	
(9)
Dataset Description
The protein sequences and their secondary structures are collected from different 
databases. Normally, the Secondary structures are taken from DSSP. Yeast Proteins 
and its structure are taken. The proteins and their secondary structures are stored in 
separate files, in the same order. The file is stored as FASTA format in a text file. 
Those files are loaded into this tool. The comparator is used to simulate the results 
of the first approach PSO k-means. The remaining two approaches are implemented 
similarly using MATLAB without GUI.
Data Preparation
The protein sequences are of different length and it is collection of Amino acids. 
In order to equalize the sequence length and to convert it to the numerical data the 
sequence is arranged into 9 or 10 residues (columns). The frequency profiles of these 
amino acid residues are taken to implement the proposed approach. The columns 

108
Protein Motif Comparator Using Bio-Inspired Two-Way K-Means
and rows represent Amino acids and residues. Now each sequence (Elayaraja, 
K.Thangavel, M.Chitralega, & T.Chandrasekhar, 2012) (Y.Vincent, Bernard, & 
SinanKockara) is now converted into 9 by 20 matrixes. These are used for clustering 
purpose it is shown in the figure 8.
For 2-way clustering the sequence these matrixes are further normalized into a 
single row as in the figure 9 using average normalization.
There are eight classes in secondary structure which is mapped to three classes 
by using the following conversion model: assigning H, G, and I to H (Helices), 
assigning B and E to E (Sheets), and assigning all others to C (Coils).
Clustering the Sequential Data
The protein sequences are clustered in order to group the highly homologous sequences 
together and detect the significant amino acids in it. These significant amino acids 
are used for the further research in finding the functionality of the proteins.
Figure 8. Motif Comparator preprocessing protein sequence for clustering
Figure 9. Motif Comparator preprocessing protein sequence for 2-way clustering

109
Protein Motif Comparator Using Bio-Inspired Two-Way K-Means
The PSO k-means is performed as follows: The number of clusters to be detected 
and number of particles to be handled are given as input for the clustering besides 
the sequence data in the interface as in figure 10(a). The result button is clicked to 
cluster the sequences given and visualizing panel will be displayed as in the figure 
10(b). The remaining two approaches are implemented and the comparative results 
are visualized in the figure 10.
Figure 10. Motif Comparator (PSO k-means): (a) Cluster Specification (b)Results 
Obtained
Figure 11. Motif Comparator(PSO k-means) – (a) Entering bicluster specification 
(b) and Bicluster results

110
Protein Motif Comparator Using Bio-Inspired Two-Way K-Means
Bi-Clustering the Sequential Data
The protein sequences are biclustered (Madeira.S.C & OliveiraA.L., 2004) in order 
to group the highly homologous sequences together and detect the significant amino 
acids in it better than the clustering process. These significant amino acids are used 
for the further research in finding the functionality of the proteins. The number 
of row clusters and column clusters to be detected and number of particles to be 
handled are given as input for the 2-way clustering process besides the sequence data 
as in the figure 11 (a). The result button is clicked to bicluster the given sequences 
and visualizing panel will be displayed as in the figure 11 (b). The remaining two 
approaches are implemented and the comparative results are visualized in the figure 11.
Figure 12. Logo representation of some common motifs found by all the proposed 
approaches

111
Protein Motif Comparator Using Bio-Inspired Two-Way K-Means
Visualizing Motifs and Comparative Analysis
The obtained clusters are visualized using the logo representation. The significant 
amino acids that are present in each cluster will be displayed in logo window by 
selecting the cluster id given in the list on the cluster result panel. The sample logo 
representations of some common motifs extracted are shown in the figure 12.
The obtained biclusters are visualized using the logo representation. The 
significant amino acids that are present in each cluster will be displayed in logo 
Figure 13. Logo representation of some common motifs found by all the proposed 
approaches

112
Protein Motif Comparator Using Bio-Inspired Two-Way K-Means
Figure 14. Comparison of number of cluster and biclusters extracted using the 
proposed Bio-Inspired k-means approaches based on structure similarity

113
Protein Motif Comparator Using Bio-Inspired Two-Way K-Means
window by selecting the bicluster id given in the list on the bicluster result panel. 
The sample logo representations of some common bicluster extracted by all the 
proposed approaches are shown in the figure 13. The number of biclusters with 
required similarity percentage can be detected by selecting the similarity value 
displayed in the list as in the figure 11.
The comparative analysis is carried out by comparing the number of clusters and 
biclusters predicted by all the proposed approaches at specified structure similarity 
percent value. The results show that the GA and VFO based k-means approach can 
predict more patterns with more structure similarity than the PSO k-means. The 
2-way clustering outperforms the clustering approach in all the three proposed 
approaches. The results are shown in the figure 14.
CONCLUSION
The protein motifs plays important role in studying the characteristics of the 
biological system. The existing approaches require prior knowledge to predict the 
protein motifs. They can mine motifs with structure similarity up to 75 percent. As 
the protein sequences are unsupervised data, the clustering and 2-way clustering 
approaches were proposed for protein motif prediction in this research work. The 
bio-inspired computing models like PSO, GA and VFO based k-means has been 
proposed for further refinement of the results. The experimental results evident that 
the 2-way clustering model can predict more homologous protein motifs than the 
clustering models. The GA k-means and VFO-k-means approaches perform well 
than the PSO k-means approach. The secondary structure similarity measure is 
used to extract the biologically significant patterns from the clusters and biclusters 
obtained. In future, this measure can be further incorporated in these approaches 
as fitness measure for more refined results.
REFERENCES
Ahmadyfard, A., & Modares, H. (2008). Combining PSO and K-Means to enhance 
data clustering. International Symposium on Telecommunication, 688 - 691. 
doi:10.1109/ISTEL.2008.4651388
Bairoch, A., Bucher, P., & Hofmann, K. (1996). PROSITE: New developments. 
Nucleic Acids Research, 189-196.
Bapuji Rao, B. K. (2017). An Approach to Clustering of Text Documents Using Graph 
Mining Techniques. International Journal of Rough Sets and Data Analysis, 4(1).

114
Protein Motif Comparator Using Bio-Inspired Two-Way K-Means
Berkhin, P. (2002). Survey of Clustering Data Mining Techniques. Accrue Software.
Bill, C. H., & Chang, S. (2012). Protein Motif Extraction Using Neuro-Fuzzy 
optimization. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England), 18(8), 1084–1090. PMID:12176831
Chen, Pellicer, Tai, Harrison, & Pan. (2009). Novel efficient granular computing 
models for protein sequence motifs and structure information discovery. International 
Journal of Computational Biology and Drug Design.
Chen Yi-Cheng, K. Y.-W.-T.-F. (2011). Discovery of Protein Phosphorylation Motifs 
through Exploratory Data Analysis. Discovery of Protein Phosphorylation Motifs 
(PLoS ONE), 6.
Cheng, B., Hudson, C., Kim, M., Crawford, A., Wright, J., & Che, D. (2011). Protein 
Sequence Motif Extraction using Decision Forest. World Congress in Computer 
Science, Computer Engineering.
Cui Xiaohui, P. T. (2005). Document Clustering Analysis Based on Hybrid PSO 
K-means Algorithm. Journal of Computer Sciences, 27-33.
Das Shyama, I. S. (2010). Greedy Search-Binary PSO Hybrid for Biclustering Gene 
Expression Data. International Journal of Computers and Applications, 2(3), 1–5. 
doi:10.5120/651-908
De, G. (1989). Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine Learning. 
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Duggirala Raja Kishor, N. V. (2016). A Novel Hybridization of Expectation-
Maximization and K-Means Algorithms for Better Clustering Performance. 
International Journal of Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 7(2).
Elayaraja, E., Thangavel, K., Chitralega, M., & Chandrasekhar, T. (2012). Extraction of 
Motif Patterns from Protein Sequences Using SVD with Rough K-Means Algorithm. 
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, 9(6), 350–356.
Elayaraja, E., Thangavel, K., Ramya, B., & Chitralegha, M. (2011). Extraction of 
Motif Patterns from Protein Sequence using Rough K-Means Algorithm. Procedia 
Engineering, 30, 814–820. doi:10.1016/j.proeng.2012.01.932
Forrest, S. (1993). Genetic algorithms: Principles of natural selection applied to 
Computation. Science, 872–878.
Fujiwara & Konagaya. (2008). Protein Motif Extraction using Hidden Markov 
Model. Genome Informatics, 57-64.

115
Protein Motif Comparator Using Bio-Inspired Two-Way K-Means
Gowri & Rathipriya. (2015). Extraction of Protein Sequence Motif Information 
using PSO K-Means. Journal of Network and Information Security.
Gowri & Rathipriya. (2015a). Biclustering using Venus Flytrap Optimization 
Algorithm. Computational Intelligence in Data Mining—Volume 1. Advances in 
Intelligent Systems and Computing Series, 410. 
Gowri, R., & Rathipriya, R. (2016d). MR-GABiT: MapReduce based Genetic 
Algorithm for Biclustering Time Series Data. International Conference on Advances 
in Computer Applications. IEEE.
Gowri, R., & Rathipriya, R. (2017). Cohesive Sub-Network Mining in Protein 
Interaction Networks using Score Based Co-Clustering with MapReduce Model 
(MR-CoC). International Conference on Big Data Analytics and Cloud Computing. 
Springer.
Gowri, R., & Rathipriya, R. (2016b). Extraction of Protein Sequence Motif Information 
using Bio-Inspired Computing. In Handbook of Research on Computational 
Intelligence Applications in Bioinformatics (pp. 240–262). IGI Global.
Gowri, R., & Rathipriya, R. (2016c). Quality based Clustering using MapReduce 
Framework. International conference on Green Engineering and Technologies. IEEE.
Gowri, R., & Rathipriya, R. (2015b). Venus Flytrap Optimization Algorithm. 
International Conference on Computational Intelligence, Cyber Security and 
Computational Models. Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing Series, 412.
Gowri & Rathipriya. (2016a). Protein Motif Comparator using PSO K-Means. 
International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 7(3), 56–68.
Holland, J. H. (n.d.). Genetic Algorithms and Adaptation. Adaptive Control of Ill-
Defined Systems, NATO Conference Series, 16, 317-333.
Karegowda & Kumari. (2013). Particle Swarm Optimization Algorithm Based 
K-Means and Fuzzy c-means clustering. International Journal of Advanced Research 
in Computer Science and Software Engineering, 3(7).
Kunik, V., Solan, Z., Edelman, S., Ruppin, E., & Horn, D. (2005). Motif Extraction and 
Protein Classification: Computational Systems. Proceedings of IEEE Computational 
Systems Bioinformatics / Life Sciences Society.
Madeira, S. C., & Oliveira, A. L. (2004). Biclustering Algorithms for Biological 
Data Analysis. Survey (London, England), 1–31. PMID:17048406

116
Protein Motif Comparator Using Bio-Inspired Two-Way K-Means
NizarBanu, P. K., & Andrews, S. (2015). Gene Clustering Using Metaheuristic 
Optimization Algorithms. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 
6(4).
Pietrokovski, S., Henikoff, J. G., & Henikoff, S. (1996). The BLOCKS database 
- a system for protein classification. Nucleic Acids Research, 24(1), 197–200. 
doi:10.1093/nar/24.1.197 PMID:8594578
PriteshVora. (2013). A Survey on K-mean Clustering and Particle Swarm Optimization. 
International Journal of Science and Modern Engineering, 1(3), 24–26.
Rathipriya, R., Thangavel, K., & Bagyamani, J. (2011). Binary Particle Swarm 
Optimization based Biclustering of Web usage Data. International Journal of 
Computers and Applications, 25(2), 43–49. doi:10.5120/3001-4036
Riccardo, P., James, K., & Tim, B. (2007). Particle swarm optimization An Overview. 
Swarm Intelligence, 33–57.
Structures of life. (2007). US Department of Health and Human Services.
Vincent, , & Bernard, , & Kockara. (n.d.). Extraction of Protein Sequence Motifs 
Information by Bi-Clustering Algorithm. Academic Press.
Wang.G, & Dunbrack.R. (2003). PISCES: A protein sequence culling server. 
Bioinformatics, 1589-1591.
Youcheng, Nan, Majie, Kedi, Yuan, & Qu. (2012). K-means optimization clustering 
algorithm based on Particle swarm optimization and multiclass merging. Advances 
in CSIE, 1, 569-578.
Zhaoa-Xing-Ming. (2005). A novel approach to extracting features from motif 
content and protein composition for protein sequence classification. Neural Networks, 
1019–1028. PMID:16153801
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Amino Acid: Amino acids are the organic compounds that are fundamental 
elements of protein sequence or peptides. The protein consists of twenty amino 
acids. They possess different characteristics such as hydrophobic, hydrophilic, 
polar, non-polar and etc.
Homologous Proteins: The Homologous proteins are set of proteins having 
similar characteristic either structurally or functionally.

117
Protein Motif Comparator Using Bio-Inspired Two-Way K-Means
Logo Representation: It is one of the graphical representations of amino acids, 
nucleic acids used for protein sequence alignment processing. The weights of amino 
acids in a particular position are represented by the height of the amino acids.
Meta-Heuristic Model: A meta-heuristic model is a high-level problem-
independent algorithmic framework that provides a set of guidelines or strategies 
to develop heuristic optimization algorithms.
Protein Motif: A consecutive sequence of amino acids present in a protein 
sequence, which possesses some specific characteristic.
Protein Sequence: Protein sequences are the fundamental determinants of 
biological structure and function. It is a sequence of Amino Acids.
Significant Amino Acid (SAA): SAA are present protein motifs, possess specific 
characteristics in homologous protein motifs. The SAA are highlighted using the 
Logo representation.

118
Copyright © 2018, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  5
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-4151-6.ch005
ABSTRACT
The state of a cutting tool is an important factor in any metal cutting process as 
additional costs in terms of scrapped components, machine tool breakage and 
unscheduled downtime result from worn tool usage. Therefore, tool wear prediction 
plays an important role in industry automation for higher productivity and acceptable 
product quality. Therefore, in order to increase the productivity of turning process, 
various researches have been made recently for tool wear estimation and classification 
in turning process. Chip form is one of the most important factors commonly 
considered in evaluating the performance of machining process. On account of 
the effect of the progressive tool wear on the shape and geometrical features of 
produced chip, it is possible to predict some measurable machining outputs such 
as crater wear. According to experimentally performed researches, cutting speed 
and cutting time are two extremely effective parameters which contribute to the 
development of the crater wear on the tool rake face. As a result, these parameters 
will change the chip radius and geometry. This chapter presents the development
Metaheuristics in 
Manufacturing:
Predictive Modeling of Tool Wear in 
Machining Using Genetic Programming
Mohammad Zadshakoyan
University of Tabriz, Iran
Vahid Pourmostaghimi
University of Tabriz, Iran

119
Metaheuristsics in Manufacturing
INTRODUCTION
Manufacturing processes like drilling, milling, or turning can be optimized 
significantly using reliable and flexible tool monitoring systems. The most important 
tasks in this context are (Golz, Schillo, Wolf, & Kaufeld, 1995):
•	
The fast detection of collisions, i.e. unintended contacts between the tool or 
the tool-holder and the work piece or components of the machine tool,
•	
The identification of tool fracture (breakage), e.g. outbreaks at cutting edges,
•	
The estimation or classification of tool wear caused by abrasion or other 
influences.
While collision and tool fracture are sudden and mostly unexpected events 
which require reactions in real-time, the development of wear is more or less slowly 
proceeding. This chapter focuses on the determination of wear, the most difficult of 
the three tasks. The importance of tool wear monitoring is implied by the possible 
economic advantages. By exchanging worn tools in time (considering the current 
machining process such as rough or finish turning, for instance), it is possible to avoid 
the production of waste. Furthermore, tools costs can be reduced noticeably with a 
precise exploitation of a tool’s life time. With an accurate estimation of tool wear, it 
is even possible to adjust the tool position in order to meet geometric specifications 
and to control the tool wear rate in order to guarantee a certain surface quality of 
the work piece or roughness.
Chip form and tool wear are two of the major machining performance measures 
that have been the subject of extensive studies over several decades. It must be said 
that having the true conception of chip formation and chip movement is an essential 
task in the prediction of chip breakability. Furthermore, geometrical features of 
produced chip give us valuable information about tribological phenomena in cutting 
zone such as tool wear, cutting zone temperature, etc.
of the genetic equation for the tool wear using occurred changes in chip radius in 
turning process. The development of the equation combines different methods and 
technologies like evolutionary methods, manufacturing technology, measuring and 
control technology with the adequate hardware and software support. The results 
obtained from genetic equation and experiments showed that obtained genetic 
equations are correlated well with the experimental data. Furthermore, it can be 
used for tool wear estimation during cutting process and because of its parametric 
form, genetic equation enables us to analyze the effect of input parameters on the 
crater wear parameters.

120
Metaheuristsics in Manufacturing
On the other hand, tool wear and economical estimations related to tool life are 
among essential issues associated with machining optimization, because in automated 
manufacturing operations, tool must be removed from the cutting process well 
before it fails, otherwise the parts produced become out of the allowable tolerance 
(Devillez, Lesko, & Mozer, 2004). Therefore, tool wear is of great significance in 
manufacturing since it affects the quality of the components, tool life and machine 
costs.
Mechanisms responsible for tool failure are abrasive, adhesive and diffusion wear 
(Devillez et al., 2004). Considering that the chip radius has a direct relation with the 
form of crater wear and this type of wear is formed due to adhesive and diffusion 
factors, so it can be resulted that these factors affect chip geometry impressively.
By considering the basic nature of the various wear mechanisms that are generally 
observed in machining operations, it has been showed that during the progressive 
tool wear, some major wear parameters contribute to the variation in chip flow, chip 
curl and chip breakability in metal machining, typically in a turning operations. 
Figure 1 shows various wear features studied in mentioned research.
To predict the tool crater wear in this work, two independent data sets are 
obtained on the basis of measurements: training data set and testing data set. Chip 
radius is used as independent input variable, while crater wear is the dependent 
output variable. An equation for the tool crater wear is developed on the basis of 
training data set and the accuracy of obtained model is proved on the testing data 
set by using fitness functions.
So in this chapter, on the basis of results obtained from practical experiments, the 
interrelationship between the chip radius and tool crater wear using their geometrical 
Figure 1. Major tool wear parameters affecting chip geometry in a turning operation, 
VB: major flank wear; KT: crater wear depth; KB: crater wear length; KS: wear 
retract of the cutting edge; KK: crater wear width; N: tool nose wear (Devillez et 
al., 2004).

121
Metaheuristsics in Manufacturing
features has been studied and then using GP, a model has been presented to estimate 
the values of crater wear depth, KT, and crater wear length, KB.
Genetic Programming (GP)
Genetic algorithms (GA) are generally used as an optimization technique to search 
the global optimum of a function. However, this is not the only possible use for GA. 
Other fields of applications where robustness and global optimization are needed 
could also benefit greatly from GA. The two most important alternative domains 
applying GA are genetic based machine learning (GBML) and genetic programming 
(Settea & Boullartb, 2001). GP is basically a GA which is applied to a population of 
Figure 2. A schematic overview of the methodology used in present study

122
Metaheuristsics in Manufacturing
members or computer programs, while a GA usually operates on (coded) strings of 
numbers a GP has to operate on members. GP allows, in comparison with GA, the 
optimization of much more complicated structures and can therefore be applied to a 
greater diversity of problems (Koza, 1992). A schematic overview of GP model which 
shows its different stages is given in Figure 3. The following steps are performed in 
each stage of programming. The aim of GP is to find out the member or offspring 
that best solves the problem. Possible solutions in GP are all the possible computer 
programs that can be composed in a recursive manner from a set of function genes 
which is as F = {f1, f2, . . ., fm}, where m is the number of function genes, and the 
set of terminal genes T = {a1, a2, . . ., an}, where n is the number of terminal genes. 
Each individual function fi from the set F has a certain number of arguments z(fi). 
The appropriate number of arguments for function genes from the set F is thus 
determined with the list {z(f1), z(f2), . . ., z(fm)}.
Figure 3. Schematic overview of GP model application (Zadshakoyan & 
Pourmostaghimi, 2013)

123
Metaheuristsics in Manufacturing
The set of function genes F can include basic mathematical functions, Boolean 
functions, relation functions, program flow control functions, functions for recursion, 
and functions defined with respect to the problem area studied. The set of terminal 
genes T can include numerical constants, logical constants, variables, etc. Terminal 
genes are, in fact, function genes without arguments. An example of such a tree 
using the F and T is given in Figure 4.
The initial population is obtained with the randomly creation of members by the 
use of available function genes from the set F and the available terminal genes from 
the set T. Each member of generation represents a random point in the searching space.
The creation of the initial population is a blind random search for solutions in 
the huge space of possible solutions. The next step is the calculation of adaptation 
of individuals to the environment (i.e., calculation of fitness for each member of 
generation). Fitness is a guideline for modifying the structures undergoing adaptation. 
In GP, the computer programs change, in particular, with two genetic operations: 
reproduction and crossover. The reproduction operation gives a higher probability 
of selection to more successful organisms.
In each generation the best chromosome is copied unchanged into the next 
generation. The crossover operation ensures the exchange of genetic material between 
the offsprings. Figure 5 shows the crossover operation of two parents’ chromosomes 
consisting of several function and terminal genes and mutation operation.
Each cycle includes: (І) creation of initial population, (ІІ) calculation of fitness 
for each individual of the population, and (ІІІ) genetic modification of contents of 
Figure 4. An example tree representation of a member corresponding with the 
equation (2-x)*(y+5)

124
Metaheuristsics in Manufacturing
the computer programs, an iterative repetition of second and third stages follows. 
After a certain number of generations, the newly born offsprings are usually much 
better adapted to the environment.
The meaning of the environment depends on the problem dealt with. The evolution 
is terminated when a termination criterion is fulfilled.
This can be a prescribed number of generations or sufficient quality of the 
solution. Since evolution is a non-deterministic process, it does not end with a 
successful solution in each run. In order to obtain a successful solution, the problem 
must be processed in several independent runs. The number of runs required for 
the satisfactory solution depends on the difficulty of the problem (Zadshakoyan & 
Pourmostaghimi, 2013).
Figure 5. GP method mathematical operations (Zadshakoyan & Pourmostaghimi, 
2013)

125
Metaheuristsics in Manufacturing
In this chapter, for determination of the relationship between crater wear parameters 
and chip radius a genetic equation with genetic programming has been developed. 
The genetic equations for the wear characteristics were developed as follows:
KT
F R
=
1( ) 	
(1)
KB
F R
=
2( )	
(2)
In which KT is crater wear depth, KB is crater wear length and F1 and F2 are 
functions which relates chip radius, R, to KT and KB respectively. The evolutionary 
parameters for the determination of the genetic equation are population size (number 
of chromosomes) Ms=40 and number of generations G=3000. The number of 
chromosomes is selected 30, that is, a very small population, as it produces very good 
results for virtually all problems, even for such high dimensional problems as DNA 
microarrays with more than 25000 variables. The genetic operations, crossover and 
mutation are used. The mutation rate is Pm=0.044 and crossover rate was Pc=0.1. 
Moreover, arithmetic operations, according to the nature of wear mechanism and 
wear rate, set as follows:
F = {+, -, ×, Ln, exp}	
(3)
BACKGROUND
Today’s scientific approaches in the area of tool wear monitoring usually measure 
several process parameters which are indirectly correlated with tool wear (such as 
force or vibration signals). These signals are measured on-line, i.e. during a cutting 
process. The process itself is influenced by many cutting conditions such as tool 
geometry or work material. A detailed description of metal-cutting manufacturing 
processes can be found in(Milton & Shaw, 1984), for instance. Very often, artificial 
neural networks (ANN), fuzzy systems, or combinations of both are used to model 
the non-linear dependencies between features extracted from the measured signals 
and cutting conditions on the one hand and tool wear or tool fracture on the other 
hand. A lot of promising research has been performed within the last years. However, 
particularly due to insufficient generalization capabilities (e.g. the use is restricted 
to a specific machine tool, only a small range of cutting conditions is allowed, or 
time-consuming ‘teach-in’ cycles are needed) or simply a lack of precision even 

126
Metaheuristsics in Manufacturing
promising methods are not marketable up to now. These shortages purse researchers 
to examine other modeling and analytical methods.
Tool wear estimation can be discussed in two categories:
1. 	
On-line or sensor-based monitoring system which is aimed to measure the 
wear during the machining process.
2. 	
Off-line or sensorless monitoring process which presents a predictive modeling 
of tool wear (Sick, 2002).
First category which consists of on-line tool wear monitoring methods can be 
classified into two categories: direct and indirect methods. Direct methods are 
based upon direct measurements of the tool wear using optical (Jianfeng, Yongqing, 
Fangrong, Zhiren, & Yao), radioactive, electrical resistance methods or vision systems 
(Sortino, 2003) (Lanzetta, 2001), etc. These methods present the advantage of high 
accuracy but they have not yet proven to be very attractive either economically or 
technically. Indirect methods are based on the relationship between tool conditions 
and measurable signals from the cutting process. Different measurable signals have 
been used, including force (Ghosh et al., 2007), vibration (Abu-Mahfouz, 2003), 
acoustic emission (Lu & Kannatey-Asibu, 2004), cutting temperature (D’Errico, 
1998), etc. for detecting tool wear. However, very few reliable indirect methods have 
been established for industrial applications. This is mainly because the monitoring 
signals can be considered stochastic and non-stationary in nature rather than 
deterministic, and because of the non-linear relationship between the measured 
features and tool wear.
A number of approaches have been evolved for efficient TCM, some of which are 
being employed successfully in the industry. The sensor-based systems have been 
found to be more advantageous and are preferred for collecting information about 
the condition of the tool during machining. The information or signals from the 
sensors are processed by different methods and significant parameters are identified 
to determine the state of tool wear. Based on these parameters, efficient decision-
making strategies are designed. A number of policies and methods of TCM are in 
practice, but most of those methods are capable of detecting tool wear and failure 
related to certain specific types of faults only. A universal approach to differentiate 
amongst the variety of failure modes is yet to be developed (Dan & Mathew, 1990). 
Direct methods can be described as follows:
1. 	
Use of sensors to collect information about the state of tool wear: Either single 
or multiple sensors are used to sense signals related to the tool wear states 
during machining. Multiple sensors seem to be more advantageous as a part of 
subsequent sensor fusion strategy. Sensor fusion is the process of combining 

127
Metaheuristsics in Manufacturing
sensory data obtained from several sources into a single element of information 
or knowledge (Tanner & Loh, 1992).
2. 	
Extraction of significant features from the sensory information: Sometimes 
it is essential to analyze the information collected through the sensors and 
extract some relevant features significantly related to the states of tool wear. 
This information is either a direct indication of the state of failure or they are 
further processed as a part of subsequent decision-making strategy.
3. 	
Development of a decision-making strategy for controlling the machining 
process and to indicate the requirement of a tool change state: Neural networks 
enjoy a very popular status as a part of decision-making strategy, on account 
of their efficient classification and optimization capabilities. Developments in 
computer technology have made faster computation possible and economically 
viable for common users. Moreover, the inherent nature of fault tolerance, noise 
suppression and the limitations of other methods have made neural networks 
a very popular choice in TCM (Dutta, Paul, & Chattopadhyay, 2000).
Second category which is sensorless and is based on predictive models can 
be divided in two classes: Empirical modeling and intelligent modeling. Taylor’s 
tool-life equation, for example, belongs to the first class(see, e.g. (Ghani, Rizal, 
Nuawi, Ghazali, & Haron, 2011)). Other mathematical models such as regression 
can be grouped in this class. Other class uses intelligent modeling techniques such 
as genetic programming, artificial neural networks, and other modeling methods. 
Examples for sensorless monitoring techniques are lifetime prediction by means of 
multilayer perceptrons (Chao & Hwang, 1997), prediction of flank wear width and 
crater wear depth with multilayer perceptrons (Prasad & Ramamoorthy, 2001), and 
lifetime prediction by means of multilayer perceptrons and optimization of cutting 
conditions (Li & Nee, 1996), tool wear modeling in drilling by genetic programming 
(Zakeri & Pourmostaghimi, 2017), and other intelligent methods. However the 
majority of these methods are designed to evaluate the flank wear, VB, and progress 
in modeling the crater wear has slightly been done (Sick, 2002).
There has been some research on tool wear estimation over the past several 
years, and some analytical (Dawson & Kurfess, 2005) and empirical models were 
proposed for the evaluation of crater depth and length, however most of them lack 
practical applications.
Several direct and indirect measurement techniques have been proposed for 
evaluating crater wear in carbide inserts. Direct methods are based upon direct 
measurements of the worn area of the tool using optical (Dawson & Kurfess, 2005) and 
vision systems (Jurkovic, Korosec, & Kopac, 2005). These methods have advantage 
of high-measuring accuracy, but cannot be easily adopted for online applications, 

128
Metaheuristsics in Manufacturing
mainly because of interruption of coolant and chips (Lister & Barrow, 1986). For 
this reasons, several authors have proposed indirect techniques for wear monitoring.
In spite of the fact that numerous researches have been done in the field of chip 
radius and tool wear, there is a few works which has considered the effect of tool wear 
on the produced chip radius. Fang and Jawahir (Fang & Jawahir, 1993) investigated 
the effects of progressive tool wear on chip breakability and chip form in turning 
operations. The experimental results from this research showed that developing 
crater wear on the tool rake face acts as a chip breaking groove and so by passing 
time and expanding crater, chip radius will reduce.
K.C.Ea et al. investigated tool wear mechanisms and their effects on chip curl/
chip form in machining with grooved tools using equivalent tool face (ET) model. 
In mentioned work, a new methodology is extended to correlate chip curling when 
machining with progressive tool wear mechanism in grooved tools (Ee, Balaji, & 
Jawahir, 2003).
For the present time, due to the shortage of studies in this field and being difficult 
to establish an ideal analytical model, using intelligent or metaheuristic methods 
such as genetic programming is inevitable.
In computer science and mathematical optimization, a metaheuristic is a higher-
level procedure or heuristic designed to find, generate, or select a heuristic (partial 
search algorithm) that may provide a sufficiently good solution to an optimization 
problem, especially with incomplete or imperfect information or limited computation 
capacity. Metaheuristics sample a set of solutions which is too large to be completely 
sampled. Metaheuristics may make few assumptions about the optimization problem 
being solved, and so they may be usable for a variety of problems (Osman & Kelly, 
1996).
Metaheuristics have been used in wide area of research such as supervised machine 
learning (Abinash & Santanu Kumar, 2017), Forecasting Exchange Rates (Ahmed, 
Mahmoud, Mohammed, & Aboul Ella, 2015), Architecture (Alexiei, Daniel, & 
Ruben, 2012), genetic engineering (Banu & Andrews, 2015), elderly people care 
(Claas, Daniel, Michael, & Gerrit, 2011), medical purposes (Ashour et al., 2015), 
health science (Nilanjan Dey, Samanta, Yang, Das, & Chaudhuri, 2013), optimization 
algorithms (Gerald, 2016), recognizing human behavior (Hans & Stephen, 2016), 
Wi-Fi systems (Heba & Moustafa, 2014), manufacturing (Z. Mohammad & Vahid, 
2015), energy and wind turbines (H. Mohammad & Mohammad Hassan, 2016), 
image processing (Samantaa, Dey, Das, Acharjee, & Chaudhuri, 2013), intelligent 
language recognition (Hore et al., 2017),complex mathematical problems (Hicham 
El, Said, & Jamal, 2015), learning techniques (Jennifer, Tom, & Paul Mc, 2011), 
data clustering (Kanungo, Janmenjoy, Bighnaraj, & Behera, 2016), wireless 
sensor networks (Binh, Hanh, & Dey), bio engineering technologies for example 
electrocardiography (Nilanjan Dey et al., 2013), retinal imaging (Nilanjan Dey et 

129
Metaheuristsics in Manufacturing
al., 2014), medical signals processing (N Dey, Chakraborty, & Samanta, 2014), 
MRI de-noising (Nilanjan Dey et al., 2015), brain disease detection (Ashour et al., 
2015), civil engineering (Rahul, Senthilnath, Omkar, & Narendra, 2016), tracking 
systems (Sean & Kevin, 2014), prediction of stock price (Vipul & Kulkarni, 2017), 
educational methods (Vladimír, Petr, Peter, Karel, & Petr, 2016), and big data 
analytics (Zakaria, Souham, & Mohamed, 2017).
Belonging to the family of evolutionary computation and metaheuristic methods, 
GP imitates biological evolution of living organisms in nature. This relatively new 
automatic programming technique was first described by Koza in his methods 
which combined efficiently the concepts of evolutionary computation and automatic 
programming (Koza, 1992). In engineering, especially manufacturing engineering, GP 
is frequently applied to model various processes and conditions. Some applications 
of GP have been reported in prediction of surface roughness (Brezocnik, Kovacic, 
& Ficko, 2004), nonlinear system modeling (Metenidis, Witczak, & Korbicz, 2004), 
investigation of the cutting force (Milfelner, Kopac, Cus, & Zuperl, 2005), tool-chip 
contact length modeling (Zadshakoyan & Pourmostaghimi, 2013), and machine 
scheduling problems (Dimopoulos & Zalzala, 2001).
MAIN FOCUS OF THE CHAPTER
The manufacturing community is always striving to reduce operating costs while 
trying to improve product quality and meeting or exceeding customer satisfaction. 
These goals are behind the drive towards automation and the use of high production 
unmanned equipment. The metal cutting process is highly nonlinear involving such 
phenomena as plastic deformation, fracture, impact, continuous and intermittent 
multi contact points, friction, and wear. Direct visual inspection of the cutting edge 
during machining is not feasible because the work piece and chips obstruct the 
view. To overcome this difficulty indirect methods are required. On the other hand, 
using sensory systems is expensive and has some limitations. Therefore, finding 
a reliable model which can predict the wear and determine the relation between 
cutting parameters and tool wear is extremely needed.
In this chapter, a precise and quicker method for the estimation of tool life is 
proposed, which requires less consumption of work piece material and tools. In this 
method the tool life is estimated by using genetic programming and finding the time 
till tool failure by extrapolation. Genetic programming is used to predict tool crater 
wear. Tool wear estimation involves a number of tests to be carried out at various 
cutting conditions till the failure of the cutting tool. The wear after each cutting 
pass is noted and the time for a limiting crater wear is estimated by extrapolating 
the wear-time curve.

130
Metaheuristsics in Manufacturing
Experimental Work
All the experimental tests were performed on a CNC lathe machine and under dry 
conditions. To decrease the variation of cutting speed across the cutting edge, a 
large diameter work piece were used. In order to establish the genetic equation, 
different values of cutting speed, V, and cutting time, t, were selected while feed 
rate and depth of cut were selected constant values of 0.07 mm/rev and 1.5 mm 
respectively. The values of cutting speed selected were 65 (m/min), 75 (m/min) and 
85 (m/min) and cutting times were 1 (min), 3 (min), 5 (min) and 7 (min). In addition 
to 12 mentioned experiments which were performed to train the genetic equation, 5 
extra experiments were done to test the equation quantitatively which are according 
to conditions shown in Table 1.
Commercially available uncoated cemented carbide insert (Tizit, TNMA 
220408, grade P20) were used in these tests. AISI 4104 with hardness about 187 
BHN were selected as a work piece material because of its widespread application 
and acceptable machinability. For the measurement of the wear parameters, cutting 
inserts were examined carefully using an optical microscope equipped with image 
processing software.
The radii of obtained chips were measured by vernier caliper, however, profile 
projector were used to measure accurately chips with bigger radius.
The accuracy of developed equations was analyzed in terms of two statistical 
measures. These measures are the root mean square error, RMSE, and absolute 
friction of variance, R2, which are defined as below:
RMSE
Y
Y
n
predicted m
erimental m
m
n
=
−
=∑
(
)
,
exp
.
2
1
	
(4)
R
Y
Y
Y
predicted m
erimental m
m
n
erimental m
2
2
1
1
=
−
−
=∑(
)
(
)
,
exp
.
exp
.
2
1
m
n
=∑
	
(5)
Table 1. Cutting parameters for testing step of GP
  
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Test 4
Test 5
V(m/min)
80
60
50
60
70
t (min)
3
2
4
4
3

131
Metaheuristsics in Manufacturing
Where n is the number of data points, Ypredicted,m and Yexperimental,m 
respectively indicate the predicted value and the target value from experimental 
data of one data point m. RMSE indicates the deviation between the experimental 
and predicted values. A very good fit yields R2 value of 1, where as a poor fit results 
in a value near zero.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this chapter to modeling the condition of crater wear in turning by using chip 
radius, the evolutionary algorithm of GP has been used. 12 practical experiments 
have been performed to train and modeling of the equation and 5 other experiments 
to qualify established model. The experimental results corresponding with cutting 
conditions have been shown in Figure 6.
Figure 7 illustrates produced chips in the cutting speed of 75 (m/min) in various 
times. In Figures 8 and 9 tool wear measurement results for cutting conditions have 
been presented. As it can be seen, by passing time and increasing cutting speed, crater 
depth KT and crater length KB will increase. The value of crater depth KT increases 
more rapidly than the other. This rapid increase will lead to an increase in the chip 
Figure 6. Chip radii obtained from experiments
t=1(min) t=3(min) t=5(min) t=7(min)

132
Metaheuristsics in Manufacturing
curvature. In other hand, the deeper the crater depth KT, the smaller the chip curl 
radius. Generally, the crater length KB and crater width KK are formed quickly on 
the tool rake face within the first few minutes and then continue to develop slowly. 
The results for performed tests have been shown in table 2.
To perform genetic programming, various arithmetic operations can be used. 
In this chapter, arithmetic-functional set is as equation 3. Based on values obtained 
for RMSE and R2, the best genetic equation for KT and KB are obtained as follows:
KT
R
Ln R
R
R
R
=
−
−
+
+
−
77 77
3 17
28
0 06
816
20952
2
.
.
( )
exp( .
)
exp( )
exp(
)
	
(6)
Figure 7. Produced chips in cutting speed of 75 (m/min)
Figure 8. Experimental data For KT (training data set)

133
Metaheuristsics in Manufacturing
KB
R
R
R
R
=
−
+
+
+
+
1 008
0 009
1 63
0 75
32
2
.
.
.
.
exp( )
exp(
)
exp( )	
(7)
In which R is chip radius, KT is crater wear depth and KB is crater wear length. 
In Figures 10 and 11 the plot corresponding with obtained genetic equations is 
represented. As shown, any decrease in chip radius corresponds with increase in 
both KT and KB values. Therefore, it can be concluded that the developed genetic 
equations indicate wear manner during turning process of AISI 4140 accurately.
Table 3 shows the values of RMSE and R2 for selected genetic equations. According 
to this table, it can be concluded that the genetic equation presented for KT and KB 
corresponds well with experimental data in given range of cutting parameters, so it 
has unique ability in prediction of the chip radius with progressive tool crater wear.
Figure 9. Experimental data For KB (training data set)
Table 2. Experimental data and conditions for testing data set
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Test 4
Test 5
V (m/min)
80
60
50
60
70
t (min)
3
2
4
4
3
R (mm)
12.96
17.27
12.33
11.76
12.64
KT (µm)
15
10
15
18
17
KB (mm)
1
0.89
0.99
1.03
0.98

134
Metaheuristsics in Manufacturing
Figure 10. Variation of KT versus chip radius, R, according to Equation 6
Figure 11. Variation of KB versus chip radius, R, according to Equation 7
Table 3. RMSE and R2 for selected genetic models
  KT(µm)
  KB(mm)
  train
  test
  train
  test
  R2
  RMSE
  R2
  RMSE
  R2
  RMSE
  R2
  RMSE
  0.95
  2.56
  0.98
  2.11
  0.96
  0.029
  0.95
  0.036

135
Metaheuristsics in Manufacturing
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
Although a lot of work has been done in this field, there is still a great demand in 
presenting reliably applicable models in machining industry which could predict 
the effect of various parameters on tool wear. As an outline of future work these 
guidelines can be noted:
•	
Comparing the accuracy and reliability of various intelligent and metaheuristic 
methods.
•	
Extending the models with more materials and tools.
•	
Modeling of tool wear in other machining practices such as milling and 
drilling.
•	
Finding a relationship between various types of wear in machining processes.
•	
Finding optimized cutting parameters by using various metaheuristic 
methods.
•	
Integration of the proposed approach with an intelligent manufacturing 
system
CONCLUSION
In this chapter, the interaction between the two major machining performance 
measures, chip form and tool wear, have been studied. The work investigates the 
variation of chip radius at different stages of progressive tool wear giving experimental 
evidence for the inter-relationships of these two major machining performance 
factors. The reduction of chip radius with tool wear progression shows a consistent 
pattern for the flat faced tool under all cutting conditions used in this experiment.
This chapter also presents the development of the genetic equation in machining 
process. The results obtained from the proposed genetic programming approach 
prove its effectiveness. The implication of the encouraging results obtained from 
the present approach is that such approach can be integrated on-line, with an 
intelligent manufacturing system for automated process planning. Since the genetic 
programming based approach can obtain near optimal solution, it can be used 
for machining parameter selection of complex machined parts that require many 
machining constraints. Integration of the proposed approach with an intelligent 
manufacturing system will lead to reduction in production cost and production time 
and improvement of product quality.

136
Metaheuristsics in Manufacturing
REFERENCES
Abinash, T., & Santanu Kumar, R. (2017). Classification of Sentiment of Reviews 
using Supervised Machine Learning Techniques. International Journal of Rough 
Sets and Data Analysis, 4(1), 56–74. doi:10.4018/IJRSDA.2017010104
Abu-Mahfouz, I. (2003). Drilling wear detection and classification using vibration 
signals and artificial neural network. International Journal of Machine Tools & 
Manufacture, 43(7), 707–720. doi:10.1016/S0890-6955(03)00023-3
Ahmed, R., Mahmoud, K., Mohammed, Y. D., & Aboul Ella, H. (2015). Forecasting 
Exchange Rates: A Chaos-Based Regression Approach. International Journal of 
Rough Sets and Data Analysis, 2(1), 38–57. doi:10.4018/ijrsda.2015010103
Alexiei, D., Daniel, A., & Ruben, M. (2012). Turning Homes into Low-Cost Ambient 
Assisted Living Environments. International Journal of Ambient Computing and 
Intelligence, 4(2), 1–23. doi:10.4018/jaci.2012040101
Ashour, A. S., Samanta, S., Dey, N., Kausar, N., Abdessalemkaraa, W. B., & Hassanien, 
A. E. (2015). Computed tomography image enhancement using cuckoo search: A 
log transform based approach. Journal of Signal and Information Processing, 6(03), 
244–257. doi:10.4236/jsip.2015.63023
Banu, P. K. N., & Andrews, S. (2015). Gene Clustering Using Metaheuristic 
Optimization Algorithms. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 
6(4), 14–38. doi:10.4018/IJAMC.2015100102
Binh, H. T. T., Hanh, N. T., & Dey, N. (n.d.). Improved Cuckoo Search and Chaotic 
Flower Pollination optimization algorithm for maximizing area coverage in Wireless 
Sensor Networks. Neural Computing and Applications, 1-13.
Brezocnik, M., Kovacic, M., & Ficko, M. (2004). Prediction of surface roughness 
with genetic programming. Journal of Materials Processing Technology, 157, 28–36. 
doi:10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2004.09.004
Chao, P. Y., & Hwang, Y. D. (1997). An improved neural network model for the 
prediction of cutting tool life. Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, 8(2), 107–115. 
doi:10.1023/A:1018552620196
Claas, A., Daniel, K., Michael, L., & Gerrit, K. (2011). IT-ASSIST: Towards Usable 
Applications for Elderly People. International Journal of Ambient Computing and 
Intelligence, 3(1), 33–41. doi:10.4018/jaci.2011010104

137
Metaheuristsics in Manufacturing
Dan, L., & Mathew, J. (1990). Tool wear and failure monitoring techniques for 
turning—a review. International Journal of Machine Tools & Manufacture, 30(4), 
579–598. doi:10.1016/0890-6955(90)90009-8
Dawson, T. G., & Kurfess, T. R. (2005). Quantification of tool wear using white 
light interferometry and three-dimensional computational metrology. International 
Journal of Machine Tools & Manufacture, 45(4), 591–596. doi:10.1016/j.
ijmachtools.2004.08.022
Derrico, G. (1998). An adaptive system for turning process control based on tool 
temperature feedback. Journal of Materials Processing Technology, 78(1), 43–47. 
doi:10.1016/S0924-0136(97)00461-5
Devillez, A., Lesko, S., & Mozer, W. (2004). Cutting tool crater wear measurement 
with white light interferometry. Wear, 256(1), 56–65. doi:10.1016/S0043-
1648(03)00384-3
Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Beagum, S., Pistola, D. S., Gospodinov, M., Gospodinova, 
E. P., & Tavares, J. M. R. (2015). Parameter optimization for local polynomial 
approximation based intersection confidence interval filter using genetic algorithm: 
An application for brain MRI image de-noising. Journal of Imaging, 1(1), 60–84. 
doi:10.3390/jimaging1010060
Dey, N., Chakraborty, S., & Samanta, S. (2014). Optimization of watermarking in 
biomedical signal. Heinrich-Böcking-Straße, 6, 66121.
Dey, N., Samanta, S., Chakraborty, S., Das, A., Chaudhuri, S. S., & Suri, J. S. (2014). 
Firefly algorithm for optimization of scaling factors during embedding of manifold 
medical information: An application in ophthalmology imaging. Journal of Medical 
Imaging and Health Informatics, 4(3), 384–394. doi:10.1166/jmihi.2014.1265
Dey, N., Samanta, S., Yang, X.-S., Das, A., & Chaudhuri, S. S. (2013). Optimisation 
of scaling factors in electrocardiogram signal watermarking using cuckoo search. 
International Journal of Bio-inspired Computation, 5(5), 315–326. doi:10.1504/
IJBIC.2013.057193
Dimopoulos, C., & Zalzala, A. M. (2001). Investigating the use of genetic programming 
for a classic one-machine scheduling problem. Advances in Engineering Software, 
32(6), 489–498. doi:10.1016/S0965-9978(00)00109-5
Dutta, R., Paul, S., & Chattopadhyay, A. (2000). Applicability of the modified 
back-propagation algorithm in tool condition monitoring for faster convergence. 
Journal of Materials Processing Technology, 98(3), 299–309. doi:10.1016/S0924-
0136(99)00295-2

138
Metaheuristsics in Manufacturing
Ee, K., Balaji, A., & Jawahir, I. (2003). Progressive tool-wear mechanisms and 
their effects on chip-curl/chip-form in machining with grooved tools: An extended 
application of the equivalent toolface (ET) model. Wear, 255(7), 1404–1413. 
doi:10.1016/S0043-1648(03)00112-1
Fang, X., & Jawahir, I. (1993). The effects of progressive tool wear and tool restricted 
contact on chip breakability in machining. Wear, 160(2), 243–252. doi:10.1016/0043-
1648(93)90427-N
Gerald, S. (2016). Gene Expression Analysis based on Ant Colony Optimisation 
Classification. International Journal of Rough Sets and Data Analysis, 3(3), 51–59. 
doi:10.4018/IJRSDA.2016070104
Ghani, J. A., Rizal, M., Nuawi, M. Z., Ghazali, M. J., & Haron, C. H. C. (2011). 
Monitoring online cutting tool wear using low-cost technique and user-friendly GUI. 
Wear, 271(9), 2619–2624. doi:10.1016/j.wear.2011.01.038
Ghosh, N., Ravi, Y., Patra, A., Mukhopadhyay, S., Paul, S., Mohanty, A., & 
Chattopadhyay, A. (2007). Estimation of tool wear during CNC milling using neural 
network-based sensor fusion. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, 21(1), 
466–479. doi:10.1016/j.ymssp.2005.10.010
Golz, H., Schillo, E., Wolf, A., & Kaufeld, M. (1995). Bewertung von 
Werkzeugüberwachungssystemen aus Sicht der Anwender. VDI-Berichte, 1179, 
309–309.
Hans, W. G., & Stephen, M. (2016). Using Contextual Information for Recognising 
Human Behaviour. International Journal of Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 
7(1), 27–44. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2016010102
Heba, A., & Moustafa, Y. (2014). An Analysis of Device-Free and Device-Based 
WiFi-Localization Systems. International Journal of Ambient Computing and 
Intelligence, 6(1), 1–19. doi:10.4018/ijaci.2014010101
Hicham El, H., Said, B., & Jamal, B. (2015). New Genetic Operator (Jump Crossover) 
for the Traveling Salesman Problem. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic 
Computing, 6(2), 33–44. doi:10.4018/IJAMC.2015040103
Hore, S., Chatterjee, S., Santhi, V., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Balas, V. E., & Shi, 
F. (2017). Indian Sign Language Recognition Using Optimized Neural Networks. 
In Information Technology and Intelligent Transportation Systems (pp. 553–563). 
Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-38771-0_54

139
Metaheuristsics in Manufacturing
Jennifer, H., Tom, L., & Paul Mc, K. (2011). AmbiLearn: Multimodal Assisted 
Learning. International Journal of Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 3(1), 
53–59. doi:10.4018/jaci.2011010106
Jianfeng, L., Yongqing, Z., Fangrong, C., Zhiren, T., & Yao, W. (n.d.). Wear 
and Breakage Monitoring of Cutting Tools By Optic Method (1st Part: Theory). 
Academic Press.
Jurkovic, J., Korosec, M., & Kopac, J. (2005). New approach in tool wear measuring 
technique using CCD vision system. International Journal of Machine Tools & 
Manufacture, 45(9), 1023–1030. doi:10.1016/j.ijmachtools.2004.11.030
Kanungo, D. P., Janmenjoy, N., Bighnaraj, N., & Behera, H. S. (2016). Hybrid 
Clustering using Elitist Teaching Learning-Based Optimization: An Improved Hybrid 
Approach of TLBO. International Journal of Rough Sets and Data Analysis, 3(1), 
1–19. doi:10.4018/IJRSDA.2016010101
Koza, J. R. (1992). Genetic programming: on the programming of computers by 
means of natural selection (Vol. 1). MIT Press.
Lanzetta, M. (2001). A new flexible high-resolution vision sensor for tool condition 
monitoring. Journal of Materials Processing Technology, 119(1), 73–82. doi:10.1016/
S0924-0136(01)00878-0
Li, X., & Nee, A. (1996). Monitoring cutting conditions for tool scheduling in CNC 
machining. Manuf Syst, 25(4), 377–383.
Lister, P., & Barrow, G. (1986). Tool condition monitoring systems. Paper presented 
at the Proceedings of the Twenty-sixth International Machine Tool Design and 
Research Conference. doi:10.1007/978-1-349-08114-1_36
Lu, M.-C., & Kannatey-Asibu, E. (2004). Flank wear and process characteristic 
effect on system dynamics in turning. Transactions-American Society of Mechanical 
Engineers Journal of Manufacturing Science and Engineering, 126(1), 131–140. 
doi:10.1115/1.1643082
Metenidis, M. F., Witczak, M., & Korbicz, J. (2004). A novel genetic programming 
approach to nonlinear system modelling: Application to the DAMADICS benchmark 
problem. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, 17(4), 363–370. 
doi:10.1016/j.engappai.2004.04.009
Milfelner, M., Kopac, J., Cus, F., & Zuperl, U. (2005). Genetic equation for the 
cutting force in ball-end milling. Journal of Materials Processing Technology, 164, 
1554–1560. doi:10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2005.02.147

140
Metaheuristsics in Manufacturing
Milton, C., & Shaw, M. (1984). Metal cutting principles. Oxford Science Publication.
Mohammad, H., & Mohammad Hassan, A. (2016). Optimization of Small Wind 
Turbines using Genetic Algorithms. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic 
Computing, 7(4), 50–65. doi:10.4018/IJAMC.2016100104
Mohammad, Z., & Vahid, P. (2015). Cutting Tool Crater Wear Measurement in 
Turning Using Chip Geometry and Genetic Programming. International Journal 
of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 6(1), 47–60. doi:10.4018/ijamc.2015010104
Osman, I. H., & Kelly, J. P. (1996). Meta-heuristics: an overview. In Meta-heuristics 
(pp. 1–21). Springer. doi:10.1007/978-1-4613-1361-8
Prasad, K. N., & Ramamoorthy, B. (2001). Tool wear evaluation by stereo vision and 
prediction by artificial neural network. Journal of Materials Processing Technology, 
112(1), 43–52. doi:10.1016/S0924-0136(00)00896-7
Rahul, K., Senthilnath, J., Omkar, S. N., & Narendra, S. (2016). A Novel Multiobjective 
Optimization for Cement Stabilized Soft Soil based on Artificial Bee Colony. 
International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 7(4), 1–17. doi:10.4018/
IJAMC.2016100101
Samantaa, S., Dey, N., Das, P., Acharjee, S., & Chaudhuri, S. S. (2013). Multilevel 
threshold based gray scale image segmentation using cuckoo search. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1307.0277
Sean, C., & Kevin, C. (2014). An Active Low Cost Mesh Networking Indoor Tracking 
System. International Journal of Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 6(1), 45–79. 
doi:10.4018/ijaci.2014010104
Sick, B. (2002). On-line and indirect tool wear monitoring in turning with artificial 
neural networks: A review of more than a decade of research. Mechanical Systems 
and Signal Processing, 16(4), 487–546. doi:10.1006/mssp.2001.1460
Sortino, M. (2003). Application of statistical filtering for optical detection of tool 
wear. International Journal of Machine Tools & Manufacture, 43(5), 493–497. 
doi:10.1016/S0890-6955(02)00266-3
Tanner, R., & Loh, N. K. (1992). A toxonomy of multi-sensor fusion. Journal of 
Manufacturing Systems, 11(5), 314–325. doi:10.1016/0278-6125(92)90060-S
Vipul, B., & Kulkarni, U. V. (2017). Stock Price Trend Prediction and Recommendation 
using Cognitive Process. International Journal of Rough Sets and Data Analysis, 
4(2), 36–48. doi:10.4018/IJRSDA.2017040103

141
Metaheuristsics in Manufacturing
Vladimír, B., Petr, T., Peter, M., Karel, M., & Petr, B. (2016). Application of Ambient 
Intelligence in Educational Institutions: Visions and Architectures. International 
Journal of Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 7(1), 94–120. doi:10.4018/
IJACI.2016010105
Zadshakoyan, M., & Pourmostaghimi, V. (2013). Genetic equation for the prediction 
of tool–chip contact length in orthogonal cutting. Engineering Applications of 
Artificial Intelligence, 26(7), 1725–1730. doi:10.1016/j.engappai.2012.10.016
Zakaria, B., Souham, M., & Mohamed, B. (2017). Scalable Differential Evolutionary 
Clustering Algorithm for Big Data Using Map-Reduce Paradigm. International 
Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 8(1), 45–60. doi:10.4018/
IJAMC.2017010103
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Crater Wear: Crater wear in which contact with chips erodes the rake face. This 
is somewhat normal for tool wear, and does not seriously degrade the use of a tool 
until it becomes serious enough to cause a cutting-edge failure.
Genetic Programming: In artificial intelligence, genetic programming (GP) 
is a technique whereby computer programs are encoded as a set of genes that are 
then modified (evolved) using an evolutionary algorithm (often a genetic algorithm, 
“GA”) – it is an application of (for example) genetic algorithms where the space of 
solutions consists of computer programs.
Machining: Machining is the broad term used to describe removal of material 
from a work piece, it covers several processes, which we usually divide into the 
following categories: Cutting, generally involving single-point or multipoint cutting 
tools, each with a clearly defined geometry.
Metaheuristics: Metaheuristics is a higher-level procedure or heuristic designed 
to find, generate, or select a heuristic (partial search algorithm) that may provide a 
sufficiently good solution to an optimization problem, especially with incomplete 
or imperfect information or limited computation capacity.
Predictive Modeling: Is a process that uses data mining and probability to 
forecast outcomes. Each model is made up of a number of predictors, which are 
variables that are likely to influence future results. Once data has been collected 
for relevant predictors, a statistical model is formulated.

142
Metaheuristsics in Manufacturing
Tool Wear: Tool wear describes the gradual failure of cutting tools due to regular 
operation. It is a term often associated with tipped tools, tool bits, or drill bits that 
are used with machine tools.
Turning: Turning is a machining process in which a cutting tool, typically a 
non-rotary tool bit, describes a helix tool-path by moving more or less linearly while 
the work piece rotates.

Copyright © 2018, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  6
143
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-4151-6.ch006
ABSTRACT
Biomedical imaging is considered main procedure to acquire valuable physical 
information about the human body and some other biological species. It produces 
specialized images of different parts of the biological species for clinical analysis. 
It assimilates various specialized domains including nuclear medicine, radiological 
imaging, Positron emission tomography (PET), and microscopy. From the early 
discovery of X-rays, progress in biomedical imaging continued resulting in highly 
sophisticated medical imaging modalities, such as magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI), ultrasound, Computed Tomography (CT), and lungs monitoring. These 
biomedical imaging techniques assist physicians for faster and accurate analysis and 
treatment. The present chapter discussed the impact of intelligent computing methods 
for biomedical image analysis and healthcare. Different Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
Intelligent Computing 
in Medical Imaging:
A Study
Shouvik Chakraborty
University of Kalyani, India
Sankhadeep Chatterjee
University of Calcutta, India
Amira S. Ashour
Tanta University, Egypt
Kalyani Mali
University of Kalyani, India
Nilanjan Dey
Techno India College of Technology, India

144
Intelligent Computing in Medical Imaging
INTRODUCTION
Medical image analysis has a major role in detecting and diagnosis of different 
diseases. Recently, researchers are interested with biomedical image analysis (Doi, 
2007). Mainly, techniques based on machine learning including artificial neural 
networks (ANNs), and bio-inspired algorithms have drawn the attention of several 
researchers. Computer aided diagnosis (CAD) is considered a promptly developing 
active areas with the help of modern computer based methods, and new medical 
imaging modalities. Decision-support tools and intelligent analysis frameworks 
are significant in biomedical imaging for CAD, detection and evaluation where 
accuracy is one of the major issues. CAD helps physicians by the results obtained 
from a computerized system for detecting and diagnosing different diseases, such 
as lesions, and tumors as well as measuring the extent and effect of specific disease. 
One of the foremost goals of these artificial systems is to improve the consistency and 
accuracy of diagnosis in such a way that the rate of false negative will be reduced. 
Generally, CAD systems involve initial selection of samples for training, image pre-
processing for enhancement, selection of region of interests (ROI), features extraction, 
feature selection, classification and segmentation. The CAD system generally tries 
to localize and to identify the disease for diagnosis. CAD systems consist of two 
most important processes, namely image segmentation and image classification. 
During the image segmentation, pixels are grouped into some domains based on 
some feature of the image producing a set of distinct regions or objects that can be 
studied and quantified separately, representing specific ROC (Receiver Operating 
based automated biomedical image analysis are considered. Different approaches 
are discussed including the AI ability to resolve various medical imaging problems. 
It also introduced the popular AI procedures that employed to solve some special 
problems in medicine. Artificial Neural Network (ANN) and support vector machine 
(SVM) are active to classify different types of images from various imaging modalities. 
Different diagnostic analysis, such as mammogram analysis, MRI brain image analysis, 
CT images, PET images, and bone/retinal analysis using ANN, feed-forward back 
propagation ANN, probabilistic ANN, and extreme learning machine continuously. 
Various optimization techniques of ant colony optimization (ACO), genetic algorithm 
(GA), particle swarm optimization (PSO) and other bio-inspired procedures are 
also frequently conducted for feature extraction/selection and classification. The 
advantages and disadvantages of some AI approaches are discussed in the present 
chapter along with some suggested future research perspectives.

145
Intelligent Computing in Medical Imaging
Characteristics) of the actual image. In the classification stage, features are extracted 
and depending on those features classification of objects are performed, i.e. normal 
or abnormal, malignant or benign.
The prime goal of computational intelligence is to understand and to learn 
the principles and logics that can help a machine or artificial systems to behave 
intelligently. General approaches and methods applied in medical image analysis 
at various stages are shown in Figure 1.
For applying the preceding medical image analysis/processing stages, the ANN is 
considered one of the popular, effective nonlinear information processing systems that 
designed from interconnected basic processing modules, namely neurons. Some of the 
basic advantages of the ANN include fault tolerance, adaptive learning, parallelism, 
and self-adjustment. ANN has several applications in knowledge extraction and 
classification, pattern recognition, forecasting of some results depending on some 
current results, clinical diagnosis and analysis. In this chapter, a study is conducted 
on the uses of NN and other AI systems to diagnostic science.
Ideally, the main objective the biomedical imaging system is to upgrade the 
efficiency in monitoring the conditions of humans and other biological species 
efficiently for possible illness and/or diseases detection and treatment. Techniques 
based on AI are widely used for biomedical imaging improvement. In order to perform 
biomedical image analysis for useful information retrieving with a certain amount 
of uncertainty related to it. It is generally performed using artificial computational 
intelligence methods, such as fuzzy logic (FL), GA, bio-inspired algorithms, SVM, 
ANN and deep neural networks. Recent research deals with different tools and methods 
based on AI, which are effective and known for very high classification accuracy. 
Some related tasks, such as biological features identification and segmentation 
are performed more precisely by applying the AI based methods. Consequently, 
these techniques are precious in biomedical image analysis for accurate analysis 
(Rastgarpour, & Shanbehzadeh, 2013). Thus, advanced procedures and systems for 
automated biomedical image analysis are very helpful in increasing the consistency 
and precise interpretation of the biomedical images. AI approaches integrated with 
fuzzy logic, machine learning, and deep learning are so precious in interpretation, 
analysis and mining some useful information from biomedical image data. AI has 
been tested to obtain promising results in digital imaging. Moreover, the structural 
information nature for biomedical images may efficiently be approached by using 
tools and techniques of AI. In biomedical imaging domain; conflicting, ambiguous, 
uncertain, imprecise, and complementary are very common and data fusion techniques 
can efficiently cope up with these issues.
The following sections illustrate in detail how the ANN is employed for image 
classification and analysis. Typically, the ANN has a important role in the medical 
image analysis domain (Miller et al., 1992). Thus, the major focus of the current 

146
Intelligent Computing in Medical Imaging
Figure 1. Different stages of biomedical image analysis

147
Intelligent Computing in Medical Imaging
chapter is on preprocessing of the biomedical images, segmentation, and object 
recognition from biomedical images instead of attempting to cover the research 
aspects of artificial computing in biomedical image analysis.
NEURAL NETWORKS IN BIOMEDICAL IMAGING
ANNs are very popular and massively used for their high performance and accuracy 
in classification and approximation of functions. ANNs have been employed with 
success in various applications of biomedical image analysis, more specifically in 
the preprocessing, segmentation, recognition and classification. An overview of 
some types of the ANN used in this domain is reported in Table 1.
Artificial Neural Network Assisted 
Biomedical Image Pre-Processing
ANN assisted biomedical image pre-processing for image restoration including 
noise removal/quality enhancement and reconstruction. Hopfield neural network 
is considered as an efficient neural work for the reconstruction stage of biomedical 
images (Warsito, & Fan, 2001). The reconstruction process can be considered as an 
optimization problem using NN by allowing it to converge to a stable state through 
Table 1. Some types of NN used in biomedical image processing
Image Pre-
processing
Image 
Segmentation
Classification/
Recognition
Feed Forward Neural Network
Yes
Yes
Yes
Fuzzy Neural Network
Yes
Yes
Yes
Probabilistic Neural Network
X
Yes
Yes
Convolution Neural Network
X
X
Yes
Radial basis function based Neural Network
X
X
Yes
Hopfield Neural Network
Yes
Yes
Yes
Self-organizing feature based Neural 
Network
Yes
Yes
Yes
Adaptive resonance theory based Neural 
Network
X
X
Yes
Artificial Neural ensemble
X
Yes
Yes
Massive training Neural Network
Yes
X
Yes
Cellular Neural Network
Yes
X
X

148
Intelligent Computing in Medical Imaging
optimizing the energy function. Wang et al. (2003) conducted a comparative study 
of reconstructed shapes with the output generated from conventional convolution 
techniques and algebraic reconstruction methods. This study established the Hopfield 
neural networks efficiency in biomedical image reconstruction.
Acquired images reconstruction from electrical impedance tomography 
necessitates the removal of the nonlinear inverse on the data corrupted with noise. 
This requires some assumptions or generalization depending on some previous 
knowledge. The feed-forward ANN and the self-organizing ANN can be more 
advantageous for the reconstruction of such medical images compared to some 
other methods (Adler, & Guardo, 1994). Generally, noise is one of the major issues 
in biomedical images and in restoration stage, noise removal is performed. Suzuki 
et al. (2003) suggested a filter based on NN to solve this issue. An ANN has been 
employed in the proposed filter with multiple layers. This filter can obtain the 
function of different linear and nonlinear filters by proper training.
Edge detection is very popular and has popular effective solutions. For example 
the Laplace, Prewitt, Sobel and some other advanced operators. Suzuki et al. (2003) 
developed a neural edge enhancement approach based on an adapted NN with 
multiple layers. It can enhance desired edges prominently from noisy images. This 
method is verified to be robust and less sensitive to noise and superior compared 
to other conventional methods. It has the capability to enhance continuous edges 
from noisy images.
Neural Network Based Biomedical Image Segmentation
Feed-forward ANN based segmentation are powerful and less noisy than the 
conventional segmentation methods similar to the methods based on Maximum 
Likelihood Classifier (MLC). Feed-forward ANN is insensitive to the training 
set selection compared to the MLC classifier. An overview of the ANNs used in 
biomedical image segmentation is given in table 2.
From the preceding literature review, it can be concluded that the NN is effective 
for biomedical image segmentation. However, it undergoes slow convergence rate 
and its learning parameters should be defined in advance. These disadvantages 
restrict the use of feed- forward ANN in biomedical image segmentation. However, 
recent studies have revealed that the ANNs performance can be improved by using 
metaheuristics. Training ANNs essentially means to find the optimal set of weight 
vector for the network for which some error function is minimized. Thus, the 
training can be framed as an optimization problem. Traditional backpropagation 
based learning algorithms may lead to a set of weight vectors for the ANN, which 
are not optimal. This happens due to the convergence to local optima while finding 
the optimal weight vectors. The problem has been addressed in several literatures 

149
Intelligent Computing in Medical Imaging
(Chatterjee et al., 2016a; 2016b; 2017; Hore et al., 2015a; 2016a; 2017). It can be 
solved by solving the optimization problem regarding the training phase of ANN using 
metaheuristics (Hore et al., 2016b; Chatterjee et al., 2017a). Several metaheuristics 
have been proposed to train ANNs leading to hybrid ANN models that are extremely 
effective in image processing applications. Typically, the Hopfield ANN has been 
proposed as a tool for computing efficient output to difficult optimization problems. 
This sorts it an attractive option to conventional optimization procedures for the 
reconstruction process of the biomedical image reconstruction. Some other ANNs, 
such as fuzzy Gaussian basis ANN, contextual ANN, hybrid ANN based method 
is also employed for medical image segmentation.
Neural Network Based Object Detection
In biomedical imaging, detection and recognition of different shapes and object, 
such as tumors is considered significant and prerequisite in various applications. It 
is also important in disease detection and useful in interpretation and retrieval of 
information from the biomedical images. Sometimes it is also the final stage in the 
Table 2. Overview of the artificial neural networks applied for biomedical image 
segmentation
Algorithm
Description
Du–Yih et al. (1994)
Applied on CT images of liver structure. A three layer BP artificial neural 
network has been used for segmentation.
Hasegawa et al. (1998)
Employed on the radiographic images of the chest. A shift invariant ANN has 
been used.
Ozkan et al. (1993)
Tested on the Magnetic Resonance Images acquired from brain tissues. A BP 
NN based method has been employed for characterization.
Li et al. (1999)
A method based on LSB ANN has been illustrated.
Middleton, & Damper 
(2004)
Applied on Magnetic Resonance Images. Here, Multilayer Perceptron has been 
combined with Active Contour model.
Koss et al. (1999)
Employed on CT images acquired from abdominal region. Images of liver have 
been taken for consideration. Hopfield NN has been used for segmentation.
Chang, & Ching (2002)
A fuzzy Hopfield NN based segmentation technique has been described.
Cheng et al. (1996)
A competitive Hopfield neural network has been discussed for biomedical 
image segmentation
Sun, & Wang (2005)
Applied on MRI, where Fuzzy Gaussian basis NN has been used for 
segmentation.
Lee, & Chung (2002)
A contextual NN based segmentation method has been described.
Wang et al. (1998)
A probabilistic NN based segmentation method has been described.
Pitiot et al. (2002)
Applied on MRI/CT images, where Hybrid NN has been presented.

150
Intelligent Computing in Medical Imaging
biomedical image analysis. It is potentially the brightest area for the application of 
ANN because it is possible to combine several preceding phases (e.g. preprocessing, 
and feature extraction) by applying a NN. The main advantage is its capability to 
train the whole as a single system. A summary of the ANN that has been employed 
in object detection and recognition are reported in Table 3.
Feed-forward NN based techniques have proved their efficiency and preferred 
over conventional image detection and recognition methods due to their accuracy in 
terms of recognition. ANN ensembles are engaged for detecting cancer using two-
level constructions, which are applied to find whether a cell is normal containing 
high confidence. Each network can produce two outputs related to normal cell or 
abnormal cell. In addition, the second-level is employed to handle the cancer cells 
as computed by the first level. The judgment of those separate networks is combined 
Table 3. Summary of the AA applied for biomedical image detection
Algorithm
Description
Maclin, & Dempsey 
(1992)
A feed-forward neural network based technique has been applied on liver images 
obtained from ultrasonography and has been used for liver images classification.
Wu et al. (1993)
A feed-forward NN based technique has been proposed for the interpretation and 
recognition of mammograms.
Tourassi, & Floyd 
(1993)
A feed-forward NN based technique has been developed for localization of cold 
lesion and the images are of SPECT modality.
Ercal et al. (1994)
This method has been based on BP NN with skin dataset for Melanoma detection.
Wolberg et al. (1995)
A feed-forward NN based technique has been carried out for breast cancer 
diagnosis.
Kadah et al. (1996)
A neural network based on radial basis function has been developed for diagnosis 
of liver related diseases obtained from ultrasonic modality.
Zhu, & Yan (1997)
This approach has been based on Hopfield NN to detect boundaries of brain tumor.
Innocent et al. (1997)
An ART NN based method has been proposed for radiographic image 
classification.
Chan et al. (1997)
A convolution NN has been applied for the detection of clustered micro 
calcifications.
Chen et al. (1998)
A probabilistic NN based model has been developed for the recognition of liver 
tumors.
Ashizawa et al. (1999)
A BP NN method has been tested on lung diseases classification.
Pavlopoulos et al. 
(2000)
A fuzzy NN based model has been employed on the ultrasound image of the liver.
Verma, & Zakos 
(2001)
A fuzzy NN based model has been used to detect micro calcifications in 
mammogram images.
Suzuki et al. (2005)
A modified BP NN based approach has been discussed to reduce the false 
positives. This method has been illustrated in computerized detection of lung 
nodules.

151
Intelligent Computing in Medical Imaging
by a plurality voting method. Experimental results proved that the ANN ensemble 
can achieve a good rate of classification and recognition as well as can minimize 
the false negatives.
ADVANTAGES OF ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS 
IN BIOMEDICAL IMAGE ANALYSIS
From the preceding literatures, it can be concluded that the Hopfield ANN and the 
feed-forward ANN are the two mostly adapted models that can be used efficiently 
in biomedical image analysis. The main advantage of Hopfield ANN model in the 
domain of biomedical image analysis is that the problem in this domain can be 
considered as an optimization problem. The major advantages of this type of NN 
based techniques are their efficient capability to handle the tradeoff between the noise 
sensitivity and image reconstruction resolution. Furthermore, the self-organization 
feature map (SOM) is one of the attractive alternatives to supervised methods. It 
has the ability to learn and to classify biomedical image information.
Disadvantages of Artificial Neural Networks 
in Biomedical Image Analysis
Beside the success history, ANN based methods have several disadvantages compared 
to some other methods. The first problem that can be mentioned is the choice of the 
best ANN model and its related architecture. There are no appropriate data that can 
select the ANN type to be used for a certain application and no proper guidelines 
found that assures the best trade-off between the variance and bias for a specific 
volume of the training samples. These networks have to be developed by empirical 
trial and error method and it is hard to surmount. Moreover, there is chance of over 
fitting an ANN. Sometimes optimizing the objective measure does not lead to obtain 
a generalized ANN. The second issue is that the internal implementation is hidden 
such as the black-box. For a certain input, a corresponding output is generated without 
explanation of the taken decision. The third problem related with biomedical image 
analysis is the large volume of input data. If a neural network is trained with a few 
number of test instances, then the generalization power will be degraded and may 
not be useful for test cases. In order to ensure high reliability sufficient training 
samples is essential. In biomedical image analysis, the accuracy is imperative for 
computer aided diagnostic systems.
Finally, training with large number of data may consume huge amount of time, 
while time is very important in diagnostic profession and timely accurate results. 
Moreover, there is a prominent necessity for a detailed validation of the proposed 

152
Intelligent Computing in Medical Imaging
algorithms. In addition, in case of Hopfield ANN for biomedical image analysis, 
the actual problem is the requirement to its modification before being placed for a 
solution to the Hopfield network organization.
IMPACT OF THE BIO-INSPIRED AND EVOLUTIONARY 
ALGORITHMS IN BIOMEDICAL IMAGING
Evolutionary algorithms are inspired by living organisms. One of the effective 
optimization techniques based on the evolution theory is the Genetic Algorithm 
(GA). Learning technique of GA uses computational models of natural adaptation 
to increase their efficiency by mimicking the population genetics. The GA is known 
as a population-based method because it does to consider only a single potential 
solution. It has several applications in biomedical imaging, which are proved to be 
efficient and effective. In mammogram image classification, physicians are interested 
about three types of classes i.e. normal, benign and malignant. A hybrid method 
has been developed by Vasantha et al. (2010) for feature selection and reduction. 
This method can reduce up to 75% of the features. A hybrid method of Greedy 
stepwise technique and GA has been developed to choose the optimal features for 
further classification.
Cartesian genetic programming (CGP) is an efficient method where more than 
one networks is employed to classify the mammograms (Nandi et al., 2006), genetic 
programming has been adapted for implicit feature selection. Now to select the 
features from the available pool, feature selection approach with three statistical 
parameters, namely Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, Student’s t-test, and Kullback–Leibler 
divergence has been employed. The proposed method achieved system accuracy of 
98%. Hernández-Cisneros, & Terashima-Marín (2006) developed a classification 
method for micro calcification clusters in using consecutive difference of Gaussian 
filters (DoG). Three evolutionary ANNs has been compared against a back-propagation 
feed forward ANN. The GA has been employed to find the optimal weights for ANN.
Das, & Bhattacharya (2008) developed a computer guided treatment development 
system using Neuro-fuzzy method based on GA. The tumor features have been 
extracted based on the boundary using Fourier descriptors to represent the features. 
The proposed approach achieved 87% classification accuracy. Kharrat et al. (2010) 
proposed a hybrid method for brain tissues classification obtained from MRI 
images. This approach was based on GA and SVM classifier using texture features 
that based on wavelet. Spatial gray level dependence method is used to extract 
the features from both normal and tumor segments. These acquired features have 
been supplied to SVM. The RBF Kernel has been employed with accuracy range 
96.38% to 98.78%. Hong, & Cho (2006) developed an advanced technique to select 

153
Intelligent Computing in Medical Imaging
features using GA. Yeh, & Fu (2008) developed an optimization method based on 
hierarchical GA associated with a fuzzy learning-vector quantization network to 
perform segmentation of multi-spectral human-brain images of MRI modality. The 
HGALVQ method has been compare to some other well-known methods, namely 
fuzzy c-means, k-means, FALVQ, and LVQ. The HGALVQ provided an exact 
number of clusters. Moreover, it outperformed some other techniques in terms of 
specificity. Saha & Bandyopadhyay (2007) proposed an automatic segmentation 
method based on genetic clustering. This clustering method has been based on 
fuzzy point symmetry and has been applied on the multispectral MRI of the brain. 
The proposed fuzzy-VGAPS method can automatically iterate and can evolve total 
number of clusters within the data set. This method used elitist GA with fixed 
number of generations.
Kishore et al. (2000) studied the efficiency of the GA for various multiclass 
problems using association rules. This method has been compared with the maximum 
likelihood classifier. A classification function has been evolved through the training 
samples, where those samples that belong to same class are assigned with association 
strengths in terms of association degrees. A distinct expression-tree has been evolved 
through every class. It checked whether unknown test samples belong to the class 
under test. Parthiban, & Subramanian, (2008) proposed an automated analysis system 
based on coactive neuro-fuzzy inference system (CANFIS) to predict the heart 
disease using the ANN adaptive nature. Fuzzy logic qualitative approach has been 
used along with GA to detect the disease. GA has been used to improve the learning 
capability of CANFIS. It is used to optimize the number of membership function 
for separate inputs and other control parameters including the rate of learning, and 
momentum coefficient. A power spectral based hybrid GA has been proposed by 
Khazaee & Ebrahimzadeh (2010), where the SVM classifier has been employed to 
classify five different types of electrocardiogram (ECG) signals. These five classes 
are normal and four manifestations of heart arrhythmia. In case of SVM, the free 
parameters have great impact on the accuracy of the classification. This method 
could achieve up to 96.0% accuracy.
Apart from GA, other bio-inspired method, such as PSO, ABC, and cuckoo search 
have great impact in the biomedical image analysis. PSO has been inspired by social 
behavior of bird flocking, where the possible solutions are termed as particles. This 
technique is easy to implement and computationally cheap. Its system requirements 
(i.e. mainly CPU and memory) are low. A new method has been developed by 
Dheeba,& T. Selvi (2010) to detect micro calcification from mammograms. This 
method has been based on PSO and clustering. Fuzzy c-means clustering method 
has been used with the PSO to find the center of the clusters automatically. This 
approach avoids the minimum local value. Geetah et al. (2010) developed a model 
to enhance the mammogram images. A median filter has been used for enhancement 

154
Intelligent Computing in Medical Imaging
and normalization. In this study, the GA has been used to enhance the border; in 
addition, the PSO has been applied to find the nipple position in the mammogram. 
The algorithm effectiveness has been measured by true and false positive, where the 
Corel image database has been used to compute the efficiency of the classification. 
Ibrahim et al. (2010) applied the PSO algorithm to detect abnormalities in brain 
tissue. This technique is based on four main stages, namely an initially generated 
population particle, and then the computed fitness using the fitness function, afterward 
the position and velocity has been updated and finally the stopping criterion has been 
applied. Typically, PSO based methods worked efficiently on the light abnormalities 
but gives poor output in dark abnormalities segmentation.
Maitra, & Chatterjee (2008) developed a new multilevel thresholding procedure 
for MRI brain images segmentation based on bacterial forging algorithm, where 
thresholding based on image histogram has been used. Jude et al. (2010) offered a 
modified counter propagation NN for brain MRI classification. In order to increase 
the efficiency, the PSO has been used with addition to the CPN. Alba et al. (2007) 
empirically evaluated a modified PSO namely Geometric PSO. This method has been 
evaluated by employing a binary representation in Hamming space. This approach 
has been tested on high dimensional microarray data. A comparative study has been 
given to compare PSO and GA. Both of them are associated with SVM with 10- fold 
cross-validation for the classification purpose. Generally, several researchers have 
been interested to apply several image processing techniques in various applications 
that can be applied in the medical domain (Setiawan, 2014; Kumar et al., 2014; 
Hore et al., 2016; Sambyal, & Abrol, 2016; Ang et al., 2016; Naik et al., 2016, 
Mohanpurkar, & Joshi, 2016; Wang et al., 2016; Dey et al. 2016; Manogaran, & 
Lopez, 2017; Li et al., 2017; Khachane, 2017; Tian et al., 2017; Boulmaiz et al., 
2017; Satapathy et al., 2017; Juneja et al., 2017; Sharma, & Virmani, 2017).
CONCLUSION
In this chapter, a study has been conducted on the impact and different application 
area of intelligent computing methods for biomedical image analysis. Different 
methods along with their basic features, limitations and advantages have been 
addressed. These methods can be used as the platform for future development and 
the problems associated with the discussed method can be eliminated. More efficient 
systems will ensure better and faster performance of the health care industry.
Moreover, some modifications in ANN for biomedical and other image analysis 
applications have also been noticed in recent past years. Several advanced techniques, 
such as SVM are used to get more efficient results. ANN is not always considered 

155
Intelligent Computing in Medical Imaging
as the only solution to the classification or regression related applications. There 
are some modified versions of the NN that seems to be promising. The use of some 
emergent ANN techniques in biomedical image processing, e.g. ANN ensembles, 
the hybrid ANN combined with some intelligent agents, the combination of bio-
inspired methods with fuzzy fitness and ANN represent a promising choice to 
enhance efficiency and accuracy in biomedical image analysis.
REFERENCES
Adler, A., & Guardo, R. (1994). A neural network image reconstruction technique 
for electrical impedance tomography. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 13(4), 
594–600. doi:10.1109/42.363109 PMID:18218537
Alba, E., Garcia-Nieto, J., Jourdan, L., & Talbi, E. G. (2007, September). Gene 
selection in cancer classification using PSO/SVM and GA/SVM hybrid algorithms. 
In Evolutionary Computation, 2007. CEC 2007. IEEE Congress on (pp. 284-290). 
IEEE.
Ang, L. M., Seng, K. P., & Heng, T. Z. (2016). Information Communication Assistive 
Technologies for Visually Impaired People. International Journal of Ambient 
Computing and Intelligence, 7(1), 45–68. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2016010103
Ashizawa, K., Ishida, T., MacMahon, H., Vyborny, C. J., Katsuragawa, S., & Doi, K. 
(1999). Artificial neural networks in chest radiography: Application to the differential 
diagnosis of interstitial lung disease. Academic Radiology, 6(1), 2–9. doi:10.1016/
S1076-6332(99)80055-5 PMID:9891146
Boulmaiz, A., Messadeg, D., Doghmane, N., & Taleb-Ahmed, A. (2017). Design 
and Implementation of a Robust Acoustic Recognition System for Waterbird Species 
using TMS320C6713 DSK. International Journal of Ambient Computing and 
Intelligence, 8(1), 98–118. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2017010105
Chan, H. P., Sahiner, B., Petrick, N., Helvie, M. A., Lam, K. L., Adler, D. D., & 
Goodsitt, M. M. (1997). Computerized classification of malignant and benign 
microcalcifications on mammograms: Texture analysis using an artificial neural 
network. Physics in Medicine and Biology, 42(3), 549–567. doi:10.1088/0031-
9155/42/3/008 PMID:9080535
Chang, C. L., & Ching, Y. T. (2002). Fuzzy Hopfield neural network with fixed 
weight for medical image segmentation. Optical Engineering (Redondo Beach, 
Calif.), 41(2), 351–358. doi:10.1117/1.1428298

156
Intelligent Computing in Medical Imaging
Chatterjee, S., Ghosh, S., Dawn, S., Hore, S., & Dey, N. (2016b). Forest Type 
Classification: A hybrid NN-GA model based approach. In Information Systems 
Design and Intelligent Applications (pp. 227-236). Springer India. doi:10.1007/978-
81-322-2757-1_23
Chatterjee, S., Hore, S., Dey, N., Chakraborty, S., & Ashour, A. S. (2017). Dengue 
Fever Classification Using Gene Expression Data: A PSO Based Artificial Neural 
Network Approach. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Frontiers 
in Intelligent Computing: Theory and Applications (pp. 331-341). Springer. 
doi:10.1007/978-981-10-3156-4_34
Chatterjee, S., Nag, R., Sen, S., & Sarkar, A. (2017a, June). Towards Golden Rule 
of Capital Accumulation: A Genetic Algorithm Approach. In IFIP International 
Conference on Computer Information Systems and Industrial Management (pp. 
481-491). Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-59105-6_41
Chatterjee, S., Sarkar, S., Hore, S., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., & Balas, V. E. (2016a). 
Particle swarm optimization trained neural network for structural failure prediction 
of multistoried RC buildings. Neural Computing & Applications, 1–12.
Chen, E. L., Chung, P. C., Chen, C. L., Tsai, H. M., & Chang, C. I. (1998). An 
automatic diagnostic system for CT liver image classification. IEEE Transactions on 
Bio-Medical Engineering, 45(6), 783–794. doi:10.1109/10.678613 PMID:9609943
Cheng, K. S., Lin, J. S., & Mao, C. W. (1996). The application of competitive 
Hopfield neural network to medical image segmentation. IEEE Transactions on 
Medical Imaging, 15(4), 560–567. doi:10.1109/42.511759 PMID:18215937
Das, A., & Bhattacharya, M. (2008, September). GA based neuro fuzzy techniques 
for breast cancer identification. In Machine Vision and Image Processing Conference, 
2008. IMVIP’08. International (pp. 136-141). IEEE. doi:10.1109/IMVIP.2008.19
Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Chakraborty, S., Samanta, S., Sifaki-Pistolla, D., Ashour, 
A. S., & Nguyen, G. N. et al. (2016). Healthy and unhealthy rat hippocampus cells 
classification: A neural based automated system for Alzheimer disease classification. 
Journal of Advanced Microscopy Research, 11(1), 1–10. doi:10.1166/jamr.2016.1282
Dheeba, J., & Selvi, T. (2010, December). Bio inspired swarm algorithm for 
tumor detection in digital mammogram. In International Conference on Swarm, 
Evolutionary, and Memetic Computing (pp. 404-415). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-17563-3_49

157
Intelligent Computing in Medical Imaging
Doi, K. (2007). Computer-aided diagnosis in medical imaging: Historical review, 
current status and future potential. Computerized Medical Imaging and Graphics, 
31(4), 198–211. doi:10.1016/j.compmedimag.2007.02.002 PMID:17349778
Du–Yih, T. S. A. I. (1994). Automatic segmentation of liver structure in CT images 
using a neural network. IEICE Transactions on Fundamentals of Electronics, 
Communications and Computer Science, 77(11), 1892–1895.
Ercal, F., Chawla, A., Stoecker, W. V., Lee, H. C., & Moss, R. H. (1994). Neural 
network diagnosis of malignant melanoma from color images. IEEE Transactions on 
Bio-Medical Engineering, 41(9), 837–845. doi:10.1109/10.312091 PMID:7959811
Hasegawa, A., Lo, S. C. B., Lin, J. S., Freedman, M. T., & Mun, S. K. (1998). A shift-
invariant neural network for the lung field segmentation in chest radiography. The 
Journal of VLSI Signal Processing, 18(3), 241–250. doi:10.1023/A:1007937214367
Hemanth, D. J., Vijila, C. K. S., & Anitha, J. (2010). Performance improved PSO 
based modified counter propagation neural network for abnormal MR brain image 
classification. Int. J. Advance. Soft Comput. Appl, 2(1), 65–84.
Hernández-Cisneros, R., & Terashima-Marín, H. (2006). Classification of individual 
and clustered microcalcifications in digital mammograms using evolutionary neural 
networks. MICAI 2006. Advances in Artificial Intelligence, 1200–1210.
Hong, J. H., & Cho, S. B. (2006). Efficient huge-scale feature selection with speciated 
genetic algorithm. Pattern Recognition Letters, 27(2), 143–150. doi:10.1016/j.
patrec.2005.07.009
Hore, S., Chakraborty, S., Chatterjee, S., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Van Chung, L., 
& Le, D. N. (2016a). An Integrated Interactive Technique for Image Segmentation 
using Stack based Seeded Region Growing and Thresholding. Iranian Journal of 
Electrical and Computer Engineering, 6(6), 2773–2780.
Hore, S., Chatterjee, S., Chakraborty, S., & Shaw, R. K. (2016b). Analysis of 
Different Feature Description Algorithm in object Recognition. Feature Detectors 
and Motion Detection in Video Processing, 66.
Hore, S., Chatterjee, S., Santhi, V., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Balas, V. E., & Shi, F. 
(2017). Indian Sign Language Recognition Using Optimized Neural Networks. 
In Information Technology and Intelligent Transportation Systems (pp. 553–563). 
Springer International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-38771-0_54

158
Intelligent Computing in Medical Imaging
Hore, S., Chatterjee, S., Sarkar, S., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Balas-Timar, D., & 
Balas, V. E. (2016). Neural-based prediction of structural failure of multistoried 
RC buildings. Structural Engineering & Mechanics, 58(3), 459–473. doi:10.12989/
sem.2016.58.3.459
Hore, S., Chatterjee, S., Shaw, R., Dey, N., & Virmani, J. (2015a, November). 
Detection of chronic kidney disease: A NN-GA based approach. In CSI—2015; 
50th Golden Jubilee Annual Convention.
Ibrahim, S., Khalid, N. E. A., & Manaf, M. (2010, March). Empirical study of 
brain segmentation using particle swarm optimization. In Information Retrieval & 
Knowledge Management,(CAMP), 2010 International Conference on (pp. 235-239). 
IEEE. doi:10.1109/INFRKM.2010.5466910
Innocent, P. R., Barnes, M., & John, R. (1997). Application of the fuzzy ART/MAP and 
MinMax/MAP neural network models to radiographic image classification. Artificial 
Intelligence in Medicine, 11(3), 241–263. doi:10.1016/S0933-3657(97)00032-8 
PMID:9413608
Juneja, D., Singh, A., Singh, R., & Mukherjee, S. (2017). A thorough insight into 
theoretical and practical developments in multiagent systems. International Journal 
of Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 8(1), 23–49. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2017010102
Kadah, Y. M., Farag, A. A., Zurada, J. M., Badawi, A. M., & Youssef, A. B. (1996). 
Classification algorithms for quantitative tissue characterization of diffuse liver 
disease from ultrasound images. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 15(4), 
466–478. doi:10.1109/42.511750 PMID:18215928
Khachane, M. Y. (2017). Organ-Based Medical Image Classification Using 
Support Vector Machine. International Journal of Synthetic Emotions, 8(1), 18–30. 
doi:10.4018/IJSE.2017010102
Kharrat, A., Gasmi, K., Messaoud, M. B., Benamrane, N., & Abid, M. (2010). A 
hybrid approach for automatic classification of brain MRI using genetic algorithm 
and support vector machine. Leonardo Journal of Sciences, 17(1), 71–82.
Khazaee, A., & Ebrahimzadeh, A. (2010). Classification of electrocardiogram 
signals with support vector machines and genetic algorithms using power spectral 
features. Biomedical Signal Processing and Control, 5(4), 252–263. doi:10.1016/j.
bspc.2010.07.006
Kishore, J. K., Patnaik, L. M., Mani, V., & Agrawal, V. K. (2000). Application of 
genetic programming for multicategory pattern classification. IEEE Transactions 
on Evolutionary Computation, 4(3), 242–258. doi:10.1109/4235.873235

159
Intelligent Computing in Medical Imaging
Koss, J. E., Newman, F. D., Johnson, T. K., & Kirch, D. L. (1999). Abdominal 
organ segmentation using texture transforms and a hopfield neural network. 
IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 18(7), 640–648. doi:10.1109/42.790463 
PMID:10504097
Kumar, S. U., Inbarani, H. H., Azar, A. T., & Hassanien, A. E. (2014). Identification 
of heart valve disease using bijective soft sets theory. [IJRSDA]. International 
Journal of Rough Sets and Data Analysis, 1(2), 1–14. doi:10.4018/ijrsda.2014070101
Lee, C. C., & Chung, P. C. (2000). Recognizing abdominal organs in CT images 
using contextual neural network and fuzzy rules. In Engineering in Medicine and 
Biology Society, 2000. Proceedings of the 22nd Annual International Conference 
of the IEEE (Vol. 3, pp. 1745-1748). IEEE.
Li, Y., Wen, P., Powers, D., & Clark, C. R. (1999). LSB neural network based 
segmentation of MR brain images. In Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 1999. IEEE 
SMC’99 Conference Proceedings. 1999 IEEE International Conference on (Vol. 
6, pp. 822-825). IEEE.
Li, Z., Shi, K., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Wang, D., Balas, V. E., & Shi, F. et al. 
(2017). Rule-based back propagation neural networks for various precision rough 
set presented KANSEI knowledge prediction: A case study on shoe product form 
features extraction. Neural Computing & Applications, 1–18.
Maclin, P. S., & Dempsey, J. (1992). Using an artificial neural network to diagnose 
hepatic masses. Journal of Medical Systems, 16(5), 215–225. doi:10.1007/
BF01000274 PMID:1289469
Maitra, M., & Chatterjee, A. (2008). A novel technique for multilevel optimal 
magnetic resonance brain image thresholding using bacterial foraging. Measurement, 
41(10), 1124–1134. doi:10.1016/j.measurement.2008.03.002
Manogaran, G., & Lopez, D. (2017). Disease surveillance system for big climate data 
processing and dengue transmission. International Journal of Ambient Computing 
and Intelligence, 8(2), 88–105. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2017040106
Middleton, I., & Damper, R. I. (2004). Segmentation of magnetic resonance 
images using a combination of neural networks and active contour models. Medical 
Engineering & Physics, 26(1), 71–86. doi:10.1016/S1350-4533(03)00137-1 
PMID:14644600
Miller, A. S., Blott, B. H., & Hames, T. K. (1992). Review of neural network applications 
in medical imaging and signal processing. Medical & Biological Engineering & 
Computing, 30(5), 449–464. doi:10.1007/BF02457822 PMID:1293435

160
Intelligent Computing in Medical Imaging
Mohanpurkar, A. A., & Joshi, M. S. (2016). A Traitor Identification Technique 
for Numeric Relational Databases with Distortion Minimization and Collusion 
Avoidance. International Journal of Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 7(2), 
114–137. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2016070106
Naik, A., Satapathy, S. C., Ashour, A. S., & Dey, N. (2016). Social group optimization 
for global optimization of multimodal functions and data clustering problems. Neural 
Computing & Applications, 1–17.
Nandi, R. J., Nandi, A. K., Rangayyan, R. M., & Scutt, D. (2006). Classification of 
breast masses in mammograms using genetic programming and feature selection. 
Medical & Biological Engineering & Computing, 44(8), 683–694. doi:10.1007/
s11517-006-0077-6 PMID:16937210
Ozkan, M., Dawant, B. M., & Maciunas, R. J. (1993). Neural-network-based 
segmentation of multi-modal medical images: A comparative and prospective study. 
IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 12(3), 534–544. doi:10.1109/42.241881 
PMID:18218446
Parthiban, L., & Subramanian, R. (2008). Intelligent heart disease prediction 
system using CANFIS and genetic algorithm. International Journal of Biological, 
Biomedical and Medical Sciences, 3(3).
Pavlopoulos, S., Kyriacou, E., Koutsouris, D., Blekas, K., Stafylopatis, A., & 
Zoumpoulis, P. (2000). Fuzzy neural network-based texture analysis of ultrasonic 
images. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Magazine, 19(1), 39–47. 
doi:10.1109/51.816243 PMID:10659429
Pitiot, A., Toga, A. W., Ayache, N., & Thompson, P. (2002). Texture based MRI 
segmentation with a two-stage hybrid neural classifier. In Neural Networks, 2002. 
IJCNN’02. Proceedings of the 2002 International Joint Conference on (Vol. 3, pp. 
2053-2058). IEEE. doi:10.1109/IJCNN.2002.1007457
Rastgarpour, M., & Shanbehzadeh, J. (2013). The status quo of artificial intelligence 
methods in automatic medical image segmentation. International Journal of Computer 
Theory and Engineering, 5(1), 5–8. doi:10.7763/IJCTE.2013.V5.636
Saha, S., & Bandyopadhyay, S. (2007, September). MRI brain image segmentation 
by fuzzy symmetry based genetic clustering technique. In Evolutionary Computation, 
2007. CEC 2007. IEEE Congress on (pp. 4417-4424). IEEE. doi:10.1109/
CEC.2007.4425049

161
Intelligent Computing in Medical Imaging
Sambyal, N., & Abrol, P. (2016). Feature based Text Extraction System using 
Connected Component Method. International Journal of Synthetic Emotions, 7(1), 
41–57. doi:10.4018/IJSE.2016010104
Satapathy, S. C., Raja, N. S. M., Rajinikanth, V., Ashour, A. S., & Dey, N. (2017). 
Multi-level image thresholding using Otsu and chaotic bat algorithm. Neural 
Computing & Applications, 1–23.
Setiawan, N. A. (2014). Fuzzy decision support system for coronary artery disease 
diagnosis based on Rough set theory. International Journal of Rough Sets and Data 
Analysis, 1(1), 65–80. doi:10.4018/ijrsda.2014010105
Sharma, K., & Virmani, J. (2017). A Decision Support System for Classification of 
Normal and Medical Renal Disease Using Ultrasound Images: A Decision Support 
System for Medical Renal Diseases. International Journal of Ambient Computing 
and Intelligence, 8(2), 52–69. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2017040104
Sun, W., & Wang, Y. (2005). Segmentation method of MRI using fuzzy Gaussian basis 
neural network. Neural Information Processing-Letters and Reviews, 8(2), 19–24.
Suzuki, K., Horiba, I., & Sugie, N. (2003). Neural edge enhancer for supervised 
edge enhancement from noisy images. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and 
Machine Intelligence, 25(12), 1582–1596. doi:10.1109/TPAMI.2003.1251151
Suzuki, K., Shiraishi, J., Abe, H., MacMahon, H., & Doi, K. (2005). False-positive 
reduction in computer-aided diagnostic scheme for detecting nodules in chest 
radiographs by means of massive training artificial neural network 1. Academic 
Radiology, 12(2), 191–201. doi:10.1016/j.acra.2004.11.017 PMID:15721596
Tian, Z., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., McCauley, P., & Shi, F. (2017). Morphological 
segmenting and neighborhood pixel-based locality preserving projection on brain 
fMRI dataset for semantic feature extraction: An affective computing study. Neural 
Computing & Applications, 1–16.
Tourassi, G. D., & Floyd, C. Jr. (1993). Artificial Neural Networks for Single 
Photon Emission Computed Tomography: A Study of Cold Lesion Detection and 
Localization. Investigative Radiology, 28(8), 671–677. doi:10.1097/00004424-
199308000-00002 PMID:8375998
Vasantha, M., Bharathi, D. V. S., & Dhamodharan, R. (2010). Medical image feature, 
extraction, selection and classification. International Journal of Engineering Science 
and Technology, 1(2), 2071–2076.

162
Intelligent Computing in Medical Imaging
Verma, B., & Zakos, J. (2001). A computer-aided diagnosis system for digital 
mammograms based on fuzzy-neural and feature extraction techniques. 
IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine, 5(1), 46–54. 
doi:10.1109/4233.908389 PMID:11300216
Wang, D., He, T., Li, Z., Cao, L., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., & Shi, F. et al. (2016). 
Image feature-based affective retrieval employing improved parameter and structure 
identification of adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system. Neural Computing & 
Applications, 1–16.
Wang, Y., Adali, T., Kung, S. Y., & Szabo, Z. (1998). Quantification and segmentation 
of brain tissues from MR images: A probabilistic neural network approach. IEEE 
Transactions on Image Processing, 7(8), 1165–1181. doi:10.1109/83.704309 
PMID:18172510
Wang, Y., Heng, P. A., & Wahl, F. M. (2003). Image reconstructions from two 
orthogonal projections. International Journal of Imaging Systems and Technology, 
13(2), 141–145. doi:10.1002/ima.10036
Warsito, W., & Fan, L. S. (2001). Neural network based multi-criterion optimization 
image reconstruction technique for imaging two-and three-phase flow systems using 
electrical capacitance tomography. Measurement Science & Technology, 12(12), 
2198–2210. doi:10.1088/0957-0233/12/12/323
Wolberg, W. H., Street, W. N., & Mangasarian, O. L. (1995). Image analysis and 
machine learning applied to breast cancer diagnosis and prognosis. Analytical and 
Quantitative Cytology and Histology, 17(2), 77–87. PMID:7612134
Wu, Y., Giger, M. L., Doi, K., Vyborny, C. J., Schmidt, R. A., & Metz, C. E. 
(1993). Artificial neural networks in mammography: Application to decision 
making in the diagnosis of breast cancer. Radiology, 187(1), 81–87. doi:10.1148/
radiology.187.1.8451441 PMID:8451441
Yeh, J. Y., & Fu, J. C. (2008). A hierarchical genetic algorithm for segmentation 
of multi-spectral human-brain MRI. Expert Systems with Applications, 34(2), 
1285–1295. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2006.12.012
Zhou, Jiang, Yang, & Chen. (2002). Lung Cancer Cell Identification Based on 
Artificial Neural Network Ensembles. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 24, 25-36.
Zhu, Y., & Yan, Z. (1997). Computerized tumor boundary detection using a 
Hopfield neural network. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 16(1), 55–67. 
doi:10.1109/42.552055 PMID:9050408

163
Intelligent Computing in Medical Imaging
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Classification: Defined as assigning a physical object or incident into a set of 
known groups. It is considered a numerical properties analysis of the image features 
for classification.
Feature Extraction: The attributes transformation into a lower dimensional space.
Feature Selection: The selection of the most significant attributes that provide 
important information about the object under concern.
Image Analysis: The extraction of expressive information from images using 
digital image processing procedures.
Image Processing: The manipulation and analysis of a digitized image for 
quality improvement.
Image Segmentation: The image partitioning process into several segments.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging: A medical device that employed nuclear magnetic 
resonance of protons to yield images.
Medical Imaging: The method that produces/captures medical images.
Medical Modalities: The medical instruments for capturing medical images of 
the internal organ of the body to support diagnosis.

164
Copyright © 2018, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  7
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-4151-6.ch007
ABSTRACT
Load changes in any one of interconnected power system that influence the system 
response from their nominal values. The Proportional–Integral- Derivative (PID) 
controller is employed to mitigate this issue as a secondary controller in addition to 
the Superconducting Magnetic Energy Storage (SMES) unit. In Automatic Generation 
Control (AGC), the current work proposed an Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) 
technique to tune PID controller gain values of multi-area interconnected thermal 
power system. The gain value of PID controller is tuned by using the ACO techniques. 
The system response is compared with and without considering SMES unit in the 
system. The comparative results clearly established that the system response with 
SMES unit improve the performance of system during sudden load disturbance.
Effect of SMES Unit in AGC of 
an Interconnected Multi-Area 
Thermal Power System With 
ACO-Tuned PID Controller
K. Jagatheesan
Paavai Engineering College, India
B. Anand
Hindusthan College of Engineering and Technology, India
Nilanjan Dey
Techno India College of Technology, India
Amira S. Ashour
Tanta University, Egypt

165
Effect of SMES Unit in AGC of an Interconnected Multi-Area Thermal Power System
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, the electrical energy demand increases rapidly all over the world due to 
the enormous development in technology. Large scale power systems are created to 
achieve energy demand balance. The large scale power systems are incorporated with 
a number of control areas that are interconnected through the tie lines. In any one of 
power system, the increased load demand will lead to share the power between the 
connected areas to maintain the system in stable condition. The size and complexity 
are increased with large control areas’ interconnections. The system complexity can 
be reduced with the help of recently developed modern control theory.
Many researchers reported the AGC of interconnected power systems performance 
that were related to AGC or LFC of two and three equal or unequal areas of thermal-
thermal, and thermal-hydro systems. Several studies have been including various 
optimization techniques (Samanta et al., 2013a; 2013b; Jagatheesan, & Anand, 2014), 
while others have been directed with controller types with different optimization 
techniques that have been used in the LFC, such as classical, optimal, fuzzy logic 
(Ali, & Abd-Elazim, (2011), neural network (Anand, & Jeyakumar, 2009), Variable 
Structure Control (VSC) (Das et al., 1991), Optimal Control (Moon et al., 2000), 
and Decentralized Controller (Jagatheesan et al., 2014). In LFC or AGC the optimal 
PID controller gain values are optimized by using recently developed evolutionary 
computation techniques, such as ACO (Hsiao et al., 2004), Bacteria Foraging 
Optimization (BFO) (Ali, & Abd-Elazim, (2011), and Particle Swarm Optimization 
(PSO) (Ebrahim et al., 2009), Artificial Bee Colony (ABC) (Debbarma et al., 2013), 
Cuckoo Search (CS) (Dash et al., 2014), and Teaching Learning Based Optimization 
(TLBO) (Chidambaram, & Paramasivam, 2012).
The AGC in 3-area equal Thermal–Thermal–Hydro system has been investigated 
with different classical controllers and the performance has been compared with 
fuzzy Integral double derivative (IDD) controller (Taher et al., 2014). The optimal 
controllers’ gain values are optimized using BFO associated to conventional PID 
controller. Imperialist Competitive Algorithm (ICA) is implemented with LFC of 
3-area power system with Fractional Order PID (FOPID) controller (Debbarma et al., 
2013). The simulation result demonstrated the superiority of system performance with 
ICA based controller compared to the existing controller. The FOPID controller has 
been implemented under released environment using BF technique for optimization 
(Roy et al., 2010). From the above discussion, it is very clear that the modern 
evolutionary computation techniques have been developed and implemented the 
three areas system in the load frequency control successfully. An energy storage 
device with the ability to decrease the system frequency oscillations andthe tie-line 
power flow within a quick period of time has been presented in (Tam, & Kumar, 

166
Effect of SMES Unit in AGC of an Interconnected Multi-Area Thermal Power System
1990). Many energy storage units, namely the capacitive energy storage (CES), 
battery energy storage, SMES and flywheels, have been modeled.
In the current chapter, super conducting magnetic energy storage unit is 
implemented, which stores the energy in the magnetic field model (Tam, & Kumar, 
1990). The stored energy is suddenly released through power conversion system with 
the rise in load demand. Due to this demand, the turbine and other LFC arrangements 
are adjusted for the power balance and a new equilibrium. SMES coil absorbs the 
energy through the system steady state situation. The absorbed energy is released 
during sudden load changes. The control of SMES unit is based on changing the 
converter firing angle. Since the operative way of using SMES unit is based on the 
control strategy method, an efficient soft computing ACO technique is used for 
tuning the PID controller gain values in AGC of three areas interconnected reheat 
thermal power systems. The chief aims of the presented work are as follows:
1. 	
Design a 3-area interconnected reheat thermal power system without and 
with the consideration of SMES unit in association with PID controller as a 
secondary controller.
2. 	
Design a PID controller for AGC of 3 equal areas reheat thermal power system 
and to optimize the gain values of controller by ACO technique.
3. 	
Compute the Kp, Ki and Kd gain values of PID controller without and with 
the consideration of SMES unit.
4. 	
Investigate the performances of the AGC reheat thermal system with the SMES 
energy storage unit.
5. 	
Compare the AGC reheat thermal system performance without and with 
including the Superconducting Magnetic Energy Storage unit effect.
SYSTEM UNDER STUDY
The model of transfer function of uncontrolled 3-area interconnected reheat thermal 
power system is illustrated in Figure 1 (Anand, & Jeyakumar, 2009; Jagatheesan, & 
Anand, 2012). In this power system, each power plant is incorporated with speed 
regulator, a governor, turbine with reheater and generator. In addition, each plant 
has an equal rating of 2000MW.
All the power plants are interconnected with the help of tie-lines for interchanging 
the power among the plants during abnormal condition to keep the system stability. 
Increasing load demand in either plant of the system; affects the reactive/real 
system power. Changes in real power mainly affect (tie-line power flow and system 
frequency) stability of total interconnected power system compared to reactive power 
changes. The proper control signal that generated to enhance the system stability 

167
Effect of SMES Unit in AGC of an Interconnected Multi-Area Thermal Power System
is very important that is fed to the connected plants. The generated control signal 
from PID controller is given by:
u t
K ACE
K
ACE dt
T K
d
dt
ACE
p
i
d
d
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
( ) =−
−
−
∫
	
(1)
u t
K ACE
K
ACE dt
T K
d
dt
ACE
p
i
d
d
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
( ) =−
−
−
∫
	
(2)
u t
K ACE
K
ACE dt
T K
d
dt
ACE
p
i
d
d
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
( ) =−
−
−
∫
	
(3)
The area control error (ACE) that generated in area 1, area 2 and area 3 is given by:
ACE
F B
Ptie
1
1
1
12
=
+
∆
∆
.
	
(4)
Figure 1. Model of open loop 3-area transfer function with SMES

168
Effect of SMES Unit in AGC of an Interconnected Multi-Area Thermal Power System
ACE
F B
Ptie
2
2
2
23
=
+
∆
∆
.
	
(5)
ACE
F
B
Ptie
3
3
3
31
=
+
∆
∆
.
	
(6)
Superconducting Magnetic Energy Storage (SMES) Unit
SMES is a DC current device that uses the magnetic field as a form to store the energy 
(Tam, & Kumar, 1990). Figure 2 illustrates the basic component of this unit is shown. 
It contains the cryogenic system, superconducting coil, transformer, Power Conversion 
System (PCS) with proper control. From these components, superconducting coil 
is the heart of SMES unit. It incorporates with vacuum vessels and liquid vessels 
for the cooling arrangement of coil. A cryogenic system is employed for keeping 
the temperature of coil within the permissible limits. The power conversion system 
is used for two purposes, namely the conversion of electrical energy from DC to 
AC and the charging/discharging of the oil. The power system is connected to the 
PCS with the help of transformer to reduce the operating voltage into acceptable 
level for the PCS.
The energy is stored in the super conducting coil (E) in the SMES unit, and the 
rated power (P) is given by (Tam, & Kumar, 1990):
E
LI
= 1
2
2 	
(7)
Figure 2. Components of SMES unit

169
Effect of SMES Unit in AGC of an Interconnected Multi-Area Thermal Power System
P
dE
dt
LI dI
dt
VI
=
=
=
	
(8)
where, L is the coil (H) inductance, V is voltage across coil and I is DC current 
flowing over a coil (A). As the superconducting coil reaches the rated current, the 
SMES unit is equipped for AGC/LFC control. ACE is sensed. It is conducted for 
the voltage control of SMES unit by changing the duty cycle of the chopper. Table 
1 reports the few noteworthy applications of SMES in LFC/AGC issue of multi-area 
interconnected power systems.
The preceding studies involved applications of SMES units in interconnected 
power system, it is clearly shows that sudden power surplus in power system is 
overcome by deriving power from large inductor coil. It improved the inclusive 
dynamic system performance and stability.
Proportional-Integral-Derivative (PID) Controller
An industrial PID controller is used to solve the AGC problem. The ACO procedure 
is utilized to obtain the gain values of PID controller and discussed in section 4. 
PID controller structure is illustrated in Figure 3.
Table 1. Applications of SMES unit in LFC/AGC issue of multi-area interconnected 
power systems
Size of the Power System
Authors
Remarks
Two area
Pothiye et 
al. (2007)
AGC problem of 2-area reheat thermal power system has been 
discussed using fuzzy logic based PID controller with applying 
multiple Tabu Search algorithms.
Two area (multi-unit)
Bhatt et 
al.(2010)
Multi-area multiple unit hydrothermal power system operation 
has been improved by TCPS coordinated SMES units in all areas 
with integral controller.
Two area
Joseph et 
al. (2011)
Damping oscillations in tie-line power and frequency in two area 
thermal has been discussed with SMES and TCPS coordination.
Two area (multi-unit)
Roy et 
al.(2014)
Dynamic performance two area hydro power system with three 
multiple units in each area has been improved by introducing 
SMES units in both units.
Two area (multi-unit)
Padhan et 
al.(2014)
Multi-area multiple unit thermal power system has been 
deliberated in with fuzzy based PID controller. It improved 
system response with less settling time and overshoots.
Two area
Chine,& 
Tripathy 
(2015)
The real power surplus in two area power system compensated by 
deriving same amount of power from large indictor coil. By the 
use of SMES unit in interconnected two area power system.

170
Effect of SMES Unit in AGC of an Interconnected Multi-Area Thermal Power System
The PID controller structure entails 3-different control terms (Integral, Proportional 
and Derivative terms). In power system, all are connected together to solve AGC 
problematic. Here, Integral Time Absolute Error (ITAE) objective function is applied 
to obtain the optimal gain values of integral (Ki), Proportional (Kp), and Derivative 
(Kd) controller gain values. The ITAE expression is given as follows:
J
t
f
P
dt
i
tie i
j
T
=
+
{
}
−
∫
∆
∆
0
	
(9)
where, J represents performance index, t is simulation time period, ∆f is frequency 
deviation, ∆Ptie is tie-line power deviation and i,j = 1, 2, 3.
Ant Colony Optimization Technique
Real ants’ performance stimulated several researchers to solve many discrete 
optimization problems. When ants are searching their food, originally the ants are 
explored random manner around their nest. The explored ants are finding a food 
source as soon as possible. The quality/quantity of the food source is evaluated. It 
deposits some pheromone chemical trial on the ground. The indirect communication 
between the ants using chemical trials enables shortest path between food and 
their nest. These characteristics of real ants are used to find the solution for many 
Figure 3. PID controller

171
Effect of SMES Unit in AGC of an Interconnected Multi-Area Thermal Power System
optimization problems. Transition probability from town i and j for the kth ant is 
expressed by:
p t
t
t
ij
ij
ij
ij
ij
j nodes
( )
( )
( )
=
(
)
(
)
∈∑
τ
η
τ
η
α
β
α
β 	
(10)
The pheromone value against heuristic ηij  information is:
ηij
ij
d
= 1 	
(11)
The global updating rule is applied based on the following expression:
τ
ρ τ
ij
ij
k
k
colony that
used edge i j
t
t
Q
L
(
)
(
)
( )
( , )
+
=
−
+
∈∑
1
1
	
(12)
here, Pij is the probability between the town i and j, τij  is pheromone related to edge 
linking cities i and j, Q is constant, dij is distance between cities i and j, Lk is the 
tour length that performed by Kth ant, α, β are constants to determine the relative 
time between heuristic values and pheromone and ρ is the evaporation rate.
During the optimization of PID controller parameters using ACO algorithm 
consists of several steps. The first step is initialization simulation parameters, including 
the number of ants, pheromone and iteration. After running initialization simulation 
model, ants are start moving from source to node (nest to food source) on the ground 
by pasting pheromone chemicals. The chemicals concentrations are varied based on 
the food quantity and quality. During this tour shortest path having higher chemical 
concentration and longer path having lesser concentration, it evaporates after few 
iteration. The simulation is stops when it has maximum value of the iteration. The 
optimal control gain values and results comparisons are as follows.
SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
MATLAB 7.5(R2007b) is conducted to gain dynamic response of power system in 
all areas with and without considering SMES unit. The PID controller parameters 

172
Effect of SMES Unit in AGC of an Interconnected Multi-Area Thermal Power System
are tuned by applying ACO technique, it is discussed in the section IV and gain 
values are illustrated in the Table 2.
In this section, the simulation performance comparison of AGC multi-area 
interconnected reheat thermal power system without and with considering SMES unit 
in all the areas is shown in Figures 4-12. In these figures, the response comparison 
dashed line illustrates the response system without considering SMES unit and solid 
line illustrates the system of response with considering SMES unit.
Table 2. Gain values of PID controller optimized using ACO
 
PID Controller Gain Values
Ki
Kp
Kd
Ki1
Ki2
Ki3
Kp1
Kp2
Kp3
Kd1
Kd2
Kd3
Without 
Considering 
SMES Unit
9.6
6.7
5.7
10
9.6
8
1.3
4.3
2.1
Considering 
SMES Unit
0.8
9.6
9.6
6.3
9.6
9.8
8.7
2.3
3.3
Figure 4. Change in frequency deviation comparisons in area 1 with and without 
considering SMES unit

173
Effect of SMES Unit in AGC of an Interconnected Multi-Area Thermal Power System
Figure 6 demonstrates the frequency deviation system assessments in three 
areas with ACO based PID controller with and without considering SMES unit in 
all areas. It is shows that system response including SMES unit response settled 
quickly without considering energy storage unit.
Figure 9 show the tie-line power flow response between connected power 
systems with and without considering SMES unit in all area for 1% SLP in area 
1. It is effectively regulated with superior settling time and minimum damping 
oscillations in comparison with the system response without taking into account 
the SMES unit in all areas.
Figures 10-12 show the performance comparison of area control error with and 
without considering SMES unit in all the areas. It is clearly evident that the ACE 
is settled quickly compared to system response without considering SMES unit. 
Table 3 reported the performance analysis is made by time domain specifications 
and numerical values.
Simulation result comparisons in plot and time domain specification parameters 
comparison in the table of the interconnected power system establish that the SMES 
unit including system response settled faster with lesser damping oscillations compared 
to system response without considering SMES unit in all interconnected area.
Figure 5. Change in frequency deviation comparisons in area 2 with and without 
considering SMES unit

174
Effect of SMES Unit in AGC of an Interconnected Multi-Area Thermal Power System
Figure 6. Frequency deviation change comparison in area 3 with and without 
considering SMES unit
Figure 7. Tie-line power flow deviations in between area 1 & 2 with and without 
considering SMES unit

175
Effect of SMES Unit in AGC of an Interconnected Multi-Area Thermal Power System
Figure 8. Tie-line power flow deviations in between area 1 & 3 with and without 
considering SMES unit
Figure 9. Tie-line power flow deviations in between area 2 & 3 with and without 
considering SMES unit

176
Effect of SMES Unit in AGC of an Interconnected Multi-Area Thermal Power System
Figure 10. Area control error deviation in area 1 with and without considering 
SMES unit
Figure 11. Area control error deviation in area 2 with and without considering 
SMES unit

177
Effect of SMES Unit in AGC of an Interconnected Multi-Area Thermal Power System
Figure 12. Area control error deviation in area 3 with and without considering 
SMES unit
Table 3. Comparison of numerical values of settling time with and without considering 
SMES unit
Settling Time Comparison With and Without Considering SMES Unit
Fig.No
Response
Without Considering 
SMES Unit
With Considering SMES 
Unit
4
delF1
10.1
10
5
delF2
19
16
6
delF3
16.5
10.1
7
delPtie12
21.5
20
8
delPtie13
19
18
9
delPtie23
18.5
17
10
ACE1
14.5
13.5
11
ACE2
13
12.5
12
ACE3
15.5
14.5

178
Effect of SMES Unit in AGC of an Interconnected Multi-Area Thermal Power System
The settling time bar chart comparisons of system with and without considering 
SMES is shown in Figures 13-15. It is clearly evident that the SMES unit equipped 
system settled quick compare to system without SMES unit response.
The percentage improvement comparisons of system with and without considering 
SMES unit equipped system response frequency deviations, tie-line power flow 
deviations and area control error is shown in following Tables 4 through 6.
Tables 4 through 6 and Figures 16 through 18 clearly proved that SMES unit 
equipped system response enhanced in terms of minimum settling time in comparison 
with the system response without SMES unit during sudden load demand.
Figure 13. Bar chart comparisons of settling time in system frequency
Table 4. Percentage of improvement of SMES unit over without SMES unit in settling 
time of delF
Response
% of Improvement Over Without SMES Unit
delF1
0.99
delF2
15.79
delF3
38.79

179
Effect of SMES Unit in AGC of an Interconnected Multi-Area Thermal Power System
Figure 14. Bar chart comparisons of settling time in tie-line power flow
Figure 15. Bar chart comparisons of settling time in area control error

180
Effect of SMES Unit in AGC of an Interconnected Multi-Area Thermal Power System
Table 5. Percentage of improvement of SMES unit over without SMES unit in settling 
time of delPtie
Response
% of Improvement Over Without SMES Unit
delP12
6.98
delP13
5.26
delP23
8.11
Table 6. Percentage of improvement of SMES unit over without SMES unit in settling 
time of ACE
Response
% of Improvement Over Without SMES Unit
ACE1
6.90
ACE2
3.85
ACE3
6.45
Figure 16. Bar chart comparisons of percentage of improvement in settling time 
of delF

181
Effect of SMES Unit in AGC of an Interconnected Multi-Area Thermal Power System
Figure 17. Bar chart comparisons of percentage of improvement in settling time 
of delPtie
Figure 18. Bar chart comparisons of percentage of improvement in settling time 
of ACE

182
Effect of SMES Unit in AGC of an Interconnected Multi-Area Thermal Power System
CONCLUSION
In the present work, AGC of three area interconnected reheat thermal power system 
is investigated with PID controller considered as secondary controller. The ACO is 
used for optimizing the gain values of PID controller using ITAE objective function. 
The optimization process is performed without and with SMES energy storage unit 
in all the three interconnected areas.
The system performance with SMES energy storage unit is associated with 
performance of system without the energy storage unit. Simulation results depicted 
that SMES unit effectively damping out the oscillations and reduced the system 
response settling time during sudden load disturbance. The numerical values and 
response comparisons are given in the table and plot. It is clearly proved that system 
response with SMES unit settled quick response in comparison with the system 
response without considering SMES unit in all areas.
REFERENCES
Ali, E. S., & Abd-Elazim, S. M. (2011). Bacteria foraging optimization algorithm 
based load frequency controller for interconnected power system. International 
Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems, 33(3), 633–638. doi:10.1016/j.
ijepes.2010.12.022
Anand, B., & Jeyakumar, A. E. (2009). Load frequency control with fuzzy logic 
controller considering non-linearities and boiler dynamics. ICGST-ACSE Journal, 
8(111), 15–20.
Bhatt, P., Ghoshal, S. P., & Roy, R. (2010). Load frequency stabilization by 
coordinated control of Thyristor Controlled Phase Shifters and superconducting 
magnetic energy storage for three types of interconnected two-area power systems. 
International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems, 32(10), 1111–1124. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijepes.2010.06.009
Chaine, S., & Tripathy, M. (2015). Design of an optimal SMES for automatic 
generation control of two-area thermal power system using cuckoo search algorithm. 
Journal of Electrical Systems and Information Technology, 2(1), 1–13. doi:10.1016/j.
jesit.2015.03.001
Chidambaram, I. A., & Paramasivam, B. (2012). Control performance standards based 
load-frequency controller considering redox flow batteries coordinate with interline 
power flow controller. Journal of Power Sources, 219, 292–304. doi:10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2012.06.048

183
Effect of SMES Unit in AGC of an Interconnected Multi-Area Thermal Power System
Das, D., Kothari, M. L., Kothari, D. P., & Nanda, P. J. (1991, November). Variable 
structure control strategy to automatic generation control of interconnected reheat 
thermal system. IEE Proceedings. Control Theory and Applications, 138(6), 579–585. 
doi:10.1049/ip-d.1991.0080
Dash, P., Saikia, L. C., & Sinha, N. (2014). Comparison of performances of several 
Cuckoo search algorithm based 2DOF controllers in AGC of multi-area thermal 
system. International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems, 55, 429–436. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijepes.2013.09.034
Debbarma, S., Saikia, L. C., & Sinha, N. (2013). AGC of a multi-area thermal 
system under deregulated environment using a non-integer controller. Electric Power 
Systems Research, 95, 175–183. doi:10.1016/j.epsr.2012.09.008
Ebrahim, M. A., Mostafa, H. E., Gawish, S. A., & Bendary, F. M. (2009, November). 
Design of decentralized load frequency based-PID controller using stochastic particle 
swarm optimization technique. In Electric Power and Energy Conversion Systems, 
2009. EPECS’09. International Conference on (pp. 1-6). IEEE.
Hsiao, Y. T., Chuang, C. L., & Chien, C. C. (2004, September). Ant colony optimization 
for designing of PID controllers. In Computer Aided Control Systems Design, 2004 
IEEE International Symposium on (pp. 321-326). IEEE.
Jagatheesan, K., & Anand, B. (2012, December). Dynamic performance of multi-
area hydro thermal power systems with integral controller considering various 
performance indices methods. In Emerging Trends in Science, Engineering and 
Technology (INCOSET), 2012 International Conference on (pp. 474-484). IEEE. 
doi:10.1109/INCOSET.2012.6513952
Jagatheesan, K., & Anand, B. (2014). Automatic generation control of three area 
hydro-thermal power systems considering electric and mechanical governor with 
conventional controller and ant colony optimization technique. Advances in Natural 
and Applied Sciences, 8(20), 25–34.
Jagatheesan, K., Anand, B., & Ebrahim, M. A. (2014). Stochastic particle swarm 
optimization for tuning of PID controller in load frequency control of single area 
reheat thermal power system. International Journal of Electrical and Power 
Engineering, 8(2), 33–40.
Joseph, R., Abraham, A., Das, D., & Patra, A. (2011). Damping oscillations in tie 
power and area frequencies in a thermal power system with SMES-TCPS combinations. 
Journal of Electrical System, 1(1), 71–80.

184
Effect of SMES Unit in AGC of an Interconnected Multi-Area Thermal Power System
Moon, Y. H., Ryu, H. S., Kim, B., & Song, K. B. (2000). Optimal tracking approach 
to load frequency control in power systems. In Power Engineering Society Winter 
Meeting, 2000. IEEE (Vol. 2, pp. 1371-1376). IEEE.
Padhan, S., Sahu, R. K., & Panda, S. (2014). Automatic generation control with 
thyristor controlled series compensator including superconducting magnetic energy 
storage units. Ain Shams Engineering Journal, 5(3), 759–774. doi:10.1016/j.
asej.2014.03.011
Pothiya, S., Ngamroo, I., & Kongprawechnon, W. (2007, December). Design of 
optimal fuzzy logic-based PID controller using Multiple Tabu Search algorithm for 
AGC including SMES units. In Power Engineering Conference, 2007. IPEC 2007. 
International (pp. 838-843). IEEE.
Roy, A., Dutta, S., & Roy, P. K. (2014, January). Automatic generation control by 
SMES-SMES controllers of two-area hydro-hydro system. In Non Conventional 
Energy (ICONCE), 2014 1st International Conference on (pp. 302-307). IEEE. 
doi:10.1109/ICONCE.2014.6808731
Roy, R., Bhatt, P., & Ghoshal, S. P. (2010). Evolutionary computation based three-area 
automatic generation control. Expert Systems with Applications, 37(8), 5913–5924. 
doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2010.02.014
Samanta, S., Acharjee, S., Mukherjee, A., Das, D., & Dey, N. (2013a, December). 
Ant weight lifting algorithm for image segmentation. In Computational Intelligence 
and Computing Research (ICCIC), 2013 IEEE International Conference on (pp. 
1-5). doi:10.1109/ICCIC.2013.6724160
Samanta, S., Chakraborty, S., Acharjee, S., Mukherjee, A., & Dey, N. (2013b, 
December). Solving 0/1 knapsack problem using ant weight lifting algorithm. 
In Computational Intelligence and Computing Research (ICCIC), 2013 IEEE 
International Conference on (pp. 1-5). IEEE.
Taher, S. A., Fini, M. H., & Aliabadi, S. F. (2014). Fractional order PID controller 
design for LFC in electric power systems using imperialist competitive algorithm. 
Ain Shams Engineering Journal, 5(1), 121–135. doi:10.1016/j.asej.2013.07.006
Tam, K. S., & Kumar, P. (1990). Application of superconductive magnetic energy 
storage in an asynchronous link between power systems. IEEE Transactions on 
Energy Conversion, 5(3), 436–444. doi:10.1109/60.105266

Copyright © 2018, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  8
185
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-4151-6.ch008
ABSTRACT
Artificial intelligence is the outlet of computer science apprehensive with creating 
computers that perform as humans. It compromises expert systems, playing games, 
natural language, and robotics. However, soft computing (SC) varies from the hard 
(conventional) computing in its tolerant of partial truth, uncertainty, imprecision, 
and approximation, thus, it models the human mind. The most common SC techniques 
include neural networks, fuzzy systems, machine learning, and the meta-heuristic 
stochastic algorithms (e.g., Cellular automata, ant colony optimization, Memetic 
algorithms, particle swarms, Tabu search, evolutionary computation and simulated 
annealing. Due to the required accurate diseases analysis, magnetic resonance 
imaging, computed tomography images and images of other modalities segmentation 
remains a challenging problem. Over the past years, soft computing approaches attract 
attention of several researchers for problems solving in medical data applications. 
Image segmentation is the process that partitioned an image into some groups based 
on similarity measures. This process is employed for abnormalities volumetric 
analysis in medical images to identify the disease nature. Recently, meta-heuristic 
algorithms are conducted to support the segmentation techniques. In the current 
chapter, different segmentation procedures are addressed. Several meta-heuristic 
approaches are reported with highlights on their procedures. Finally, several medical 
applications using meta-heuristic based-approaches for segmentation are discussed.
Meta-Heuristic Algorithms in 
Medical Image Segmentation:
A Review
Nilanjan Dey
Techno India College of Technology, India
Amira S. Ashour
Tanta University, Egypt

186
Meta-Heuristic Algorithms in Medical Image Segmentation
INTRODUCTION
Image analysis, pattern recognition, image disciplines are the foremost domains of 
computer engineering and computer science in several domains, such as medical, 
military, astronomy and real-world applications. In the medical applications, 
image-guided therapy is one of the vital methods for accurate diagnosis. Medical 
image computing has a rising prominence for medical diagnosis. Image analysis 
systems incorporating with innovative image computing procedures carried out 
to extract quantifiable parameters from the medical image in order to support the 
diagnosis and treatment. In order to achieve accurate clinical routine, automated 
and robust medical image computing techniques become an active research area. 
Model-based image analysis as well as image-based modelling methods becomes 
significant tools for accurate assessable analysis of the objects in the medical image. 
These methods require earlier information about the medical images’ structures, 
including bones, tumours, tissue, vessels and organs. Afterward, the image-based 
modelling approaches applied to extract the significant features automatically. For 
complex visualization and quantitative measures, processing of digital indicative 
imaging data carried out to support disease progression monitoring, diagnosis and 
pre-operative planning. Nevertheless, successful image analysis requires optimized 
and complex processing systems, which is a challenging aspect. Currently, research 
in medical image analysis pursued by an ongoing stream of successful new clinical 
applications to achieve robust solutions based on computing techniques (Dey,& 
Ashour, 2016; Kotyk et al., 2016; Saba et al. (2016); Ahmed et al., 2017; Ashour 
et al., 2016; Dey et al., 2017).
Medical image segmentation and classification are considered the main image 
processing approaches. High soft tissue contrast of magnetic resonance (MR) images 
segmentation has a significant role for evaluating the brain tumors’ therapy. Manual 
segmentation by physicians still the segmentation gold standard of atypical brain 
images, however, it is disposed to human bias/error as well as its tedious process. An 
endeavor for reliable computerization of medical image segmentation is consequently 
extremely desired. This leads to the necessity to used clustering algorithms to label 
the pixels of the medical image into a prearranged number of clusters, where the 
number of clusters is known a priori in most of the anatomic structures. Furthermore, 
medical image classification is extensively used to discriminate the abnormal and 
normal images. Automated classification process is highly desired to support the 
physicians in the analysis monotonous task.
Artificial intelligence and soft computing play a significant role in several 
applications (Mhetre et al., 2016; Bureš et al., 2016; Boulmaiz et al., 2017; Acharjya, 
& Anitha, 2017; Sharma, & Virmani, 2017; Manogaran, & Lopez, 2017). Computing 
algorithms have an imperative role in medical image analysis and processing to 

187
Meta-Heuristic Algorithms in Medical Image Segmentation
solve the inherent uncertainties in the captured medical image data. Recently, 
researchers developed fuzzy methods for image segmentation, fuzzy clustering 
approaches, and fuzzy methods for object delineation and recognition (Pham et 
al., 2000). Generally, computing methods comprise support vector machines, 
neural networks, fuzzy logic, probabilistic methods, chaos theory and evolutional 
computation. Medical image computing improves mathematical and computational 
approaches to solve related problems to medical images (Chan, T. F., & Shen, 2005). 
Clinically, the chief objective of the medical image computing is the extraction of 
relevant information from medical images. Medical image computing focuses on the 
images computational analysis. Generally, medical image computing methods can 
categorize into image segmentation-, image classification-, and image registration- 
based computational techniques. Typically, medical image computing works on 
sampled data with consistent spatial space. The data under concern is based on the 
used modality, namely, Computed Radiography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI), functional MRI (fMRI), X-ray, optical coherence tomography (OCT), positron 
emission tomography (PET), Single photon emisson computed tomography (SPECT), 
SPECT-CT, PET-MRI, and PET-CT. These imaging modalities capture images of 
the different human organs (Ahmad et al., 2014). Recently, numerous meta-heuristic 
optimization algorithms have been developed and involved is several medical and 
real applications, namely cuckoo search (CS), Particle swarm optimization (PSO), 
genetic algorithms (GA), and Firefly algorithm (FA) (Samanta et al., 2016; Satapathy 
et al., 2016; Dey et al., 2016b; Chakraborty et al., 2017).
MEDICAL IMAGE SEGMENTATION TECHNIQUES
Automation of image processing and analysis techniques is compulsory to to assist 
physicians in treatment planning and clinical diagnosis. Consistent algorithms 
are mandatory for the delineation of regions of interest (ROI) and the anatomical 
structures. Subsequently, computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) developed to acquire 
accurate medical images analysis process, to achieve fast results using high-speed 
computers and to support information technology for faster communication with 
patients at remote areas. Medical images segmentation techniques are specific to the 
used imaging modality, the application under concern, and type of the considered body 
part. However, there is no universal segmentation algorithm that used efficiently with 
all medical image types, where each imaging modality has its own definite limits.
Segmentation defined as the process of allotting an image into several regions 
having similar properties, including color, gray level, contrast brightness, and texture. 
Its basic role in the medical domain is to identify the ROI, such as lesion, tumor, 
and any abnormalities, to study the anatomical structures, to measure the tissue 

188
Meta-Heuristic Algorithms in Medical Image Segmentation
volume and to assist treatment planning. Automated medical images segmentation 
is complex; in addition, the inhomogeneous intensity, low contrast, partial volume 
effect, artifacts and the close gray level values of the different soft tissues affect 
the segmented images. Consequently, several segmentation techniques have been 
employed in the medical applications, which can be categorized into i) Shape-based 
segmentation, ii) interactive segmentation, iii) atlas-based segmentation and iv) 
shape-based segmentation. Another classification of the segmentation techniques 
is as follows, i) histogram based segmentation, region based segmentation and edge 
based segmentation, which based on the gray level features, and ii) texture features 
based segmentation (Heimann et al., 2009).
Histogram Based Segmentation
Histogram based segmentation depends mainly on a thresholding value of the 
histogram. This technique used with uniform brightness regions within the image under 
consideration, where the threshold is employed to segment the ROI and background. 
The threshold can have single value or multiple values based on the number of ROI 
within the image (Tobias, & Seara, 2002). Several computing algorithms are used 
to perform thresholding segmentation effectively. Commonly, the whole image is 
scanned pixel by pixel to label the pixels into object or the background based on 
the gray level value compared to the thresholding function (T). The main steps of 
the global thresholding are as follows (Algorithm 1).
Algorithm 1. Global thresholding algorithm
Start
Chose an initial threshold value T
Apply T to segment the image leading to two groups of pixels
     R1 are pixels with gray level >T
     R2 are pixels with gray level <=T
Measure the average gray level values mean1 and mean2 for the 
pixels in R1 and R2.
Calculate the new threshold value Tnew=(mean1+mean2)/2
Repeat the previous steps till the difference in T is smaller 
than a pre-defined threshold T0 in the successive iterations
     End

189
Meta-Heuristic Algorithms in Medical Image Segmentation
Region-Based Segmentation
In region-based segmentation, the main goal is to partition the image into dissimilar 
regions to determine the images’ disjoint regions directly. Region split and merge 
segmentation as well as region growing segmentation are the major region-based 
segmentation techniques (Salembier, & Marqués, 1999). The main steps of the 
region-based segmentation are as follows (Algorithm 2).
Split and Merge Segmentation
Split and merge based segmentation depends on the quad quadrant tree data depiction, 
where the image segment is divided into four quadrants providing the non-uniform 
original segment. Afterward, the 4 neighboring squares are fused based on the 
segments uniformity (Freixenet et al., 2002). This split/merge process is iterative and 
repeated until all possible split/merge occur using the following steps (Algorithm 3).
Edge-Based Segmentation
Edge-based segmentation is considered one of the vital segmentation methods, where 
edges embrace much information about the image. Edges represent the boundaries 
between any two dissimilar regions that provide information about the objects 
location, their size/shape, and their texture (Tsai et al., 2003). Thus, the gradient 
can be calculated to determine the pixel values differences between the regions 
Algorithm 2. Region-based segmentation algorithm (region growing)
Start 
Merge iteratively an initial small area set based on similarity
Select an arbitrary pixel
Compare the arbitrary pixel with the neighboring pixel
  Add similar neighboring pixels that increase the region size 
from the seed pixel 
If one region growth stops
  Select another seed pixel that does not belong to any region
  Repeat
Endif
Repeat the whole process until all pixels fit some region
End

190
Meta-Heuristic Algorithms in Medical Image Segmentation
at which the image intensity changes from high value to low value or vice versa. 
Hough transform based, border detection, edge relaxation are different methods of 
edge-based segmentation (Algorithm 4).
META-HEURISTIC
Global optimization (GO) algorithm is applied to find the global optimum of a 
fitness function in the search space. It has applications in several domains, including 
healthcare, economics, and engineering. The GO algorithms have two sets, namely 
evolutionary and deterministic. The deterministic approaches locate the local 
minimums of the fitness function, while the evolutionary procedures activate over 
the candidate solutions population, thus, can localize the global optimum faster than 
the deterministic ones. Recently, meta-heuristic (MHs) algorithms are applied for 
Algorithm 3. Split and merge segmentation algorithm
Start
Delineate homogeneity criterion.
Divide the image into 4 square quadrants
If inhomogeneous square result
     Split it further into 4 quadrants
Endif
Merge the two or more neighbouring regions that satisfy the 
homogeneity condition at each level 
Continue the split/merge until no further split/merge of region 
is possible 
End
Algorithm 4. Edge-based segmentation algorithm
Start
Use the derivative of the image for detecting the edges
Measure the gradient amplitude to calculate the edges strength
Preserve all edge with greater magnitude than a threshold T
Determine the crack edges
Repeat the previous two steps with different threshold values 
to realize the closed boundaries 
End

191
Meta-Heuristic Algorithms in Medical Image Segmentation
optimization, however, such approaches still deliberated as an open research problem 
due to several complexities, including the overcoming of the local optimum and the 
premature convergence (Voß et al., 2012).
Metaheuristics are defined as a stochastic optimization procedure that use 
brute-force or random search to find the optimal solutions of the problems under 
consideration. The algorithmic MHs family includes simulated annealing, genetic 
algorithms, ant colony optimization, hill-climbing, and particle swarm optimization. 
The foremost aim of the MHs’ learning/optimization algorithms is to realize a trade-
off between diversification and intensification, where the exploration (diversification) 
denotes creating different solutions in order to discover the search space on a global 
scale, whereas, the exploitation (intensification) entails directing the search onto 
a local region at which good solutions have been established. These optimization 
algorithms have common characteristics, such as i) reliable and robust, ii) implied 
parallelism, iii) easy implementation, iv) approximate and non-deterministic, v) 
explore efficiently search spaces, and vi) global search ability. MHs techniques can 
categorize into, Memetic algorithms, Population-based methods, and Trajectory 
methods (Onwubolu, & Babu, 2013).
Memetic algorithms are hybrid local/global search approaches, where a local 
enhancement procedure is integrated into a population-based procedure (Moscato, 
& Cotta, 2003). The basic concept is to emulate the social interaction/learning effect 
of the individuals by a local enhancement procedures smeared to the established 
solutions by the global search operators. Thus, memetic algorithms contain a 
virtual several potential hybridizations of prevailing approaches. Population-based 
approaches handle a solutions’ population in every iteration of the procedure. The 
search procedure can be considered as the progress in discrete time of a points’ set 
of in the solution space. Such algorithms include genetic algorithms, evolutionary 
programming, evolution algorithms, and swarm intelligence techniques (e.g. particle 
swarm optimization). Generally, swarm intelligence approaches imitate the collective 
activities of dispersed, self-organized artificial systems at which global search is an 
evolving actions of the agents’ population. Furthermore, the evolutionary algorithms 
depend on a computational model that imitates appliances inspired by the biological 
evolution, namely reproduction, mutation, recombination, and selection, in order to 
solve the optimization problems.
The most recent and popular procedure for continuous optimization is the 
differential evolution that inherits its characteristics from both the swarm intelligence 
algorithms and the evolutionary algorithms (Qin et al., 2009). Moreover, the trajectory 
procedures can be considered as the evolution algorithms in the discrete time of 
a distinct dynamical system. In such algorithms, the search process designates a 
trajectory in the search space. Tabu search, iterated local search, variable neighborhood 
search and the simulated annealing are several types of the trajectory procedures 

192
Meta-Heuristic Algorithms in Medical Image Segmentation
(Osman, & Christofides, 1994). Generally, each MHs category include a huge 
number of methods. Generally, the most prevalent swarm inspired algorithms are 
Bee colony optimization, ant colony optimization, particle swarm optimization, 
bacteria optimization algorithm, firefly algorithm, and cuckoo search algorithms.
Genetic Algorithm
The GA is a search procedure for optimizing common combinational problems. It 
is one of the most prevalent evolutionary algorithms that inspired by the evolution 
Darwins theory (i.e. survival of the fitness) to solve difficult optimization problems. 
A solution in the GA is called individual, while the term populations are used to refer 
to set of individuals (Leung, & Wang, 2001). The GA operators are the selection, 
cross over and mutation, where the selection associates to the fitness survival, the 
cross over signifies the mating between individuals, and the mutation presents 
random modifications. The genetic algorithm steps are as follows (Algorithm 5).
Algorithm 5. Genetic Algorithm
     Start
     Produce random population of n suitable solutions 
(chromosomes) 
     Assess the fitness f(x) of each solution in the population
          Generate a new population by reciting following 
phases until completing the new population 
          Choose from the population, two parent chromosomes 
based on their fitness (Selection) 
          Cross over the parents with a crossover probability 
to form a new offspring (Crossover) 
          Mutate new offspring with a mutation probability at 
each position in the chromosome (Mutation) 
          Place in a new population, new offspring
     Use new produced population
     Test if the end condition is satisfied
     stop, and return the best solution
     Repeat the previous steps
End

193
Meta-Heuristic Algorithms in Medical Image Segmentation
Particle Swarm Optimization
The PSO is one of the contemporary meta-heuristic population-based stochastic 
optimization that carried out to non- continuous and non-linear optimization 
problems. It delivers an evolutionary based search to discover the near optimal/
optimal solutions. The PSO behavior is envisioned from the searching strategy for 
optimal food sources by the bird swarms. The bird movement direction is influenced 
by its present movement to find the best food source. Typically, the birds are 
motivated by their personal knowledge, inertia, and the swarm knowledge. Thus, in 
the PSO algorithm, the particle movement is affected by its personal-/ global- best 
position, and its inertia (Eberhart, & Kennedy, 1995). The PSO algorithm consists of 
multiple particles, where each has its position, velocity and current objective value. 
It preserves the global best value, which is related to the best objective value, and 
the global best position at which the global best value achieved. The PSO algorithm 
consists of the following repeated steps until the pre-determined stopping condition 
is achieved (Algorithm 6).
Ant Colony Optimization
The ACO meta-heuristic algorithm is a modern population-based approach enthused 
by the real ants colony collective foraging behavior. The real ants capability to find 
the shortest path from a food source toward their nest is the main inspiration of the 
ACO. In ACO, a pheromone trail is known as the ants’ movement in a straight line 
that joins the food source to their nests to obtain optimum value from a population. 
Problem solutions are constructed in a stochastic iterative process, where each 
individual ant creates a part of the solution using a pheromone (Dorigo et al., 2006).
Algorithm 6. Particle Swarm Optimization
Start
Initialize the position and velocity of the particles
Determine stopping criteria
Assess the fitness of each particle using the objective 
function 
Update the individual/global best positions and finesses
Update position and velocity of each particle
Stop

194
Meta-Heuristic Algorithms in Medical Image Segmentation
Bat Optimization Algorithm
The BAT algorithm is based on the echolocation bats’ behavior. The ability of 
microbats echolocation is attractive, where the bats can discover their prey and 
distinguish different insects’ types even in complete darkness. This bats’ behavior 
inspired the BAT algorithm based on the echolocation microbats’ characteristics. 
Some realization rules are used in the BAT algorithm, namely i) all to sense distance, 
background barriers, and dissimilarity between prey/food, bats use echolocation, ii) 
bats fly randomly with certain velocity at specific position with a fixed frequency 
but varying wavelength to search for prey, and iii) the loudness changes from a large 
to a minimum constant value (Yang, 2010). The inclusive pseudocode of the BAT 
algorithm is as follows (Algorithm 7).
SEGMENTATION ALGORITHMS FOR MEDICAL IMAGES
Segmentation is an essential technique in medical image processing to extract 
suspicious regions from a medical image. Recently, several researches are interested 
in different organs segmentation in medical images (Pham et al., 2000). Prevalent 
procedures using supervised algorithms include active appearance models (AAM), 
supervised support vector machine (SVMs), and artificial neural network (ANNs) 
are considered for medical image processing, which require training set. The ANNs 
and SVMs are non-linear statistical data exhibiting methods for modelling complex 
Algorithm 7. Particle Swarm Optimization
Start
Delineate the initial population and velocities vector
Chose a pulse frequency, rates and loudness
Do until get to number of iterations
     Compute new solutions via frequency
     Update velocity and location for each particle (bat)
     Produce a random value and compare to
     If a solution is the best solutions, a new local solution 
is produced 
     Use a random bat’s fly to generate a new solution
     Re-evaluate all particles to determine the current new 
best 
End

195
Meta-Heuristic Algorithms in Medical Image Segmentation
associations between inputs and outputs. The classifiers’ weights are chosen using 
optimizing the energy function distinct by the features of organs, structures, cells, 
etc. These weights reorganized through handling each sample in the training set. 
Thus, meta-heuristic can be involved for optimal weights selection. From the training 
set, the extracted information offers essential cues of the structures, including shape, 
position and intensity that can be valued corresponding information for the test 
images segmentation. However, the AAM are statistical models of the structures’ 
shape, where the training samples are employed to extract the shape parameters’ 
ranges, mean appearance and mean shape. In order to ensure the similarity between 
the segmentation result and the training samples, restrictions on shape parameters 
is required, where the segmentation technique is to find the superior locations of 
the shape points based on the appearance information. Consequently, in medical 
images, the algorithms established on classifiers can be widely applied to segment 
organs, such as the brain and cardiac images.
Meta-Heuristic Based Segmentation of 
Magnetic Resonance Images
Brain tumor occurs when infrequent cells shape appear inside the cerebrum, which 
has two main types, namely benign tumors and harmful tumors. Malignant tumors 
can be categorized into basic tumors, and secondary tumors that spread elsewhere. 
Currently, the MRI is one of the unsurpassed technologies for brain tumor diagnosis. 
In addition, segmentation has a significant role to extract suspicious areas from 
complex brain medical images. Automated brain tumor detection through MRI 
can offer valued outlook and earlier accurate detection of the brain tumor. Gopal, 
N. N., & Karnan (2010) designed an intelligent system for brain tumor diagnosis 
through MRI exhausting image processing clustering procedures, namely Fuzzy-C 
Means along with optimization intelligent algorithms, including Particle Swarm 
Optimization (PSO), and Genetic Algorithm (GA). The tumor detection has been 
performed in several stages, namely enhancement, segmentation and classification.
Karnan, & Logheshwari (2010) employed a recent population-based approach, 
namely the Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) meta-heuristic, which is stimulated 
real ants colony and their collective foraging performance. The authors proposed 
hybrid technique of the ACO with Fuzzy segmentation. Initially, the MRI brain 
image has been segmented using the proposed approach to extract the suspicious 
region. Afterward, the pixel similarity and tumor position of the proposed segmented 
process and the radiologist report compared. Hamdaoui et al. (2014) compared 
the performance of two meta-heuristic swarm intelligence methods, namely the 
PSO and Shuffled Frog Leaping Algorithm (SFLA) for MR brain medical images 
segmentation. The performance of the Modified PSO (MPSO) and Modified SFLA 

196
Meta-Heuristic Algorithms in Medical Image Segmentation
(MSFLA) techniques has been investigated through the segmentation process that 
consists of dividing an image into two regions.
Ladgham et al., (2015) proposed a new meta-heuristic algorithm, called the 
modified Shuffled Frog Leaping algorithm (MSFLA) for fast MR brain image 
segmentation. The MSFLA allow the segmentation process without using de-noising 
filter. A new fitness function has been used to quickly evaluate the particle frogs to 
arrange them in descendent order. The results included a comparative study with 
other meta-heuristic for segmentation, namely Genetic Algorithm (GA), and 3D-Otsu 
thresholding with SFLA. It has been established that the proposed MSFLA is capable 
to realize superior segmentation quality with less execution time compared to the 
use of GA or the SFLA.
Si et al. (2015) proposed a novel segmentation method of MRI brain tumor 
images. Entropy maximization using Grammatical Swarm (GS) algorithm has 
been applied to attain a threshold values set. A threshold value is then selected with 
the expert knowledge to isolate the lesion part from the non-diseased cells in the 
image. A discrete wavelet transform (DWT)-based soft-thresholding procedure has 
been carried out to remove the noise form the MRI images. Afterward, intensity 
inhomogeneity (IIH) noise independent has been removed, followed by DWT to 
sharpen the IIH corrected and de-noised images. The wavelet decomposition has been 
used to decompose the image into first level and approximate values. The detailed 
image has been added with the pre-processed image to yield sharpened image.
Quantitative assessment of MRI lesion load of patients with multiple sclerosis 
is vital for a better understanding of the pathology history as well as for natural/
modified therapies. Numerous methods have been conducted for the MS lesions 
segmentation in MR images. Zangeneh, & Yazdi (2016) employed a constrained 
Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) and GA to define the optimal highly non-linear 
model’s parameters for the segmentation process. A pre-processing step has been 
executed for artifacts suppression and unwanted skull portions removal from the brain 
MRI. The proposed technique has been evaluated on real MR images proving the 
efficiency of the proposed method for segmenting the MS lesions in the MR images.
Meta-Heuristic Based Segmentation of 
Computed Tomography Images
For CT medical image segmentation, Bruyninckx et al. (2010) proposed an algorithm 
for segmenting the liver portal veins from an arterial stage. Using minimal mechanical 
energy, the physiological model stated that the vasculature pattern is arranged 
such that the entire organ is perfused. In the image, the proposed method has been 
locally detecting the possible candidate vessel segments. The segments subset that 
produces the most plausible vessel tree based on the physiological model and the 

197
Meta-Heuristic Algorithms in Medical Image Segmentation
image is subsequently sought by a global optimization technique. From CT images, 
the proposed technique has been applied for segmenting the lung vessel trees. In 
addition, a SVM has been used to cope with the low contrast to locally detect vessels. 
This proposed model can be applied to the liver, lungs, and kidney.
Bong et al. (2012) proposed a multi-objective clustering ensemble technique, 
called adaptive multi-objective archive-based hybrid scatter search (AMAHSS) to 
segment lung CT images for candidate nodule detection. Fuzzy clustering has been 
used with optimization of three objective functions, namely symmetry distance-based 
cluster validity index, global fuzzy clusters compactness, and fuzzy separation. The 
proposed AMAHSS empowers the search scheme to explore the search space to find 
the optimal solutions. The optimal solution is determined using the meta-clustering 
procedure. The results established that the proposed algorithm achieved positive 
predictive rate of 90%.
Active Contour Models (ACMs) has superior performance compared to the 
traditional low-level method to segment ill-defined medical images. However, it is 
sensitive to the contour initial position and the setup in the local minima. Sahoo, & 
Chandra (2013) considered the ACM based segmentation as an optimization problem 
find a minimal energy contour. A nature-inspired meta-heuristic procedure, namely 
the L’evy flight firefly algorithm (LFA) has been employed effectively to solve the 
global optimization problems. Thus, a hybrid technique based on integrating the 
ACM with LFA has been designed to improve its segmentation capability of real 
abdomen CT images.
Ramakrishnan, & Sankaragomathi (2017) proposed a technique for classifying 
CT images into tumor and the non-tumor images followed by the tumor region 
segmentation in CT images has been performed. The classification process has been 
carried out using SVM with different kernel functions and optimization procedures. 
The Sequential Minimal Optimization (SMO) based SVM classifier has a significant 
role. Modified Region Growing (MRG) based on threshold optimization has been 
applied for the segmentation process after the classification. Grey Wolf Optimization 
(GWO), Evolutionary Programming (EP) and Harmony Search (HS) have been used 
for threshold optimization. The experimental results reported 99.05% accuracy of 
the segmentation process using the GWO algorithm. It has been established that 
the proposed MRG-GWO achieved high accuracy with superior tumor detection 
compared to the HS and EP.
Liver segmentation is a challenging initial stage of liver diagnosis due to its 
likeness with other structures in terms of the intensity values. For liver image 
segmentation of the abdomen CT images, Mostafa et al. (2017) proposed a grey wolf 
optimization based approach. This approach carried out the grey wolf optimization, 
simple region growing, statistical image of liver, and Mean shift clustering method. 
Grey Wolf (GW) optimization algorithm has been applied on the pre-processed 

198
Meta-Heuristic Algorithms in Medical Image Segmentation
image to calculate the centroids of a pre-defined number of clusters. In the image, 
according to the intensity value of each pixel, the number of the nearest cluster has 
labeled the pixel. In order to extract the probable area of the liver, a binary liver 
statistical image has been used. Lastly, the mean shift clustering procedure has been 
applied to extract the ROI in the segmented liver.
CONCLUSION
In the medical domain, MRI, CT and other modalities are conducted to distinguish 
pathological tissues from normal ones, and to acquire images of the different body 
parts for further analysis and processing. Image segmentation is the most significant 
pre-processing task for several computer aided medical imaging applications. From 
MRI data, Tumor segmentation is considered an imperative process, while it is time 
consuming if accomplished manually. Thus, automated image analysis becomes 
essential to facilitate image-based diagnosis. In computer-aided systems, the analysed 
computer-based are used to support the radiologists and physicians in diagnosis in 
a faster mode. The current chapter reported different meta-heuristic approaches and 
their uses in the MRI and CT images segmentation, including Genetic Algorithm, 
Particle Swarm Optimization, Ant Colony Optimization, and Artificial Bee Colony 
Optimization (ABCO). These optimization algorithms are carried out to obtain 
the optimal parameters required during the segmentation process, where different 
segmentation methodologies are explained.
REFERENCES
Acharjya, D., & Anitha, A. (2017). A Comparative Study of Statistical and Rough 
Computing Models in Predictive Data Analysis. International Journal of Ambient 
Computing and Intelligence, 8(2), 32–51. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2017040103
Ahmad, H. A., Yu, H. J., & Miller, C. G. (2014). Medical imaging modalities. In 
Medical Imaging in Clinical Trials (pp. 3–26). Springer London. doi:10.1007/978-
1-84882-710-3_1
Ahmed, S. S., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Sifaki-Pistolla, D., Bălas-Timar, D., Balas, 
V. E., & Tavares, J. M. R. (2017). Effect of fuzzy partitioning in Crohns disease 
classification: A neuro-fuzzy-based approach. Medical & Biological Engineering 
& Computing, 55(1), 101–115. doi:10.1007/s11517-016-1508-7 PMID:27106754

199
Meta-Heuristic Algorithms in Medical Image Segmentation
Ashour, A. S., Beagum, S., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Pistolla, D. S., Nguyen, G. N., & 
Shi, F. et al. (2016). Light microscopy image de-noising using optimized LPA-ICI 
filter. Neural Computing & Applications, 1–17.
Bong, C. W., Lam, H. Y., Khader, A. T., & Kamarulzaman, H. (2012). Adaptive 
multi-objective archive-based hybrid scatter search for segmentation in lung computed 
tomography imaging. Engineering Optimization, 44(3), 327–350. doi:10.1080/03
05215X.2011.639369
Boulmaiz, A., Messadeg, D., Doghmane, N., & Taleb-Ahmed, A. (2017). Design 
and Implementation of a Robust Acoustic Recognition System for Waterbird Species 
using TMS320C6713 DSK. International Journal of Ambient Computing and 
Intelligence, 8(1), 98–118. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2017010105
Bruyninckx, P., Loeckx, D., Vandermeulen, D., & Suetens, P. (2010, March). 
Segmentation of liver portal veins by global optimization. In SPIE Medical 
Imaging (pp. 76241Z–76241Z). International Society for Optics and Photonics. 
doi:10.1117/12.843995
Bureš, V., Tučník, P., Mikulecký, P., Mls, K., & Blecha, P. (2016). Application 
of ambient intelligence in educational institutions: Visions and architectures. 
International Journal of Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 7(1), 94–120. 
doi:10.4018/IJACI.2016010105
Chakraborty, S., Chatterjee, S., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Ashour, A. S., Shi, F., & Mali, 
K. (2017). Modified cuckoo search algorithm in microscopic image segmentation 
of hippocampus. Microscopy Research and Technique. doi:10.1002/jemt.22900 
PMID:28557041
Chan, T. F., & Shen, J. (2005). Image processing and analysis: variational, PDE, 
wavelet, and stochastic methods. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics. 
doi:10.1137/1.9780898717877
Dey, N., & Ashour, A. S. (Eds.). (2016). Classification and clustering in biomedical 
signal processing. IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0140-4
Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., & Althoupety, A. S. (2017a). Thermal Imaging in Medical 
Science. In Recent Advances in Applied Thermal Imaging for Industrial Applications 
(pp. 87–117). IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-2423-6.ch004
Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Chakraborty, S., Samanta, S., Sifaki-Pistolla, D., Ashour, 
A. S., & Nguyen, G. N. et al. (2016b). Healthy and unhealthy rat hippocampus cells 
classification: A neural based automated system for Alzheimer disease classification. 
Journal of Advanced Microscopy Research, 11(1), 1–10. doi:10.1166/jamr.2016.1282

200
Meta-Heuristic Algorithms in Medical Image Segmentation
Dorigo, M., Birattari, M., & Stutzle, T. (2006). Ant colony optimization. IEEE 
Computational Intelligence Magazine, 1(4), 28–39. doi:10.1109/MCI.2006.329691
Eberhart, R., & Kennedy, J. (1995, October). A new optimizer using particle swarm 
theory. In Micro Machine and Human Science, 1995. MHS’95., Proceedings of the 
Sixth International Symposium on (pp. 39-43). IEEE. doi:10.1109/MHS.1995.494215
Freixenet, J., Muñoz, X., Raba, D., Martí, J., & Cufí, X. (2002). Yet another survey 
on image segmentation: Region and boundary information integration. Computer 
Vision—ECCV 2002, 21-25.
Gopal, N. N., & Karnan, M. (2010, December). Diagnose brain tumor through MRI 
using image processing clustering algorithms such as Fuzzy C Means along with 
intelligent optimization techniques. In Computational Intelligence and Computing 
Research (ICCIC), 2010 IEEE International Conference on (pp. 1-4). IEEE. 
doi:10.1109/ICCIC.2010.5705890
Hamdaoui, F., Mtibaa, A., & Sakly, A. (2014, December). Comparison between 
MPSO and MSFLA metaheuristics for MR brain image segmentation. In Sciences 
and Techniques of Automatic Control and Computer Engineering (STA), 2014 15th 
International Conference on (pp. 164-168). IEEE. doi:10.1109/STA.2014.7086725
Heimann, T., Van Ginneken, B., Styner, M. A., Arzhaeva, Y., Aurich, V., Bauer, 
C., & Bello, F. et  al. (2009). Comparison and evaluation of methods for liver 
segmentation from CT datasets. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 28(8), 
1251–1265. doi:10.1109/TMI.2009.2013851 PMID:19211338
Karnan, M., & Logheshwari, T. (2010, December). Improved implementation of brain 
MRI image segmentation using ant colony system. In Computational Intelligence 
and Computing Research (ICCIC), 2010 IEEE International Conference on (pp. 
1-4). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ICCIC.2010.5705897
Kotyk, T., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Balas-Timar, D., Chakraborty, S., Ashour, A. S., 
& Tavares, J. M. R. (2016). Measurement of glomerulus diameter and Bowmans 
space width of renal albino rats. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine, 
126, 143–153. doi:10.1016/j.cmpb.2015.10.023 PMID:26796351
Ladgham, A., Hamdaoui, F., Sakly, A., & Mtibaa, A. (2015). Fast MR brain image 
segmentation based on modified Shuffled Frog Leaping Algorithm. Signal. Image 
and Video Processing, 9(5), 1113–1120. doi:10.1007/s11760-013-0546-y
Leung, Y. W., & Wang, Y. (2001). An orthogonal genetic algorithm with quantization 
for global numerical optimization. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 
5(1), 41–53. doi:10.1109/4235.910464

201
Meta-Heuristic Algorithms in Medical Image Segmentation
Manogaran, G., & Lopez, D. (2017). Disease surveillance system for big climate data 
processing and dengue transmission. International Journal of Ambient Computing 
and Intelligence, 8(2), 88–105. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2017040106
Mhetre, N. A., Deshpande, A. V., & Mahalle, P. N. (2016). Trust Management Model 
based on Fuzzy Approach for Ubiquitous Computing. International Journal of 
Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 7(2), 33–46. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2016070102
Moscato, P., & Cotta, C. (2003). A gentle introduction to memetic algorithms. 
In Handbook of metaheuristics (pp. 105-144). Springer US. doi:10.1007/0-306-
48056-5_5
Mostafa, A., Hassanien, A. E., & Hefny, H. A. (2017). Grey Wolf Optimization-
Based Segmentation Approach for Abdomen CT Liver Images. In Handbook of 
Research on Machine Learning Innovations and Trends (pp. 562–581). IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-2229-4.ch024
Onwubolu, G. C., & Babu, B. V. (2013). New optimization techniques in engineering 
(Vol. 141). Springer.
Osman, I. H., & Christofides, N. (1994). Capacitated clustering problems by hybrid 
simulated annealing and tabu search. International Transactions in Operational 
Research, 1(3), 317–336. doi:10.1016/0969-6016(94)90032-9
Pham, D. L., Xu, C., & Prince, J. L. (2000). Current methods in medical image 
segmentation 1. Annual Review of Biomedical Engineering, 2(1), 315–337. 
doi:10.1146/annurev.bioeng.2.1.315 PMID:11701515
Pham, D. L., Xu, C., & Prince, J. L. (2000). Current methods in medical image 
segmentation 1. Annual Review of Biomedical Engineering, 2(1), 315–337. 
doi:10.1146/annurev.bioeng.2.1.315 PMID:11701515
Qin, A. K., Huang, V. L., & Suganthan, P. N. (2009). Differential evolution algorithm 
with strategy adaptation for global numerical optimization. IEEE Transactions on 
Evolutionary Computation, 13(2), 398–417. doi:10.1109/TEVC.2008.927706
Ramakrishnan, T., & Sankaragomathi, B. (2017). A professional estimate on the 
computed tomography brain tumor images using SVM-SMO for classification 
and MRG-GWO for segmentation. Pattern Recognition Letters, 94, 163–171. 
doi:10.1016/j.patrec.2017.03.026

202
Meta-Heuristic Algorithms in Medical Image Segmentation
Saba, L., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Samanta, S., Nath, S. S., Chakraborty, S., & 
Suri, J. S. et al. (2016). Automated stratification of liver disease in ultrasound: An 
online accurate feature classification paradigm. Computer Methods and Programs 
in Biomedicine, 130, 118–134. doi:10.1016/j.cmpb.2016.03.016 PMID:27208527
Sahoo, A., & Chandra, S. (2013, August). L’evy-flight firefly algorithm based 
active contour model for medical image segmentation. In Contemporary Computing 
(IC3), 2013 Sixth International Conference on (pp. 159-162). IEEE. doi:10.1109/
IC3.2013.6612181
Salembier, P., & Marqués, F. (1999). Region-based representations of image and 
video: Segmentation tools for multimedia services. IEEE Transactions on Circuits 
and Systems for Video Technology, 9(8), 1147–1169. doi:10.1109/76.809153
Samanta, S., Choudhury, A., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., & Balas, V. E. (2016). Quantum 
inspired evolutionary algorithm for scaling factors optimization during manifold 
medical information embedding. InQuantum Inspired Computational intelligence: 
Research and Applications. Elsevier.
Satapathy, S. C., Raja, N. S. M., Rajinikanth, V., Ashour, A. S., & Dey, N. (2016). 
Multi-level image thresholding using Otsu and chaotic bat algorithm. Neural 
Computing & Applications, 1–23.
Sharma, K., & Virmani, J. (2017). A Decision Support System for Classification of 
Normal and Medical Renal Disease Using Ultrasound Images: A Decision Support 
System for Medical Renal Diseases. International Journal of Ambient Computing 
and Intelligence, 8(2), 52–69. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2017040104
Si, T., De, A., & Bhattacharjee, A. K. (2015). Brain MRI segmentation for tumor 
detection via entropy maximization using Grammatical Swarm. International 
Journal of Wavelets, Multresolution, and Information Processing, 13(05), 1550039. 
doi:10.1142/S0219691315500393
Tobias, O. J., & Seara, R. (2002). Image segmentation by histogram thresholding 
using fuzzy sets. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 11(12), 1457–1465. 
doi:10.1109/TIP.2002.806231 PMID:18249714
Tsai, A., Yezzi, A., Wells, W., Tempany, C., Tucker, D., Fan, A., & Willsky, A. 
et al. (2003). A shape-based approach to the segmentation of medical imagery using 
level sets. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 22(2), 137–154. doi:10.1109/
TMI.2002.808355 PMID:12715991

203
Meta-Heuristic Algorithms in Medical Image Segmentation
Voß, S., Martello, S., Osman, I. H., & Roucairol, C. (Eds.). (2012). Meta-heuristic: 
Advances and trends in local search paradigms for optimization. Springer Science 
& Business Media.
Yang, X. S. (2010). A new metaheuristic bat-inspired algorithm. Nature inspired 
cooperative strategies for optimization (NICSO 2010), 65-74.
Zangeneh, D., & Yazdi, M. (2016, May). Automatic segmentation of multiple 
sclerosis lesions in brain MRI using constrained GMM and genetic algorithm. In 
Electrical Engineering (ICEE), 2016 24th Iranian Conference on (pp. 832-837). 
IEEE. doi:10.1109/IranianCEE.2016.7585635

Section 2
Genetic Algorithm 
Applications

Copyright © 2018, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  9
205
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-4151-6.ch009
ABSTRACT
Inspired by nature, genetic algorithms (GA) are among the greatest meta-heuristics 
optimization methods that have proved their effectiveness to conventional NP-hard 
problems, especially the traveling salesman problem (TSP) which is one of the most 
studied Supply chain management problems. This paper proposes a new crossover 
operator called Jump Crossover (JMPX) for solving the travelling salesmen problem 
using a genetic algorithm (GA) for near-optimal solutions, to conclude on its 
efficiency compared to solutions quality given by other conventional operators to 
the same problem, namely, Partially matched crossover (PMX), Edge recombination 
Crossover (ERX) and r-opt heuristic with consideration of computational overload. 
We adopt the path representation technique for our chromosome which is the most 
direct representation and a low mutation rate to isolate the search space exploration 
ability of each crossover. The experimental results show that in most cases JMPX 
can remarkably improve the solution quality of the GA compared to the two existing 
classic crossover approaches and the r-opt heuristic.
Optimized Crossover JumpX 
in Genetic Algorithm for 
General Routing Problems:
A Crossover Survey and Enhancement
Hicham El Hassani
ENSEM Casablanca, Morocco
Said Benkachcha
ENSEM Casablanca, Morocco
Jamal Benhra
ENSEM Casablanca, Morocco

206
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing Problems
INTRODUCTION
NP-hard problems generally require exponential time depending on the problem 
size to find exact optimal solutions. This is why many metaheuristics are used to 
obtain approximate solutions to problems of such difficulty.To legitimate using 
metaheuristics to solve an optimization problem, a complexity analysis of a problem 
can be driven to give an indication on the hardness of the problem. It is also 
important to know the size of input instances the algorithm is supposed to solve. 
Even if a problem is NP-hard, small instances or even large-size instances with a 
specific structure may be solved in optimality by exact approach. Moreover, the 
required search time to solve a given problem is an important issue in the selection 
of an optimization algorithm. It is unwise to use metaheuristics to solve problems 
where efficient exact algorithms are available. For instance, one should not use a 
metaheuristic to find a minimum spanning tree or a shortest path in a graph. Known 
polynomial-time exact algorithms exist for those problems.
There are several powerful optimization techniques that are inspired by nature. 
Evolutionary algorithms (EAs) have been developed based on the principles of 
natural genetics to perform research and optimization in complex spaces. The most 
important components of the Evolutionary algorithms family are: Genetic Algorithms, 
Genetic Programming and Evolutionary Strategies.
Various other bio-inspired research and optimization techniqueswhich was created, 
developed, hybridized, enhanced and used in numerous fields of optimization, such 
as Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) in (Shweta & Kamal, 2014; Soleimani & 
Kannan, 2015; Wang, Ma, Xu, Liu, & Wang, 2015), Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) 
in (Ahmed Hamza, Ahmad Taher, & Aboul Ella, 2014), A.hamza developed a New 
Heuristic Function, Differential Evolution (DE) in (Zhu, Fang, Tang, Zhang, & Du, 
2012), Artificial Bee Colony (ABC) in (Rahul, Senthilnath, Omkar, & Narendra, 
2016), Cuckoo Search and Chaotic Flower Pollination optimization algorithm 
in(Binh, Hanh, Van Quan, & Dey, 2016),(Dey, Samanta, Yang, Das, & Chaudhuri, 
2013), (Ashour et al., 2015), Firefly algorithmin (Dey, Samanta, et al., 2014),Neural 
Networks in (Hore et al., 2017), and Simulated Annealing in (Bouttier et al., 2017), 
are also classified among the metaheuristics techniques. In (Reza, 2016), a new Meta 
heuristic algorithm inspired of the biologic nephron performance for optimization of 
objective functions in Np-hard problems is introduced (NAO).In (Dey, Chakraborty, 
& Samanta, 2014) the author is using Particle Swarm Optimization and Genetic 
Algorithm based techniques and offers MATLAB result sets, tables, flow charts and 
illustrations to exemplify the complicated concepts discussed in the text.
Over the past years, hybridization of metaheuristics has become an important 
issue, to the point that all the different metaheuristics that we have cited, and other 

207
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing Problems
techniques, are now seen as starting points for the development of new optimization 
algorithms. In (A. Meryem & Salim, 2016), authors present a new approach based 
on the cooperation of many variants of metaheuristics in order to solve the large 
existing benchmark instances of the capacitated vehicle routing problem (CVRP). 
(Amal Mahmoud & Sawsan, 2015) propose a new variation of ABC that uses 
multi-parent crossover named multi parent crossover operator artificial bee colony 
(MPCO-ABC). In the proposed technique the crossover operator is used to generate 
three new parents based on memory.
Also, Harmony search algorithm (HSA) which is a recent evolutionary algorithm 
used to solve several optimization problems. The algorithm mimics the improvisation 
behavior of a group of musicians to find a good harmony. Several variations of 
HSA have been proposed to enhance its performance. In (Iyad Abu, Faisal, Eslam 
Al, Mohammed Azmi, & Basima Hani, 2013), a new variation of HSA that uses 
multi-parent crossover is proposed (HSA-MPC). In (B. Meryem & Abdelmadjid, 
2016), the authors present a new Quantum Inspired Harmony Search algorithm with 
Variable Population Size QIHSVPS for a complex variant of vehicle routing problem 
(VRP), called HVRPMBTW (Vehicle Routing Problem with Heterogeneous fleet, 
Mixed Backhauls and Time Windows). In (B. Meryem & Abdelmadjid, 2015), the 
author deals with a variant of the famous NP-hard (Laporte, 1992)vehicle routing 
problem called the Vehicle Routing Problem with Simultaneous Pickup and Delivery 
VRPSPD.
Genetic algorithms are stochastic search methods which mimic the natural biological 
evolution. They are widely used in NP-hard problems optimization(Mohammad & 
Mohammad Hassan, 2016).
Genetic algorithms were developed by John Holland of the University of 
Michigan in the early 1970s(Holland, 1975) and since then, the GAs continue to 
prove theoretically and empirically their efficiency and robustness to provide good 
solutions in complexes areas (David Edward Goldberg, 1989).
GA operates on a population (group of individuals) of possible solutions applying 
the principle of survival of the fittest, to generate new and improved estimates. In 
every generation, a new set of approximate solutions is created by the process of 
selecting individuals according to their fitness (objective) and the use of genetic 
operators inspired by natural genetics. This approach guarantees the evolution towards 
better populations(Eiben, Hinterding, & Michalewicz, 1999).
In the following, a description of the main genetic operators is given, namely: 
selection, crossover, mutation, and replacement. The emphasis here is on presenting 
a functional description of the principles, rather than giving a complete overview 
of the concepts of these operators; however, the focusin this work is on crossovers 
operators.

208
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing Problems
The selection mechanism is one of the main components of research in evolutionary 
algorithms. The overall principle of parent selection is that their probability of being 
chosen grows with their fitness. Such selection pressure will lead the population 
towards better solutions. However, the worst individuals should not be rejected and 
they have a chance to be selected. This can lead to useful genetic material.After 
the selection process, the crossing operator is applied to each parent pair (P1, P2) 
with a probability Pc (predetermined) and generates the child pair (E1, E2). The 
mutationoperators are unary operators that act on a single individual and whose 
main action is the modification of an individual genotype and thus allow a better 
exploration of the solutions space.Finally, the replacement phase concerns the 
selection of survivors from the parents generation to maintain the size of population.
Evolutionary algorithms have shown their efficiency in solving optimization 
problems, but given their stochastic nature, these algorithms alone may sometimes 
not retain the correct solutions encountered during their execution until the end 
of the algorithm. The notion of elitism which advocates that the best individuals 
of the actual population will be saved in the next generation is then necessary. In 
(Kanungo, Janmenjoy, Bighnaraj, & Behera, 2016), an effort has been made with 
a recently developed population based metaheuristic called Elitist based teaching 
learning based optimization (ETLBO) for data clustering. The ETLBO has been 
hybridized with K-means algorithm (ETLBO-K-means) to get the optimal cluster 
centers and effective fitness values.
The TSP is one of the most famous combinatorial optimization problems (NP-hard 
for large size), it was treated by a large number of metaheuristicand approximate 
methods(Yong, 2015)andparticularly genetic algorithms (Abdoun & Abouchabaka, 
2011; Bontoux, Artigues, & Feillet, 2010; Dwivedi, Chauhan, Saxena, & Agrawal, 
2012; Yuan, Skinner, Huang, & Liu, 2013).
Researchers have proposed several versions of genetic operators for this kind of 
ordered problems such as order based crossover (OBX) and uniform order based 
crossover (UOBX) chapitre 1 pages 1–101)(L. D. Davis, 1991), partially mapped 
crossover (PMX) (David E. Goldberg & Lingle, 1985)and many others that we cite 
afterwards.
Here, we propose a new crossover called Jump crossover (JMPX) then we compare 
it with some pretty powerful and classic methods.
This paper is organized into 4 sections. The first deals with some basic concepts of 
genetic algorithms and a brief description of the benchmark operators and methods. 
In the second section, we describe the proposed crossover operator. The third section 
presents the results and discussions in comparison with the benchmark, while the 
fourth section discusses the conclusions reached.

209
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing Problems
GENETIC ALGORITHMS FOR THE 
TRAVELING SALESMAN PROBLEM
Traveling Salesman Problem
The TSP is a classic combinatorial optimization problem, simple in its formulation 
but very difficult to solve. This problem is known to be NP-hard, in other words it 
cannot be solved exactly in a polynomial time. Many exact and heuristic algorithms 
have been developed in the field of Operations Research (OR) to solve it. The problem 
is to find the shortest possible tour through a set of n vertices in such a way that 
each vertex is visited once and only once.
This problem can be divided into two categories depending on the form of the 
costs matrix: symmetric and asymmetric. If the equality C(i, j) = C(j, i) is satisfied, 
the TSP is symmetric, otherwise it is called an asymmetric TSP, i and j being any 
vertices. In a symmetric tsp of n cities, there are (n-1)!/2 possible solutions
and their inverses cyclic permutations with the same total cost. The purpose is 
then to find a Hamiltonian cycle of minimum total cost (Cicirello & Smith, 2000).
Mathematic Formulation
The tsp is formulated as a cost matrix in n dimensions of dij values Figure 1, where 
the purpose is to obtain a permutation of these values, ​as the sum of costs dij is 
minimal, for all i and j, where i is a node and j his next in a sequence.
More formally, we have:
MINIMIZE
d x
ij
ij
j
n
i
n
=
= ∑
∑
1
1
	
(1)
With:
x
i
x
j
x
i j
ij
ij
ij
i
n
j
n
=
∀
=
∀
∈{
} ∀
=
=
∑
∑
1
1
0 1
1
1
,
,
,
,
,
,
, 	
(2)
x
S
S
V S
ij
i j S
n
〈
∀
⊂
≠∅
∈∑
,
,
,
	
(3)

210
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing Problems
Xij is the decision matrix (connection).	
S is a vertex Set from the global set V.	
We consider dij = dji, ∀i, j to work on the symmetric TSP (STSP);
Genetic Algorithm
Representation Methods
In this section we present the method of data representation which is best adapted to 
the handled problem.In recent decades there have been three vector representations 
considered within the tsp (Michalewicz, 1996):the adjacency representation, the 
ordinal representation and path representation.
Path Representation is the most natural representation of a tour; this is the one 
we adopt in this article. A path simply lists visited nodes using labels representing 
the successor and predecessor of each city. So a tour like [1 → 2 → 3 → 4 → 5 → 
6]can be represented as shown in Figure 2.
Figure 1. distance matrix of symmetric tsp of 8 cities

211
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing Problems
Crossover Operators
Several ways to do the crossing in tsp optimization context are described in the 
literature: Partially Mapped Crossover (PMX)(David Edward Goldberg, 1989), 
Order Crossover (OX) proposed by(L. Davis, 1985) which produces offspring that 
preserves the cities relative order of parents, Edge Crossover (EX) (L. D. Whitley, 
Starkweather, & Fuquay, 1989), Subtour Exchange Crossover (SXX) (Yamamura, 
Ono, & Kobayashi, 1992), Edge Exchange Crossover (EXX) (Murata & Itai, 2008), 
Edge Assembly Crossover (EAX) (J. Watson et al., 1998).
Various Others Crossover Operators and Their Variations
the Modified crossover(L. Davis, 1985),this crossover operator is an extension of the 
one-point crossover for permutation problems.The Order-based crossover (OBX) 
which focuses on the relative order of the cities on the parent chromosomes, used 
by G. Syswerda in (L. D. Davis, 1991);
Alternate Edges Crossover (AEC) is reported in (Grefenstette, Gopal, Rosmaita, 
& Van Gucht, 1985), the results with this operator have been uniformly discouraging. 
However, it was a good introduction to the other edge-preserving operators.(Deep 
& Mebrahtu, 2011) proposed three new additional variations of order crossover 
and their performance were far better than the existing variations. The variations 
are designed using cut point analysis on the standard ordered crossover operator.
Freisleben and Merz(Freisleben & Merz, 1996) and (Merz & Freisleben, 1997) 
suggested the distance-preserving crossover (DPX) for TSP.
•	
More Specific Crossover for Ordered Problems
◦◦
Position-Based Crossover Pperator (POS) (Goel & Wadhwa, 2013)
◦◦
Voting Recombination Crossover Operator (VR) (Muhlenbein, 1989)
Figure 2. path representation

212
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing Problems
◦◦
Alternating-Position Crossover Operator (AP) (Larranaga, Kuijpers, 
Poza, & Murga, 1997)
◦◦
Sequential Constructive Crossover Operator (SCX) (Zakir, 2010)
•	
Brief Description of Used Crossovers
◦◦
Partially Matched Crossover (PMX): PMX is one of the most popular 
Crossovers for the tsp, (Kumar, Karambir, & Kumar, 2012)says it gives 
better results compared to other cross operators as Cyclic Crossover CX 
which has been proposed by (I.M.Oliver, D.J.Smith, &J.R.C.Holland, 
1987) and the Order Crossover OX already introduced in the previous 
paragraph. PMX and many variants of it have proved their worth on the 
ordered problems such as TSP (Deep &Mebrahtu, 2012).
In this method, two crossing points are randomly selected. Children 
completely inherit segments inside the cut points, while the borders of 
children are filled by a mapped matching with vertices in the two parents 
as shown in Figure 3. The complexity of this crossover is O(n).
◦◦
Edge Recombination Crossover (ERX): Since its introduction by 
(D. Whitley, Starkweather, &Shaner, 1990), this method is among the 
most used in the literature to solve various problems of planning and 
scheduling using GA. It tends to preserve inherited edges from parents.
In this method, we select an initial city in one parent (it can be a random 
or guided choice by a defined criteria) and all occurrences of this city are 
eliminated from other cities neighborhoods. If this selected city still has 
neighbors (unvisited) then we choose the city with the least neighborhood 
(for exceptional cases random is carried out) and then redo the same 
process for the chosen city untill filling the current child Figure 4.
Figure 3. PMX

213
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing Problems
◦◦
R-opt Heuristic: First introduced by (Lin & Kernighan, 1973) is one 
of the most powerful heuristic algorithms for the TSP.It was proposed 
almost fifty years ago but even nowadays it is the state-of-the-art 
TSPlocal search(Johnson &McGeoch, 2002), (Rocki&Suda, 2012) and 
(Manthey&Veenstra, 2013).
An R-opt operator consists of replacing r edges from a tour by r edges not in 
the tour if this decreases the length of the tour (Jog, Suh, & Gucht, 1989).
For giving an example, a 2-opt strategy randomly selects two edges 
(1,2) and (3,4) from a tour and checks if ED(1,2) + ED(3,4)> ED(1,4) 
+ ED(2,3) (ED stands for Euclidiandistance).
If this is the case, the new tour is obtained by removing the edges (1,2) 
and (3,4) and replacing them with the edges (1,4) and (3,2) as shown in 
Figure 5.
Genetic Algorithm Functioning
We use a simple but effective strategy, to get an elitist genetic algorithm using 
overlapped populations. This principle has been presented as a Steady State Genetic 
Algorithm(David Edward Goldberg, 1989)and (Vavak & Fogarty, 1996).
Figure 4. ERX
Figure 5. r-opt(2-opt)

214
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing Problems
During GA Evolving from one generation to another, the population is preserved 
and new individuals are inserted only if they improve the average quality of the 
population and this is performed by replacing those less useful as described in the 
pseudocode in Figure 6.
ADOPTED APPROCH: JUMP CROSSOVER
A good crossover should mainly have two features: respect and edgetransmission 
(Surry & Radcliffe, 1996). Respect means that the common traits between both 
parents must be inherited and transmission implies that each inherited trait must 
belong to at least one of the two parents. (R. A. Watson & Pollack, 2000) states that 
effective Crossover must also introduce new characteristic into generated children.
In summary, it is necessary that our operator tends to inherit the traits of the 
parents and also to introduce new traits for children diversity.
Overview of the Jump Crossover
The Jump crossover operator is aimed at exchanging information between two parent 
chromosomes. The adjacency lists of the two parents are made then a starting item 
(city) and its link to a second item are chosen from one parent(it can be a random 
Figure 6. Pseudo-code of a standard GA

215
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing Problems
or guided choice by a defined criteria), then the jump to the other parent is made 
taking the last selected entry (in the particular case where all its neighbors are 
already visited, we generate it randomly) then loop until filling the current Child. As 
described the jump crossover tend to keep the parents traits by its edge transmission 
procedure and apply as far as possible the two principles introduced above.
A probability is associated to the application of the crossover operator. If the 
operator is not applied to the selected parents, they are copied to the new population 
without any modification. In this way, good chromosomes can be preserved from 
one generation to the next.
Jump Crossover Processing
We have developed a process that builds new children inheriting as much information 
as possible from parents’ structures as well as introducing new genes. The Figure 
7 shows all steps of this operator:
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS COMPARED 
WITH THE BENCHMARK
The system was developed using the C + + language and tests were performed on 
a personal computer Core2 Duo with a speed of 4 GHz and 4GB RAM running on 
MS Windows 7.
The various operators of the genetic algorithm was written in C + + based on 
the Galib library (Wall, 1996). The initial population is generated randomly. The 
experiments were carried out 40 times for each instance. The quality of the solution 
is measured by the percentage of the error above the optimum solution value as 
reported in TSPLIB(Reinelt, 1991), as given by the formula:
Error
Solution
optimal solution
Optimal Solution
%
–
*
=
 
 
 
 
 100 	
The scale used for the fitness is linear (linear scaling); the selection method 
adopted in the simulations is the Roulette Wheel based on the fitness value. We 
apply different crossovers with a probability equal to 1, a relatively small mutation 
rate (probability equal to 0.3) to compare the ability of operators to diversify the 
offsprings, a moderate population size popsize = 60, a number of generations equal 
to 3000 iterations and a replacement rate of 0.5.
Table 1 includes all of the results for a set of 10 instances from the TSPLIB library.

216
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing Problems
Figure 7. JMP crossover

217
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing Problems
Table 1. Results summary
Instance 
Optimal Solution
Cross
Best Solution
Worst Solution
Avg Solutions
Average Time(second)
Error (%)
a280
2579
PMX
7642,98
8514,24
8059,723
35,902225
196,35%
a280
2579
ERX
5760,51
6437,17
6144,11725
104,7723
123,36%
a280
2579
JMPX
7093,56
8357,93
7637,657
14,912925
175,05%
a280
2579
r-opt
10036,5
11073,1
10436,7975
14,144025
289,16%
berlin52
7542
PMX
7966,35
10460,4
8532,3585
3,16255
5,63%
berlin52
7542
ERX
7648,88
8823,12
8246,92675
10,0123
1,42%
berlin52
7542
JMPX
7913,37
8793,54
8257,745
2,895375
4,92%
berlin52
7542
r-opt
7854,82
9137,63
8391,71625
2,8926
4,15%
ch130
6110
PMX
9462,43
14098,9
10373,847
10,5164
54,87%
ch130
6110
ERX
7770,08
9342,48
8483,37325
31,5467
27,17%
ch130
6110
JMPX
7852,38
9763,67
8935,4725
6,79755
28,52%
ch130
6110
r-opt
11468
12995,7
12253,09
6,56115
87,69%
eil51
426
PMX
443,013
524,196
475,156175
3,13695
3,99%
eil51
426
ERX
442,092
483,868
458,106125
10,210875
3,78%
eil51
426
JMPX
435,612
495,813
461,0907
2,9425
2,26%
eil51
426
r-opt
450,453
488,379
469,802175
2,70975
5,74%
eil101
629
PMX
796,883
944,825
854,251125
7,43235
26,69%
eil101
629
ERX
717,073
820,35
765,862
23,818925
14,00%
eil101
629
JMPX
732,377
843,159
782,79155
5,179675
16,44%
eil101
629
r-opt
902,597
996,687
953,138225
5,13125
43,50%
d657
48912
PMX
289300
297417
293352,3333
178,0301667
491,47%
d657
48912
ERX
213492
232933
225224,4
473,099
336,48%
d657
48912
JMPX
339441
370123
354573,3333
40,85266667
593,98%
d657
48912
r-opt
358976
379768
370784,175
33,452125
633,92%
ch150
6528
PMX
11294,2
13230,6
12127,6175
15,4144
73,01%
ch150
6528
ERX
9061,53
10534,3
9835,223
46,2424
38,81%
ch150
6528
JMPX
9838,28
11443,2
10639,3445
7,926375
50,71%
ch150
6528
r-opt
13946,5
15593,5
14913,3175
7,482325
113,64%
bier127
118282
PMX
162001
186434
175763,325
10,373775
36,96%
bier127
118282
ERX
140174
163650
152040,25
30,659675
18,51%
bier127
118282
JMPX
143125
166566
157971,6
6,83695
21,00%
bier127
118282
r-opt
181965
210261
193874,525
6,3253
53,84%
eil76
538
PMX
620,46
870,146
673,722625
5,191925
15,33%
eil76
538
ERX
586,673
643,665
618,3357
16,9454
9,05%
eil76
538
JMPX
599,862
669,751
626,811175
4,141475
11,50%
eil76
538
r-opt
659,248
739,603
694,36385
4,69785
22,54%
pr76
108159
PMX
125910
170257
137975,175
5,0882
16,41%
pr76
108159
ERX
111779
132786
122628,9
15,9418
3,35%
pr76
108159
JMPX
113647
135422
124316,25
4,1669
5,07%
pr76
108159
r-opt
134193
157256
144516,525
4,04595
24,07%

218
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing Problems
We chose to take as a stop criterion for the genetic algorithm: the number of 
iteration to compare the trend and the evolution of the different results of studied 
crossovers. Figure 10 shows the evolution of the GA with JMPX during 3000 
generations.
The results are illustrated globally in Figure 8 which shows clearly the contribution 
of our approach JMPX compared to PMX, ERX and r-opt heuristic.JMPX outperform 
PMX in all simulations in execution time and solutions accuracy.
Simulations on the ERX show an advantage for our approach in instances having 
moderate size and for ERX in instances having a significant size.
In most cases the JMPX consumes less execution time and have a better ratio 
reporting the solution quality and the time to reach it than required by ERX, PMX 
and r-opt heuristic (details Figure 9).
An execution of 100000 iterations clearly shows that the JMPX method compete 
well the benchmark at the beginning of the GA evolution and Ends up with override 
these methods as shown in Figure 11.
Based on the model structure, the basic logistic network design models can be 
summarized. In this classification approach Farahani(Farahani, Rezapour, Drezner, 
& Fallah, 2014) offers an overview of the classification of models and the techniques 
of resolutions.
In this scope we can introduce the use of GIS, financial information, demand, 
time, transport, networks, in strategic decisions as shown in Figure 12.
Figure 8. Quality percentage for each tested instance

219
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing Problems
Figure 9. Simulations results on TSPLIB instances

220
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing Problems
For the Moroccan context, Figure 13 shows a simulation of our algorithm, on 
a real instance with a real data set of the Moroccan road network. The concept of 
Volunteered Geographic Information has recently emerged with the new Web 2.0 
technologies. The OpenStreetMap project is currently the most significant example 
of a VGI-based system (Girres & Touya, 2010). It aims to produce free geographic 
databases using the contributions of Internet users.
We cleaned the data and organized it for use, and then transformed it into a road 
graph in QGIS (Tsou & Smith, 2011).
We choose 128 of the important and largest cities in Morocco, in terms of 
population, and therefore the most demanding in terms of goods. Then we run a 
Dijkstra algorithm to find the shortest paths between each of the selected cities on 
the road graph, and then we have launched the genetic algorithm with that input 
data to optimize the overall path.
CONCLUSION
This paper presented a new genetic crossover operator for solving the TSP using 
GAs. The new method is tested and compared to other conventional crossover 
operators and methods: Partially matched crossover (PMX), Edge recombination 
Crossover (ERX) and r-opt Heuristic, To conclude on the overall performance of 
Figure 10. Evolution during the GA of mean min max objective function (ch130, 
JMPX)

221
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing Problems
it, simulations study shows the remarkable performance of the proposed method of 
crossing (jump crossover).
Thus, we evaluate and compare the proposed JMPX with the three different 
methods for one TSP objective function namely, minimizing total travel distance. 
The benchmarking was performed using TSPLIB. The experimental results show 
that in most cases the JMPX operator enables the GA to produce high solution 
quality in less time than the existing crossover operators.
The crossover method proposed is simple to implement, it should help to solve 
other difficult problems quickly, reliably and accurately.
Our future work will focus on two main areas: Firstly, studying the contribution of 
classic mutation operators such as Inversion, Displacement, Insertion and Exchange 
Figure 11. Comparative convergence (eil76)

222
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing Problems
mutationused with the just studied crossovers and then, applying genetic algorithm 
to optimize design and management of a global supply chain. Secondly, since many 
practical problems can be modeled by the multi objective TSP (MTSP), we will 
use the JMPX operator into our existing GA for solving a large multi objective TSP 
problem in green supply chain management including minimizing green house gas 
into objective functions.
Figure 12. Multi-level approach to freight modeling (adaptedfrom Xu, Hancock, & 
Southworth, 2003)
Figure 13. Simulation on 128 Moroccan cities

223
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing Problems
REFERENCES
Abdoun, O., & Abouchabaka, J. (2011). A Comparative Study of Adaptive Crossover 
Operators for Genetic Algorithms to Resolve the Traveling Salesman Problem. 
International Journal of Computers and Applications, 31(11), 49–57.
Ahmed Hamza, A., Ahmad Taher, A., & Aboul Ella, H. (2014). A New Heuristic 
Function of Ant Colony System for Retinal Vessel Segmentation. International 
Journal of Rough Sets and Data Analysis, 1(2), 15–30. doi:10.4018/ijrsda.2014070102
Amal Mahmoud, A., & Sawsan, A. (2015). Hybridizing Artificial Bee Colony 
Algorithm with Multi-Parent Crossover Operator. International Journal of Applied 
Metaheuristic Computing, 6(2), 18–32. doi:10.4018/IJAMC.2015040102
Ashour, A. S., Samanta, S., Dey, N., Kausar, N., Abdessalemkaraa, W. B., & Hassanien, 
A. E. (2015). Computed tomography image enhancement using cuckoo search: A 
log transform based approach. Journal of Signal and Information Processing, 6(03), 
244–257. doi:10.4236/jsip.2015.63023
Binh, H. T. T., Hanh, N. T., Van Quan, L., & Dey, N. (2016). Improved Cuckoo 
Search and Chaotic Flower Pollination optimization algorithm for maximizing area 
coverage in Wireless Sensor Networks. Neural Computing & Applications, 1–13. 
doi:10.1007/s00521-016-2823-5
Bontoux, B., Artigues, C., & Feillet, D. (2010). A Memetic Algorithm with a 
large neighborhood crossover operator for the Generalized Traveling Salesman 
Problem. Computers & Operations Research, 37(11), 1844–1852. doi:10.1016/j.
cor.2009.05.004
Bouttier, C., Babando, O., Gadat, S., Gerchinovitz, S., Laporte, S., & Nicol, F. 
(2017). Adaptive Simulated Annealing with Homogenization for Aircraft Trajectory 
Optimization. In K. Doerner, I. Ljubic, G. Pflug, & G. Tragler (Eds.), Operations 
Research Proceedings 2015: Selected Papers of the International Conference of the 
German, Austrian and Swiss Operations Research Societies (GOR, ÖGOR, SVOR/
ASRO) (pp. 569-574). Cham: Springer International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-
3-319-42902-1_77
Cicirello, V. A., & Smith, S. F. (2000). Modeling GA Performance for Control 
Parameter Optimization. Paper presented at the GECCO.
Davis, L. (1985). Applying Adaptive Algorithms to Epistatic Domains. San Francisco, 
CA: Academic Press.

224
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing Problems
Davis, L. D. (1991). Handbook Of Genetic Algorithms. Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Deep, K., & Mebrahtu, H. (2011). New Variations of Order Crossover for Travelling 
Salesman Problem. International Journal of Combinatorial Optimization Problems 
and Informatics, 2(1), 2–13.
Deep, K., & Mebrahtu, H. (2012). Variant of partially mapped crossover for the 
Travelling Salesman problems. International Journal of Combinatorial Optimization 
Problems and Informatics, 3(1), 47–69.
Dey, N., Chakraborty, S., & Samanta, S. (2014). Optimization of Watermarking in 
Biomedical Signal: Lambert Publication. Heinrich-Böcking-Straße, 6, 66121.
Dey, N., Samanta, S., Chakraborty, S., Das, A., Chaudhuri, S. S., & Suri, J. S. 
(2014). Firefly Algorithm for Optimization of Scaling Factors During Embedding 
of Manifold Medical Information: An Application in Ophthalmology Imaging. 
Journal of Medical Imaging and Health Informatics, 4(3), 384–394. doi:10.1166/
jmihi.2014.1265
Dey, N., Samanta, S., Yang, X.-S., Das, A., & Chaudhuri, S. S. (2013). Optimisation 
of scaling factors in electrocardiogram signal watermarking using cuckoo search. 
International Journal of Bio-inspired Computation, 5(5), 315–326. doi:10.1504/
IJBIC.2013.057193
Dwivedi, V., Chauhan, T., Saxena, S., & Agrawal, P. (2012). Travelling Salesman 
Problem using Genetic Algorithm. Paper presented at the National Conference on 
Development of Reliable Information Systems, Techniques and Related Issues.
Eiben, A. E., Hinterding, R., & Michalewicz, Z. (1999). Parameter control in 
evolutionary algorithms. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 3(2), 
124–141. doi:10.1109/4235.771166
Farahani, R. Z., Rezapour, S., Drezner, T., & Fallah, S. (2014). Competitive supply 
chain network design: An overview of classifications, models, solution techniques 
and applications. Omega, 45, 92–118. doi:10.1016/j.omega.2013.08.006
Freisleben, B., & Merz, P. (1996). New genetic local search operators for the 
traveling salesman problem. In Parallel Problem Solving from Nature—PPSN IV 
(pp. 890–899). Springer. doi:10.1007/3-540-61723-X_1052
Girres, J.-F., & Touya, G. (2010). Quality Assessment of the French OpenStreetMap 
Dataset. Transactions in GIS, 14(4), 435–459. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9671.2010.01203.x

225
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing Problems
Goel, S., & Wadhwa, V. (2013). A comparative analysis of PMX, POS and OX 
crossover operators for solving. International Journal of Latest Research in Science 
and Technology, 2(2), 80–83.
Goldberg, D. E. (1989). Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine 
Learning. Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co.
Goldberg, D. E., & Lingle, R. (1985). Alleles, loci, and the traveling salesman 
problem. Proceedings of the First International Conference on Genetic Algorithms 
and Their Applications, 154-159.
Grefenstette, J., Gopal, R., Rosmaita, B., & Van Gucht, D. (1985). Genetic algorithms 
for the traveling salesman problem. Proceedings of the first International Conference 
on Genetic Algorithms and their Applications.
Holland, J. H. (1975). Adaption in Natural and Artificial Systems. The University 
of Michigan Press.
Hore, S., Chatterjee, S., Santhi, V., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Balas, V. E., & Shi, F. 
(2017). Indian Sign Language Recognition Using Optimized Neural Networks. In 
V. E. Balas, L. C. Jain, & X. Zhao (Eds.), Information Technology and Intelligent 
Transportation Systems: Vol. 2. Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on 
Information Technology and Intelligent Transportation Systems ITITS 2015 (pp. 553-
563). Cham: Springer International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-38771-0_54
Iyad Abu, D., Faisal, A., Eslam Al, M., Mohammed Azmi, A.-B., & Basima Hani, 
F. H. (2013). Hybridizing Harmony Search Algorithm with Multi-Parent Crossover 
to Solve Real World Optimization Problems. International Journal of Applied 
Metaheuristic Computing, 4(3), 1–14. doi:10.4018/ijamc.2013070101
Jog, P., Suh, J. Y., & Gucht, D. v. (1989). The effects of population size, heuristic 
crossover and local improvement on a genetic algorithm for the traveling salesman 
problem. Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Genetic Algorithms.
Johnson, D. S., & McGeoch, L. A. (2002). Experimental analysis of heuristics for the 
STSP. In The traveling salesman problem and its variations (pp. 369–443). Springer.
Kanungo, D. P., Janmenjoy, N., Bighnaraj, N., & Behera, H. S. (2016). Hybrid 
Clustering using Elitist Teaching Learning-Based Optimization: An Improved Hybrid 
Approach of TLBO. International Journal of Rough Sets and Data Analysis, 3(1), 
1–19. doi:10.4018/IJRSDA.2016010101

226
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing Problems
Kumar, N., Karambir, & Kumar, R. (2012). A Comparative Analysis of PMX, CX 
and OX Crossover operators for solving Travelling Salesman Problem. International 
Journal of Latest Research in Science and Technology, 1(2), 98–101.
Laporte, G. (1992). The vehicle routing problem: An overview of exact and 
approximate algorithms. European Journal of Operational Research, 59(3), 345–358. 
doi:10.1016/0377-2217(92)90192-C
Larranaga, P., Kuijpers, C. M. H., Poza, M., & Murga, R. H. (1997). Decomposing 
Bayesian Networks: Triangulation of the Moral Graph with Genetic Algorithms. 
Statistics and Computing, 7(1), 19–34. doi:10.1023/A:1018553211613
Lin, S., & Kernighan, B. W. (1973). An effective heuristic algorithm for the traveling-
salesman problem. Operations Research, 21(2), 498–516. doi:10.1287/opre.21.2.498
Manthey, B., & Veenstra, R. (2013). Smoothed analysis of the 2-Opt heuristic for 
the TSP: Polynomial bounds for Gaussian noise. In Algorithms and Computation 
(pp. 579–589). Springer.
Meryem, A., & Salim, C. (2016). Cooperative Parallel Metaheuristics based Penguin 
Optimization Search for Solving the Vehicle Routing Problem. International Journal 
of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 7(1), 1–18. doi:10.4018/IJAMC.2016010101
Meryem, B., & Abdelmadjid, B. (2015). Resolution of a Vehicle Routing Problem with 
Simultaneous Pickup and Delivery: A Cooperative Approach. International Journal 
of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 6(3), 53–68. doi:10.4018/ijamc.2015070103
Meryem, B., & Abdelmadjid, B. (2016). Quantum Inspired Algorithm for a VRP with 
Heterogeneous Fleet Mixed Backhauls and Time Windows. International Journal 
of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 7(4), 18–38. doi:10.4018/IJAMC.2016100102
Merz, P., & Freisleben, B. (1997). Genetic local search for the TSP: New results. Paper 
presented at the Evolutionary Computation, 1997., IEEE International Conference 
on. doi:10.1109/ICEC.1997.592288
Michalewicz, Z. (1996). Genetic algorithms + data structures = evolution programs 
(3rd ed.). London: Springer-Verlag.
Mohammad, H., & Mohammad Hassan, A. (2016). Optimization of Small Wind 
Turbines using Genetic Algorithms. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic 
Computing, 7(4), 50–65. doi:10.4018/IJAMC.2016100104

227
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing Problems
Muhlenbein, H. (1989). Parallel Genetic Algorithms, Population Genetics and 
Combinatorial Optimization. Academic Press.
Murata, T., & Itai, R. (2008). Enhancing Solution Similarity in Multi-Objective 
Vehicle Routing Problems with Different Demand Periods. In T. Caric & H. Gold 
(Eds.), Vehicle Routing Problem. InTech. doi:10.5772/5619
Oliver, Smith, & Holland. (1987). A Study of Permutation Crossover Operator on 
the TSP. Academic Press.
Rahul, K., Senthilnath, J., Omkar, S. N., & Narendra, S. (2016). A Novel Multiobjective 
Optimization for Cement Stabilized Soft Soil based on Artificial Bee Colony. 
International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 7(4), 1–17. doi:10.4018/
IJAMC.2016100101
Reinelt, G. (1991). TSPLIB—A Traveling Salesman Problem Library. ORSA Journal 
of Computing, 3(4), 376–384. doi:10.1287/ijoc.3.4.376
Reza, B. (2016). Nephron Algorithm Optimization: Inspired of the Biologic Nephron 
Performance. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 7(1), 
38–64. doi:10.4018/IJAMC.2016010103
Rocki, K., & Suda, R. (2012). Accelerating 2-opt and 3-opt local search using 
GPU in the travelling salesman problem. Paper presented at the High Performance 
Computing and Simulation (HPCS), 2012 International Conference on.
Shweta, T., & Kamal, K. B. (2014). A Particle Swarm Optimization Approach 
to Fuzzy Case-based Reasoning in the Framework of Collaborative Filtering. 
International Journal of Rough Sets and Data Analysis, 1(1), 48–64. doi:10.4018/
ijrsda.2014010104
Soleimani, H., & Kannan, G. (2015). A hybrid particle swarm optimization and 
genetic algorithm for closed-loop supply chain network design in large-scale 
networks. Applied Mathematical Modelling, 39(14), 3990–4012. doi:10.1016/j.
apm.2014.12.016
Surry, P. D., & Radcliffe, N. J. (1996). Formal Algorithms + Formal Representations 
= Search Strategies. Paper presented at the Parallel Problem Solving from Nature 
IV, London, UK.

228
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing Problems
Tsou, M.-H., & Smith, J. (2011). Free and Open Source software for GIS education. 
San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Vavak, F., & Fogarty, T. C. T. C. (1996). Comparison of Steady State and Generational 
Genetic Algorithms for Use in Nonstationary Environments. Academic Press.
Wall, M. (1996). GAlib: A C ++ Library of Genetic Algorithm Components. 
Academic Press.
Wang, Y., Ma, X., Xu, M., Liu, Y., & Wang, Y. (2015). Two-echelon logistics 
distribution region partitioning problem based on a hybrid particle swarm 
optimization–genetic algorithm. Expert Systems with Applications, 42(12), 5019–
5031. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2015.02.058
Watson, J., Ross, C., Eisele, V., Denton, J., Bins, J., Guerra, C., . . . Howe, A. (1998). 
The Traveling Salesrep Problem, Edge Assembly Crossover, and 2-opt. Academic 
Press.
Watson, R. A., & Pollack, J. B. (2000). Recombination without respect: Schema 
combination and disruption in genetic algorithm crossover. Proceedings of the 2000 
Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference.
Whitley, D., Starkweather, T., & Shaner, D. (1990). The Traveling Salesman and 
Sequence Scheduling: Quality Solutions Using Genetic Edge Recombination. 
Academic Press.
Whitley, L. D., Starkweather, T., & Fuquay, D. A. (1989). Scheduling problems and 
traveling salesmen: The genetic edge recombination operator. Paper presented at 
the ICGA.
Xu, J., Hancock, K., & Southworth, F. (2003). Simulation of regional freight 
movement with trade and transportation multinetworks. Transportation Research 
Record, 1854, 152–161. doi:10.3141/1854-17
Yamamura, M., Ono, I., & Kobayashi, S. (1992). Character-preserving genetic 
algorithms for traveling salesman problem. Journal of Japanese Society for Artificial 
Intelligence, 7(6), 1049–1059.
Yong, W. (2015). An Approximate Algorithm for Triangle TSP with a Four-Vertex-
Three-Line Inequality. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 
6(1), 35–46. doi:10.4018/ijamc.2015010103

229
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing Problems
Yuan, S., Skinner, B., Huang, S., & Liu, D. (2013). A new crossover approach for 
solving the multiple travelling salesmen problem using genetic algorithms. European 
Journal of Operational Research, 228(1), 72–82. doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2013.01.043
Zakir, H. A. (2010). Genetic algorithm for the traveling salesman problem using 
sequential constructive crossover operator. International Journal of Biometrics & 
Bioinformatics, 3(6), 96–105.
Zhu, W., Fang, J., Tang, Y., Zhang, W., & Du, W. (2012). Digital IIR Filters Design 
Using Differential Evolution Algorithm with a Controllable Probabilistic Population 
Size. PLoS ONE, 7(7), e40549–e40549. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0040549 
PMID:22808191
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Combinatorial Optimization: In applied mathematics and theoretical computer 
science, combinatorial optimization is a topic that consists of finding an optimal 
object from a finite set of objects.
Meta-Heuristics: In computer science and mathematical optimization, a 
metaheuristic is a higher-level procedure or heuristic designed to find, generate, 
or select a heuristic (partial search algorithm) that may provide a sufficiently good 
solution to an optimization problem.
NP-Hardness: (Non-Deterministic Polynomial-Time Hard), In computational 
complexity theory, is the defining property of a class of problems that are, informally, 
“at least as hard as the hardest problems in NP”.
Optimization: In mathematics, computer science and operations research, 
optimization is the selection of a best element (with regard to some criterion) from 
some set of available alternatives. In the simplest case, an optimization problem 
consists of maximizing or minimizing a real function by systematically choosing 
input values and computing the value of the function. More generally, optimization 
includes finding “best available” values of some objective function given a defined 
domain (or input), including a variety of different types of objective functions and 
different types of domains.
Routing Problem Optimization: Combinatorial optimization and integer 
programming problem which asks “What is the optimal set of routes for a fleet of 
agents to traverse in order to deliver to a given set of nodes?”.

230
Optimized Crossover JumpX in Genetic Algorithm for General Routing Problems
Supply Chain: A system of organizations, people, activities, information, and 
resources involved in moving a product or service from supplier to customer.
Volunteered Geographic Information (VGI): The harnessing of tools to create, 
assemble, and disseminate geographic data provided voluntarily by individuals 
(Goodchild, 2007).
ENDNOTE
1 	
VGI is a special case of the larger Web phenomenon known as user-generated 
content.

Copyright © 2018, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  10
231
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-4151-6.ch010
ABSTRACT
Financial time series forecasting has been regarded as a challenging issue because 
of successful prediction could yield significant profit, hence require an efficient 
prediction system. Conventional ANN based models are not competent systems. 
Higher order neural networks have several advantages over traditional neural 
networks such as stronger approximation, higher fault tolerance capacity and faster 
convergence. With the aim of achieving improved forecasting accuracy, this article 
develops and evaluates the performance of an adaptive single layer second order 
neural network with GA based training (ASONN-GA). The global search ability of
On Developing and 
Performance Evaluation 
of Adaptive Second Order 
Neural Network With GA-
Based Training (ASONN-
GA) for Financial Time 
Series Prediction
Sarat Chandra Nayak
Kommuri Pratap Reddy Institute of Technology, India
Bijan Bihari Misra
Silicon Institute of Technology, India
Himansu Sekhar Behera
Veer Surendra Sai University of Technology, India

232
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
1. INTRODUCTION
Stock market behaves very much like a random walk process and the stock market 
index prediction has been considered as an important and challenging task for 
the researchers. Due to the influence of uncertainties involved in the movement 
of the market, the stock market forecasting is regarded as a difficult task. Stock 
movement prediction is also difficult due to its nonlinearities, highly volatile in 
nature, discontinuities, movement of other stock markets, political influences and 
other many macro-economical factors and even individual psychology. Various 
economic factors such as oil prices, exchange rates, interest rates, stock price indices 
in other countries, domestic as well as global economic situations, etc. have been 
influencing the market behavior. As more and more money is being invested in the 
stock market by common investors, brokers and speculators, they get anxious about 
the future trend of the stock prices in the market. Hence, an effective and accurate 
forecasting model is necessary in order to predict the stock market behavior. If the 
direction of the market is successfully predicted, the investors may be better guided 
and also monetary rewards will be substantial. In recent years, many new methods 
for the modeling and forecasting the stock market have been developed including 
linear as well as nonlinear models.
Exchange rate prediction is relevant to all sorts of firms and interesting for 
international companies which want to decrease exchange exposure. The foreign 
exchange rates have an important role in the financial market as well as economy of 
a country. Its area of influence includes not only interest rate and inflation but also 
the economic stability of any country. While deciding the monetary policies of any 
country FOREX rates acts as a vital factor. Global economy also comes under the 
influence of FOREX rate. Various massive economic crises such as The Asian crisis 
of 1997-98, China’s undervalued Yuan (1994-2004) and Japanese yen’s gyrations 
from 2008 to mid-2013, portrays the influence of FOREX rate on global economy. 
Hence to maintain the national as well as international economic stability numerous 
research activities have been carried out in this area. Till now it is one of the most 
GA has been incorporated with the better generalization ability of a second order 
neural network and the model is found quite capable in handling the uncertainties 
and nonlinearities associated with the financial time series. The model takes minimal 
input data and considered the partially optimized weight set from previous training, 
hence a significant reduction in training time. The efficiency of the model has been 
evaluated by forecasting one-step-ahead closing prices and exchange rates of five 
real stock markets and it is revealed that the ASONN-GA model achieves better 
forecasting accuracy over other state of the art models.

233
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
demanding fields of research due to the highly volatile nature of FOREX rate. The 
dependency of FOREX rates on various fundamental and technical factors such as, 
inflation, interest rate differentials, capital flows, technical support and resistance 
levels, and so on, is the root cause of its dynamic nature.
For many decades linear models have been the basis of traditional statistical 
forecasting models in financial engineering. The Box-Jenkins method using 
autoregressive moving average (ARMA) linear models have extensively been used 
in many areas of time series forecasting (Box & Jenkins, 1976). Several statistical 
techniques such as moving averages (MA), auto-regressive integrated moving 
average (ARIMA), auto-regressive heteroscedastic (ARCH), generalized ARCH 
(GARCH) have been used extensively for stock market prediction. They have been 
successfully applied to different engineering, economic and social applications. 
Nonlinear dynamics proposes that in financial time series, past prices help to 
determine future prices, but not in a straightforward way. The relationship between 
past prices and future prices is nonlinear, and this nonlinearity implies that past price 
change can have wide ranging effects on future prices. Due to the presence of noise 
and nonlinearity in the financial time series, such traditional methods have seldom 
proved to be effective. These models were lacking in capturing the nonlinearity 
of other types of time series, since they have developed to model certain types 
of problems. This paves the path toward adopting nonlinear models. The popular 
nonlinear models used for financial forecasting include artificial neural networks, 
support vector machine, Bayesian networks, fuzzy system models etc. Amongst 
these frequently adopted methods, artificial neural networks have drawn significant 
interests from several researchers in the stock market behavior forecasting.
Artificial neural network (ANN) is one of the important approaches in machine 
learning methods. ANNs are software constructs designed to mimic the way the 
human brain learns. The neural network can imitate the process of human’s behavior 
and solve nonlinear problems, which have made it widely used in calculating and 
predicting complicated systems. The quality of non linearity mapped achieved in 
ANN is difficult with the conventional calculating approaches. It has the capability 
of dealing with complex problems of structural instability. They are analogous to 
nonparametric, nonlinear regression models. Their novelty lies in their ability to 
model nonlinear processes with few a priori assumptions about the nature of the 
generating process. Neural networks extensively used in medical applications such 
as image/signal processing (Miller,
1992), pattern and statistical classifiers (Maglaveras, 1998) and for modeling 
the dynamic nature of biological systems. ANNs are relatively recent method for 
business forecasting and has been successfully applied to wide range of forecasting 
problems such as exchange rate, credit scoring, business failure, bankruptcy, interest 
rate, stock return, stock market index, portfolio management and option & future 

234
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
prices. ANNs have been successfully applied in financial engineering and gained 
wide acceptance due to their better learning abilities and approximation capabilities. 
ANNs are considered to be an effective modeling procedure when the mapping 
from the input to the output contains both regularities and exceptions. This is 
particularly useful in financial engineering applications where much is assumed 
and little is known about the nature of the processes determining asset prices. The 
neural networks have the ability to discover nonlinear relationships in the input 
data set without a priori assumption of the knowledge of relation between the input 
and the output. ANNs are found to be good universal approximator which can 
approximate any continuous function to any desire accuracy. They are considered to 
be an effective modeling procedure when the mapping from the input to the output 
contains both regularities and exceptions which is the way the stock market behaves. 
It also allows the adaptive adjustment to the model and nonlinear description of 
the problems. These advantages of ANN attract researchers to develop ANN based 
forecasting models to the area of stock market prediction. These forecasting models 
incorporate prior knowledge in ANN to improve the prediction accuracy. Gradient 
based methods are one of the most widely used error minimization methods used to 
train back propagation networks. Back propagation algorithm is a classical domain 
dependent technique for supervised training. It works by measuring the output error, 
calculating the gradient of this error, and adjusting the ANN weights and biases in 
the descending gradient direction. Back propagation is the most commonly used and 
the simplest feed forward algorithm used for classification. Back propagation based 
ANNs are very popular methods to predict stock market with better calculation, 
spreading abilities and stronger nonlinear mapping ability. But the stock market 
is not only with nonlinearity but also chaos, and it is a dynamic system related 
to time. Therefore the network for predicting itself is a dynamic system. Back 
propagation neural networks, particularly the multilayer perceptron (MLP) has many 
shortcomings such as the slow learning rate, more computational overhead, larger 
memory size, easy to get into local minimum, bigger randomicity and so on. This 
affects the predicted results of the stock price. These shortcomings force researchers 
toward developing hybrid models by combining linear and nonlinear models. These 
hybrid models that have been developed by many researchers combining nonlinear 
models such as ANN and evolutionary soft computing techniques such as Particle 
Swarm Optimization (PSO), Genetic Algorithm (GA) and other nature and bio-
inspired search techniques, have better accuracies. ANN and its hybridization with 
other soft computing techniques have been successfully applied to the potential 
corporate finance applications and found to be appropriate. Over the decades, a 
number of forecasting models based on soft computing techniques such as ANN 
(White, 1998; Chiang, 1996), fuzzy logic and its hybridization (Romahi & Shen, 
2000; Abraham, 2002), GA based ANN (Nayak, 2012) have been applied to the 

235
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
stock index forecasting. Several nature-inspired population-based algorithms such 
as GA, PSO, differential evolution (DE), and evolutionary algorithm (EA) have 
shown their promising ability as learning algorithm utilized for forecasting purpose. 
A hybrid version of harmony search algorithm (HSA) with multi-parent crossover 
is proposed in (Doush, 2013) and applied to solve a set of real world numerical 
optimization problem. Their experimental results show superiority over other. A 
GA based hybrid RBF models have been proposed for classification (Dash, 2013) 
and an ANN-RBF hybrid model used for estimation (Nourani, 2013) and claimed to 
be superior over conventional models. A discrete artificial bee colony optimization 
has been used for financial classification problem and found to be performing better 
as compared to other nature inspired methods (Marinakis, 2011).There are several 
applications of nature-inspired optimization techniques found in literature such as 
Cuckoo Search (Binh et al., 2016; Dey et al., 2013; Samantaa et al., 2013; Ashour 
et al., 2015), Firefly Algorithm (Dey et al., 2014a; Dey et al., 2014b), GA and PSO 
(Hore et al., 2017; Dey et al., 2015).
Pai and Michel proposed a hybrid PSO strategy in which the global best particle 
position arrived at by the hybrid PSO acts as the initial point to the Sequential 
Quadratic Programming (SQP) algorithm (Pai& Michel, 2017)). The superiority 
of the hybrid model has been demonstrated on portfolio set selection of BSE200 
index and Nikkei225 index. A highly scalable DE algorithm based on map-reduce 
programming model has been proposed by Benmounah et al. (2017). for clustering 
large sets of data with reduced time consumption. A comparative analysis between 
statistical, rough computing, and hybridized techniques based models in predictive 
data analysis has been proposed by Acharjya and Anitha (2017).The comparative 
analysis was carried out over financial bankruptcy data set and it was found that the 
hybridized computing techniques provides better accuracy as compared to rough and 
statistical based computing. A Novel Hybridization of Expectation-Maximization 
and K-Means Algorithms for Better Clustering Performance has been proposed 
by Raja Kishor and Venkateswarlu (2016). The method was taking less execution 
time by producing results with higher clustering fitness and lesser SSE than other 
algorithms. Prediction of stock price trend and recommendation using cognitive 
process has been proposed by Bag and Kulkarni (Bag, & Kulkarni, 2017). They 
used a Naïve bays classification algorithm to classify the news sentiments. A News 
Sentiment Index (NSI) was calculated and effect of the news on particular stock was 
calculated to predict the trend. The results were compared with traditional systems 
and showed significant improvement. Rough Set Theory was used to analyze the 
understanding of complex shopping behavior of retail consumers of India in grocery 
segment (Senthilnathan, 2016).
It has been found in most of the research work in financial forecasting area used 
ANN, particularly multilayer perceptron (MLP). Suffering from slow convergence, 

236
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
sticking to local minima are the two well known lacuna of a MLP. In order to 
overcome the local minima, more number of nodes added to the hidden layers. 
Multiple hidden layers and more number of neurons in each layer also add more 
computational complexity to the network. In the other hand, HONN are type of 
feed forward network which provide nonlinear decision boundaries, hence offering 
better classification capability as compared to linear neuron (Guler & Sahin, 1994). 
They are different from ordinary feed forward networks by the introduction of 
higher order terms into the network. HONN have fast learning properties, stronger 
approximation, greater storage capacity, higher fault tolerance capability and powerful 
mapping of single layer trainable weights (Wang, 2006). In most of neural network 
models, neural inputs are combined using summing operation, where in HONN, not 
only summing units, but also units that find the product of weighted inputs called 
as higher order terms. Due to single layer of trainable weights needed to achieve 
nonlinear separability, they are simple in architecture and require less number of 
weights to capture the associated nonlinearity (Shin & Ghosh, 1995; Park, 2000). 
As compared to networks utilizing summation units only, higher order terms in 
HONN can increase the information capacity of the network. This representational 
power of higher order terms can help solving complex nonlinear problems with small 
networks as well as maintaining fast convergence capabilities (Leerink, 1995). A 
novel application of Ridge polynomial network formed by adding different degrees 
of Pi–Sigma neural networks has been suggested by (Ghazali, 2006) for financial 
time series prediction. The model is able to find an appropriate input output mapping 
of various chaotic financial time series data with a good performance in learning 
speed and generalization capability.
In the expedition of enhancing the accuracy of the prediction evolutionary 
algorithms or optimization techniques such as GA, PSO, Ant Colony Optimization 
(ACO), and so on, were used along with ANNs. Sermpinis et al. (2013) investigated 
the performance of an adaptive radial basis neural network along with PSO in the 
field of FOREX rate forecasting (Chen & Zhang, 2013). The experimental result 
shows that the hybrid model performs better than other traditional models in terms 
of both statistical and trading efficiency. Another investigation lead by Chen and 
Zhang (2013) used GA based on Mendel’s principle of evolution to predict the 
FOREX rate. The outcome shows that the Mendel’s-GA model works as a valuable 
tool for FOREX rate prediction in case of high-frequency data. A back propagation 
neural network was employed by Chang et al. (2009) to predict the buy/sell points 
for a stock. The study applied a case based dynamic window for improved forecast 
accuracy. Some compressive reviews of data mining applications in stock market 
forecasting were found in articles (Atsalakis & Valavanis, 2009; Venugopal et 
al., 2010). It was observed that neural networks, neuro-fuzzy models and other 
soft computing techniques outperform conventional models in most of cases. The 

237
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
prediction of stock closing prices of NSE and SENSEX using hybrid ANN model 
of functional link fuzzy logic neural models was found in the article (Kumaran, & 
Kailas, 2012). Forecasting currency exchange rates using an adaptive ARMA model 
with differential evolution based training was proposed by Rout et al. (2014). A 
novel knowledge guided artificial neural network (KGANN) was proposed by Jena 
et al. (2015) for exchange rate prediction. The prediction results of their proposed 
models were compared with that of the individual FLANN and LMS based models 
and found better. Performance evaluation of ANN based model for exchange rate 
prediction was conducted by Svitlana Galeshchuk in 2016 (Galeshchuk, 2016). The 
author claims the superiority of a MLP based model for one-step-ahead prediction 
of daily, monthly, and quarterly collected samples. Some applications of higher 
order neural networks for financial forecasting are proposed by Nayak et al. (2016a, 
2016b, 2016c, 2016d, 2015a, 2015b) and Sahu et al. (2016).
The motivation of this research work is to develop and apply some of the most 
promising new neural networks such as HONNs to stock market data with improved 
forecasting accuracies. In order to overcome the disadvantages of gradient descent 
based training algorithm, an evolutionary global search optimization technique such 
as GA has been chosen for optimizing the parameters of the HONN based model. The 
prediction of short term (one-day-ahead), closing prices of BSE, DJIA, FTSE and 
NASDAQ have been carried out for financial year 2012 data. Similarly the prediction 
of one-step-ahead exchange rates also carried out by employing the same model. 
The sliding window technique has been used to select the training pattern for the 
network instead of dividing the whole data set into training and test pattern. Instead 
of normalizing the whole data set before training, we normalize the current training 
data. Also, for each current training pattern, a previously optimized weight set has 
been utilized adaptively and hence there is a significant reduction in training time.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the GA based 
evolutionary training. Section 3 describes the model architecture of the forecasting 
models. Section 4 presents the experimental results and discussion. Finally Section 
5 gives the concluding remarks followed by a list of references.
2. GENETIC ALGORITHM
Genetic algorithm has been considered as a popular global search optimization works 
on a population of potential solutions in the form of chromosomes, attempting to 
locate the best solution through the process of artificial evolution. GA are based on 
biological evolutionary theory and used to solve optimization problems which work 
with encoding parameter instead of parameter itself. It consists of the following 
repeated artificial genetic operations: evaluation, selection, crossover, and mutation. 

238
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
In general the genetic evolution process consist the following basic steps as described 
by Algorithm 1. A complete discussion about GA can be found in (Goldberg, 1989; 
Holland, 1975).
The basic GA has six fundamental issues such as individual representation, 
creation of the initial population, selection, reproduction using genetic operators, 
evaluation, and termination criteria. Each part is described in the following sub 
section as follows:
2.1 Individual Representation
The representation scheme of GA determines how the problem is structured and the 
genetic operators used. To describe each individual in the population of interest i.e. 
search space, they are represented in the form of chromosome, which is made up of 
a sequence of genes from a certain alphabet. An alphabet can be binary, integers, 
floating point or symbols.
2.2 Creation of Initial Population
The most common method to supply an initial population to GA is randomly generated 
population. Since there can be improvement in the existing solution iteratively, the 
first solution can be a potentially good solution followed by randomly generated 
solutions for rest of the population. However, initial population may be created in 
the infeasible region, or all chromosomes in population may be far to the optimal 
solution, or search of solution may get a local solution and this local solution 
cannot get rid of. Uniform population generation can be another possible method 
for creation of initial mating pools in the population. In this method, instead of 
randomly generated initial population, a uniform population that forces the initial 
population to be not far away from the solutions and distributes it in the feasible 
region uniformly can be used.
Algorithm 1. Basic steps of Genetic Algorithm
1. Initialization of the search node randomly. 
2. Evaluation of fitness of individuals. 
3. Application of selection operator. 
4. Application of crossover operator. 
5. Application of mutation operator. 
6. Repetition of the above steps until convergence.

239
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
2.3 Selection
The selection of better fit individuals to produce more suitable offspring in the 
successive generations is called as the selection mechanism in GA. This can act as 
the most important feature of GA. Based upon the individual’s fitness; a probabilistic 
selection can be performed with the hope of creating better individuals in the next 
generation. There are several selection schemes that can be adopted in GA, such as 
tournament selection, roulette wheel selection, rank selection, and elitism method. 
In case of roulette wheel selection, the probability Pi, for each individual can be 
defined by:
P individualchoosen
F
F
j
j
popsize
i
[
] =
=∑
1
	
(1)
where Fi is the fitness of individual i.
2.4 Genetic Operators
The basic search mechanism of GA can be achieved through two genetic operators 
such as crossover and mutation. These two operators used to create new individuals 
from the existing individuals of the population. The crossover operator takes two 
individuals, exchange their genetic characteristics and produce two new solutions. 
The mutation takes one individual, alters it and produces one new solution. The 
mechanism of crossover and mutation depends upon the individual representation. 
For two individuals X and Y (m dimension vector) with binary representation, the 
crossover and mutation operators can be defined as follows:
Simple crossover: it generates a random number r from a uniform distribution 
from 1 to m and creates two new individuals x '  and y '  as shown by Equation 2 
and Equation 3.
x
x
ifi
r
y
otherwise
i
i
i
'
{
=
<
	
(2)
y
y
ifi
r
x
otherwise
i
i
i
'
{
=
<
	
(3)

240
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
Binary mutation: it flips each bit in every individual in the current population 
with probability pm according to Equation 4.
x
x
ifU
p
x
otherwise
i
i
m
i
'
{
( , )
=
−
<
1
0 1
	
(4)
There are several crossover methods such as single point, 2-point, multi point, 
uniform, arithmetic, and matrix crossover. Similarly, there can be uniform, non 
uniform, multi non uniform, boundary mutation etc., based upon the type of 
chromosome representation used.
2.5 Evaluation and Termination
The evaluation function is independent of the GA and can be used in many forms. 
The evaluation mechanism is subject to the minimal requirement that the function 
can map the population into a partially ordered set. GAs will force much of the 
entire population to converge to a single solution.
As the GA moves from generation to generation, there is chance of producing 
better solutions. The GA stopped by meeting the stopping criteria, which can be the 
maximum number of generation or population convergence criteria.
3. MODEL ARCHITECTURE
3.1 Multilayer Perceptron
The architecture of the MLP based forecasting model developed is discussed by 
this subsection. MLP is the most popular and frequently used neural model used 
for financial forecasting purpose. The better approximation and generalization 
capability of MLP has been established by many research works. The MLP model 
developed in this research work has only one hidden layer. The first layer is the input 
layer and the number of neurons/nodes in this layer corresponds to a fixed number 
of past closing prices selected by a sliding window. The optimal number of input 
to the model is a matter of trail. The last layer is called as the output layer and the 
number of neurons in this layer corresponds to the number of response variables. 
In this work the number of output neuron is fixed to one since it is going to predict 
the next day’s closing prices. The number of neurons in the hidden layer defines the 
amount of complexity the model is capable of fitting. Apart from this there is an 
extra node having a fixed value of one to the hidden and output layer. This is called 

241
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
as a bias node. Each node in one layer has connected to all nodes in the immediate 
next layer. Each node connection represents a weight factor. Each node in the higher 
layer receives a weighted sum of input and weight factors from the previous layer. 
Each node in the hidden and output layer passes the information through a nonlinear 
activation function. In this way the information passes through the network and an 
output signal is produced at the output neuron called as an estimated closing price. 
Now the actual/desired price is provided at the output neuron and an error signal is 
calculated by finding difference between the estimated and actual price. This error 
value act as a feedback to the network and the weight vector and biases are adjusted 
accordingly. The learning process is the process of finding optimal weight and bias 
values for the MLP model so that it will able to map the input value of the training 
data to the corresponding output value. Figure 1 shows the standard MLP model 
developed for this experimental work.
Where:
X
x x
xn
= [ ,
,
,
]
1
2 
represents the network input.	
W
w
w
wmn
= [
,
,
,
]
01
02 
is the adjustable weight vector between input and hidden 
layer.	
Figure 1. Architecture of MLP with one hidden layer

242
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
V n
v v
vn
( )
[
,
,
,
]
=
0
1 
is the adjustable weight vector between hidden and output 
layer.	
Σ is the weighted sum of input signals.	
F
f f
fn
= ( ,
,
,
)
1
2 
is the transfer sigmoid activation: S x
e
x
( ) =
+
−
1
1
	
yesst is the estimated closing price by the model.	
y is the actual/desired closing price	
3.2. Second Order Neural Network: ASONN-GA
This subsection presents the architecture of the proposed ASONN-GA forecasting 
model and GA based adaptive training for ASONN-GA.
3.2.1 ASONN-GA Architecture
Figure 2 presents the standard ASONN-GA based forecasting model. The network 
has single layer architecture. The input signal contains the original closing prices as 
selected by the sliding window and product of these input signals resulting higher 
order terms of degree two. The neuron at the output layer receives the weighted sum 
of the input values along with a bias value of fixed weight one. This weighted sum 
is passed through a nonlinear activation which is a sigmoid function and produces 
an estimated closing price. The optimal weight vector and bias values are selected 
by GA and the GA based training is explained in the section ASONN-GA Based 
Forecasting.
Where:
X
x
x
x
x x x x
x x
x
x
m
m
m
m
T
=
−
[
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
]
0
1
0
1
0
2
0
1



is the model input (including the 
input bias).	
y n
( ) is the estimated closing price by the forecasting model.	
d n
( )is the desired closing price.	
w n
( ) is the adjustable weight vector.	

243
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
e n
( ) is the error signal generated by the forecasting model	
Σ is the weighted sum of input signals at the output neuron.	
3.2.2 ASONN-GA Based Forecasting
This section explains about incorporation global search capability of GA to the 
above developed ASONN-GA based models. The basic of GA has been discussed 
in section 2.
In this research work, first we define a network structure with a fixed number 
of inputs, and a single output as shown in the Figure 1. The higher order signals 
terms are generated from the original input signals. Hence the input data contains 
the original signal and the second order terms generated from them. In order to 
keep the network architecture simple, the higher order terms are limited to second 
order only. Second we employed the GA in the learning phase of the network, as 
it is capable to search in a large search space. The hybridization of neural network 
and GA is able to select the optimal weight sets as well as the bias value for the 
forecasting model. The genetic algorithm performs search over the whole solution 
space, finds the optimal solution relatively easily, and it does not requires continuous 
differentiable objective functions. The problem of finding an optimal parameter set 
Figure 2. Architecture of single layer ASONN-GA trained with genetic algorithm

244
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
to train the model could be seen as a search problem into the space of all possible 
parameters. The fitness of the best and average individual in each generation increases 
towards a global optimum. It can be used as the tool for decision making in order 
to solve the complex nonlinear problems such as stock index prediction here. The 
chromosomes of GA represent the weight and bias values for a set of ASONN-GA 
models. Input data along with the chromosome values are fed to the set of ASONN-
GA models. The fitness is obtained from the absolute difference between the target 
and the estimated output. The less the fitness value of an individual, GA considers 
it better fit. Figure 3 shows the general architecture of GA based adaptive ASONN-
GA model developed for this experimental work.
The major steps of the GA based ASONN-GA models can be summarized and 
described by Algorithm 2.
4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
This section presents the forecasting results obtained by employing the above 
models. Different steps such as data collection, input design and normalization, and 
Figure 3. Adaptive ASONN-GA forecasting model trained with Genetic Algorithm

245
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
experimental setup are discussed first followed by result analysis and discussion. 
Results obtained from closing prices forecasting and exchange rate forecasting are 
discussed separately.
4.1 Data Collection
The closing prices are collected from four fast growing stock markets such as BSE, 
DJIA, FTSE and NASDAQ for each transaction day of the stock exchange for the 
year 2016. The descriptive statistics for the closing prices are summarized in Table 1.
Algorithm 2. ASONN-GA Training
1. Random initialization of search spaces, i.e. populations. 
   Initialize each search space, i.e. chromosome with values 
   from the domain [0, 1]. 
2. Setting training data, i.e. choosing number of closing  
   prices as input vector for the network. 
3. Mapping of input patterns. 
   Map input pattern from the lower dimension to higher  
   dimension by incorporating second order terms. 
4. While (termination criteria not met) 
      For each chromosome in the search space 
         Calculate the weighted sum and feed as an input to the  
         node of output layer. 
         Present the desired output, calculate the error signal  
         and accumulate it. 
         Fitness of the chromosome is equal to the accumulated  
         error signal. 
      End 
      Apply crossover operator. 
      Apply mutation operator. 
      Select better fit solutions. 
    End 
5. Present the testing input vector, immediate to the training 
   vectors. 
   Calculated the weighted sum and calculate the error value. 
6. Repeat the steps 2-5 for all training and testing patterns, 
   calculate the mean absolute error signals.

246
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
The positive skewness value of the closing price as observed from Table 1 
implies that all the data sets except FTSE are spread out more toward right. The 
kurtosis analysis implies that stock price of DJIA, and NASDAQ are more outlier 
prone whereas all other financial time series are less outlier prone. Also, from the 
Jarque-Bera test statistics, it can be observed that all the stock price data sets are 
non-normal distributed.
For experimental purpose real data from five exchange rates have been collected 
from the website www.forecasts.org. (Financial Forecast Center, LLC., 2017). The 
data set consists of exchange rates of European Euro, British Pound, Indian Rupees, 
Japanese Yen, and Australian Dollar. The data show the average of daily figures on 
the 1st day of each month and collected for the period of 1999 to 2016. The number 
of data in each set is 214. The descriptive statistics of the exchange rate series are 
summarized in Table 2. It can be observed that except Yen to Dollar and Pound to 
Dollar dataset all other datasets show positive skewness value. This means, these 
Table 1. Descriptive statistics of closing prices for different stocks
Stock Index
Descriptive Statistics
Minimum
Maximum
Mean
Standard 
deviation
Skewness
Kurtosis
Jarque-Bera 
test statistics
BSE
1.1024e+004
792.1800
4.6235e+003
2.6947e+003
0.1154
1.7908
236.0430(h=1)
DJIA
1.7138e+004
6.5471e+003
1.1400e+004
2.1801e+003
0.6644
3.0512
253.8134(h=1)
NASDAQ
4.5982e+003
1.1141e+003
2.3858e+003
709.7888
1.0392
4.0027
764.3663(h=1)
FTSE
6.8785e+003
3287
5.4165e+003
836.2381
-0.2837
2.1378
158.4568(h=1)
Table 2. Descriptive statistics from all financial time series
Dataset
Descriptive Statistics
Minimum
Maximum
Mean
Standard 
deviation
Skewness
Kurtosis
Jarque-Bera 
test statistics
US Dollar to 
Rupees
39.2680
68.2400
49.5192
7.5903
1.0952
2.9765
42.7875(h=1)
US Dollar to 
Euro
0.6345
1.1723
0.8430
0.1344
0.8812
2.8473
27.9051(h=1)
US Dollar to 
Yen
76.6430
133.6430
106.2796
14.0317
-0.5481
2.3795
14.1480(h=1)
US Dollar to 
Pound
0.9276
1.9920
1.3393
0.2888
0.6141
2.4885
15.7831(h=1)
US Dollar to 
Australian 
Dollar
0.4831
0.7886
0.6161
0.0619
-0.2110
2.6432
2.7234(h=0)

247
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
datasets are spread out more toward right and suggest investment opportunities. The 
kurtosis analysis implies that exchange rate of all datasets are less outlier prone than 
the normal distribution. Again from the Jarque-Bera test statistics, it can be observed 
that all the stock price datasets are non-normal distributed.
Each model is simulated for 10 times for each training set, in order to reduce the 
stochastic behavior of the model and the average error is considered for comparative 
analysis of results. Since each time the sliding window moves one step ahead, only 
one new closing price data has been included into the training set. So there may 
not be significant change in nonlinearity behavior of the training data set. For that 
reason, instead of considering another random weight set, we have used the previously 
optimized weight set for the successive training. In this way, after the first training set, 
the number of iteration has been fixed to a small value, hence significant reduction 
in training time. For comparison purpose the same set of training and testing data 
are fed to all the models. Also another statistical based model, i.e. Multi linear 
regression (MLR) has been considered for comparative study.
The experiment was carried out by a system with Intel ® core TM i3 CPU, 2.27 
GHz and 2.42 GB memory. The programming language used MATLAB-2009 
Version-7.8.0.347.
4.2 Input Design and Data Normalization
The sliding window method has been used to decide the input pattern for the model. 
An initial window with size 6 containing the present day closing prices and past 5 
days closing price data is used. Subsequently the sliding window is shifted by one 
position in the financial time series to extract the next training pattern. The sliding 
window size is chosen 6 as it provides best prediction accuracy in the simulation 
experiment. Figure 4 shows an example of training and testing pattern is generated 
in this study. Table 1 presents the total number of closing prices and the number of 
windows generated by the sliding window for each financial time series.
Figure 4. Training window generation for short term prediction

248
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
The sigmoid normalization method has been used to normalize the original input 
signals as shown by Equation 5 (Nayak et al., 2012, 2014).
x
e
norm
x
x
x
x
i
=
+
−
−
−
1
1
(
)
min
max
min
	
(5)
Where xnorm  is the normalized price, xi  is the current day closing price, xmax  
and xmin  are the maximum and minimum price of the window respectively. The 
data within the current training set are normalized within [0, 1].
4.3 Experimental Setup
The normalized values are now considered as the input vector to the model. Let 
X n
x x
xn
( )
[ ,
,
,
]
=
1
2 
 be the normalized closing prices. Let W n
w w
wn
( )
[
,
,
,
]
=
1
2 
 
W n
w
w
w
w
w
w
n
n
n
( )
[
,
,
,
,
,
]
=
11
12
13
1
2
3

 represent the elements of a weight vector 
associated with the input vector X n
( )  at the summing unit neuron as shown in 
Figure 3. Each input pattern X n
( )  is applied to the model sequentially and the 
desired closing prices value is supplied at the output neuron. Given the input, the 
model produces an output y n
( ) , which acts as an estimate to the desired value.
The error signal e n
( )  is calculated as the difference between the desired response 
and the estimated output of the model. This is represented as in Equation 6.
e n
d n
y n
( )
( )
( )
=
−
	
(6)
The error signal e n
( )  and the input vectors are employed to the weight update 
algorithm to compute the optimal weight vector.
Figure 5 shows the individual representation in GA for both MLP and RNN as 
they have one hidden layer.
Figure 6 presents the individual representation for ASONN-GA.
Figure 5. Individual representation of MLP and RNN model

249
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
To overcome the demerits of GD based back propagation, we employed the GA 
which is a popular global search optimization. We adopted the binary encoding 
for GA. Each weight and bias value constitute of 15 binary bits. For calculation of 
weighted sum at output neuron, the decimal equivalent of the binary chromosome 
is considered. A randomly initialized population with 50 genotypes is considered. 
GA was run for maximum 100 generations with the same population size. Parents 
are selected from the population by elitism method in which first 10% of the mating 
pools are selected from the best parents and the rest are selected by binary tournament 
selection method. A new offspring is generated from these parents using uniform 
crossover followed by mutation operator. In this experiment the crossover probability 
is taken as 0.5 and mutation probability is taken as 0.003. In this way the new 
population generated replaces the current population and the process continues until 
convergence occurs. The fitness of the best and average individuals in each generation 
increases towards a global optimum. The uniformity of the individuals increases 
gradually leading to convergence. Extensive experiments have been conducted and 
average results of 10 simulations have been collected. The same data sets are provided 
to each forecasting model and the computation time have been recorded. Table 2 
summarizes the computation times for different models for different financial time 
series. It can be observed that the RNN model requires more computational time 
as compared to MLP due to more number of weight values. There is a substantial 
reduction in computational time in case of ASONN-GA as compared to MLP and 
RNN due to absence of hidden layer and simple architecture. The mean absolute 
errors (MAE) of 10 simulations from each model are considered for comparison 
and represented by Equation 7.
MAE
N
actual
estimated
i
N
j
=
−
=
=
∑
∑
1
10
1
1
1
10 (
)	
(7)
MAE
N
actual
estimated
closing prices
closing prices
i
N
=
−
=
∑
1
10
1
1
(
)
j=
∑
1
10
	
Figure 6. Individual representation of ASONN-GA model

250
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
Further, to find out the exact benefit of using higher order neural network based 
forecasting model over other models for different stock indices, performance gain 
is evaluated as follows at Equation	
8.
Performance Gain
MAE of existing
MAE of SONN
MAE of ex
model
model
=
−
(
)
isting model
	
(8)
4.4 Results Analysis From Closing Price Data
This sub section presents and analyses the prediction accuracies obtained from all 
the three forecasting models for the prediction of one-step-ahead closing price. 
Separate experiments have been conducted for the aforementioned real stock market 
time series. Table 3 presents the prediction error signals.
Table 3. Prediction error generated by MLP, RNN, and ASONN-GA for all closing 
price series
MLP
RNN
ASONN-GA
BSE
Minimum
0.000140
0.000100
0.000100
Maximum
0.057200
0.060200
0.063700
Average
0.014433
0.013958
0.013100
Std.Deviation
0.011398
0.011247
0.011114
DJIA
Minimum
0.000000
0.000100
0.000000
Maximum
0.030400
0.032000
0.031400
Average
0.008060
0.008632
0.008024
Std.Deviation
0.006975
0.006857
0.006928
NASDAQ
Minimum
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
Maximum
0.063400
0.057300
0.050300
Average
0.016045
0.012511
0.010741
Std.Deviation
0.013033
0.010415
0.008918
FTSE
Minimum
0.000000
0.000100
0.000000
Maximum
0.073900
0.031100
0.032100
Average
0.014741
0.008106
0.007910
Std.Deviation
0.012637
0.006813
0.006802

251
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
From Table 3 it can be observed for BSE data set that the ASONN-GA model 
generates minimum average error, i.e. 0.013100 values as compared to MLP and 
RNN. RNN has an overall performance similar to that of MLP model. Comparing 
the performance of ASONN-GA to MLP and RNN, there is a gain in performance 
of 9.23515% and 6.147012% respectively.
For DJIA, MLP gives superior results as compared to RNN. However, the 
performance of ASONN-GA dominates that of MLP and RNN generating a minimal 
error of 0.008024. By adopting ASONN-GA, there is a % gain in performance of 
0.445635% and 7.036159% as compared to MLP and RNN respectively.
The NASDAQ data set is provided to MLP, RNN and ASONN-GA model 
separately. Here also the ASONN-GA performs better than MLP and RNN. It can 
be observed that the ASONN-GA model generates lowest error value. It achieves 
significant better result over MLP and RNN. The % gain in error values are 33.05931% 
and 14.14995% when compared with MLP and RNN respectively.
The three forecasting models are employed to forecast the next day’s closing 
prices of FTSE financial time series. Here the RNN and ASONN-GA model give 
quite superior results as compared to MLP. The ASONN-GA model achieves 
46.3386% and 2.4176% gain in performance as compared to MLP and ASONN-GA 
respectively. From the results the superiority of the ASONN-GA forecasting model 
has been very clearly established.
From the above discussed empirical results, it can be clearly establish that the 
ASONN-GA model achieves better forecasting accuracies over other two conventional 
neural based models. To make it more clear the performance gain of ASONN-GA 
over MLP and RNN are calculated as in Equation 8. It can be observed that the 
ASONN-GA model gains a highest performance improvement over MLP for FTSE 
data, i.e. 46.3385% and lowest in case of DJIA, i.e. 0.445635%. The trend repeats 
for performance gain of ASONN-GA over RNN. There is a maximum performance 
gain over RNN in case of NASDAQ, i.e. 33.05931% and a minimum of 2.417577% 
in case of FTSE. On an average ASONN-GA achieves 22.26965% performance 
gain over MLP and 7.437674% over RNN while considering all the four data sets.
The actual v/s estimated prices by the proposed ASONN-GA model are plotted 
and presented by Figure 7 – 10 for BSE, DJIA, NASDAQ, and FTSE respectively. 
From these figures it can be observed that the proposed model is quite able to 
estimate future prices very closer to the actual values.
4.5 Results Analysis From Exchange Rate Data
This sub section presents and analyses the prediction accuracies obtained from all 
the three forecasting models for the prediction of one-step-ahead exchange rate price. 

252
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
Figure 7. Actual vs. estimated closing prices by ASONN-GA from BSE stock data
Figure 8. Actual vs. estimated closing prices by ASONN-GA from DJIA stock data

253
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
Figure 9. Actual vs. estimated closing prices by ASONN-GA from NASDAQ stock data
Figure 10. Actual vs. estimated closing prices by ASONN-GA from FTSE stock data

254
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
Separate experiments have been conducted for the aforementioned real exchange 
rate time series from the stock market. Table 4 presents the prediction error signals.
From Table 4 it can be observed that, the ASONN-GA achieves lowest average 
error for all the exchange rate series except US Dollar to Euro data set, where the MLP 
generated the lowest. In case of US Dollar to Rupees data, ASONN-GA obtained 
56.5549% and 48.0956% less error as compared to MLP and RNN respectively. In 
case of US Dollar to Yen data, the proposed model generated 34.4063% and 11.3131% 
less error as compared to MLP and RNN. For US Dollar to Pound series data the 
percentage of less error as compared to MLP and RNN are found to be 68.1428% 
and 86.1433% respectively. Similarly for US Dollar to Australian Dollar data the 
ASONN-GA model generated 79.7804% and 77.2239% less error over MLP and 
RNN forecasting model respectively. For more clarity on the performance of the 
proposed model, the actual v/s estimated prices are plotted and presented by the 
Figure 11 – 15.
Table 4. Prediction error generated by MLP, RNN, and ASONN-GA for all exchange 
rate series
MLP
RNN
ASONN-GA
US Dollar to Rupees
Minimum
0.001160
0.000102
8.2553e-005
Maximum
0.054720
0.064202
0.049700
Average
0.017033
0.014257
0.007400
Std.Deviation
0.013318
0.012045
0.008000
US Dollar to Euro
Minimum
0.000030
0.000162
2.0725e-004
Maximum
0.032300
0.032101
0.039700
Average
0.008351
0.008601
0.011000
Std.Deviation
0.006377
0.006127
0.008100
US Dollar to Yen
Minimum
0.000020
0.000001
4.4548e-005
Maximum
0.061200
0.046303
0.050400
Average
0.018142
0.013418
0.011900
Std.Deviation
0.013130
0.010315
0.010100
US Dollar to Pound
Minimum
0.000000
0.000100
5.8760e-006
Maximum
0.082900
0.053100
0.075800
Average
0.034843
0.080106
0.011100
Std.Deviation
0.015607
0.002813
0.011000
US Dollar to 
Australian Dollar
Minimum
0.014030
0.011001
1.1901e-006
Maximum
0.000550
0.000010
0.076300
Average
0.051930
0.046101
0.010500
Std.Deviation
0.044245
0.070105
0.010300

255
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
Figure 11. Comparison of actual and predicted values for dollar to rupees exchange 
rates for 1 month ahead prediction
Figure 12. Comparison of actual and predicted values for dollar to euro exchange 
rates for 1 month ahead prediction

256
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
Figure 13. Comparison of actual and predicted values for dollar to pound exchange 
rates for 1 month ahead prediction
Figure 14. Comparison of actual and predicted values for dollar to yen exchange 
rates for 1 month ahead prediction

257
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
5. CONCLUSION
With the objective of achieving more forecasting accuracy, a second order neural 
network (ASONN-GA) based forecasting model trained with a global optimization 
technique has been proposed. The single layer architecture of the proposed model 
makes it simpler, requires less training time and provides white box visualization 
as compared to multilayer approach. The dimensions of input signals are limited to 
a degree of two in order to avoid the complexity and the model is quite capable to 
handle the high nonlinearity associated with the stock market data. For comparison 
purpose, two multilayer approach based networks such as a MLP and a RNN with 
one hidden layer have developed. The optimal parameters of the three models are 
fine tuned by genetic algorithm. The models are employed to forecast the next day’s 
closing prices of four real stock market data and one-step-ahead exchange rates of 
five real stock markets. These models are trained adaptively and hence there is a 
reduction in training time. From extensive simulation results, it can be observed 
that the prediction capabilities of the three models are found to be satisfactory and 
Figure 15. Comparison of actual and predicted values for dollar to Australian dollar 
exchange rates for 1 month ahead prediction

258
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
acceptable. However, it can be established that the ASONN-GA model requires less 
training time and gives an overall better forecasting accuracies over other two models.
The future work may explore other HONN models, hybridizing with other 
evolutionary algorithms as well as application of the model toward other forecasting 
and data mining problems.
REFERENCES
Abraham, A., Nath, B., & Mahanti, P. K. (2002). Hybrid Intelligent Systems for Stock 
Market Analysis. Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational 
Science, 337-345. doi:10.1109/FUZZY.2000.838709
Acharjya, D., & Anitha, A. (2017). A Comparative Study of Statistical and Rough 
Computing Models in Predictive Data Analysis. International Journal of Ambient 
Computing and Intelligence, 8(2), 32–51. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2017040103
Ashour, A. S., Samanta, S., Dey, N., Kausar, N., Abdessalemkaraa, W. B., & Hassanien, 
A. E. (2015). Computed tomography image enhancement using cuckoo search: A 
log transform based approach. Journal of Signal and Information Processing, 6(03), 
244–257. doi:10.4236/jsip.2015.63023
Atsalakis, G. S., & Valavanis, K. P. (2009). Surveying stock market forecasting 
techniques – part II: Soft computing methods. Expert Systems with Applications, 
36(3), 5932–5941. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2008.07.006
Bag, V., & Kulkarni, U. V. (2017). Stock Price Trend Prediction and Recommendation 
using Cognitive Process. International Journal of Rough Sets and Data Analysis, 
4(2), 36–48. doi:10.4018/IJRSDA.2017040103
Benmounah, Z., Meshoul, S., & Batouche, M. (2017). Scalable Differential 
Evolutionary Clustering Algorithm for Big Data Using Map-Reduce Paradigm. 
International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 8(1), 45–60. doi:10.4018/
IJAMC.2017010103
Binh, H. T. T., Hanh, N. T., & Dey, N. (2016). Improved Cuckoo Search and Chaotic 
Flower Pollination optimization algorithm for maximizing area coverage in Wireless 
Sensor Networks. Neural Computing & Applications, 1–13.
Box, G. E. P., & Jenkins, G. M. (1976). Time Series Analysis-Forecasting and 
Control. San Francisco, CA: Holden-Day Inc.

259
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
Chang, P.-C., Liu, C.-H., Lin, J.-L., Fan, C.-Y., & Ng, C. S. P. (2009). A neural 
network with a case based dynamic window for stock trading prediction. Expert 
Systems with Applications, 36(3), 6889–6898. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2008.08.077
Chen, Y., & Zhang, G. (2013). Exchange rates determination based on genetic 
algorithms using Mendels principles: Investigation and estimation under uncertainty. 
Information Fusion, 14(3), 327–333. doi:10.1016/j.inffus.2011.12.003
Chiang, W. C., Urban, T. L., & Baldridge, G. W. (1996). A Neural Network 
Approach to Mutual Fund Net Asset Value Forecasting. Omega, 24(2), 205–215. 
doi:10.1016/0305-0483(95)00059-3
Dash, Ch. S. K., Dash, A. P., Dehuri, S., & Cho, S. B. (2013). Feature Selection for 
Designing a Novel Differential Evolution Trained Radial Basis Function Network 
for Classification. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 4(1), 
32–49. doi:10.4018/jamc.2013010103
Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Beagum, S., Pistola, D. S., Gospodinov, M., Gospodinova, 
E. P., & Tavares, J. M. R. (2015). Parameter optimization for local polynomial 
approximation based intersection confidence interval filter using genetic algorithm: 
An application for brain MRI image de-noising. Journal of Imaging, 1(1), 60–84. 
doi:10.3390/jimaging1010060
Dey, N., Chakraborty, S., & Samanta, S. (2014b). Optimization of watermarking in 
biomedical signal.Lambert Publication. Heinrich-Böcking-Straße, 6, 66121.
Dey, N., Samanta, S., Chakraborty, S., Das, A., Chaudhuri, S. S., & Suri, J. S. (2014a). 
Firefly algorithm for optimization of scaling factors during embedding of manifold 
medical information: An application in ophthalmology imaging. Journal of Medical 
Imaging and Health Informatics, 4(3), 384–394. doi:10.1166/jmihi.2014.1265
Dey, N., Samanta, S., Yang, X. S., Das, A., & Chaudhuri, S. S. (2013). Optimisation 
of scaling factors in electrocardiogram signal watermarking using cuckoo search. 
International Journal of Bio-inspired Computation, 5(5), 315–326. doi:10.1504/
IJBIC.2013.057193
Doush, I. A., Alkhateed, F., & Al Maghayreh, E. (2013). Hybridizing Harmony 
Search Algorithm with Multi-Parent Crossover to Solve Real World Optimization 
Problems. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 4(3), 1–14. 
doi:10.4018/ijamc.2013070101
Financial Forecast Center, LLC. (2017). Why do the stock markets keep going up?. 
Retrieved from www.forecasts.org

260
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
Galeshchuk, S. (2016). Neural networks performance in exchange rate prediction. 
Neurocomputing, 172, 446–452. doi:10.1016/j.neucom.2015.03.100
Ghazali, R., Hussain, A., & El-Deredy, V. (2006). Application of ridge polynomial 
neural networks to financial time series prediction. 2006 International Joint 
Conference on Neural Networks, 913–20. doi:10.1109/IJCNN.2006.246783
Goldberg, D. (1989). Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine 
Learning. Addison Wesley.
Guler, M., & Sahin, E. (1994). A new higher-order binary-input neural unit: Learning 
and generalizing effectively via using minimal number of monomials. Third Turkish 
Symposium on Artificial Intelligence and Neural Networks Proceedings. Middle 
East Technical University.
Holland, J. (1975). Adaptation in natural and artificial systems. Ann Arbor, MI: 
The University of Michigan Press.
Hore, S., Chatterjee, S., Santhi, V., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Balas, V. E., & Shi, F. 
(2017). Indian Sign Language Recognition Using Optimized Neural Networks. In 
Information Technology and Intelligent Transportation Systems (pp. 553-563). 
Springer International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-38771-0_54
Jena, P. R., Majhi, R., & Majhi, B. (2015). Development and performance evaluation 
of a novel knowledge guided artificial neural network (KGANN) model for exchange 
rate prediction. Journal of King Saud University-Computer and Information Sciences, 
27(4), 450–457. doi:10.1016/j.jksuci.2015.01.002
Kishor, D. R., & Venkateswarlu, N. B. (2016). A Novel Hybridization of Expectation-
Maximization and K-Means Algorithms for Better Clustering Performance. 
International Journal of Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 7(2), 47–74. 
doi:10.4018/IJACI.2016070103
Kumaran Kumar, J., Kailas, A., 2012. Prediction of future stock close price using 
proposed hybrid ANN model of functional link fuzzy logic neural model (FLFNM). 
Int. J. Comput. Appl. Eng. Sci., 2(1).
Leerink, L. R., Giles, C. L., Horne, B. G., & Jabri, M. A. (1995). Learning with 
product units. In G. Tesaro, D. Touretzky, & T. Leen (Eds.), Advances in Neural 
Information Processing Systems 7. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

261
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
Maglaveras, N., Stamkopoulas, T., Pappas, C., & Strintzis, M. (1998). An Adaptive 
back-propagation neural network for real time ischemia episodes detection 
Development and performance using the European ST-T databases. IEEE Trans., 
Biomed Engng., 805-813.
Marinakis, Y., & Magdalene, N. (2011). Discrete Artificial Bee Colony Optimization 
Algorithm for Financial Classification Problems. International Journal of Applied 
Metaheuristic Computing, 2(1), 1–17. doi:10.4018/jamc.2011010101
Miller, A. S., Blott, B. H., & Hames, T. K. (1992). Review of neural network applications 
in medical imaging and signal processing. Medical & Biological Engineering & 
Computing, 30(5), 449–464. doi:10.1007/BF02457822 PMID:1293435
Nayak, S. C., Misra, B. B., & Behera, H. S. (2012). Stock Index Prediction With 
Neuro-Genetic Hybrid Techniques. Intenational Journal of Computer Science and 
Informatics, IJCSI, 2(3), 27–34.
Nayak, S. C., Misra, B. B., & Behera, H. S. (2012, October). Evaluation of 
normalization methods on neuro-genetic models for stock index forecasting. In 
Information and Communication Technologies (WICT), 2012 World Congress on 
(pp. 602-607). IEEE. doi:10.1109/WICT.2012.6409147
Nayak, S. C., Misra, B. B., & Behera, H. S. (2014). Impact of data normalization 
on stock index forecasting. Int. J. Comp. Inf. Syst. Ind. Manag. Appl, 6, 357–369.
Nayak, S. C., Misra, B. B., & Behera, H. S. (2015a). A Pi-Sigma Higher Order 
Neural Network for Stock Index Forecasting. In Computational Intelligence in Data 
Mining-Volume 2 (pp. 311–319). Springer India. doi:10.1007/978-81-322-2208-8_29
Nayak, S. C., Misra, B. B., & Behera, H. S. (2015b). Comparison of Performance 
of Different Functions in Functional Link Artificial Neural Network: A Case Study 
on Stock Index Forecasting. In Computational Intelligence in Data Mining-Volume 
1 (pp. 479–487). Springer India. doi:10.1007/978-81-322-2205-7_45
Nayak, S. C., Misra, B. B., & Behera, H. S. (2016a). Adaptive Hybrid Higher Order 
Neural Networks for Prediction of Stock Market Behavior. In Applied Artificial 
Higher Order Neural Networks for Control and Recognition (pp. 174-191). IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0063-6.ch007
Nayak, S. C., Misra, B. B., & Behera, H. S. (2016b). Improving Performance of 
Higher Order Neural Network using Artificial Chemical Reaction Optimization: A 
Case Study on Stock Market Forecasting. In Applied Artificial Higher Order Neural 
Networks for Control and Recognition (pp. 253–280). IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-5225-0063-6.ch011

262
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
Nayak, S. C., Misra, B. B., & Behera, H. S. (2016c). An Adaptive Second Order 
Neural Network with Genetic-Algorithm-based Training (ASONN-GA) to Forecast 
the Closing Prices of the Stock Market. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic 
Computing, 7(2), 39–57. doi:10.4018/IJAMC.2016040103
Nayak, S. C., Misra, B. B., & Behera, H. S. (2016d). Fluctuation prediction of stock 
market index by adaptive evolutionary higher order neural networks. International 
Journal of Swarm Intelligence, 2(2-4), 229–253. doi:10.1504/IJSI.2016.081152
Nourani, V., Entezari, E., & Yousefi, P. (2013). ANN-RBF Hybrid model for 
Spatiotemporal Estimation of Monthly Precipitation Case Study: Ardabil Plain. 
International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 4(2), 1–16. doi:10.4018/
jamc.2013040101
Pai, G. V., & Michel, T. (2017). Metaheuristic Optimization of Constrained Large 
Portfolios using Hybrid Particle Swarm Optimization. International Journal of 
Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 8(1), 1–23. doi:10.4018/IJAMC.2017010101
Park, S., Smith, M. J. T., & Mersereau, R. M. (2000). Target recognition based on 
directional filter banks and higher-order neural networks. Digital Signal Processing, 
10(4), 297–308. doi:10.1006/dspr.2000.0376
Romahi, Y., & Shen, Q. (2000). Dynamic Financial Forecasting with Automatically 
Induced Fuzzy Associations. Proc. of the 9th International Conference on Fuzzy 
Systems, 493-498.
Rout, M., Majhi, B., Majhi, R., & Panda, G. (2014). Forecasting of currency exchange 
rates using an adaptive ARMA model with differential evolution based training. 
Journal of King Saud University-Computer and Information Sciences, 26(1), 7–18. 
doi:10.1016/j.jksuci.2013.01.002
Sahu, K. K., Sahu, S. R., Nayak, S. C., & Behera, H. S. (2016). Forecasting foreign 
exchange rates using CRO based different variants of FLANN and performance 
analysis. International Journal of Computational Systems Engineering, 2(4), 190–208. 
doi:10.1504/IJCSYSE.2016.081380
Samantaa, S., Dey, N., Das, P., Acharjee, S., & Chaudhuri, S. S. (2013). Multilevel 
threshold based gray scale image segmentation using cuckoo search. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1307.0277
Senthilnathan, C. R. (2016). Understanding Retail Consumer Shopping Behaviour 
Using Rough Set Approach. International Journal of Rough Sets and Data Analysis, 
3(3), 38–50. doi:10.4018/IJRSDA.2016070103

263
On Developing and Performance Evaluation of Adaptive Second Order Neural Network
Sermpinis, G., Theofilatos, K., Karathanasopoulos, A., Georgopoulos, E. F., & Dunis, 
C. L. (2013). Forecasting foreign exchange rates with adaptive neural networks 
using radial-basis functions and Particle Swarm Optimization. European Journal 
of Operational Research, 225(3), 528–540. doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2012.10.020
Shin, Y., & Ghosh, J. (1995). Ridge Polynomial Networks. IEEE Transactions on 
Neural Networks, 6(3), 610–622. doi:10.1109/72.377967 PMID:18263347
Venugopal Setty, D., Rangaswamy, T. M., & Subramanya, K. N. (2010). A review 
on data mining applications to the performance of stock marketing. International 
Journal of Computers and Applications, 1(3), 33–43. doi:10.5120/88-187
Wang, Z., Fang, J., & Liu, X. (2006). Global stability of stochastic high-order neural 
networks with discrete and distributed delays, Chaos, Solutions and Fractals. doi:, 
06.06310.1016/j.chaos.2006
White, H. (1998). Economic Prediction Using Neural Networks: The Case of IBM 
Daily Stock Returns. Proceedings of the Second Annual IEEE Conference on Neural 
Networks, 1(2), 451-458.
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
ANN: Artificial Neural Network.
ARCH: Auto-Regressive Heteroscedastic.
ARIMA: Auto-Regressive Integrated Moving Average.
ASONN-GA: Adaptive Second Order Neural Network with GA training.
BSE: Bombay Stock Exchange.
DE: Differential Evolution.
EA: Evolutionary Algorithm.
FLANN: Functional Link Artificial Neural Network.
GA: Genetic Algorithm.
GARCH: Generalized ARCH.
HONN: Higher Order Neural Network.
MAE: Mean Absolute Error.
MLP: Multilayer Perceptron.
MLR: Multi Linear Regression.
PSO: Particle Swarm Optimization.
RBF: Radial Basis Function.
RNN: Recurrent Neural Network.
SONN: Second Order Neural Network.

264
Copyright © 2018, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  11
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-4151-6.ch011
ABSTRACT
Water pollution due to industrial and domestic reasons is highly affecting the water 
quality. In undeveloped and developed countries, it has become a major reason 
behind a number of water borne diseases. Poor public health is putting an extra 
economic liability in order to deploy precautionary measures against these diseases. 
Recent research works have been directed toward more sustainable solutions to 
this problem. It has been revealed that good quality of water supply can not only 
improve the public health, it also accelerates economic growth of a geographical 
location as well. Water quality prediction using machine learning methods is still 
at its primitive stage. Besides, most of the studies did not follow any national or 
international standard for water quality prediction. In the current work, both the 
problems have been addressed. First, advanced machine learning methods, namely 
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) supported by a well-known multi-objective
Hybrid Non-Dominated 
Sorting Genetic Algorithm:
II-Neural Network Approach
Sankhadeep Chatterjee
University of Calcutta, India
Sarbartha Sarkar
Indian Institute of Technology Dhanbad, India
Nilanjan Dey
Techno India College of Technology, India
Amira S. Ashour
Tanta University, Egypt
Soumya Sen
University of Calcutta, India

265
Hybrid Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm
INTRODUCTION
Water quality monitoring is a domineering process for maintaining safe and reliable 
water source. It is considered one of the serious problems that affect the individual’s 
health. The furthermost death cause in Asia and Africa is the contaminated drinking 
water (Vasudevan, & Oturan, 2014). Deteriorated water quality originated widespread 
management labors in several countries to resolve and to predict water quality issue. 
Typically, several factors can affect the water quality, including i) the calcium level 
that exists in the natural water, and ii) the industrial wastes, rocks, sewage, which are 
another calcium source leading to lower water quality. Furthermore, the hard water 
is liable for the heart disease and many other serious and chronic diseases. Water 
contaminators are subsequently reached the ground water sources. Ultimately, water 
quality prediction techniques become urgent to evaluate and to test the water quality 
for addressing the specific water supply’s problems. This ensures the water sources 
protection from prospective contamination toward achieving good quality water that 
preserves the overall public health (Edition, 2011). Water sources contamination 
is considered the major reason behind water pollution due to physical, chemical, 
and radioactive elements. In the urban areas, the municipal tap water is one of the 
main water sources for the domestic uses. Accordingly, in order to ensure the water 
supply quality, water quality analysis becomes obligatory.
Water quality prediction can efficiently achieved by using machine learning 
techniques, such as the NN that has been employed for water quality prediction 
process. In order to study the industrial waste effect on the water quality prediction, 
data is to be collected from a water treatment plant in terms of the water quality 
optimization algorithm called the Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm-II 
(NSGA-II) has been used to classify the water samples into two different classes. 
Secondly, Indian national standard for water quality (IS 10500:2012) has been 
utilized for this classification task. The hybrid NN-NSGA-II model is compared with 
another two well-known meta-heuristic supported ANN classifiers, namely ANN 
trained by Genetic Algorithm (NN-GA) and by Particle Swarm Optimization (NN-
PSO). Apart from that, the support vector machine (SVM) has also been included 
in the comparative study. Besides analysing the performance based on several 
performance measuring methods, the statistical significance of the results obtained 
by NN-NSGA-II has been judged by performing Wilcoxon rank sum test with 5% 
confidence level. Results have indicated the ingenuity of the proposed NN-NSGA-II 
model over the other classifiers under current study.

266
Hybrid Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm
index. Machine learning, especially the NN has enormous applications in various 
aspects of environmental modeling and classification. Alongside, water quality 
predication magnetized the focus of several researchers. A recurrent NN has been 
employed to predict the water quality index, which compared to the results of the 
radial basis function NN based model. Reckhow and Kenneth (1999) carried out 
the Bayesian probability networks to study the eutrophication of the Neuse river 
estuary for determining the water quality. Wu et al. (2011) expected the chlorine 
residual in water distribution system using NNs using different flow features and 
water quality measurements. In addition, free ammonia content has been predicted. 
Furthermore, the NN has an extensive role in several applications (Hore et al., 
2016; Chatterjee et al., 2016a; 2016b). Sheppard et al. demonstrated the remote 
sensing role as well as the global positioning systems to enrich the water quality 
detection in the Northern Alabama. The proposed system supervised, evaluated 
and predicted the non-point contamination sources. Jain et al. (2001) carried out 
the NN to model the short-term water demand. A comparative study has been 
carried out for six network prototypes, namely regression models and 2 time series 
models. El-Din et al. (2004) conducted the NN to model the process of wastewater 
treatment with conducted comparative study between the proposed ANNs approach 
and the conventional deterministic approach. The experimental results established 
that the NN contained huge extra information with respect to the modeled scheme. 
Wechmongkhonkon et al. (2012) grouped the water environment of Dusit District 
canals in Thailand using the NN through Levenberg-Marquardt algorithms with a 
high accuracy of 96.52%. Despite the effectiveness of the NN in various real life 
applications, the NN performance is highly dependent on the training strategy. In 
the intricate real life situations (Guesgen, & Marsland, 2016; Odella, 2017), the 
traditional back-propagation based algorithm (Paola, & Schowengerdt, 1995) is 
ineffectual due to the premature convergence of the training algorithms. Since water 
quality prediction is highly significant for public health, it demands more accurate 
and trustworthy model. Several analysis and optimization techniques have been 
employed in several applications for prediction and classification (Dey et al., 2014; 
2015a; 2015b; 2015c; Ashour et al., 2015; Pal et al. 2015; 2015a; Mukherjee et al., 
2015; Araki et al., 2015; Nandi et al., 2015; Ghosh et al., 2015; Maji et al., 2015; 
Araki et al., 2015; Ikeda, 2015; Kotyk et al., 2015; Karaa et al., 2016; Bureš et al., 
2016; Saba et al., 2016; Virmani, 2016; Kausar et al., 2016; Sharma, & Virmani, 
2017; Manogaran, & Lopez, 2017; Boulmaiz et al., 2017; Acharjya, & Anitha, 
2017; Khachane, 2017; Juneja et al, 2017; Tyagi et al., 2017; Ahmed et al., 2017). 
Consequently, meta-heuristic algorithms can be conducted to train the NN using 
their ability to significantly improve the NN performance.

267
Hybrid Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm
Consequently, in the current study three different models are engaged to predict 
the water quality. The water dataset is collected from different municipal areas on both 
sides of Hooghly river bank at West Bengal in India throughout one year (12 months). 
The water quality is classified into two classes, namely ‘Safe’ and ‘Unsafe’ water 
based on the IS 10500:2012 standard (Standard, 1991). First, the genetic algorithm 
(GA) as well as the PSO are engaged in to train the NN, which is referred as NN-GA 
and NN-PSO; respectively. Both models used the root mean squared error (RMSE) 
as their objective function. In addition, multi-objective GA based NN is employed 
using the RMSE and maximum error (ME) as its objective functions. Apart from 
these three NN models, the SVM also is engaged. All models are compared with each 
other with respect to the accuracy, precision, recall, F-measure, Matthews correlation 
coefficient (MCC) (Jurman et al., 2012) and Fowlkes-Mallows index (FM index).
METHODOLOGY
Neural Network
The NN is neuron interaction inspired model that can be efficiently used to learn 
complex patterns. Understanding patterns lead to future prediction of certain value. 
The basic structure of a typical NN consists of several artificial neurons that are 
arranged into multiple layers. Neurons of a layer connect with the neurons of its 
preceding and succeeding layers. During the training phase, the data instances are 
fed to the ANN and the response is compared with the expected outcome. The 
difference between the expected outcome and response given by the NN is used 
as an error measure. This error quantity is utilized to adjust the weights associated 
with the NN to improve its performance. The same process is conducted for each 
data instance. At the last step of training phase, it is expected to have the optimal 
set of weights that used to minimize the misclassification probability. Throughout 
the testing stage, the NN is tested with a set of unknown data and its responses are 
checked to measure its performance. Figure 1 depicted a typical NN.
The traditional training algorithms (Møller, 1993) do not ensure the optimal 
training as they may trap in local optima while searching for the best solution. For 
ensuring that the NN obtains the optimal set of weights during the training phase 
ensures, the error is to be minimized, which can be considered as an optimization 
problem. In the current work, minimizing the error is used as the objective function 
to attain the optimal weights set. Thus, meta-heuristic algorithms can be employed to 
ensure convergence to the global optima. Consequently, meta-heuristic optimization 
methods, such as GA, PSO, and NSGA-II can be employed to train the NN.

268
Hybrid Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm
Genetic Algorithm
Genetic algorithm inspired by the evolutionary process is conducted to solve several 
problems (Gen, & Cheng, 2000). It includes a population that participates to find 
the solution, where each population’s member denotes a potential solution of the 
considered problem. Furthermore, it is associated with a fitness function to define 
the superior solution. At every generation, the GA attempts to realize the best 
solution by propagating the superior solutions from the preceding generation. A 
multidimensional search involves an optimization of certain objective function. Initial 
random population is manipulated by using the definite genetic operators in order 
to produce new solutions. These operators are namely the selection, crossover, and 
mutation. Furthermore, the fitness values of the offspring are generally determined 
by the concerned objective function to be optimized. After calculating the fitness, 
some of the better solutions will participate in the next evolution level. It is expected 
that after certain number of generations, superior solution will be achieved. This 
Figure 1. One hidden layer NN structure

269
Hybrid Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm
process can be terminated after obtaining satisfactory fitness of the optimum solution 
in the population as illustrated in the following GA procedure (Algorithm 1).
Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm
Generally, several problems comprise multiple objectives optimization at the same 
time to attain a potent solution. The multi-objective optimization (Coello, 1999) 
can properly be definite by finding the vector x
x x
x
p
n
T

=
…


 ,
,
,
1
2
of n  decision 
variables such that f x
f
x
f
x
f x
p
n
T
(
)
,
,
,
( )







=
( )
( ) …




1
2
satisfies some constraints. The 
vector xp

 is considered Pareto optimal if only there is no x  exist such that 
∀∈
…
i
n
{ , ,
, }
1 2
, f x
f x
i
i
p


( ) ≤( ) and there exist at least one i  such that f x
f x
i
i
p


( ) < ( ) 
. The set of solutions which is generated due to the Pareto optimality are generally 
addressed as non-dominated solutions. The working principle of multi-objective 
GA (NSGA-II) is analogous to the GA. However, the optimization process in the 
NSGA-II tries to optimize multiple objectives, which are sometimes contradictory 
to each other. A general NSGA-II algorithm has been depicted in Figure 2.
Algorithm 1. Genetic Algorithm 
Begin
     Produce random n chromosomes population representing the
     suitable solutions 
     Estimate the fitness of each chromosome
     Use the following iterative steps to create a new 
     population: 
             Choose from the population two parent chromosomes 
             using their fitness 
             Use the crossover probability to crossover the 
             parents for new offspring formation 
             Mutate new offspring
             Assign fresh offspring in a new population
     Utilize the new produced population for another iteration
       If the end constraint is achieved
          stop, and give the preeminent solution 
       End if
     Repeat preceding steps
End

270
Hybrid Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm
The selection process comes after a ranking of the current population, which is 
achieved in the current work by a non-dominated sorting (Deb, 2001) that used in 
the NSGA-II algorithm. For selection purpose a binary tournament method has been 
utilized. In NSGA-II (Li, & Zhang, 2009), the non-dominated sorting process is 
faster than the previous version. In addition, it also assures elitism of next generation, 
which is a key factor of successful and efficient convergence of the algorithm.
Particle Swarm Optimization
PSO algorithm is stimulated by the school of fishes or flock of birds’ social interaction 
comportment, which can efficiently, engaged for single objective optimization 
problems. It can be carried out to determine the global minima of a real valued 
objective function f x
( ) , where f x
( ) ∈R  at minima x0 , f x
f x
x
n
0
( ) ≤( )∀
∈
 
R  
is used. The PSO employs N  number of search agents known as particles, which 
perform the searching operation over the domain (
)
Rn  . All search agents together 
are called the Swarm. During the searching for the minima, every ith  particle 
maintains its current position (xi ) with a velocity (vi ). Based on the gathered 
information, a solution ( pi  or pbest) is maintained representing the best solution. 
The best of all particles ( pi  s) is called the global best (gbest ) at certain instance 
of time. The velocity and positions of particles are calculated using the following 
expressions:
v t
v t
a
r
pbest t
x
t
a
r
gbest t
x
i
i
i
i
i
i
+
(
) =
( ) +
( )−
( ) +
( )−
1
1
1
2
2
*
*(
)
*
* (
(t))  (1)
x
t
x
t
v t
i
i
i
+
(
) =
( ) +
+
1
1
(
)	
(2)
Figure 2. Flow chart of multi-objective GA

271
Hybrid Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm
PROPOSED SYSTEM
In order to achieve efficient prediction and classification using the NN, a reasonable 
number of data instances of each class are required. Consequently, a dataset of 240 
data samples collected from 10 different municipal areas on both sides of Hooghly 
river bank are involved in the current study. The water supply of those areas is highly 
dependent on the Hooghly river water source. This particular region is selected due 
to its high population density and presence of industrial sectors which reflects the 
population due to domestic as well as industrial sources.
Extracted Features
Different features are extracted in the present study from the water samples that 
collected from 10 different municipal areas of the Hooghly river side region by 
performing several laboratory based tests. Such features include the Chlorides, level 
of pH, total hardness, Turbidity, total alkalinity, and Residual Chlorine. The collected 
samples are investigated and are analyzed by different laboratory experiments to 
extract the following features that used to determine the water quality, which are 
namely i) the hydrogen ion concentration (pH) having the range limits of 6.50 to 
8.50 maximum allowable limits given by the IS 10500:2012, ii) the chlorides, 
where a large chlorides concentration in the water indicates organic pollution that 
has maximum tolerable limit of 1000 mg/l as standardized by IS 10500:2012, iii) 
the total hardness that reflects the water quality having maximum allowable limit 
of 600 mg/l, iv) the calcium hardness having maximum tolerable limit of 200 mg/l, 
v) the total alkalinity of 600 mg/l maximum tolerable limit, vi) the turbidity having 
maximum tolerable limit of 5 N.T.U., and vii) the residual chlorine having maximum 
tolerable limit of 1 mg/l. Afterward, the water samples are labeled as ‘Safe’ and 
‘Unsafe’ based on the Indian Standards (IS 10500:2012) using the meta-heuristic 
supported ANNs. The proposed system block diagram is illustrated in Figure 3.
Fitness Functions
In the present work, the root mean-squared error (RMSE) of the classifier to predict 
the water quality regarding the computed variable vik  is expressed as follows:
RMSE
v
v
n
k
n
j
i
k
k
=
−
=
∑
1
2
(
)
	
(3)

272
Hybrid Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm
where, vjk  represents the observed data instance  kth  value, and vik  represents the 
forecasted value by the classifier. Apart from the RMSE, the NSGA-II is used 
simultaneously to optimize the ME, which is given by:
ME
Z
n
=
/
α
σ
2
	
(4)
where, Zα/2  denotes the z-score having confidence level 1−
(
)
α  and σ  denotes 
the standard deviation of n  many samples. The objective of the NSGA-II is to 
determine the Pareto optimal front from which no further improvement is possible 
without sacrificing one of the objectives. Additionally, in the current work, the 
LIBSVM (Chang, & Lin, 2011) is betrothed for predicting the water quality using 
the SVM.
Performance Metrics
In terms of different performance metrics, the optimization models are assessed 
using the confusion matrix (Powers, 2011), which are expressed by:
Figure 3. A general flow of training phase of ANN using meta-heuristics

273
Hybrid Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm
Accuracy
tp
tn
tp
fp
fn
tn
=
+
+
+
+
 
  
	
(5)
Precision
tp
tp
fp
=
+
 
	
(6)
Recall
tp
tp
fn
=
+
 
	
(7)
F
Measure
Precision
Recall
Precision
Recall
−
=
+
2 *
*
	
(8)
MCC
tp
tn
fp
fn
tp
fp
tp
fn
tn
fp
tn
fn
=
−
+
(
) +
+
(
) +
+
(
) +
+

(
*
)
(
*
)


(
)
	
Matthews Correlation Coefficient MCC
tp*tn
fp*fn
tp
(
) =
(
)−(
)
+
(
) +
+
(
) +
+
(
) +
+
(
)
fp
tp
fn
tn
fp
tn
fn
	
(9)
FM
Index
Precision
Recall
−
=
*
	
Fowlkes
Mallows index FM index
Precision*Recall
−
(
) =
	
(10)
SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The proposed optimization model is simulated using MATLAB 2015a software. Each 
optimization method is run for 100 times, keeping the parameters same, where the 
GA parameters setup is used as reported in (Hore et al., 2017). Objective function 

274
Hybrid Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm
engaged in GA and PSO was the RMSE. Table 1 reports the performance of SVM, 
NN-GA, NN-PSO and NN-NSGA-II with respect to precision, F-measure, accuracy, 
recall, and MCC and FM-index.
Table 1 establishes that the SVM has poor performance with respect to the measured 
performance metrics where the precision, accuracy, recall, F-measure, MCC, and 
FM-index of 78.95%, 80.56%, 83.33%, 81.08%, 61.21%, and 81.11%values. The 
accuracy achieved by NN-GA is 86.11%, while it achieved 88.89% precision, 84.21% 
recall, 86.49% F-measure, 72.33% MCC, and 89.52% FM-index value. However, the 
NN-PSO achieved moderate performance, where 88.89% accuracy and 77.78% MCC 
are obtained. It is observed that the PSO supported NN model is slightly superior in 
predicting the water quality, but it is not a reasonable improvement. Multi-objective 
GA coupled NN model performed best among all. It reports 97.22% accuracy along 
with 94.74% precision, 100% recall, 97.3% F-measure, 94.59% MCC and 97.33% 
FM-index value. The NN-NSGA-II results reveal that the optimization models do not 
have a significant difference in terms of accuracy, recall, precision, and F-measure. 
However, the MCC and FM-index evidently designates the NN-NSGA-II superiority 
in predicting the water quality as illustrated in Figure 4.
Figure 4 depicts that the NN-NSGA-II is superior to the other models in predicting 
the water quality. This comparative study depicts the NN-NSGA-II model superiority. 
In the training phase, Figure 5 illustrates the convergence of GA. In addition, the 
objective function versus the iteration plot of PSO is shown in Figure 6.
Figures 5 and 6 reveal that the NN-PSO converges faster than NN-GA in the 
training phase. Figure 7 illustrates the plot of both objective functions employed in 
the training phase of NN-NSGA-II.
The Pareto front achieved by the NN-NSGA-II in Figure 7 demonstrates that 
both the objective functions are well minimized. The plot supports the results 
reported previously and further establishes its ingenuity over other models. In 
order to establish the statistical significance of the proposed NN-NSGA-II model, 
Table 1. Comparative study of different models with NN-NSGA-II
SVM
NN-GA
NN-PSO
NN-NSGA-II
Accuracy
80.56
86.11
88.89
97.22
Precision
78.95
88.89
88.89
94.74
Recall
83.33
84.21
88.89
100
F-Measure
81.08
86.49
88.89
97.3
MCC
61.21
72.33
77.78
94.59
FM-Index
81.11
86.52
88.89
97.33

275
Hybrid Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm
Figure 5. Convergence of GA during training the NN
Figure 4. Comparative study of NN-NSGA-II with NN-GA and NN-PSO

276
Hybrid Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm
a well-known non-parametric statistical significance test called the Wilcoxon rank 
sum test (Wilcoxon et al., 1970) is performed with 5% confidence level. As the 
meta-heuristic supported ANN models are highly probabilistic in nature, thus for 
a particular set up of weight vectors of ANN the models may perform differently. 
The optimization process is highly dependent on initialization of ANN parameters, 
meta-heuristic algorithmic set up etc. Consequently, Wilcoxon rank sum test is 
adopted to check the statistical significance.
The test is conducted using the performance values achieved in all 100 iterations 
for each model mentioned earlier. Table 2 reports the P-values achieved by each 
group (NN-NSGA-II vs. NN-PSO, NN-NSGA-II vs. NN-GA) for every performance 
measure. The null hypothesis is considered as there is no significant difference 
between the median values of two groups. The alternative hypothesis considers 
significant difference between median values.
Figure 6. Convergence of PSO during training the NN

277
Hybrid Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm
According to Bonferroni inequality, a threshold of 0.017 (0.05/3) is considered 
for achieving 5% level of significance. The P-values in Table 2 are smaller than the 
threshold, indicating a strong statistical significance of the achieved results. Hence, 
better performance metric values achieved by NN-NSGA-II (Table 1) has not been 
achieved by chance, the results are statistically significant.
Figure 7. Pareto front of the NSGA-II during training the NN
Table 2. P-values of Wilcoxon rank sum test of NN-NSGA-II with other metaheuristic 
supported models
SVM
NN-GA
NN-PSO
Accuracy
2.9E-03
3.2E-06
2.6E-09
Precision
2.7E-04
2.5E-07
2.4E-09
Recall
3.1E-03
2.2E-09
2.2E-08
F-Measure
2.6E-02
2.1E-08
2.5E-09

278
Hybrid Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm
Further, the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves for meta-heuristic 
supported ANN classifiers have been reported. Figures 8 and 9 illustrate the ROC 
curve of NN-GA classifier and the NN-PSO classifier; respectively.
Figure 8 indicates moderate performance for both classes. However, in Figure 
9 the ROC of NN-PSO depicts a better ROC the curves for both the classes are 
nearer to the top left corner of the plot than the NN-GA. This indicates that the 
performance of NN-PSO is slightly better than NN-GA. Finally, the ROC of NN-
NSGA-II is depicted in Figure 10.
The ROC curves for both the classes are highly tending toward the top left corner. 
The plot reveals that the performance of NN-NSGA-II is better than previous models. 
However, all three ROC curves indicate that the results are statistically significance 
which is supporting the P-values reported in Table 2.
Figure 8. Receiver Operating Characteristic of NN-GA classifier

279
Hybrid Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm
CONCLUSION
Water quality is a critical vital issue that directly affects the economy and health. It 
is extremely significant to guarantee safe drinking water supply for decent public 
health. Subsequently, accurate water quality prediction becomes a challenging 
issue. In the present work, an effective multi-objective GA supported the NN model 
has been conducted for predicting the drinking water quality. Water samples from 
different municipal areas in both sides of the Hooghly River (West Bengal, India) 
have been collected. The collected sample have been used in the present work to 
classify them into two different classes, namely ‘Safe’ and ‘Unsafe’ in accordance 
with the Indian standards (IS 10500:2012). The simulation results established 
Figure 9. Receiver Operating Characteristic of NN-PSO classifier

280
Hybrid Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm
that meta-heuristic algorithms supported the NN modes for superior water quality 
prediction. Minimizing the multiple objective functions using NSGA-II during the 
training phase of the NN resulted in superior prediction. The NN-NSGA-II model 
realized superior accuracy of 97.22% compared to other optimization algorithms, 
such as NN-GA and NN-PSO.
REFERENCES
Acharjya, D., & Anitha, A. (2017). A Comparative Study of Statistical and Rough 
Computing Models in Predictive Data Analysis. International Journal of Ambient 
Computing and Intelligence, 8(2), 32–51. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2017040103
Figure 10. Receiver Operating Characteristic of NN-NSGA-II classifier

281
Hybrid Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm
Ahmed, S. S., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Sifaki-Pistolla, D., Bălas-Timar, D., Balas, 
V. E., & Tavares, J. M. R. (2017). Effect of fuzzy partitioning in Crohns disease 
classification: A neuro-fuzzy-based approach. Medical & Biological Engineering 
& Computing, 55(1), 101–115. doi:10.1007/s11517-016-1508-7 PMID:27106754
Araki, T., Ikeda, N., Dey, N., Acharjee, S., Molinari, F., Saba, L., & Suri, J. S. et al. 
(2015). Shape‐Based Approach for Coronary Calcium Lesion Volume Measurement 
on Intravascular Ultrasound Imaging and Its Association With Carotid Intima‐Media 
Thickness. Journal of Ultrasound in Medicine, 34(3), 469–482. doi:10.7863/
ultra.34.3.469 PMID:25715368
Araki, T., Ikeda, N., Dey, N., Chakraborty, S., Saba, L., Kumar, D., & Laird, J. R. 
et al. (2015). A comparative approach of four different image registration techniques 
for quantitative assessment of coronary artery calcium lesions using intravascular 
ultrasound. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine, 118(2), 158–172. 
doi:10.1016/j.cmpb.2014.11.006 PMID:25523233
Ashour, A. S., Samanta, S., Dey, N., Kausar, N., Abdessalemkaraa, W. B., & Hassanien, 
A. E. (2015). Computed tomography image enhancement using cuckoo search: A 
log transform based approach. Journal of Signal and Information Processing, 6(03), 
244–257. doi:10.4236/jsip.2015.63023
Boulmaiz, A., Messadeg, D., Doghmane, N., & Taleb-Ahmed, A. (2017). Design 
and Implementation of a Robust Acoustic Recognition System for Waterbird Species 
using TMS320C6713 DSK. International Journal of Ambient Computing and 
Intelligence, 8(1), 98–118. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2017010105
Bureš, V., Tučník, P., Mikulecký, P., Mls, K., & Blecha, P. (2016). Application 
of ambient intelligence in educational institutions: Visions and architectures. 
International Journal of Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 7(1), 94–120. 
doi:10.4018/IJACI.2016010105
Chang, C. C., & Lin, C. J. (2011). LIBSVM: A library for support vector 
machines. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 2(3), 27. 
doi:10.1145/1961189.1961199
Chatterjee, S., Ghosh, S., Dawn, S., Hore, S., & Dey, N. (2016b). Forest Type 
Classification: A hybrid NN-GA model based approach. In Information Systems 
Design and Intelligent Applications (pp. 227-236). Springer India. doi:10.1007/978-
81-322-2757-1_23
Chatterjee, S., Sarkar, S., Hore, S., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., & Balas, V. E. (2016a). 
Particle swarm optimization trained neural network for structural failure prediction 
of multistoried RC buildings. Neural Computing & Applications, 1–12.

282
Hybrid Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm
Coello, C. A. C. (1999). A comprehensive survey of evolutionary-based multiobjective 
optimization techniques. Knowledge and Information Systems, 1(3), 129–156.
Deb, K. (2001). Nonlinear goal programming using multi-objective genetic 
algorithms. The Journal of the Operational Research Society, 52(3), 291–302. 
doi:10.1057/palgrave.jors.2601089
Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Ashour, A. S., & Singh, A. (2015b). Digital analysis of 
microscopic images in medicine. Journal of Advanced Microscopy Research, 10(1), 
1–13. doi:10.1166/jamr.2015.1229
Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Beagum, S., Pistola, D. S., Gospodinov, M., Gospodinova, 
E. P., & Tavares, J. M. R. (2015c). Parameter optimization for local polynomial 
approximation based intersection confidence interval filter using genetic algorithm: 
An application for brain MRI image de-noising. Journal of Imaging, 1(1), 60–84. 
doi:10.3390/jimaging1010060
Dey, N., Dey, M., Mahata, S. K., Das, A., & Chaudhuri, S. S. (2015a). Tamper 
detection of electrocardiographic signal using watermarked bio–hash code in wireless 
cardiology. International Journal of Signal and Imaging Systems Engineering, 8(1-
2), 46–58. doi:10.1504/IJSISE.2015.067069
Dey, N., Samanta, S., Chakraborty, S., Das, A., Chaudhuri, S. S., & Suri, J. S. (2014). 
Firefly algorithm for optimization of scaling factors during embedding of manifold 
medical information: An application in ophthalmology imaging. Journal of Medical 
Imaging and Health Informatics, 4(3), 384–394. doi:10.1166/jmihi.2014.1265
Edition, F. (2011). Guidelines for drinking-water quality. WHO Chronicle, 38, 
104–108. PMID:6485306
El-Din, A. G., Smith, D. W., & El-Din, M. G. (2004). Application of artificial 
neural networks in wastewater treatment. Journal of Environmental Engineering 
and Science, 3(S1), S81–S95. doi:10.1139/s03-067
Gen, M., & Cheng, R. (2000). Genetic algorithms and engineering optimization 
(Vol. 7). John Wiley & Sons.
Ghosh, A., Sarkar, A., Ashour, A. S., Balas-Timar, D., Dey, N., & Balas, V. E. 
(2015). Grid color moment features in glaucoma classification. Int J Adv Comput 
Sci Appl, 6(9), 1–14.
Guesgen, H. W., & Marsland, S. (2016). Using Contextual Information for Recognising 
Human Behaviour. International Journal of Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 
7(1), 27–44. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2016010102

283
Hybrid Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm
Hore, S., Chatterjee, S., Santhi, V., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Balas, V. E., & Shi, F. 
(2017). Indian Sign Language Recognition Using Optimized Neural Networks. 
In Information Technology and Intelligent Transportation Systems (pp. 553–563). 
Springer International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-38771-0_54
Hore, S., Chatterjee, S., Sarkar, S., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Balas-Timar, D., & 
Balas, V. E. (2016). Neural-based prediction of structural failure of multistoried 
RC buildings. Structural Engineering & Mechanics, 58(3), 459–473. doi:10.12989/
sem.2016.58.3.459
Ikeda, N., Gupta, A., Dey, N., Bose, S., Shafique, S., Arak, T., & Suri, J. S. et al. 
(2015). Improved correlation between carotid and coronary atherosclerosis SYNTAX 
score using automated ultrasound carotid bulb plaque IMT measurement. Ultrasound 
in Medicine & Biology, 41(5), 1247–1262. doi:10.1016/j.ultrasmedbio.2014.12.024 
PMID:25638311
Jain, A., Kumar Varshney, A., & Chandra Joshi, U. (2001). Short-term water demand 
forecast modelling at IIT Kanpur using artificial neural networks. Water Resources 
Management, 15(5), 299–321. doi:10.1023/A:1014415503476
Juneja, D., Singh, A., Singh, R., & Mukherjee, S. (2017). A thorough insight into 
theoretical and practical developments in multiagent systems. International Journal 
of Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 8(1), 23–49. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2017010102
Jurman, G., Riccadonna, S., & Furlanello, C. (2012). A comparison of MCC and 
CEN error measures in multi-class prediction. PLoS ONE, 7(8), e41882. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0041882 PMID:22905111
Karaa, W. B. A., Ashour, A. S., Sassi, D. B., Roy, P., Kausar, N., & Dey, N. (2016). 
Medline text mining: an enhancement genetic algorithm based approach for document 
clustering. In Applications of Intelligent Optimization in Biology and Medicine (pp. 
267–287). Springer International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-21212-8_12
Kausar, N., Palaniappan, S., Samir, B. B., Abdullah, A., & Dey, N. (2016). Systematic 
analysis of applied data mining based optimization algorithms in clinical attribute 
extraction and classification for diagnosis of cardiac patients. In Applications of 
intelligent optimization in biology and medicine (pp. 217–231). Springer International 
Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-21212-8_9
Khachane, M. Y. (2017). Organ-Based Medical Image Classification Using 
Support Vector Machine. International Journal of Synthetic Emotions, 8(1), 18–30. 
doi:10.4018/IJSE.2017010102

284
Hybrid Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm
Kotyk, T., Ashour, A. S., Chakraborty, S., Dey, N., & Balas, V. E. (2015). Apoptosis 
analysis in classification paradigm: a neural network based approach. In Healthy 
World conference (pp. 17-22). Academic Press.
Li, H., & Zhang, Q. (2009). Multiobjective optimization problems with complicated 
Pareto sets, MOEA/D and NSGA-II. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 
13(2), 284–302. doi:10.1109/TEVC.2008.925798
Maji, P., Chatterjee, S., Chakraborty, S., Kausar, N., Samanta, S., & Dey, N. (2015, 
March). Effect of Euler number as a feature in gender recognition system from 
offline handwritten signature using neural networks. In Computing for Sustainable 
Global Development (INDIACom), 2015 2nd International Conference on (pp. 
1869-1873). IEEE.
Manogaran, G., & Lopez, D. (2017). Disease surveillance system for big climate data 
processing and dengue transmission. International Journal of Ambient Computing 
and Intelligence, 8(2), 88–105. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2017040106
Møller, M. F. (1993). A scaled conjugate gradient algorithm for fast supervised 
learning. Neural Networks, 6(4), 525–533. doi:10.1016/S0893-6080(05)80056-5
Mukherjee, A., Dey, G., Dey, M., & Dey, N. (2015). Web-based intelligent EEG 
signal authentication and tamper detection system for secure telemonitoring. In 
Brain-Computer Interfaces (pp. 295–312). Springer International Publishing. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-10978-7_11
Nandi, D., Ashour, A. S., Samanta, S., Chakraborty, S., Salem, M. A., & Dey, 
N. (2015). Principal component analysis in medical image processing: A study. 
International Journal of Image Mining, 1(1), 65–86. doi:10.1504/IJIM.2015.070024
Odella, F. (2017). Technology Studies and the Sociological Debate on Monitoring of 
Social Interactions. In Biometrics: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and Applications 
(pp. 529-558). IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0983-7.ch022
Pal, G., Acharjee, S., Rudrapaul, D., Ashour, A. S., & Dey, N. (2015a). Video 
segmentation using minimum ratio similarity measurement. International Journal 
of Image Mining, 1(1), 87-110.
Pal, G., Rudrapaul, D., Acharjee, S., Ray, R., Chakraborty, S., & Dey, N. (2015). 
Video shot boundary detection: a review. In Emerging ICT for Bridging the Future-
Proceedings of the 49th Annual Convention of the Computer Society of India CSI 
(vol. 2, pp. 119-127). Springer International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-
13731-5_14

285
Hybrid Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm
Paola, J. D., & Schowengerdt, R. A. (1995). A review and analysis of 
backpropagation neural networks for classification of remotely-sensed multi-
spectral imagery. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 16(16), 3033–3058. 
doi:10.1080/01431169508954607
Powers, D. M. (2011). Evaluation: from precision, recall and F-measure to ROC, 
informedness, markedness and correlation. Academic Press.
Reckhow, K. H. (1999). Water quality prediction and probability network models. 
Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 56(7), 1150–1158. doi:10.1139/
f99-040
Saba, L., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Samanta, S., Nath, S. S., Chakraborty, S., & 
Suri, J. S. et al. (2016). Automated stratification of liver disease in ultrasound: An 
online accurate feature classification paradigm. Computer Methods and Programs 
in Biomedicine, 130, 118–134. doi:10.1016/j.cmpb.2016.03.016 PMID:27208527
Sharma, K., & Virmani, J. (2017). A Decision Support System for Classification of 
Normal and Medical Renal Disease Using Ultrasound Images: A Decision Support 
System for Medical Renal Diseases. International Journal of Ambient Computing 
and Intelligence, 8(2), 52–69. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2017040104
Sheppard, D., Tsegaye, T. D., Tadesse, W., McKay, D., & Coleman, T. L. (2001). 
The application of remote sensing, geographic information systems, and Global 
Positioning System technology to improve water quality in northern Alabama. 
In Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, 2001. IGARSS’01. IEEE 2001 
International (Vol. 3, pp. 1291-1293). IEEE. doi:10.1109/IGARSS.2001.976822
Standard, I. (1991). Drinking water-specification. 1st Revision, IS, 10500.
Tyagi, S., Som, S., & Rana, Q. P. (2017). Trust based dynamic multicast group routing 
ensuring reliability for ubiquitous environment in MANETs. International Journal of 
Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 8(1), 70–97. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2017010104
Vasudevan, S., & Oturan, M. A. (2014). Electrochemistry: As cause and cure in 
water pollution—an overview. Environmental Chemistry Letters, 12(1), 97–108. 
doi:10.1007/s10311-013-0434-2
Virmani, J., Dey, N., & Kumar, V. (2016). PCA-PNN and PCA-SVM based CAD 
systems for breast density classification. In Applications of intelligent optimization 
in biology and medicine (pp. 159–180). Springer International Publishing.

286
Hybrid Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm
Wechmongkhonkon, S., Poomtong, N., & Areerachakul, S. (2012). Application of 
Artificial Neural Network to classification surface water quality. World Academy 
of Science, Engineering and Technology, 6.
Wilcoxon, F., Katti, S. K., & Wilcox, R. A. (1970). Critical values and probability 
levels for the Wilcoxon rank sum test and the Wilcoxon signed rank test. Selected 
Tables in Mathematical Statistics, 1, 171-259.
Wu, W., Dandy, G. C., & Maier, H. R. (2011). Application of artificial neural 
networks to forecasting water quality in a chloraminated water distribution system. 
19th Int. Congr. Model. Simul. Modsim2011, 1112-1118.
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Classification: The sorting of certain case into one of two or several classes 
based on its extracted features vector.
Feature Extraction: The identification of the attributes that describe and 
characterize certain object or phenomena.
Neural Network: A machine learning computational model that used in several 
research disciplines and computer science applications. It is based on an assembly 
of connected artificial neurons at which a varying strength activation signal exist 
in the connection between these neurons.
Optimization Methods: Techniques that optimize a given problem by adjusting 
several parameters to attain suitable results. There are several optimization algorithms 
such as the particle swarm optimization, genetic algorithm, differential evolution, 
and ant colony optimization.

Compilation of References
Abdoun, O., & Abouchabaka, J. (2011). A Comparative Study of Adaptive Crossover Operators 
for Genetic Algorithms to Resolve the Traveling Salesman Problem. International Journal of 
Computers and Applications, 31(11), 49–57.
Abinash, T., & Santanu Kumar, R. (2017). Classification of Sentiment of Reviews using Supervised 
Machine Learning Techniques. International Journal of Rough Sets and Data Analysis, 4(1), 
56–74. doi:10.4018/IJRSDA.2017010104
Abraham, A., Nath, B., & Mahanti, P. K. (2002). Hybrid Intelligent Systems for Stock Market 
Analysis. Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Science, 337-345. 
doi:10.1109/FUZZY.2000.838709
Abu-Mahfouz, I. (2003). Drilling wear detection and classification using vibration signals and 
artificial neural network. International Journal of Machine Tools & Manufacture, 43(7), 707–720. 
doi:10.1016/S0890-6955(03)00023-3
Acha, E., Fuerte-Esquivel, C., Ambriz-Perez, H., & Angeles, C. (2004). FACTS: Modelling and 
Simulation in Power Networks. John Wiley & Sons; doi:10.1002/0470020164
Acharjya, D., & Anitha, A. (2017). A Comparative Study of Statistical and Rough Computing 
Models in Predictive Data Analysis. International Journal of Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 
8(2), 32–51. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2017040103
Adler, A., & Guardo, R. (1994). A neural network image reconstruction technique for 
electrical impedance tomography. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 13(4), 594–600. 
doi:10.1109/42.363109 PMID:18218537
Ahmad, H. A., Yu, H. J., & Miller, C. G. (2014). Medical imaging modalities. In Medical Imaging 
in Clinical Trials (pp. 3–26). Springer London. doi:10.1007/978-1-84882-710-3_1
Ahmadyfard, A., & Modares, H. (2008). Combining PSO and K-Means to enhance data clustering. 
International Symposium on Telecommunication, 688 - 691. doi:10.1109/ISTEL.2008.4651388
Ahmed Hamza, A., Ahmad Taher, A., & Aboul Ella, H. (2014). A New Heuristic Function of 
Ant Colony System for Retinal Vessel Segmentation. International Journal of Rough Sets and 
Data Analysis, 1(2), 15–30. doi:10.4018/ijrsda.2014070102
287

Compilation of References
Ahmed, R., Mahmoud, K., Mohammed, Y. D., & Aboul Ella, H. (2015). Forecasting Exchange 
Rates: A Chaos-Based Regression Approach. International Journal of Rough Sets and Data 
Analysis, 2(1), 38–57. doi:10.4018/ijrsda.2015010103
Ahmed, S. S., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Sifaki-Pistolla, D., Bălas-Timar, D., Balas, V. E., & Tavares, 
J. M. R. (2017). Effect of fuzzy partitioning in Crohns disease classification: A neuro-fuzzy-
based approach. Medical & Biological Engineering & Computing, 55(1), 101–115. doi:10.1007/
s11517-016-1508-7 PMID:27106754
Aja-Fern’andez, S., Jos’eEst’epar, R. S., Alberola-L’opez, C., & Westin, C. F. (2006). Image 
Quality Assessment based on Local Variance. 28th IEEE EMBS Annual International Conference, 
4815-4818.
Akashdeep, K., Kahlon, K. S., & Kumar, H. (2014). Survey of scheduling algorithms in IEEE 
802.16 PMP networks. Egyptian Informatics Journal, 15(1), 25–36. doi:10.1016/j.eij.2013.12.001
Akyildiz, I. F., Wang, X., & Wang, W. (2005). Wireless mesh networks: A survey. Computer 
Networks Journal (Elsevier), 47(4), 445–487. doi:10.1016/j.comnet.2004.12.001
Alba, E., Garcia-Nieto, J., Jourdan, L., & Talbi, E. G. (2007, September). Gene selection in cancer 
classification using PSO/SVM and GA/SVM hybrid algorithms. In Evolutionary Computation, 
2007. CEC 2007. IEEE Congress on (pp. 284-290). IEEE.
Alexiei, D., Daniel, A., & Ruben, M. (2012). Turning Homes into Low-Cost Ambient Assisted 
Living Environments. International Journal of Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 4(2), 1–23. 
doi:10.4018/jaci.2012040101
Ali, E. S., & Abd-Elazim, S. M. (2011). Bacteria foraging optimization algorithm based load 
frequency controller for interconnected power system. International Journal of Electrical Power 
& Energy Systems, 33(3), 633–638. doi:10.1016/j.ijepes.2010.12.022
Ali, N. A., Dhrona, P., & Hassanein, H. (2009). A performance study of uplink scheduling 
algorithms in point-to-multipoint WiMAX networks. Computer Communications, 32(3), 511–521. 
doi:10.1016/j.comcom.2008.09.015
Al-Kadi, O. S., & Watson, D. (2008). Texture analysis of Aggressive and non-aggressive lung 
tumor CE CT images. IEEE Transaction on Biomedical Engineering, 55, 1822-1830.
Amal Mahmoud, A., & Sawsan, A. (2015). Hybridizing Artificial Bee Colony Algorithm with 
Multi-Parent Crossover Operator. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 
6(2), 18–32. doi:10.4018/IJAMC.2015040102
Ambriz-Perez, Acha, Fuerte-Esquivel, & De la Torre. (1998). Incorporation of a UPFC model 
in an Optimal Power Flow Using Newton’s method. IEE Proc.-Generation Transmission 
Distribution, 145(3).
Anand, B., & Jeyakumar, A. E. (2009). Load frequency control with fuzzy logic controller 
considering non-linearities and boiler dynamics. ICGST-ACSE Journal, 8(111), 15–20.
288

Compilation of References
Anderson, J. A. (1972). A simple neural network generating an interactive memory. Mathematical 
Biosciences, 14(3-4), 197–200. doi:10.1016/0025-5564(72)90075-2
Ang, L. M., Seng, K. P., & Heng, T. Z. (2016). Information Communication Assistive Technologies 
for Visually Impaired People. International Journal of Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 
7(1), 45–68. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2016010103
Aparna, R. R. (2016). Swarm Intelligence for Automatic Video Image Contrast Adjustment. 
International Journal of Rough Sets and Data Analysis, 3(3), 21–37. doi:10.4018/
IJRSDA.2016070102
Araki, T., Ikeda, N., Dey, N., Acharjee, S., Molinari, F., Saba, L., & Suri, J. S. et al. (2015). 
Shape‐Based Approach for Coronary Calcium Lesion Volume Measurement on Intravascular 
Ultrasound Imaging and Its Association With Carotid Intima‐Media Thickness. Journal of 
Ultrasound in Medicine, 34(3), 469–482. doi:10.7863/ultra.34.3.469 PMID:25715368
Araki, T., Ikeda, N., Dey, N., Chakraborty, S., Saba, L., Kumar, D., & Laird, J. R. et al. (2015). A 
comparative approach of four different image registration techniques for quantitative assessment 
of coronary artery calcium lesions using intravascular ultrasound. Computer Methods and 
Programs in Biomedicine, 118(2), 158–172. doi:10.1016/j.cmpb.2014.11.006 PMID:25523233
Ashizawa, K., Ishida, T., MacMahon, H., Vyborny, C. J., Katsuragawa, S., & Doi, K. (1999). 
Artificial neural networks in chest radiography: Application to the differential diagnosis of 
interstitial lung disease. Academic Radiology, 6(1), 2–9. doi:10.1016/S1076-6332(99)80055-5 
PMID:9891146
Ashour, A. S., Beagum, S., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Pistolla, D. S., Nguyen, G. N., & Shi, F. et al. 
(2016). Light microscopy image de-noising using optimized LPA-ICI filter. Neural Computing 
& Applications, 1–17.
Ashour, A. S., Samanta, S., Dey, N., Kausar, N., Abdessalemkaraa, W. B., & Hassanien, A. 
E. (2015). Computed tomography image enhancement using cuckoo search: A log transform 
based approach. Journal of Signal and Information Processing, 6(03), 244–257. doi:10.4236/
jsip.2015.63023
Atsalakis, G. S., & Valavanis, K. P. (2009). Surveying stock market forecasting techniques – part 
II: Soft computing methods. Expert Systems with Applications, 36(3), 5932–5941. doi:10.1016/j.
eswa.2008.07.006
Bag, V., & Kulkarni, U. V. (2017). Stock Price Trend Prediction and Recommendation using 
Cognitive Process. International Journal of Rough Sets and Data Analysis, 4(2), 36–48. 
doi:10.4018/IJRSDA.2017040103
Bairoch, A., Bucher, P., & Hofmann, K. (1996). PROSITE: New developments. Nucleic Acids 
Research, 189-196.
Bakhshaii, A., & Stull, R. (2009). Deterministic ensemble forecasts using gene-expression 
programming. Weather and Forecasting, 24(5), 1431–1451. doi:10.1175/2009WAF2222192.1
289

Compilation of References
Bapuji Rao, B. K. (2017). An Approach to Clustering of Text Documents Using Graph Mining 
Techniques. International Journal of Rough Sets and Data Analysis, 4(1).
Barik, M., Sheta, A., & Ayesh, A. (2007). Image Enhancement Using Particle Swarm Optimization. 
Proceedings of the World Congress on Engineering.
Bashiri, M., & Geranmayeh, A. F. (2011). Tuning the parameters of an artificial neural network 
using central composite design and genetic algorithm. Scientia Iranica, 18(6), 1600–1608. 
doi:10.1016/j.scient.2011.08.031
Benala, T. R., Jampala, S. D., Villa, S. H., & Konathala, B. (2009). A novel Approach to Image 
Edge Enhancement Using Artificial Bee Colony Optimization Algorithm for Hybridized 
Smoothening Filters. World Congress on Nature & Biologically Inspired Computing (NaBIC), 
1071-1076. doi:10.1109/NABIC.2009.5393866
Benmounah, Z., Meshoul, S., & Batouche, M. (2017). Scalable Differential Evolutionary 
Clustering Algorithm for Big Data Using Map-Reduce Paradigm. Int. Jr. Applied Metaheuristic 
Computing, 8(1).
Berkhin, P. (2002). Survey of Clustering Data Mining Techniques. Accrue Software.
Bhandaria, A. K., Sonia, V. A., Kumar, A., & Singh, G. K. (2014). Cuckoo search algorithm 
based satellite image contrast and brightness enhancement using DWT–SVD. ISA Transactions, 
53, 1286–1296.
Bhatt, P., Ghoshal, S. P., & Roy, R. (2010). Load frequency stabilization by coordinated control 
of Thyristor Controlled Phase Shifters and superconducting magnetic energy storage for three 
types of interconnected two-area power systems. International Journal of Electrical Power & 
Energy Systems, 32(10), 1111–1124. doi:10.1016/j.ijepes.2010.06.009
Bill, C. H., & Chang, S. (2012). Protein Motif Extraction Using Neuro-Fuzzy optimization. 
Bioinformatics (Oxford, England), 18(8), 1084–1090. PMID:12176831
Binh, H. T. T., Hanh, N. T., & Dey, N. (n.d.). Improved Cuckoo Search and Chaotic Flower 
Pollination optimization algorithm for maximizing area coverage in Wireless Sensor Networks. 
Neural Computing and Applications, 1-13.
Binh, H. T. T., Hanh, N. T., & Dey, N. (2016). Improved Cuckoo Search and Chaotic Flower 
Pollination optimization algorithm for maximizing area coverage in Wireless Sensor Networks. 
Neural Computing & Applications, 1–13.
Bong, C. W., Lam, H. Y., Khader, A. T., & Kamarulzaman, H. (2012). Adaptive multi-objective 
archive-based hybrid scatter search for segmentation in lung computed tomography imaging. 
Engineering Optimization, 44(3), 327–350. doi:10.1080/0305215X.2011.639369
Bontoux, B., Artigues, C., & Feillet, D. (2010). A Memetic Algorithm with a large neighborhood 
crossover operator for the Generalized Traveling Salesman Problem. Computers & Operations 
Research, 37(11), 1844–1852. doi:10.1016/j.cor.2009.05.004
290

Compilation of References
Boulmaiz, A., Messadeg, D., Doghmane, N., & Taleb-Ahmed, A. (2017). Design and Implementation 
of a Robust Acoustic Recognition System for Waterbird Species using TMS320C6713 DSK. 
International Journal of Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 8(1), 98–118. doi:10.4018/
IJACI.2017010105
Bouttier, C., Babando, O., Gadat, S., Gerchinovitz, S., Laporte, S., & Nicol, F. (2017). Adaptive 
Simulated Annealing with Homogenization for Aircraft Trajectory Optimization. In K. Doerner, 
I. Ljubic, G. Pflug, & G. Tragler (Eds.), Operations Research Proceedings 2015: Selected 
Papers of the International Conference of the German, Austrian and Swiss Operations Research 
Societies (GOR, ÖGOR, SVOR/ASRO) (pp. 569-574). Cham: Springer International Publishing. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-42902-1_77
Box, G. E. P., & Jenkins, G. M. (1976). Time Series Analysis-Forecasting and Control. San 
Francisco, CA: Holden-Day Inc.
Brezocnik, M., Kovacic, M., & Ficko, M. (2004). Prediction of surface roughness with genetic 
programming. Journal of Materials Processing Technology, 157, 28–36. doi:10.1016/j.
jmatprotec.2004.09.004
Bruyninckx, P., Loeckx, D., Vandermeulen, D., & Suetens, P. (2010, March). Segmentation 
of liver portal veins by global optimization. In SPIE Medical Imaging (pp. 76241Z–76241Z). 
International Society for Optics and Photonics. doi:10.1117/12.843995
Caponetto, R., Fortuna, L., Fazzino, S., & Xibilia, M. G. (2003). Chaotic Sequences to Improve 
the Performance of Evolutionary Algorithms. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 
7(3), 289–304. doi:10.1109/TEVC.2003.810069
Carpentier. (1979). Optimal Power Flows. Electrical Power and Energy Systems, 1, 959-972.
Carvalho, T., Junior, J. J., Valente, W., Natalino, C., Francês, R., & Dias, K. L. (2013). A Mobile 
WiMAX Mesh Network with Routing Techniques and Quality of Service Mechanisms. In Selected 
Topics in WiMAX (pp. 61–84). InTech.
Chaine, S., & Tripathy, M. (2015). Design of an optimal SMES for automatic generation control 
of two-area thermal power system using cuckoo search algorithm. Journal of Electrical Systems 
and Information Technology, 2(1), 1–13. doi:10.1016/j.jesit.2015.03.001
Chakraborty, S., Chatterjee, S., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Ashour, A. S., Shi, F., & Mali, K. (2017). 
Modified cuckoo search algorithm in microscopic image segmentation of hippocampus. Microscopy 
Research and Technique. doi:10.1002/jemt.22900 PMID:28557041
Chang, C. C., & Lin, C. J. (2011). LIBSVM: A library for support vector machines. ACM 
Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 2(3), 27. doi:10.1145/1961189.1961199
Chang, C. L., & Ching, Y. T. (2002). Fuzzy Hopfield neural network with fixed weight for 
medical image segmentation. Optical Engineering (Redondo Beach, Calif.), 41(2), 351–358. 
doi:10.1117/1.1428298
291

Compilation of References
Chang, P.-C., Liu, C.-H., Lin, J.-L., Fan, C.-Y., & Ng, C. S. P. (2009). A neural network with 
a case based dynamic window for stock trading prediction. Expert Systems with Applications, 
36(3), 6889–6898. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2008.08.077
Chan, H. P., Sahiner, B., Petrick, N., Helvie, M. A., Lam, K. L., Adler, D. D., & Goodsitt, M. M. 
(1997). Computerized classification of malignant and benign microcalcifications on mammograms: 
Texture analysis using an artificial neural network. Physics in Medicine and Biology, 42(3), 
549–567. doi:10.1088/0031-9155/42/3/008 PMID:9080535
Chan, T. F., & Shen, J. (2005). Image processing and analysis: variational, PDE, wavelet, and 
stochastic methods. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics. doi:10.1137/1.9780898717877
Chao, P. Y., & Hwang, Y. D. (1997). An improved neural network model for the prediction of cutting 
tool life. Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, 8(2), 107–115. doi:10.1023/A:1018552620196
Chatterjee, S., Ghosh, S., Dawn, S., Hore, S., & Dey, N. (2016b). Forest Type Classification: A 
hybrid NN-GA model based approach. In Information Systems Design and Intelligent Applications 
(pp. 227-236). Springer India. doi:10.1007/978-81-322-2757-1_23
Chatterjee, S., Hore, S., Dey, N., Chakraborty, S., & Ashour, A. S. (2017). Dengue Fever 
Classification Using Gene Expression Data: A PSO Based Artificial Neural Network Approach. 
In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Frontiers in Intelligent Computing: Theory 
and Applications (pp. 331-341). Springer. doi:10.1007/978-981-10-3156-4_34
Chatterjee, S., Nag, R., Sen, S., & Sarkar, A. (2017a, June). Towards Golden Rule of Capital 
Accumulation: A Genetic Algorithm Approach. In IFIP International Conference on Computer 
Information Systems and Industrial Management (pp. 481-491). Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-
319-59105-6_41
Chatterjee, S., Sarkar, S., Hore, S., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., & Balas, V. E. (2016). Particle swarm 
optimization trained neural network for structural failure prediction of multistoried RC buildings. 
Neural Computing & Applications, 1–12.
Chen Yi-Cheng, K. Y.-W.-T.-F. (2011). Discovery of Protein Phosphorylation Motifs through 
Exploratory Data Analysis. Discovery of Protein Phosphorylation Motifs (PLoS ONE), 6.
Chen, Pellicer, Tai, Harrison, & Pan. (2009). Novel efficient granular computing models for protein 
sequence motifs and structure information discovery. International Journal of Computational 
Biology and Drug Design.
Chen, S. D., & Ramli, A. R. (2003). Contrast Enhancement using Recursive Mean Separated 
Histogram Equalization for Scalable Brightness Preservation. Academic Press.
Chen, E. L., Chung, P. C., Chen, C. L., Tsai, H. M., & Chang, C. I. (1998). An automatic diagnostic 
system for CT liver image classification. IEEE Transactions on Bio-Medical Engineering, 45(6), 
783–794. doi:10.1109/10.678613 PMID:9609943
Cheng, B., Hudson, C., Kim, M., Crawford, A., Wright, J., & Che, D. (2011). Protein Sequence Motif 
Extraction using Decision Forest. World Congress in Computer Science, Computer Engineering.
292

Compilation of References
Cheng, K. S., Lin, J. S., & Mao, C. W. (1996). The application of competitive Hopfield neural 
network to medical image segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 15(4), 560–567. 
doi:10.1109/42.511759 PMID:18215937
Chen, S. D., & Ramli, A. R. (2003). Minimum Mean Brightness Error Bi-Histogram Equalization 
in Contrast Enhancement. IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, 49(4), 1310–1319. 
doi:10.1109/TCE.2003.1261234
Chen, S. D., & Ramli, A. R. (2004). Preserving Brightness in histogram equalization based 
contrast enhancement techniques. Digital Signal Processing, 14(5), 413–428. doi:10.1016/j.
dsp.2004.04.001
Chen, Y., & Zhang, G. (2013). Exchange rates determination based on genetic algorithms using 
Mendels principles: Investigation and estimation under uncertainty. Information Fusion, 14(3), 
327–333. doi:10.1016/j.inffus.2011.12.003
Chiang, W. C., Urban, T. L., & Baldridge, G. W. (1996). A Neural Network Approach to Mutual 
Fund Net Asset Value Forecasting. Omega, 24(2), 205–215. doi:10.1016/0305-0483(95)00059-3
Chidambaram, I. A., & Paramasivam, B. (2012). Control performance standards based load-
frequency controller considering redox flow batteries coordinate with interline power flow 
controller. Journal of Power Sources, 219, 292–304. doi:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2012.06.048
Chien, C. L., & Tsai, W. H. (2014). Image Fusion with no Gamut Problem by Improved Nonlinear 
HIS Transforms for Remote Sensing. IEEE Trans. on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 52, 651-663.
Chien, C. L., & Tseng, D. C. (2011). Color image enhancement with exact HIS color model. Int. 
J. of Innovative Computing, Information and Control, 7, 6691-6710.
Chung, T. S., & Li, Y. Z. (2001). A hybrid CA approach for OPF with consideration of FACTS 
devices. IEEE Power Engineering Review, 21(2), 47–50. doi:10.1109/39.896822
Cicconetti, C., Lenzini, L., Mingozzi, E., & Eklund, C. (2006). Quality of Service Support in 
IEEE 802.16 Networks. IEEE Network, 20(2), 50–55. doi:10.1109/MNET.2006.1607896
Cicirello, V. A., & Smith, S. F. (2000). Modeling GA Performance for Control Parameter 
Optimization. Paper presented at the GECCO.
Claas, A., Daniel, K., Michael, L., & Gerrit, K. (2011). IT-ASSIST: Towards Usable Applications 
for Elderly People. International Journal of Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 3(1), 33–41. 
doi:10.4018/jaci.2011010104
Coelho, L. D. S., Sauer, J. G., & Rudek, M. (2009). Differential evolution optimization combined 
with chaotic sequences for image contrast enhancement. Chaos, Solitons, and Fractals, 42(1), 
522–529. doi:10.1016/j.chaos.2009.01.012
Coelho, L. S., & Mariani, V. C. (2008). Use of chaotic sequences in a biologically inspired 
algorithm for engineering design optimization. Expert Systems with Applications, 34(3), 1905–1913. 
doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2007.02.002
293

Compilation of References
Coello, C. A. C. (1999). A comprehensive survey of evolutionary-based multiobjective optimization 
techniques. Knowledge and Information Systems, 1(3), 129–156.
Cui Xiaohui, P. T. (2005). Document Clustering Analysis Based on Hybrid PSO K-means 
Algorithm. Journal of Computer Sciences, 27-33.
Dan, L., & Mathew, J. (1990). Tool wear and failure monitoring techniques for turning—a review. 
International Journal of Machine Tools & Manufacture, 30(4), 579–598. doi:10.1016/0890-
6955(90)90009-8
Das Shyama, I. S. (2010). Greedy Search-Binary PSO Hybrid for Biclustering Gene Expression 
Data. International Journal of Computers and Applications, 2(3), 1–5. doi:10.5120/651-908
Das, A., & Bhattacharya, M. (2008, September). GA based neuro fuzzy techniques for breast 
cancer identification. In Machine Vision and Image Processing Conference, 2008. IMVIP’08. 
International (pp. 136-141). IEEE. doi:10.1109/IMVIP.2008.19
Das, D., Kothari, M. L., Kothari, D. P., & Nanda, P. J. (1991, November). Variable structure 
control strategy to automatic generation control of interconnected reheat thermal system. IEE 
Proceedings. Control Theory and Applications, 138(6), 579–585. doi:10.1049/ip-d.1991.0080
Dash, Ch. S. K., Dash, A. P., Dehuri, S., & Cho, S. B. (2013). Feature Selection for Designing a Novel 
Differential Evolution Trained Radial Basis Function Network for Classification. International 
Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 4(1), 32–49. doi:10.4018/jamc.2013010103
Dash, P., Saikia, L. C., & Sinha, N. (2014). Comparison of performances of several Cuckoo 
search algorithm based 2DOF controllers in AGC of multi-area thermal system. International 
Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems, 55, 429–436. doi:10.1016/j.ijepes.2013.09.034
Davis, L. (1985). Applying Adaptive Algorithms to Epistatic Domains. San Francisco, CA: 
Academic Press.
Davis, L. D. (1991). Handbook Of Genetic Algorithms. Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Dawson, T. G., & Kurfess, T. R. (2005). Quantification of tool wear using white light interferometry 
and three-dimensional computational metrology. International Journal of Machine Tools & 
Manufacture, 45(4), 591–596. doi:10.1016/j.ijmachtools.2004.08.022
De, G. (1989). Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine Learning. Reading, 
MA: Addison-Wesley.
Debbarma, S., Saikia, L. C., & Sinha, N. (2013). AGC of a multi-area thermal system under 
deregulated environment using a non-integer controller. Electric Power Systems Research, 95, 
175–183. doi:10.1016/j.epsr.2012.09.008
Deb, K. (2001). Nonlinear goal programming using multi-objective genetic algorithms. The 
Journal of the Operational Research Society, 52(3), 291–302. doi:10.1057/palgrave.jors.2601089
294

Compilation of References
Deep, K., & Mebrahtu, H. (2011). New Variations of Order Crossover for Travelling Salesman 
Problem. International Journal of Combinatorial Optimization Problems and Informatics, 2(1), 
2–13.
Deep, K., & Mebrahtu, H. (2012). Variant of partially mapped crossover for the Travelling 
Salesman problems. International Journal of Combinatorial Optimization Problems and 
Informatics, 3(1), 47–69.
Deng, S., Yue, D., Fu, X., & Zhou, A. (2015). Security risk assessment of cyber physical power 
system based on rough set and gene expression programming. IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica 
Sinica, 2(4), 431-439.
Derrac, J., Garcia, S., Molina, D., & Herrera, F. (2011). A practical tutorial on the use of 
nonparametric statistical tests as a methodology for comparing evolutionary and swarm intelligence 
algorithms. Swarm and Evolutionary Computation, 1, 3-18.
Derrico, G. (1998). An adaptive system for turning process control based on tool temperature 
feedback. Journal of Materials Processing Technology, 78(1), 43–47. doi:10.1016/S0924-
0136(97)00461-5
Devillez, A., Lesko, S., & Mozer, W. (2004). Cutting tool crater wear measurement with white 
light interferometry. Wear, 256(1), 56–65. doi:10.1016/S0043-1648(03)00384-3
Dey, N., & Ashour, A. S. (Eds.). (2016). Classification and clustering in biomedical signal 
processing. IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0140-4
Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., & Althoupety, A. S. (2017a). Thermal Imaging in Medical Science. In 
Recent Advances in Applied Thermal Imaging for Industrial Applications (pp. 87–117). IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-2423-6.ch004
Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Ashour, A. S., & Singh, A. (2015b). Digital analysis of microscopic images 
in medicine. Journal of Advanced Microscopy Research, 10(1), 1–13. doi:10.1166/jamr.2015.1229
Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Beagum, S., Pistola, D. S., Gospodinov, M., Gospodinova, E. P., & Tavares, 
J. M. R. (2015). Parameter optimization for local polynomial approximation based intersection 
confidence interval filter using genetic algorithm: An application for brain MRI image de-noising. 
Journal of Imaging, 1(1), 60–84. doi:10.3390/jimaging1010060
Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Chakraborty, S., Samanta, S., Sifaki-Pistolla, D., Ashour, A. S., & 
Nguyen, G. N. et al. (2016). Healthy and unhealthy rat hippocampus cells classification: A neural 
based automated system for Alzheimer disease classification. Journal of Advanced Microscopy 
Research, 11(1), 1–10. doi:10.1166/jamr.2016.1282
Dey, N., Chakraborty, S., & Samanta, S. (2014). Optimization of watermarking in biomedical 
signal. Heinrich-Böcking-Straße, 6, 66121.
Dey, N., Chakraborty, S., & Samanta, S. (2014). Optimization of watermarking in biomedical 
signal. Lambert Publication. Heinrich-Böcking-Straße, 6, 66121.
295

Compilation of References
Dey, N., Chakraborty, S., & Samanta, S. (2014). Optimization of Watermarking in Biomedical 
Signal: Lambert Publication. Heinrich-Böcking-Straße, 6, 66121.
Dey, N., Chakraborty, S., & Samanta, S. (2014b). Optimization of watermarking in biomedical 
signal.Lambert Publication. Heinrich-Böcking-Straße, 6, 66121.
Dey, N., Dey, M., Mahata, S. K., Das, A., & Chaudhuri, S. S. (2015a). Tamper detection 
of electrocardiographic signal using watermarked bio–hash code in wireless cardiology. 
International Journal of Signal and Imaging Systems Engineering, 8(1-2), 46–58. doi:10.1504/
IJSISE.2015.067069
Dey, N., Samanta, S., Chakraborty, S., Das, A., Chaudhuri, S. S., & Suri, J. S. (2014). Firefly 
algorithm for optimization of scaling factors during embedding of manifold medical information: 
An application in ophthalmology imaging. Journal of Medical Imaging and Health Informatics, 
4(3), 384–394. doi:10.1166/jmihi.2014.1265
Dey, N., Samanta, S., Yang, X. S., Das, A., & Chaudhuri, S. S. (2013). Optimisation of scaling 
factors in electrocardiogram signal watermarking using cuckoo search. International Journal of 
Bio-inspired Computation, 5(5), 315–326. doi:10.1504/IJBIC.2013.057193
Dhal, K. G., & Das, S. (2015). Diversity Conserved Chaotic Artificial Bee Colony Algorithm 
based Brightness Preserved Histogram Equalization and Contrast Stretching Method. International 
Journal of Natural Computing Research, 5, 45-73.
Dhal, K. G., & Das, S. (2017). Cuckoo search with search strategies. Pattern Recognition and 
Image Analysis. (accepted)
Dhal, K. G., Namtirtha, A., Quraishi, I. M., & Das, S. (n.d.). Gray level image enhancement 
using Particle Swarm Optimization with Lévy Flight: An Eagle Strategy Approach. International 
Journal of Innovative Research in Science, Engineering and Technology, 5, 79-86.
Dhal, K. G., Quraishi, I. M., & Das, S. (2015). Performance Analysis of Chaotic Lévy Bat Algorithm 
and Chaotic Cuckoo Search Algorithm for Gray Level Image Enhancement. Information Systems 
Design and Intelligent Applications, 233-244.
Dhal, K. G., Quraishi, I. M., & Das, S. (2017). An improved cuckoo search based optimal ranged 
brightness preserved histogram equalization and contrast stretching method. Int. Jr. of Swarm 
intelligence Research, 8, 1-29.
Dhal, K. G., Sen, M., & Das, S. (2017). Cuckoo search based modified Bi-Histogram 
Equalizationmethod to enhance the cancerous tissues in Mammography images. Int. Journal of 
Medical Engineering and Informatics. (accepted)
Dhal, K. G., Sen, S., Sarkar, K., Das, S. (2016). Entropy based Range Optimized Brightness 
Preserved Histogram-Equalization for Image Contrast Enhancement. Int. Jr. of Computer Vision 
and Image Processing, 6(1), 59-72.
296

Compilation of References
Dhal, K.G, Quraishi, I. M., Das, S.(2015). Performance Enhancement of Differential Evolution 
by Incorporating Lévy Flight and Chaotic Sequence for the Cases of Satellite Images. Int. J. of 
Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 6, 69-81.
Dhal, K. G., & Das, S. (2017a). Combination of Histogram Segmentation and Modification to 
Preserve the Original Brightness of the Images. Pattern Recognition and Image Analysis, 27(2), 
200–212. doi:10.1134/S1054661817020031
Dhal, K. G., Quraishi, I. M., & Das, S. (2015). A Chaotic Lévy flight Approach in Bat and Firefly 
Algorithm for Gray level image Enhancement. I.J. Image, Graphics and Signal Processing, 7, 69–76.
Dhal, K. G., Quraishi, I. M., & Das, S. (2015). Development of firefly algorithm via chaotic 
sequence and population diversity to enhance the image contrast. Natural Computing , 14, 1–12.
Dheeba, J., & Selvi, T. (2010, December). Bio inspired swarm algorithm for tumor detection 
in digital mammogram. In International Conference on Swarm, Evolutionary, and Memetic 
Computing (pp. 404-415). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-17563-3_49
Dimopoulos, C., & Zalzala, A. M. (2001). Investigating the use of genetic programming for a 
classic one-machine scheduling problem. Advances in Engineering Software, 32(6), 489–498. 
doi:10.1016/S0965-9978(00)00109-5
Doi, K. (2007). Computer-aided diagnosis in medical imaging: Historical review, current status 
and future potential. Computerized Medical Imaging and Graphics, 31(4), 198–211. doi:10.1016/j.
compmedimag.2007.02.002 PMID:17349778
Dorigo, M., Birattari, M., & Stutzle, T. (2006). Ant colony optimization. IEEE Computational 
Intelligence Magazine, 1(4), 28–39. doi:10.1109/MCI.2006.329691
Duggirala Raja Kishor, N. V. (2016). A Novel Hybridization of Expectation-Maximization 
and K-Means Algorithms for Better Clustering Performance. International Journal of Ambient 
Computing and Intelligence, 7(2).
Dutta, S. (2016). Optimal Allocation of Static Synchronous. Academic Press.
Dutta, R., Paul, S., & Chattopadhyay, A. (2000). Applicability of the modified back-propagation 
algorithm in tool condition monitoring for faster convergence. Journal of Materials Processing 
Technology, 98(3), 299–309. doi:10.1016/S0924-0136(99)00295-2
Dutta, S., Roy, P. K., & Nandi, D. (2016). Series Compensator Controllers using Chemical Reaction 
Optimization for Reactive Power Dispatch. International Journal of Energy Optimization and 
Engineering, 5(3), 43–62. doi:10.4018/IJEOE.2016070103
Du–Yih, T. S. A. I. (1994). Automatic segmentation of liver structure in CT images using a neural 
network. IEICE Transactions on Fundamentals of Electronics, Communications and Computer 
Science, 77(11), 1892–1895.
297

Compilation of References
Dwivedi, V., Chauhan, T., Saxena, S., & Agrawal, P. (2012). Travelling Salesman Problem using 
Genetic Algorithm. Paper presented at the National Conference on Development of Reliable 
Information Systems, Techniques and Related Issues.
Eberhart, R., & Kennedy, J. (1995, October). A new optimizer using particle swarm theory. In 
Micro Machine and Human Science, 1995. MHS’95., Proceedings of the Sixth International 
Symposium on (pp. 39-43). IEEE. doi:10.1109/MHS.1995.494215
Ebrahim, M. A., Mostafa, H. E., Gawish, S. A., & Bendary, F. M. (2009, November). Design of 
decentralized load frequency based-PID controller using stochastic particle swarm optimization 
technique. In Electric Power and Energy Conversion Systems, 2009. EPECS’09. International 
Conference on (pp. 1-6). IEEE.
Edition, F. (2011). Guidelines for drinking-water quality. WHO Chronicle, 38, 104–108. 
PMID:6485306
Edris, A. (2000, March). FACTS Technology Development: An Update. IEEE Power Engineering 
Review.
Ee, K., Balaji, A., & Jawahir, I. (2003). Progressive tool-wear mechanisms and their effects on 
chip-curl/chip-form in machining with grooved tools: An extended application of the equivalent 
toolface (ET) model. Wear, 255(7), 1404–1413. doi:10.1016/S0043-1648(03)00112-1
Eiben, A. E., Hinterding, R., & Michalewicz, Z. (1999). Parameter control in evolutionary algorithms. 
IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 3(2), 124–141. doi:10.1109/4235.771166
El Hassani, H., Benkachcha, S., & Benhra, J. (2017). New genetic operator (jump crossover) 
for the traveling salesman problem. In Nature-Inspired Computing: Concepts, Methodologies, 
Tools, and Applications (pp. 1739-1752). IGI Global.
Elayaraja, E., Thangavel, K., Chitralega, M., & Chandrasekhar, T. (2012). Extraction of Motif 
Patterns from Protein Sequences Using SVD with Rough K-Means Algorithm. IJCSI International 
Journal of Computer Science Issues, 9(6), 350–356.
Elayaraja, E., Thangavel, K., Ramya, B., & Chitralegha, M. (2011). Extraction of Motif Patterns 
from Protein Sequence using Rough K-Means Algorithm. Procedia Engineering, 30, 814–820. 
doi:10.1016/j.proeng.2012.01.932
El-Din, A. G., Smith, D. W., & El-Din, M. G. (2004). Application of artificial neural networks 
in wastewater treatment. Journal of Environmental Engineering and Science, 3(S1), S81–S95. 
doi:10.1139/s03-067
Ercal, F., Chawla, A., Stoecker, W. V., Lee, H. C., & Moss, R. H. (1994). Neural network diagnosis 
of malignant melanoma from color images. IEEE Transactions on Bio-Medical Engineering, 
41(9), 837–845. doi:10.1109/10.312091 PMID:7959811
Eutamene, A., Kholladi, M. K., Gaceb, D., & Belhadef, H. (2017). A Dual PSO-Adaptive 
Mean Shift for Preprocessing Optimization on Degraded Document Images. Int. Jr. Applied 
Metaheuristic Computing, 8(1).
298

Compilation of References
Fang, X., & Jawahir, I. (1993). The effects of progressive tool wear and tool restricted contact 
on chip breakability in machining. Wear, 160(2), 243–252. doi:10.1016/0043-1648(93)90427-N
Farahani, R. Z., Rezapour, S., Drezner, T., & Fallah, S. (2014). Competitive supply chain network 
design: An overview of classifications, models, solution techniques and applications. Omega, 
45, 92–118. doi:10.1016/j.omega.2013.08.006
Ferreira, C. (2002). Gene Expression Programming: Mathematical Modeling by an Artificial 
Intelligence. Angra do Heroismo.
Ferreira, C. (2001). Gene Expression Programming: A New Adaptive Algorithm for Solving 
Problems. Complex Systems, 13(2), 87–129.
Financial Forecast Center, LLC. (2017). Why do the stock markets keep going up?. Retrieved 
from www.forecasts.org
Forrest, S. (1993). Genetic algorithms: Principles of natural selection applied to Computation. 
Science, 872–878.
Freisleben, B., & Merz, P. (1996). New genetic local search operators for the traveling salesman 
problem. In Parallel Problem Solving from Nature—PPSN IV (pp. 890–899). Springer. 
doi:10.1007/3-540-61723-X_1052
Freixenet, J., Muñoz, X., Raba, D., Martí, J., & Cufí, X. (2002). Yet another survey on image 
segmentation: Region and boundary information integration. Computer Vision—ECCV 2002, 21-25.
Fujiwara & Konagaya. (2008). Protein Motif Extraction using Hidden Markov Model. Genome 
Informatics, 57-64.
Galeshchuk, S. (2016). Neural networks performance in exchange rate prediction. Neurocomputing, 
172, 446–452. doi:10.1016/j.neucom.2015.03.100
Gao, C., Panetta, K., & Agaian, S. (2013). No reference color image quality measures. 2013 Int. 
Conf. on Cybernetics, 243-248.
Gatta, C., Rizzi, A., & Marini, D. (2002). ACE: An automatic color equalization algorithm. 
Proceedings of the First European Conference on Color in Graphics Image and Vision (CGIV02).
Gen, M., & Cheng, R. (2000). Genetic algorithms and engineering optimization (Vol. 7). John 
Wiley & Sons.
Gerald, S. (2016). Gene Expression Analysis based on Ant Colony Optimisation Classification. 
International Journal of Rough Sets and Data Analysis, 3(3), 51–59. doi:10.4018/
IJRSDA.2016070104
Ghani, J. A., Rizal, M., Nuawi, M. Z., Ghazali, M. J., & Haron, C. H. C. (2011). Monitoring online 
cutting tool wear using low-cost technique and user-friendly GUI. Wear, 271(9), 2619–2624. 
doi:10.1016/j.wear.2011.01.038
299

Compilation of References
Ghazali, R., Hussain, A., & El-Deredy, V. (2006). Application of ridge polynomial neural networks 
to financial time series prediction. 2006 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, 
913–20. doi:10.1109/IJCNN.2006.246783
Ghosh, A., Sarkar, A., Ashour, A. S., Balas-Timar, D., Dey, N., & Balas, V. E. (2015). Grid color 
moment features in glaucoma classification. Int J Adv Comput Sci Appl, 6(9), 1–14.
Ghosh, N., Ravi, Y., Patra, A., Mukhopadhyay, S., Paul, S., Mohanty, A., & Chattopadhyay, A. 
(2007). Estimation of tool wear during CNC milling using neural network-based sensor fusion. 
Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, 21(1), 466–479. doi:10.1016/j.ymssp.2005.10.010
Girres, J.-F., & Touya, G. (2010). Quality Assessment of the French OpenStreetMap Dataset. 
Transactions in GIS, 14(4), 435–459. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9671.2010.01203.x
Goel, S., Sharma, A., & Panchal, V. K. (2014). Multiobjective Cuckoo Search for Anticipating 
the Enemys Movements in the Battleground. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic 
Computing, 5(4), 26–46. doi:10.4018/ijamc.2014100102
Goel, S., & Wadhwa, V. (2013). A comparative analysis of PMX, POS and OX crossover operators 
for solving. International Journal of Latest Research in Science and Technology, 2(2), 80–83.
Goldberg, D. E. (1989). Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine Learning. 
Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co.
Goldberg, D. (1989). Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine Learning. 
Addison Wesley.
Goldberg, D. E. (1989). Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization and Machine Learning. 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.
Goldberg, D. E., & Lingle, R. (1985). Alleles, loci, and the traveling salesman problem. Proceedings 
of the First International Conference on Genetic Algorithms and Their Applications, 154-159.
Golz, H., Schillo, E., Wolf, A., & Kaufeld, M. (1995). Bewertung von Werkzeugüberwachungssystemen 
aus Sicht der Anwender. VDI-Berichte, 1179, 309–309.
Gonzalez, R. C., & Woods, R. E. (2002). Digital Image Processing (2nd ed.). New York: Prentice 
Hall.
Gopal, N. N., & Karnan, M. (2010, December). Diagnose brain tumor through MRI using image 
processing clustering algorithms such as Fuzzy C Means along with intelligent optimization 
techniques. In Computational Intelligence and Computing Research (ICCIC), 2010 IEEE 
International Conference on (pp. 1-4). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ICCIC.2010.5705890
Gorai, A., & Ghosh, A. (2009). Gray-level Image Enhancement By Particle Swarm Optimization. 
Proceedings of World Congress on Nature & Biologically Inspired Computing. doi:10.1109/
NABIC.2009.5393603
300

Compilation of References
Gorai, A., & Ghosh, A. (2011). Hue preserving color Image Enhancement by Particle Swarm 
Optimization. IEEE. doi:10.1109/RAICS.2011.6069375
Gowri & Rathipriya. (2015). Extraction of Protein Sequence Motif Information using PSO 
K-Means. Journal of Network and Information Security.
Gowri & Rathipriya. (2015a). Biclustering using Venus Flytrap Optimization Algorithm. 
Computational Intelligence in Data Mining—Volume 1. Advances in Intelligent Systems and 
Computing Series, 410. 
Gowri & Rathipriya. (2016a). Protein Motif Comparator using PSO K-Means. International 
Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 7(3), 56–68.
Gowri, R., & Rathipriya, R. (2015b). Venus Flytrap Optimization Algorithm. International 
Conference on Computational Intelligence, Cyber Security and Computational Models. Advances 
in Intelligent Systems and Computing Series, 412.
Gowri, R., & Rathipriya, R. (2016b). Extraction of Protein Sequence Motif Information using 
Bio-Inspired Computing. In Handbook of Research on Computational Intelligence Applications 
in Bioinformatics (pp. 240–262). IGI Global.
Gowri, R., & Rathipriya, R. (2016c). Quality based Clustering using MapReduce Framework. 
International conference on Green Engineering and Technologies. IEEE.
Gowri, R., & Rathipriya, R. (2016d). MR-GABiT: MapReduce based Genetic Algorithm for 
Biclustering Time Series Data. International Conference on Advances in Computer Applications. 
IEEE.
Gowri, R., & Rathipriya, R. (2017). Cohesive Sub-Network Mining in Protein Interaction Networks 
using Score Based Co-Clustering with MapReduce Model (MR-CoC). International Conference 
on Big Data Analytics and Cloud Computing. Springer.
Grefenstette, J., Gopal, R., Rosmaita, B., & Van Gucht, D. (1985). Genetic algorithms for the 
traveling salesman problem. Proceedings of the first International Conference on Genetic 
Algorithms and their Applications.
Grewal, V., & Sharma, A, K. (2010). On Performance Evaluation of Different QoS Mechanisms 
and AMC scheme for an IEEE 802.16 based WiMAX Network. International Journal of Computer 
Applications, 6(7), 12 – 17.
Guler, M., & Sahin, E. (1994). A new higher-order binary-input neural unit: Learning and 
generalizing effectively via using minimal number of monomials. Third Turkish Symposium 
on Artificial Intelligence and Neural Networks Proceedings. Middle East Technical University.
Gyugi, L. (1992, July). A Unified Power Control Concept for Flexible AC Transmission Systems. 
IEE Procedings-C, 139(4), 323–332.
301

Compilation of References
Gyugyi, Schauder, Williams, Rictman, Torgerson, & Edris. (1995). The Unified Power Flow 
Controller: A New Approach to Power Transmission Control. IEEE Trans. on Power Delivery, 
10(2), 1085-1097.
Hamdan, M., & Abderrazzaq, M. H. (2016). Optimization of Small Wind Turbines using Genetic 
Algorithms. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 7(4), 50–65. doi:10.4018/
IJAMC.2016100104
Hamdaoui, F., Mtibaa, A., & Sakly, A. (2014, December). Comparison between MPSO and 
MSFLA metaheuristics for MR brain image segmentation. In Sciences and Techniques of 
Automatic Control and Computer Engineering (STA), 2014 15th International Conference on 
(pp. 164-168). IEEE. doi:10.1109/STA.2014.7086725
Hamou, R. M., Bouarara, H. A., & Amine, A. (2015). Bio-Inspired Techniques in the Clustering 
of Texts: Synthesis and Comparative Study. Int. Jr. Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 6(4).
Hans, W. G., & Stephen, M. (2016). Using Contextual Information for Recognising Human 
Behaviour. International Journal of Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 7(1), 27–44. doi:10.4018/
IJACI.2016010102
Hasegawa, A., Lo, S. C. B., Lin, J. S., Freedman, M. T., & Mun, S. K. (1998). A shift-invariant 
neural network for the lung field segmentation in chest radiography. The Journal of VLSI Signal 
Processing, 18(3), 241–250. doi:10.1023/A:1007937214367
Hashemi, S., Kiani, S., Noroozi, N., & Moghaddam, M. E. (2010). An image contrast enhancement 
method based on genetic algorithm. Pattern Recognition Letters, 31(13), 1816–1824. doi:10.1016/j.
patrec.2009.12.006
Heba, A., & Moustafa, Y. (2014). An Analysis of Device-Free and Device-Based WiFi-Localization 
Systems. International Journal of Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 6(1), 1–19. doi:10.4018/
ijaci.2014010101
Heimann, T., Van Ginneken, B., Styner, M. A., Arzhaeva, Y., Aurich, V., Bauer, C., & Bello, F. 
et al. (2009). Comparison and evaluation of methods for liver segmentation from CT datasets. 
IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 28(8), 1251–1265. doi:10.1109/TMI.2009.2013851 
PMID:19211338
Hemanth, D. J., Vijila, C. K. S., & Anitha, J. (2010). Performance improved PSO based modified 
counter propagation neural network for abnormal MR brain image classification. Int. J. Advance. 
Soft Comput. Appl, 2(1), 65–84.
Hernández-Cisneros, R., & Terashima-Marín, H. (2006). Classification of individual and clustered 
microcalcifications in digital mammograms using evolutionary neural networks. MICAI 2006. 
Advances in Artificial Intelligence, 1200–1210.
Hicham El, H., Said, B., & Jamal, B. (2015). New Genetic Operator (Jump Crossover) for the 
Traveling Salesman Problem. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 6(2), 
33–44. doi:10.4018/IJAMC.2015040103
302

Compilation of References
Hingorani, N. G., & Gyugyi, L. (2000). Understanding FACTS: Concepts and Technology of 
Flexible AC Transmission System. IEEE Press.
Holland, J. (1975). Adaptation in natural and artificial systems. Ann Arbor, MI: The University 
of Michigan Press.
Holland, J. H. (1975). Adaption in Natural and Artificial Systems. The University of Michigan Press.
Holland, J. H. (n.d.). Genetic Algorithms and Adaptation. Adaptive Control of Ill-Defined Systems, 
NATO Conference Series, 16, 317-333.
Hong, J. H., & Cho, S. B. (2006). Efficient huge-scale feature selection with speciated genetic 
algorithm. Pattern Recognition Letters, 27(2), 143–150. doi:10.1016/j.patrec.2005.07.009
Hore, S., Chatterjee, S., Chakraborty, S., & Shaw, R. K. (2016b). Analysis of Different Feature 
Description Algorithm in object Recognition. Feature Detectors and Motion Detection in Video 
Processing, 66.
Hore, S., Chatterjee, S., Shaw, R., Dey, N., & Virmani, J. (2015a, November). Detection of chronic 
kidney disease: A NN-GA based approach. In CSI—2015; 50th Golden Jubilee Annual Convention.
Hore, S., Chakraborty, S., Chatterjee, S., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Van Chung, L., & Le, D. N. 
(2016a). An Integrated Interactive Technique for Image Segmentation using Stack based Seeded 
Region Growing and Thresholding. Iranian Journal of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 
6(6), 2773–2780.
Hore, S., Chatterjee, S., Santhi, V., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Balas, V. E., & Shi, F. (2017). Indian 
Sign Language Recognition Using Optimized Neural Networks. In Information Technology 
and Intelligent Transportation Systems (pp. 553–563). Springer International Publishing. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-38771-0_54
Hore, S., Chatterjee, S., Sarkar, S., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Balas-Timar, D., & Balas, V. E. (2016). 
Neural-based prediction of structural failure of multistoried RC buildings. Structural Engineering 
& Mechanics, 58(3), 459–473. doi:10.12989/sem.2016.58.3.459
Hsiao, Y. T., Chuang, C. L., & Chien, C. C. (2004, September). Ant colony optimization for 
designing of PID controllers. In Computer Aided Control Systems Design, 2004 IEEE International 
Symposium on (pp. 321-326). IEEE.
Hsmmns, T. J., & Lim, S. K. (1997). Flexible AC Transmission System (FACTS). Electric 
Machines & Power System, 25, 73–85.
Hu, J. J., Tang, C. J., Duan, L., Zuo, J., Peng, J., & Yuan, C. A. (2007). The strategy for diversifying 
initial population of gene expression programming. Chinese Journal of Computers-Chinese 
Edition, 30(2), 305.
Ibrahim, S., Khalid, N. E. A., & Manaf, M. (2010, March). Empirical study of brain segmentation 
using particle swarm optimization. In Information Retrieval & Knowledge Management,(CAMP), 
2010 International Conference on (pp. 235-239). IEEE. doi:10.1109/INFRKM.2010.5466910
303

Compilation of References
Ikeda, N., Gupta, A., Dey, N., Bose, S., Shafique, S., Arak, T., & Suri, J. S. et al. (2015). Improved 
correlation between carotid and coronary atherosclerosis SYNTAX score using automated 
ultrasound carotid bulb plaque IMT measurement. Ultrasound in Medicine & Biology, 41(5), 
1247–1262. doi:10.1016/j.ultrasmedbio.2014.12.024 PMID:25638311
Innocent, P. R., Barnes, M., & John, R. (1997). Application of the fuzzy ART/MAP and MinMax/
MAP neural network models to radiographic image classification. Artificial Intelligence in 
Medicine, 11(3), 241–263. doi:10.1016/S0933-3657(97)00032-8 PMID:9413608
Iyad Abu, D., Faisal, A., Eslam Al, M., Mohammed Azmi, A.-B., & Basima Hani, F. H. (2013). 
Hybridizing Harmony Search Algorithm with Multi-Parent Crossover to Solve Real World 
Optimization Problems. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 4(3), 1–14. 
doi:10.4018/ijamc.2013070101
Jagatheesan, K., & Anand, B. (2012, December). Dynamic performance of multi-area hydro 
thermal power systems with integral controller considering various performance indices methods. 
In Emerging Trends in Science, Engineering and Technology (INCOSET), 2012 International 
Conference on (pp. 474-484). IEEE. doi:10.1109/INCOSET.2012.6513952
Jagatheesan, K., & Anand, B. (2014). Automatic generation control of three area hydro-thermal 
power systems considering electric and mechanical governor with conventional controller and 
ant colony optimization technique. Advances in Natural and Applied Sciences, 8(20), 25–34.
Jagatheesan, K., Anand, B., & Ebrahim, M. A. (2014). Stochastic particle swarm optimization 
for tuning of PID controller in load frequency control of single area reheat thermal power system. 
International Journal of Electrical and Power Engineering, 8(2), 33–40.
Jain, A., Kumar Varshney, A., & Chandra Joshi, U. (2001). Short-term water demand forecast 
modelling at IIT Kanpur using artificial neural networks. Water Resources Management, 15(5), 
299–321. doi:10.1023/A:1014415503476
Jeffrey, G. A., Ghosh, A., & Muhamed, R. (2007). Fundamentals of WiMAX: Understanding 
Broadband Wireless Networking. Prentice-Hall.
Jena, P. R., Majhi, R., & Majhi, B. (2015). Development and performance evaluation of a novel 
knowledge guided artificial neural network (KGANN) model for exchange rate prediction. Journal 
of King Saud University-Computer and Information Sciences, 27(4), 450–457. doi:10.1016/j.
jksuci.2015.01.002
Jennifer, H., Tom, L., & Paul Mc, K. (2011). AmbiLearn: Multimodal Assisted Learning. 
International Journal of Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 3(1), 53–59. doi:10.4018/
jaci.2011010106
Jianfeng, L., Yongqing, Z., Fangrong, C., Zhiren, T., & Yao, W. (n.d.). Wear and Breakage 
Monitoring of Cutting Tools By Optic Method (1st Part: Theory). Academic Press.
304

Compilation of References
Jirapong, P. (2013, April-June). FACTS Devices Allocation for Power Transfer Capability 
Enhancement and Power System Losses Reduction. International Journal of Energy Optimization 
and Engineering, 2(2), 1–14. doi:10.4018/ijeoe.2013040101
Jog, P., Suh, J. Y., & Gucht, D. v. (1989). The effects of population size, heuristic crossover and 
local improvement on a genetic algorithm for the traveling salesman problem. Proceedings of 
the Third International Conference on Genetic Algorithms.
Johnson, D. S., & McGeoch, L. A. (2002). Experimental analysis of heuristics for the STSP. In 
The traveling salesman problem and its variations (pp. 369–443). Springer.
Joseph, R., Abraham, A., Das, D., & Patra, A. (2011). Damping oscillations in tie power and area 
frequencies in a thermal power system with SMES-TCPS combinations. Journal of Electrical 
System, 1(1), 71–80.
Juneja, D., Singh, A., Singh, R., & Mukherjee, S. (2017). A thorough insight into theoretical and 
practical developments in multiagent systems. International Journal of Ambient Computing and 
Intelligence, 8(1), 23–49. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2017010102
Jurkovic, J., Korosec, M., & Kopac, J. (2005). New approach in tool wear measuring technique 
using CCD vision system. International Journal of Machine Tools & Manufacture, 45(9), 
1023–1030. doi:10.1016/j.ijmachtools.2004.11.030
Jurman, G., Riccadonna, S., & Furlanello, C. (2012). A comparison of MCC and CEN error 
measures in multi-class prediction. PLoS ONE, 7(8), e41882. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0041882 
PMID:22905111
Kadah, Y. M., Farag, A. A., Zurada, J. M., Badawi, A. M., & Youssef, A. B. (1996). Classification 
algorithms for quantitative tissue characterization of diffuse liver disease from ultrasound images. 
IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 15(4), 466–478. doi:10.1109/42.511750 PMID:18215928
Kanungo, D. P., Janmenjoy, N., Bighnaraj, N., & Behera, H. S. (2016). Hybrid Clustering using Elitist 
Teaching Learning-Based Optimization: An Improved Hybrid Approach of TLBO. International 
Journal of Rough Sets and Data Analysis, 3(1), 1–19. doi:10.4018/IJRSDA.2016010101
Karaa, W. B. A., Ashour, A. S., Sassi, D. B., Roy, P., Kausar, N., & Dey, N. (2016). Medline 
text mining: an enhancement genetic algorithm based approach for document clustering. In 
Applications of Intelligent Optimization in Biology and Medicine (pp. 267–287). Springer 
International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-21212-8_12
Karegowda & Kumari. (2013). Particle Swarm Optimization Algorithm Based K-Means and 
Fuzzy c-means clustering. International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science 
and Software Engineering, 3(7).
Karnan, M., & Logheshwari, T. (2010, December). Improved implementation of brain MRI 
image segmentation using ant colony system. In Computational Intelligence and Computing 
Research (ICCIC), 2010 IEEE International Conference on (pp. 1-4). IEEE. doi:10.1109/
ICCIC.2010.5705897
305

Compilation of References
Kas, M., Yargicoglu, B., Korpeoglu, I., & Karasan, E. (2010). A survey on scheduling in IEEE 
802.16 mesh mode. IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, 12(2), 205–221. doi:10.1109/
SURV.2010.021110.00053
Kaur, P., & Kaur, T. (2014). A Comparative Study of Various Metaheuristic Algorithms. 
International Journal of Computer Science and Information Technologies, 5(5), 6701–6704.
Kausar, N., Palaniappan, S., Samir, B. B., Abdullah, A., & Dey, N. (2016). Systematic analysis of 
applied data mining based optimization algorithms in clinical attribute extraction and classification 
for diagnosis of cardiac patients. In Applications of intelligent optimization in biology and 
medicine (pp. 217–231). Springer International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-21212-8_9
Khachane, M. Y. (2017). Organ-Based Medical Image Classification Using Support Vector 
Machine. International Journal of Synthetic Emotions, 8(1), 18–30. doi:10.4018/IJSE.2017010102
Kharrat, A., Gasmi, K., Messaoud, M. B., Benamrane, N., & Abid, M. (2010). A hybrid approach 
for automatic classification of brain MRI using genetic algorithm and support vector machine. 
Leonardo Journal of Sciences, 17(1), 71–82.
Khazaee, A., & Ebrahimzadeh, A. (2010). Classification of electrocardiogram signals with 
support vector machines and genetic algorithms using power spectral features. Biomedical Signal 
Processing and Control, 5(4), 252–263. doi:10.1016/j.bspc.2010.07.006
Kim, Y.T. (1997). Contrast enhancement using brightness preserving bi-histogram equalization. 
IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., 43(1), 1–8.
Kishore, J. K., Patnaik, L. M., Mani, V., & Agrawal, V. K. (2000). Application of genetic 
programming for multicategory pattern classification. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary 
Computation, 4(3), 242–258. doi:10.1109/4235.873235
Kong, N. S. P., & Ibrahim, H. (2008). Color image enhancement using brightness preserving 
dynamic histogram equalization. IEEE Trans. on Consumer Electronics, 54, 1962-1968.
Koss, J. E., Newman, F. D., Johnson, T. K., & Kirch, D. L. (1999). Abdominal organ segmentation 
using texture transforms and a hopfield neural network. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 
18(7), 640–648. doi:10.1109/42.790463 PMID:10504097
Kotyk, T., Ashour, A. S., Chakraborty, S., Dey, N., & Balas, V. E. (2015). Apoptosis analysis 
in classification paradigm: a neural network based approach. In Healthy World conference (pp. 
17-22). Academic Press.
Kotyk, T., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Balas-Timar, D., Chakraborty, S., Ashour, A. S., & Tavares, 
J. M. R. (2016). Measurement of glomerulus diameter and Bowmans space width of renal 
albino rats. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine, 126, 143–153. doi:10.1016/j.
cmpb.2015.10.023 PMID:26796351
Koza, J. R. (1992). Genetic programming: on the programming of computers by means of natural 
selection (Vol. 1). MIT Press.
306

Compilation of References
Koza, J. R. (1994In press). Genetic programming II: automatic discovery of reusable programs. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kubusada, Y., Mohan, G., Manjappa, K., & Reddy, G. R. M. (2013). A Gene Expression Based 
Quality of Service Aware Routing Protocol for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks. In Computer Networks 
& Communications (pp. 283–290). NetCom.
Kumar Roy, P. (2013, July-September). Hybridization of Biogeography Based Optimization with 
Differential Evolution for solving Optimal Power Flow Problems. International Journal of Energy 
Optimization and Engineering, 2(3), 86–101. doi:10.4018/ijeoe.2013070106
Kumaran Kumar, J., Kailas, A., 2012. Prediction of future stock close price using proposed 
hybrid ANN model of functional link fuzzy logic neural model (FLFNM). Int. J. Comput. Appl. 
Eng. Sci., 2(1).
Kumar, N., Karambir, & Kumar, R. (2012). A Comparative Analysis of PMX, CX and OX 
Crossover operators for solving Travelling Salesman Problem. International Journal of Latest 
Research in Science and Technology, 1(2), 98–101.
Kumar, S. U., Inbarani, H. H., Azar, A. T., & Hassanien, A. E. (2014). Identification of heart 
valve disease using bijective soft sets theory. [IJRSDA]. International Journal of Rough Sets and 
Data Analysis, 1(2), 1–14. doi:10.4018/ijrsda.2014070101
Kundur, P. (1993). Power System Stability and Control. New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc.
Kunik, V., Solan, Z., Edelman, S., Ruppin, E., & Horn, D. (2005). Motif Extraction and 
Protein Classification: Computational Systems. Proceedings of IEEE Computational Systems 
Bioinformatics / Life Sciences Society.
Kuran, M. S., & Tugcu, T. (2007). A survey on emerging broadband wireless access technologies. 
Computer Networks, 51(11), 3013–3046. doi:10.1016/j.comnet.2006.12.009
Ladgham, A., Hamdaoui, F., Sakly, A., & Mtibaa, A. (2015). Fast MR brain image segmentation 
based on modified Shuffled Frog Leaping Algorithm. Signal. Image and Video Processing, 9(5), 
1113–1120. doi:10.1007/s11760-013-0546-y
Lanzetta, M. (2001). A new flexible high-resolution vision sensor for tool condition monitoring. 
Journal of Materials Processing Technology, 119(1), 73–82. doi:10.1016/S0924-0136(01)00878-0
Laporte, G. (1992). The vehicle routing problem: An overview of exact and approximate algorithms. 
European Journal of Operational Research, 59(3), 345–358. doi:10.1016/0377-2217(92)90192-C
Larranaga, P., Kuijpers, C. M. H., Poza, M., & Murga, R. H. (1997). Decomposing Bayesian 
Networks: Triangulation of the Moral Graph with Genetic Algorithms. Statistics and Computing, 
7(1), 19–34. doi:10.1023/A:1018553211613
Lashkar Ara, Kazemi, & Nabavi Niaki. (2012). Multi objective Optimal Location of FACTS 
Shunt-Series Controllers for Power System Operation Planning. IEEE Transactions on Power 
Delivery, 27(2), 481-490.
307

Compilation of References
Leandro, C. (2009). A novel particle swarm optimization approach using Henon map and implicit 
filtering local search for economic load dispatch. Chaos, Solitons, and Fractals, 39(2), 510–518. 
doi:10.1016/j.chaos.2007.01.093
Le, D. A., & Vo, D. N. (2016, January-March). Cuckoo Search Algorithm for Minimization of 
Power Loss and Voltage Deviation. International Journal of Energy Optimization and Engineering, 
5(1), 23–34. doi:10.4018/IJEOE.2016010102
Lee, C. C., & Chung, P. C. (2000). Recognizing abdominal organs in CT images using contextual 
neural network and fuzzy rules. In Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 2000. Proceedings 
of the 22nd Annual International Conference of the IEEE (Vol. 3, pp. 1745-1748). IEEE.
Lee, J. Y., Hwang, I. S., Liem, A. T., Lai, K. R., & Nikoukar, A. (2013). Genetic expression 
programming: A new approach for QoS traffic prediction in EPONs. Photonic Network 
Communications, 25(3), 156–165. doi:10.1007/s11107-013-0399-x
Leerink, L. R., Giles, C. L., Horne, B. G., & Jabri, M. A. (1995). Learning with product units. In 
G. Tesaro, D. Touretzky, & T. Leen (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 
7. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Leung, Y. W., & Wang, Y. (2001). An orthogonal genetic algorithm with quantization for 
global numerical optimization. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 5(1), 41–53. 
doi:10.1109/4235.910464
Li, Y., Wen, P., Powers, D., & Clark, C. R. (1999). LSB neural network based segmentation of MR 
brain images. In Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 1999. IEEE SMC’99 Conference Proceedings. 
1999 IEEE International Conference on (Vol. 6, pp. 822-825). IEEE.
Li, B., Qin, Y., Low, C. P., & Gwee, C. L. (2007). Wireless Broadband Access: A survey on 
Mobile WiMAX. IEEE Communications Magazine, 70–75. doi:10.1109/MCOM.2007.4395368
Li, H., & Zhang, Q. (2009). Multiobjective optimization problems with complicated Pareto sets, 
MOEA/D and NSGA-II. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 13(2), 284–302. 
doi:10.1109/TEVC.2008.925798
Lin, S., & Kernighan, B. W. (1973). An effective heuristic algorithm for the traveling-salesman 
problem. Operations Research, 21(2), 498–516. doi:10.1287/opre.21.2.498
Lister, P., & Barrow, G. (1986). Tool condition monitoring systems. Paper presented at the 
Proceedings of the Twenty-sixth International Machine Tool Design and Research Conference. 
doi:10.1007/978-1-349-08114-1_36
Liu, Q., Wang, X., & Giannakis, G. B. (2006). A Cross-Layer Scheduling Algorithm with QoS 
Support in Wireless Networks. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 55(3), 839–846. 
doi:10.1109/TVT.2006.873832
Li, X., & Nee, A. (1996). Monitoring cutting conditions for tool scheduling in CNC machining. 
Manuf Syst, 25(4), 377–383.
308

Compilation of References
Li, Z., Shi, K., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Wang, D., Balas, V. E., & Shi, F. et al. (2017). Rule-
based back propagation neural networks for various precision rough set presented KANSEI 
knowledge prediction: A case study on shoe product form features extraction. Neural Computing 
& Applications, 1–18.
Lu, M.-C., & Kannatey-Asibu, E. (2004). Flank wear and process characteristic effect on system 
dynamics in turning. Transactions-American Society of Mechanical Engineers Journal of 
Manufacturing Science and Engineering, 126(1), 131–140. doi:10.1115/1.1643082
Maclin, P. S., & Dempsey, J. (1992). Using an artificial neural network to diagnose hepatic 
masses. Journal of Medical Systems, 16(5), 215–225. doi:10.1007/BF01000274 PMID:1289469
Madeira, S. C., & Oliveira, A. L. (2004). Biclustering Algorithms for Biological Data Analysis. 
Survey (London, England), 1–31. PMID:17048406
Maglaveras, N., Stamkopoulas, T., Pappas, C., & Strintzis, M. (1998). An Adaptive back-propagation 
neural network for real time ischemia episodes detection Development and performance using 
the European ST-T databases. IEEE Trans., Biomed Engng., 805-813.
Maitra, M., & Chatterjee, A. (2008). A novel technique for multilevel optimal magnetic resonance 
brain image thresholding using bacterial foraging. Measurement, 41(10), 1124–1134. doi:10.1016/j.
measurement.2008.03.002
Maji, P., Chatterjee, S., Chakraborty, S., Kausar, N., Samanta, S., & Dey, N. (2015, March). Effect 
of Euler number as a feature in gender recognition system from offline handwritten signature 
using neural networks. In Computing for Sustainable Global Development (INDIACom), 2015 
2nd International Conference on (pp. 1869-1873). IEEE.
Manogaran, G., & Lopez, D. (2017). Disease Surveillance System for Big Climate Data Processing 
and Dengue Transmission. International Journal of Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 8(2), 
88–105. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2017040106
Manthey, B., & Veenstra, R. (2013). Smoothed analysis of the 2-Opt heuristic for the TSP: 
Polynomial bounds for Gaussian noise. In Algorithms and Computation (pp. 579–589). Springer.
Marchant, J. A., & Onyango, C. M. (2003). Comparison of a Bayesian classifier with a multilayer 
feed-forward neural network using the example of plant/weed/soil discrimination. Computers 
and Electronics in Agriculture, 39(1), 3–22. doi:10.1016/S0168-1699(02)00223-5
Marinakis, Y., & Magdalene, N. (2011). Discrete Artificial Bee Colony Optimization Algorithm 
for Financial Classification Problems. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 
2(1), 1–17. doi:10.4018/jamc.2011010101
Meryem, A., & Salim, C. (2016). Cooperative Parallel Metaheuristics based Penguin Optimization 
Search for Solving the Vehicle Routing Problem. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic 
Computing, 7(1), 1–18. doi:10.4018/IJAMC.2016010101
309

Compilation of References
Meryem, B., & Abdelmadjid, B. (2015). Resolution of a Vehicle Routing Problem with Simultaneous 
Pickup and Delivery: A Cooperative Approach. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic 
Computing, 6(3), 53–68. doi:10.4018/ijamc.2015070103
Meryem, B., & Abdelmadjid, B. (2016). Quantum Inspired Algorithm for a VRP with Heterogeneous 
Fleet Mixed Backhauls and Time Windows. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic 
Computing, 7(4), 18–38. doi:10.4018/IJAMC.2016100102
Merz, P., & Freisleben, B. (1997). Genetic local search for the TSP: New results. Paper presented 
at the Evolutionary Computation, 1997., IEEE International Conference on. doi:10.1109/
ICEC.1997.592288
Metenidis, M. F., Witczak, M., & Korbicz, J. (2004). A novel genetic programming approach to 
nonlinear system modelling: Application to the DAMADICS benchmark problem. Engineering 
Applications of Artificial Intelligence, 17(4), 363–370. doi:10.1016/j.engappai.2004.04.009
Mhetre, N. A., Deshpande, A. V., & Mahalle, P. N. (2016). Trust Management Model based on 
Fuzzy Approach for Ubiquitous Computing. International Journal of Ambient Computing and 
Intelligence, 7(2), 33–46. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2016070102
Michalewicz, Z. (1996). Genetic algorithms + data structures = evolution programs (3rd ed.). 
London: Springer-Verlag.
Middleton, I., & Damper, R. I. (2004). Segmentation of magnetic resonance images using a 
combination of neural networks and active contour models. Medical Engineering & Physics, 
26(1), 71–86. doi:10.1016/S1350-4533(03)00137-1 PMID:14644600
Milfelner, M., Kopac, J., Cus, F., & Zuperl, U. (2005). Genetic equation for the cutting force in 
ball-end milling. Journal of Materials Processing Technology, 164, 1554–1560. doi:10.1016/j.
jmatprotec.2005.02.147
Miller, A. S., Blott, B. H., & Hames, T. K. (1992). Review of neural network applications in 
medical imaging and signal processing. Medical & Biological Engineering & Computing, 30(5), 
449–464. doi:10.1007/BF02457822 PMID:1293435
Milton, C., & Shaw, M. (1984). Metal cutting principles. Oxford Science Publication.
Mohanpurkar, A. A., & Joshi, M. S. (2016). A Traitor Identification Technique for Numeric 
Relational Databases with Distortion Minimization and Collusion Avoidance. International 
Journal of Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 7(2), 114–137. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2016070106
Møller, M. F. (1993). A scaled conjugate gradient algorithm for fast supervised learning. Neural 
Networks, 6(4), 525–533. doi:10.1016/S0893-6080(05)80056-5
Moon, Y. H., Ryu, H. S., Kim, B., & Song, K. B. (2000). Optimal tracking approach to load 
frequency control in power systems. In Power Engineering Society Winter Meeting, 2000. IEEE 
(Vol. 2, pp. 1371-1376). IEEE.
310

Compilation of References
Moscato, P., & Cotta, C. (2003). A gentle introduction to memetic algorithms. In Handbook of 
metaheuristics (pp. 105-144). Springer US. doi:10.1007/0-306-48056-5_5
Mostafa, A., Hassanien, A. E., & Hefny, H. A. (2017). Grey Wolf Optimization-Based Segmentation 
Approach for Abdomen CT Liver Images. In Handbook of Research on Machine Learning 
Innovations and Trends (pp. 562–581). IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-2229-4.ch024
Muhlenbein, H. (1989). Parallel Genetic Algorithms, Population Genetics and Combinatorial 
Optimization. Academic Press.
Mukherjee, A., Dey, G., Dey, M., & Dey, N. (2015). Web-based intelligent EEG signal authentication 
and tamper detection system for secure telemonitoring. In Brain-Computer Interfaces (pp. 
295–312). Springer International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-10978-7_11
Mukherjee, A., Paul, S., & Roy, P. K. (2015). Transient Stability Constrained Optimal Power Flow 
Using Teaching Learning Based Optimization. International Journal of Energy Optimization 
and Engineering, 4(1), 18–35. doi:10.4018/ijeoe.2015010102
Murata, T., & Itai, R. (2008). Enhancing Solution Similarity in Multi-Objective Vehicle Routing 
Problems with Different Demand Periods. In T. Caric & H. Gold (Eds.), Vehicle Routing Problem. 
InTech. doi:10.5772/5619
Naik, S. K., & Murthy, C. A. (2003). Hue Preserving Color Image Enhancement without Gamut 
Problem. IEEE Trans. on Image Processing, 12, 1591-1598.
Naik, A., Satapathy, S. C., Ashour, A. S., & Dey, N. (2016). Social group optimization for 
global optimization of multimodal functions and data clustering problems. Neural Computing 
& Applications, 1–17.
Nandi, D., Ashour, A. S., Samanta, S., Chakraborty, S., Salem, M. A., & Dey, N. (2015). Principal 
component analysis in medical image processing: A study. International Journal of Image Mining, 
1(1), 65–86. doi:10.1504/IJIM.2015.070024
Nandi, R. J., Nandi, A. K., Rangayyan, R. M., & Scutt, D. (2006). Classification of breast 
masses in mammograms using genetic programming and feature selection. Medical & Biological 
Engineering & Computing, 44(8), 683–694. doi:10.1007/s11517-006-0077-6 PMID:16937210
Nayak, S. C., Misra, B. B., & Behera, H. S. (2012, October). Evaluation of normalization methods on 
neuro-genetic models for stock index forecasting. In Information and Communication Technologies 
(WICT), 2012 World Congress on (pp. 602-607). IEEE. doi:10.1109/WICT.2012.6409147
Nayak, S. C., Misra, B. B., & Behera, H. S. (2016a). Adaptive Hybrid Higher Order Neural Networks 
for Prediction of Stock Market Behavior. In Applied Artificial Higher Order Neural Networks 
for Control and Recognition (pp. 174-191). IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0063-6.ch007
Nayak, S. C., Misra, B. B., & Behera, H. S. (2012). Stock Index Prediction With Neuro-Genetic 
Hybrid Techniques. Intenational Journal of Computer Science and Informatics, IJCSI, 2(3), 27–34.
311

Compilation of References
Nayak, S. C., Misra, B. B., & Behera, H. S. (2014). Impact of data normalization on stock index 
forecasting. Int. J. Comp. Inf. Syst. Ind. Manag. Appl, 6, 357–369.
Nayak, S. C., Misra, B. B., & Behera, H. S. (2015a). A Pi-Sigma Higher Order Neural Network for 
Stock Index Forecasting. In Computational Intelligence in Data Mining-Volume 2 (pp. 311–319). 
Springer India. doi:10.1007/978-81-322-2208-8_29
Nayak, S. C., Misra, B. B., & Behera, H. S. (2015b). Comparison of Performance of Different 
Functions in Functional Link Artificial Neural Network: A Case Study on Stock Index 
Forecasting. In Computational Intelligence in Data Mining-Volume 1 (pp. 479–487). Springer 
India. doi:10.1007/978-81-322-2205-7_45
Nayak, S. C., Misra, B. B., & Behera, H. S. (2016). An Adaptive Second Order Neural Network 
with Genetic-Algorithm-based Training (ASONN-GA) to Forecast the Closing Prices of the Stock 
Market. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 7(2), 39–57. doi:10.4018/
IJAMC.2016040103
Nayak, S. C., Misra, B. B., & Behera, H. S. (2016b). Improving Performance of Higher Order 
Neural Network using Artificial Chemical Reaction Optimization: A Case Study on Stock Market 
Forecasting. In Applied Artificial Higher Order Neural Networks for Control and Recognition 
(pp. 253–280). IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0063-6.ch011
Nayak, S. C., Misra, B. B., & Behera, H. S. (2016d). Fluctuation prediction of stock market 
index by adaptive evolutionary higher order neural networks. International Journal of Swarm 
Intelligence, 2(2-4), 229–253. doi:10.1504/IJSI.2016.081152
Ni, Q., Vinel, A., Xiao, Y., Turlikov, A., & Jiang, T. (2007). Wireless Broadband Access: 
WiMax and Beyond - Investigation of bandwidth request mechanisms under point-to-multipoint 
mode of WiMax networks. IEEE Communications Magazine, 45(5), 132–138. doi:10.1109/
MCOM.2007.358860
NizarBanu, P. K., & Andrews, S. (2015). Gene Clustering Using Metaheuristic Optimization 
Algorithms. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 6(4).
NizarBanu. (2015). Gene Clustering Using Metaheuristic Optimization Algorithms. Int. Jr. 
Applied MetaheuristicComputing, 6(4).
Nourani, V., Entezari, E., & Yousefi, P. (2013). ANN-RBF Hybrid model for Spatiotemporal 
Estimation of Monthly Precipitation Case Study: Ardabil Plain. International Journal of Applied 
Metaheuristic Computing, 4(2), 1–16. doi:10.4018/jamc.2013040101
Odella, F. (2017). Technology Studies and the Sociological Debate on Monitoring of Social 
Interactions. In Biometrics: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and Applications (pp. 529-558). 
IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0983-7.ch022
Oliver, Smith, & Holland. (1987). A Study of Permutation Crossover Operator on the TSP. 
Academic Press.
312

Compilation of References
Omkar, S. N., John, R. L., Choudhry, N., Kubusada, Y & Bhageshpur, G. (2013). Crop Classification 
using Gene Expression Programming Technique. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
Omkar, S. N., Ramaswamy, N., Senthilnath, J., Bharath, S., & Anuradha, N. S. (2012). Gene 
expression programming-fuzzy logic method for crop type classification. In Genetic and 
Evolutionary Computing (ICGEC), 2012 Sixth International Conference on (pp. 136-139). IEEE. 
doi:10.1109/ICGEC.2012.97
Omkar, S. N., Mudigere, D., Senthilnath, J., & Kumar, M. V. (2015). Identification of Helicopter 
Dynamics based on Flight Data using Nature Inspired Techniques. International Journal of 
Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 6(3), 15. doi:10.4018/ijamc.2015070102
Omkar, S. N., Sivaranjani, V., Senthilnath, J., & Mukherjee, S. (2010). Dimensionality Reduction 
and Classification of Hyperspectral Data. International Journal of Aerospace Innovations Multi-
Science, 2(3), 157–163.
Onwubolu, G. C., & Babu, B. V. (2013). New optimization techniques in engineering (Vol. 141). 
Springer.
Osman, I. H., & Christofides, N. (1994). Capacitated clustering problems by hybrid simulated 
annealing and tabu search. International Transactions in Operational Research, 1(3), 317–336. 
doi:10.1016/0969-6016(94)90032-9
Osman, I. H., & Kelly, J. P. (1996). Meta-heuristics: an overview. In Meta-heuristics (pp. 1–21). 
Springer. doi:10.1007/978-1-4613-1361-8
Ozkan, M., Dawant, B. M., & Maciunas, R. J. (1993). Neural-network-based segmentation of 
multi-modal medical images: A comparative and prospective study. IEEE Transactions on Medical 
Imaging, 12(3), 534–544. doi:10.1109/42.241881 PMID:18218446
Padhan, S., Sahu, R. K., & Panda, S. (2014). Automatic generation control with thyristor 
controlled series compensator including superconducting magnetic energy storage units. Ain 
Shams Engineering Journal, 5(3), 759–774. doi:10.1016/j.asej.2014.03.011
Padiyar & Uma Rao. (1999). Modeling and Control of Unified Power Flow Controller For 
Transient Stability. Electrical Power and Energy Systems, 21.
Padiyar, K. R., & Kulakarni, A. M. (1998). Control Design and Simulation of Unified Power 
Flow Controller. IEEE Trans. on Power Delivery, 13(4), 1348-1354.
Pai, G. V., & Michel, T. (2017). Metaheuristic Optimization of Constrained Large Portfolios 
using Hybrid Particle Swarm Optimization. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic 
Computing, 8(1), 1–23. doi:10.4018/IJAMC.2017010101
Pal, G., Acharjee, S., Rudrapaul, D., Ashour, A. S., & Dey, N. (2015a). Video segmentation using 
minimum ratio similarity measurement. International Journal of Image Mining, 1(1), 87-110.
313

Compilation of References
Pal, G., Rudrapaul, D., Acharjee, S., Ray, R., Chakraborty, S., & Dey, N. (2015). Video shot 
boundary detection: a review. In Emerging ICT for Bridging the Future-Proceedings of the 
49th Annual Convention of the Computer Society of India CSI (vol. 2, pp. 119-127). Springer 
International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-13731-5_14
Pal, S. K., Bhandari, D., & Kundu, M. K. (1994). Genetic algorithms for optimal image 
enhancement. Pattern Recognition Letters, 15(3), 261–271. doi:10.1016/0167-8655(94)90058-2
Panetta, K., Gao, C., & Agaian, S. (2013). No reference color image contrast and quality measures. 
IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, 59, 643-651.
Paola, J. D., & Schowengerdt, R. A. (1995). A review and analysis of backpropagation neural 
networks for classification of remotely-sensed multi-spectral imagery. International Journal of 
Remote Sensing, 16(16), 3033–3058. doi:10.1080/01431169508954607
Park, S., Smith, M. J. T., & Mersereau, R. M. (2000). Target recognition based on directional 
filter banks and higher-order neural networks. Digital Signal Processing, 10(4), 297–308. 
doi:10.1006/dspr.2000.0376
Parthiban, L., & Subramanian, R. (2008). Intelligent heart disease prediction system using 
CANFIS and genetic algorithm. International Journal of Biological, Biomedical and Medical 
Sciences, 3(3).
Pavlopoulos, S., Kyriacou, E., Koutsouris, D., Blekas, K., Stafylopatis, A., & Zoumpoulis, P. 
(2000). Fuzzy neural network-based texture analysis of ultrasonic images. IEEE Engineering in 
Medicine and Biology Magazine, 19(1), 39–47. doi:10.1109/51.816243 PMID:10659429
Pham, D. L., Xu, C., & Prince, J. L. (2000). Current methods in medical image segmentation 1. 
Annual Review of Biomedical Engineering, 2(1), 315–337. doi:10.1146/annurev.bioeng.2.1.315 
PMID:11701515
Pietrokovski, S., Henikoff, J. G., & Henikoff, S. (1996). The BLOCKS database - a system 
for protein classification. Nucleic Acids Research, 24(1), 197–200. doi:10.1093/nar/24.1.197 
PMID:8594578
Pitiot, A., Toga, A. W., Ayache, N., & Thompson, P. (2002). Texture based MRI segmentation 
with a two-stage hybrid neural classifier. In Neural Networks, 2002. IJCNN’02. Proceedings 
of the 2002 International Joint Conference on (Vol. 3, pp. 2053-2058). IEEE. doi:10.1109/
IJCNN.2002.1007457
Ponomarenko, N., Silvestri, F., Egiazarian, K., Carli, M., Astola, J., & Lukin, V. (2007). On 
between-coefficient contrast masking of DCT basis functions. Proc. of the Third Int. Workshop 
on Video Proc. and Quality Metrics.
Pothiya, S., Ngamroo, I., & Kongprawechnon, W. (2007, December). Design of optimal fuzzy 
logic-based PID controller using Multiple Tabu Search algorithm for AGC including SMES 
units. In Power Engineering Conference, 2007. IPEC 2007. International (pp. 838-843). IEEE.
314

Compilation of References
Powers, D. M. (2011). Evaluation: from precision, recall and F-measure to ROC, informedness, 
markedness and correlation. Academic Press.
Prasad, K. N., & Ramamoorthy, B. (2001). Tool wear evaluation by stereo vision and prediction 
by artificial neural network. Journal of Materials Processing Technology, 112(1), 43–52. 
doi:10.1016/S0924-0136(00)00896-7
PriteshVora. (2013). A Survey on K-mean Clustering and Particle Swarm Optimization. 
International Journal of Science and Modern Engineering, 1(3), 24–26.
Qin, A. K., Huang, V. L., & Suganthan, P. N. (2009). Differential evolution algorithm with strategy 
adaptation for global numerical optimization. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 
13(2), 398–417. doi:10.1109/TEVC.2008.927706
Quraishi, I. M., De, M., Dhal, K.G, Mondal, S., & Das, G. (2013). Novel hybrid approach to 
restore historical degraded documents. IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/ISSP.2013.6526899
Quraishi, I. M., Dhal, K. G., Paul Chowdhury, J., Pattanayak, K., & De, M. (2012). A novel 
hybrid approach to enhance low resolution images using particle swarm optimization. IEEE. 
DOI: 10.1109/PDGC.2012.6449941
Rahul Khandelwal, J. (2016). A Novel Multiobjective Optimization for Cement Stabilized Soft 
Soil based on Artificial Bee Colony. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 
7(4), 1–17. doi:10.4018/IJAMC.2016100101
Ramakrishnan, T., & Sankaragomathi, B. (2017). A professional estimate on the computed 
tomography brain tumor images using SVM-SMO for classification and MRG-GWO for 
segmentation. Pattern Recognition Letters, 94, 163–171. doi:10.1016/j.patrec.2017.03.026
Rastgarpour, M., & Shanbehzadeh, J. (2013). The status quo of artificial intelligence methods 
in automatic medical image segmentation. International Journal of Computer Theory and 
Engineering, 5(1), 5–8. doi:10.7763/IJCTE.2013.V5.636
Rathipriya, R., Thangavel, K., & Bagyamani, J. (2011). Binary Particle Swarm Optimization 
based Biclustering of Web usage Data. International Journal of Computers and Applications, 
25(2), 43–49. doi:10.5120/3001-4036
Reckhow, K. H. (1999). Water quality prediction and probability network models. Canadian 
Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 56(7), 1150–1158. doi:10.1139/f99-040
Reinelt, G. (1991). TSPLIB—A Traveling Salesman Problem Library. ORSA Journal of Computing, 
3(4), 376–384. doi:10.1287/ijoc.3.4.376
Reza, B. (2016). Nephron Algorithm Optimization: Inspired of the Biologic Nephron Performance. 
International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 7(1), 38–64. doi:10.4018/
IJAMC.2016010103
Riccardo, P., James, K., & Tim, B. (2007). Particle swarm optimization An Overview. Swarm 
Intelligence, 33–57.
315

Compilation of References
Rocki, K., & Suda, R. (2012). Accelerating 2-opt and 3-opt local search using GPU in the 
travelling salesman problem. Paper presented at the High Performance Computing and Simulation 
(HPCS), 2012 International Conference on.
Romahi, Y., & Shen, Q. (2000). Dynamic Financial Forecasting with Automatically Induced 
Fuzzy Associations. Proc. of the 9th International Conference on Fuzzy Systems, 493-498.
Rout, M., Majhi, B., Majhi, R., & Panda, G. (2014). Forecasting of currency exchange rates 
using an adaptive ARMA model with differential evolution based training. Journal of King Saud 
University-Computer and Information Sciences, 26(1), 7–18. doi:10.1016/j.jksuci.2013.01.002
Roy, A., Dutta, S., & Roy, P. K. (2014, January). Automatic generation control by SMES-SMES 
controllers of two-area hydro-hydro system. In Non Conventional Energy (ICONCE), 2014 1st 
International Conference on (pp. 302-307). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ICONCE.2014.6808731
Roy, R., Bhatt, P., & Ghoshal, S. P. (2010). Evolutionary computation based three-area automatic 
generation control. Expert Systems with Applications, 37(8), 5913–5924. doi:10.1016/j.
eswa.2010.02.014
Saba, L., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Samanta, S., Nath, S. S., Chakraborty, S., & Suri, J. S. et al. 
(2016). Automated stratification of liver disease in ultrasound: An online accurate feature 
classification paradigm. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine, 130, 118–134. 
doi:10.1016/j.cmpb.2016.03.016 PMID:27208527
Sabar, N. R., Ayob, M., Kendall, G., & Qu, R. (2015). Automatic design of a hyper-heuristic 
framework with gene expression programming for combinatorial optimization problems. IEEE 
Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 19(3), 309–325. doi:10.1109/TEVC.2014.2319051
Saha, S., & Bandyopadhyay, S. (2007, September). MRI brain image segmentation by fuzzy 
symmetry based genetic clustering technique. In Evolutionary Computation, 2007. CEC 2007. 
IEEE Congress on (pp. 4417-4424). IEEE. doi:10.1109/CEC.2007.4425049
Sahoo, A., & Chandra, S. (2013, August). L’evy-flight firefly algorithm based active contour model 
for medical image segmentation. In Contemporary Computing (IC3), 2013 Sixth International 
Conference on (pp. 159-162). IEEE. doi:10.1109/IC3.2013.6612181
Sahu, K. K., Sahu, S. R., Nayak, S. C., & Behera, H. S. (2016). Forecasting foreign exchange rates 
using CRO based different variants of FLANN and performance analysis. International Journal 
of Computational Systems Engineering, 2(4), 190–208. doi:10.1504/IJCSYSE.2016.081380
Salembier, P., & Marqués, F. (1999). Region-based representations of image and video: 
Segmentation tools for multimedia services. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for 
Video Technology, 9(8), 1147–1169. doi:10.1109/76.809153
Samanta, S., Acharjee, S., Mukherjee, A., Das, D., & Dey, N. (2013a, December). Ant weight 
lifting algorithm for image segmentation. In Computational Intelligence and Computing Research 
(ICCIC), 2013 IEEE International Conference on (pp. 1-5). doi:10.1109/ICCIC.2013.6724160
316

Compilation of References
Samanta, S., Chakraborty, S., Acharjee, S., Mukherjee, A., & Dey, N. (2013b, December). 
Solving 0/1 knapsack problem using ant weight lifting algorithm. In Computational Intelligence 
and Computing Research (ICCIC), 2013 IEEE International Conference on (pp. 1-5). IEEE.
Samantaa, S., Dey, N., Das, P., Acharjee, S., & Chaudhuri, S. S. (2013). Multilevel threshold 
based gray scale image segmentation using cuckoo search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1307.0277
Samanta, S., Choudhury, A., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., & Balas, V. E. (2016). Quantum inspired 
evolutionary algorithm for scaling factors optimization during manifold medical information 
embedding. InQuantum Inspired Computational intelligence: Research and Applications. Elsevier.
Sambyal, N., & Abrol, P. (2016). Feature based Text Extraction System using Connected Component 
Method. International Journal of Synthetic Emotions, 7(1), 41–57. doi:10.4018/IJSE.2016010104
Sangeetha, J., Nagaraj, K., Murthy, K. B., & Rustagi, R. P. (2016). A New Approach for Analyzing 
the Performance of the WiMAX Networks based on QoS Traffic Prediction Routing Protocol 
using Gene Expression Programming. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 
7(2), 16–38. doi:10.4018/IJAMC.2016040102
Satapathy, S. C., Raja, N. S. M., Rajinikanth, V., Ashour, A. S., & Dey, N. (2017). Multi-level 
image thresholding using Otsu and chaotic bat algorithm. Neural Computing & Applications, 1–23.
Sean, C., & Kevin, C. (2014). An Active Low Cost Mesh Networking Indoor Tracking System. 
International Journal of Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 6(1), 45–79. doi:10.4018/
ijaci.2014010104
Sekercioglu, Y. A., Ivanovich, M., & Yegin, A. (2009). A survey of MAC based QoS implementations 
for WiMAX networks. Computer Networks, 53(14), 2517–2536. doi:10.1016/j.comnet.2009.05.001
Senthilnathan, C. R. (2016). Understanding Retail Consumer Shopping Behaviour Using Rough 
Set Approach. International Journal of Rough Sets and Data Analysis, 3(3), 38–50. doi:10.4018/
IJRSDA.2016070103
Senthilnath, J., Bajpai, S., Omkar, S. N., Diwakar, P. G., & Mani, V. (2012). An approach to 
multi-temporal MODIS image analysis using image classification and segmentation. Advances 
in Space Research, Elsevier, 50(9), 1274–1287. doi:10.1016/j.asr.2012.07.003
Senthilnath, J., Omkar, S. N., Mani, V., Vanjare, A., & Diwakar, P. G. (2014). Multi-Temporal 
Satellite Image Analysis Using Gene Expression Programming. Proceedings of Second International 
Conference on Soft Computing for Problem Solving, 236, 1039 – 1045. doi:10.1007/978-81-322-
1602-5_109
Sermpinis, G., Theofilatos, K., Karathanasopoulos, A., Georgopoulos, E. F., & Dunis, C. L. 
(2013). Forecasting foreign exchange rates with adaptive neural networks using radial-basis 
functions and Particle Swarm Optimization. European Journal of Operational Research, 225(3), 
528–540. doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2012.10.020
317

Compilation of References
Setiawan, N. A. (2014). Fuzzy decision support system for coronary artery disease diagnosis 
based on Rough set theory. International Journal of Rough Sets and Data Analysis, 1(1), 65–80. 
doi:10.4018/ijrsda.2014010105
Shanmugavadivu, P., Balasubramanian, K., & Muruganandam, A. (2014). Particle swarm optimized 
bi-histogram equalization for contrast enhancement and brightness preservation of images. The 
Visual Computer, 30(4), 387–399. doi:10.1007/s00371-013-0863-8
Sharma, K., & Virmani, J. (2017). A Decision Support System for Classification of Normal 
and Medical Renal Disease Using Ultrasound Images: A Decision Support System for Medical 
Renal Diseases. International Journal of Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 8(2), 52–69. 
doi:10.4018/IJACI.2017040104
Sharma, S., Kumar, S., & Singh, B. (2014). AntMeshNet: An ant colony optimization based 
routing approach to wireless mesh networks. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic 
Computing, 5(1), 20–45. doi:10.4018/ijamc.2014010102
Sharma, S., & Malik, A. (2017). Routing in Wireless Mesh Networks based on Termites 
Intelligence. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 8(2), 1–21. doi:10.4018/
IJAMC.2017040101
Sheikholeslami, R., & Kaveh, A. (2013). A Survey of Chaos Embedded Meta-Heuristic Algorithms. 
Int. J. Optim. Civil. Eng., 3(4), 617–633.
Sheppard, D., Tsegaye, T. D., Tadesse, W., McKay, D., & Coleman, T. L. (2001). The application 
of remote sensing, geographic information systems, and Global Positioning System technology 
to improve water quality in northern Alabama. In Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, 
2001. IGARSS’01. IEEE 2001 International (Vol. 3, pp. 1291-1293). IEEE. doi:10.1109/
IGARSS.2001.976822
Shin, Y., & Ghosh, J. (1995). Ridge Polynomial Networks. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 
6(3), 610–622. doi:10.1109/72.377967 PMID:18263347
Shweta, T., & Kamal, K. B. (2014). A Particle Swarm Optimization Approach to Fuzzy Case-
based Reasoning in the Framework of Collaborative Filtering. International Journal of Rough 
Sets and Data Analysis, 1(1), 48–64. doi:10.4018/ijrsda.2014010104
Sick, B. (2002). On-line and indirect tool wear monitoring in turning with artificial neural networks: 
A review of more than a decade of research. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, 16(4), 
487–546. doi:10.1006/mssp.2001.1460
Si, T., De, A., & Bhattacharjee, A. K. (2015). Brain MRI segmentation for tumor detection 
via entropy maximization using Grammatical Swarm. International Journal of Wavelets, 
Multresolution, and Information Processing, 13(05), 1550039. doi:10.1142/S0219691315500393
Soleimani, H., & Kannan, G. (2015). A hybrid particle swarm optimization and genetic algorithm 
for closed-loop supply chain network design in large-scale networks. Applied Mathematical 
Modelling, 39(14), 3990–4012. doi:10.1016/j.apm.2014.12.016
318

Compilation of References
Song, D., Ru-Chuan, W., Xiong, F., & Le-Chan, Y. (2010). Gene expression programming for 
attribution reduction in rough set. International Journal of Computers and Applications, 32(2), 
226–231. doi:10.2316/Journal.202.2010.2.202-2842
Sortino, M. (2003). Application of statistical filtering for optical detection of tool wear. International 
Journal of Machine Tools & Manufacture, 43(5), 493–497. doi:10.1016/S0890-6955(02)00266-3
Stagg, G. W., & El-Abid, A. H. (1968). Computer Methods in Power System Analysis. McGraw-
Hill Book Co.
Standard, I. (1991). Drinking water-specification. 1st Revision, IS, 10500.
Structures of life. (2007). US Department of Health and Human Services.
Sun, D. I., Ashley, B., Brewer, B., Hughes, A., & Tinney, W. F. (1984). Optimal Power Flow 
by Newton Approach. IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, 103(10), pp2864–
pp2880. doi:10.1109/TPAS.1984.318284
Sun, W., & Wang, Y. (2005). Segmentation method of MRI using fuzzy Gaussian basis neural 
network. Neural Information Processing-Letters and Reviews, 8(2), 19–24.
Surry, P. D., & Radcliffe, N. J. (1996). Formal Algorithms + Formal Representations = Search 
Strategies. Paper presented at the Parallel Problem Solving from Nature IV, London, UK.
Suzuki, K., Horiba, I., & Sugie, N. (2003). Neural edge enhancer for supervised edge enhancement 
from noisy images. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 25(12), 
1582–1596. doi:10.1109/TPAMI.2003.1251151
Suzuki, K., Shiraishi, J., Abe, H., MacMahon, H., & Doi, K. (2005). False-positive reduction 
in computer-aided diagnostic scheme for detecting nodules in chest radiographs by means of 
massive training artificial neural network 1. Academic Radiology, 12(2), 191–201. doi:10.1016/j.
acra.2004.11.017 PMID:15721596
Taher, S. A., Fini, M. H., & Aliabadi, S. F. (2014). Fractional order PID controller design for 
LFC in electric power systems using imperialist competitive algorithm. Ain Shams Engineering 
Journal, 5(1), 121–135. doi:10.1016/j.asej.2013.07.006
Tam, K. S., & Kumar, P. (1990). Application of superconductive magnetic energy storage in 
an asynchronous link between power systems. IEEE Transactions on Energy Conversion, 5(3), 
436–444. doi:10.1109/60.105266
Tanner, R., & Loh, N. K. (1992). A toxonomy of multi-sensor fusion. Journal of Manufacturing 
Systems, 11(5), 314–325. doi:10.1016/0278-6125(92)90060-S
Tian, Z., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., McCauley, P., & Shi, F. (2017). Morphological segmenting 
and neighborhood pixel-based locality preserving projection on brain fMRI dataset for semantic 
feature extraction: An affective computing study. Neural Computing & Applications, 1–16.
319

Compilation of References
Tinney, W. F., & Hart, C. E. (1967, November). Power Flow-Solution by Newton’s Method. 
IEEE Transactions, 86, 1449.
Tiwari, P. K., & Sood, Y. R. (2012). Efficient and optimal approach for location and parameter 
setting of multiple unified power flow controllers for a deregulated power sector. IET Gener. 
Transm. Distrib, 6(10), 958–967. doi:10.1049/iet-gtd.2011.0722
Tobias, O. J., & Seara, R. (2002). Image segmentation by histogram thresholding using fuzzy 
sets. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 11(12), 1457–1465. doi:10.1109/TIP.2002.806231 
PMID:18249714
Tourassi, G. D., & Floyd, C. Jr. (1993). Artificial Neural Networks for Single Photon Emission 
Computed Tomography: A Study of Cold Lesion Detection and Localization. Investigative 
Radiology, 28(8), 671–677. doi:10.1097/00004424-199308000-00002 PMID:8375998
Tsai, A., Yezzi, A., Wells, W., Tempany, C., Tucker, D., Fan, A., & Willsky, A. et al. (2003). A 
shape-based approach to the segmentation of medical imagery using level sets. IEEE Transactions 
on Medical Imaging, 22(2), 137–154. doi:10.1109/TMI.2002.808355 PMID:12715991
Tsou, M.-H., & Smith, J. (2011). Free and Open Source software for GIS education. San Diego, 
CA: Academic Press.
Tyagi, S., Som, S., & Rana, Q. P. (2017). Trust based dynamic multicast group routing ensuring 
reliability for ubiquitous environment in MANETs. International Journal of Ambient Computing 
and Intelligence, 8(1), 70–97. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2017010104
Vasantha, M., Bharathi, D. V. S., & Dhamodharan, R. (2010). Medical image feature, extraction, 
selection and classification. International Journal of Engineering Science and Technology, 1(2), 
2071–2076.
Vasudevan, S., & Oturan, M. A. (2014). Electrochemistry: As cause and cure in water pollution—
an overview. Environmental Chemistry Letters, 12(1), 97–108. doi:10.1007/s10311-013-0434-2
Vavak, F., & Fogarty, T. C. T. C. (1996). Comparison of Steady State and Generational Genetic 
Algorithms for Use in Nonstationary Environments. Academic Press.
Venkateswara Rao, B., & Nagesh Kumar, G. V. (2014). Optimal Location of Thyristor Controlled 
Series Capacitor for reduction of Transmission Line losses using BAT Search Algorithm. WSEAS 
Transactions on Power Systems, 9, 459–470.
Venugopal Setty, D., Rangaswamy, T. M., & Subramanya, K. N. (2010). A review on data mining 
applications to the performance of stock marketing. International Journal of Computers and 
Applications, 1(3), 33–43. doi:10.5120/88-187
Verma, B., & Zakos, J. (2001). A computer-aided diagnosis system for digital mammograms based 
on fuzzy-neural and feature extraction techniques. IEEE Transactions on Information Technology 
in Biomedicine, 5(1), 46–54. doi:10.1109/4233.908389 PMID:11300216
320

Compilation of References
VijayalakshmiPai, G. A., & Michel, T. (2017). Metaheuristic Optimization of Constrained Large 
Portfolios using Hybrid Particle Swarm Optimization. Int. Jr. Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 
8(1).
Vincent, , & Bernard, , & Kockara. (n.d.). Extraction of Protein Sequence Motifs Information by 
Bi-Clustering Algorithm. Academic Press.
Virmani, J., Dey, N., & Kumar, V. (2016). PCA-PNN and PCA-SVM based CAD systems for 
breast density classification. In Applications of intelligent optimization in biology and medicine 
(pp. 159–180). Springer International Publishing.
Vladimír, B., Petr, T., Peter, M., Karel, M., & Petr, B. (2016). Application of Ambient Intelligence 
in Educational Institutions: Visions and Architectures. International Journal of Ambient Computing 
and Intelligence, 7(1), 94–120. doi:10.4018/IJACI.2016010105
Voß, S., Martello, S., Osman, I. H., & Roucairol, C. (Eds.). (2012). Meta-heuristic: Advances 
and trends in local search paradigms for optimization. Springer Science & Business Media.
Wall, M. (1996). GAlib: A C ++ Library of Genetic Algorithm Components. Academic Press.
Wang, Z., Fang, J., & Liu, X. (2006). Global stability of stochastic high-order neural networks with 
discrete and distributed delays, Chaos, Solutions and Fractals. doi:, 06.06310.1016/j.chaos.2006
Wang.G, & Dunbrack.R. (2003). PISCES: A protein sequence culling server. Bioinformatics, 
1589-1591.
Wang, D., He, T., Li, Z., Cao, L., Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., & Shi, F. et al. (2016). Image feature-
based affective retrieval employing improved parameter and structure identification of adaptive 
neuro-fuzzy inference system. Neural Computing & Applications, 1–16.
Wang, Y., Adali, T., Kung, S. Y., & Szabo, Z. (1998). Quantification and segmentation of brain 
tissues from MR images: A probabilistic neural network approach. IEEE Transactions on Image 
Processing, 7(8), 1165–1181. doi:10.1109/83.704309 PMID:18172510
Wang, Y., Heng, P. A., & Wahl, F. M. (2003). Image reconstructions from two orthogonal projections. 
International Journal of Imaging Systems and Technology, 13(2), 141–145. doi:10.1002/ima.10036
Wang, Y., Ma, X., Xu, M., Liu, Y., & Wang, Y. (2015). Two-echelon logistics distribution region 
partitioning problem based on a hybrid particle swarm optimization–genetic algorithm. Expert 
Systems with Applications, 42(12), 5019–5031. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2015.02.058
Warsito, W., & Fan, L. S. (2001). Neural network based multi-criterion optimization image 
reconstruction technique for imaging two-and three-phase flow systems using electrical capacitance 
tomography. Measurement Science & Technology, 12(12), 2198–2210. doi:10.1088/0957-
0233/12/12/323
Watson, J., Ross, C., Eisele, V., Denton, J., Bins, J., Guerra, C., . . . Howe, A. (1998). The Traveling 
Salesrep Problem, Edge Assembly Crossover, and 2-opt. Academic Press.
321

Compilation of References
Watson, R. A., & Pollack, J. B. (2000). Recombination without respect: Schema combination 
and disruption in genetic algorithm crossover. Proceedings of the 2000 Genetic and Evolutionary 
Computation Conference.
Wechmongkhonkon, S., Poomtong, N., & Areerachakul, S. (2012). Application of Artificial 
Neural Network to classification surface water quality. World Academy of Science, Engineering 
and Technology, 6.
White, H. (1998). Economic Prediction Using Neural Networks: The Case of IBM Daily Stock 
Returns. Proceedings of the Second Annual IEEE Conference on Neural Networks, 1(2), 451-458.
Whitley, D., Starkweather, T., & Shaner, D. (1990). The Traveling Salesman and Sequence 
Scheduling: Quality Solutions Using Genetic Edge Recombination. Academic Press.
Whitley, L. D., Starkweather, T., & Fuquay, D. A. (1989). Scheduling problems and traveling 
salesmen: The genetic edge recombination operator. Paper presented at the ICGA.
Wilcoxon, F., Katti, S. K., & Wilcox, R. A. (1970). Critical values and probability levels for the 
Wilcoxon rank sum test and the Wilcoxon signed rank test. Selected Tables in Mathematical 
Statistics, 1, 171-259.
Wolberg, W. H., Street, W. N., & Mangasarian, O. L. (1995). Image analysis and machine learning 
applied to breast cancer diagnosis and prognosis. Analytical and Quantitative Cytology and 
Histology, 17(2), 77–87. PMID:7612134
Wu, W., Dandy, G. C., & Maier, H. R. (2011). Application of artificial neural networks to 
forecasting water quality in a chloraminated water distribution system. 19th Int. Congr. Model. 
Simul. Modsim2011, 1112-1118.
Wu, Y., Giger, M. L., Doi, K., Vyborny, C. J., Schmidt, R. A., & Metz, C. E. (1993). Artificial 
neural networks in mammography: Application to decision making in the diagnosis of breast 
cancer. Radiology, 187(1), 81–87. doi:10.1148/radiology.187.1.8451441 PMID:8451441
Xu, L., Huang, Y., Shen, X., & Liu, Y. (2017). Parallelizing Gene Expression Programming 
Algorithm in Enabling Large-Scale Classification. Scientific Programming, 2017.
Xu, J., Hancock, K., & Southworth, F. (2003). Simulation of regional freight movement with 
trade and transportation multinetworks. Transportation Research Record, 1854, 152–161. 
doi:10.3141/1854-17
Yamamura, M., Ono, I., & Kobayashi, S. (1992). Character-preserving genetic algorithms for 
traveling salesman problem. Journal of Japanese Society for Artificial Intelligence, 7(6), 1049–1059.
Yang, X. S. (2010). A new metaheuristic bat-inspired algorithm. Nature inspired cooperative 
strategies for optimization (NICSO 2010), 65-74.
322

Compilation of References
Yang, X.-S. (2010). A new metaheuristic bat-inspired algorithm. In Nature Inspired Cooperative 
Strategies for Optimization. Springer Berlin. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-12538-6_6
Yang, X.-S. (2008). Nature-Inspired Metaheuristic Algorithms. Luniver Press.
Yeh, J. Y., & Fu, J. C. (2008). A hierarchical genetic algorithm for segmentation of multi-
spectral human-brain MRI. Expert Systems with Applications, 34(2), 1285–1295. doi:10.1016/j.
eswa.2006.12.012
Yong, W. (2015). An Approximate Algorithm for Triangle TSP with a Four-Vertex-Three-Line 
Inequality. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic Computing, 6(1), 35–46. doi:10.4018/
ijamc.2015010103
Youcheng, Nan, Majie, Kedi, Yuan, & Qu. (2012). K-means optimization clustering algorithm 
based on Particle swarm optimization and multiclass merging. Advances in CSIE, 1, 569-578.
Yuan, S., Skinner, B., Huang, S., & Liu, D. (2013). A new crossover approach for solving the 
multiple travelling salesmen problem using genetic algorithms. European Journal of Operational 
Research, 228(1), 72–82. doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2013.01.043
Zadshakoyan, M., & Pourmostaghimi, V. (2013). Genetic equation for the prediction of tool–chip 
contact length in orthogonal cutting. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, 26(7), 
1725–1730. doi:10.1016/j.engappai.2012.10.016
Zadshakoyan, M., & Pourmostaghimi, V. (2015). Cutting tool crater wear measurement in turning 
using chip geometry and genetic programming. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic 
Computing, 6(1), 47–60. doi:10.4018/ijamc.2015010104
Zakaria, B., Souham, M., & Mohamed, B. (2017). Scalable Differential Evolutionary Clustering 
Algorithm for Big Data Using Map-Reduce Paradigm. International Journal of Applied 
Metaheuristic Computing, 8(1), 45–60. doi:10.4018/IJAMC.2017010103
Zakir, H. A. (2010). Genetic algorithm for the traveling salesman problem using sequential 
constructive crossover operator. International Journal of Biometrics & Bioinformatics, 3(6), 
96–105.
Zangeneh, D., & Yazdi, M. (2016, May). Automatic segmentation of multiple sclerosis lesions 
in brain MRI using constrained GMM and genetic algorithm. In Electrical Engineering (ICEE), 
2016 24th Iranian Conference on (pp. 832-837). IEEE. doi:10.1109/IranianCEE.2016.7585635
Zhaoa-Xing-Ming. (2005). A novel approach to extracting features from motif content and protein 
composition for protein sequence classification. Neural Networks, 1019–1028. PMID:16153801
Zheng & Tan. (2000). Dynamic Character Study of UPFC Based on Detailed Simulation Model. 
IEEE Power Conference 2000.
323

Compilation of References
Zhou, Jiang, Yang, & Chen. (2002). Lung Cancer Cell Identification Based on Artificial Neural 
Network Ensembles. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 24, 25-36.
Zhu, W., Fang, J., Tang, Y., Zhang, W., & Du, W. (2012). Digital IIR Filters Design Using 
Differential Evolution Algorithm with a Controllable Probabilistic Population Size. PLoS ONE, 
7(7), e40549–e40549. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0040549 PMID:22808191
Zhu, Y., & Yan, Z. (1997). Computerized tumor boundary detection using a Hopfield neural network. 
IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 16(1), 55–67. doi:10.1109/42.552055 PMID:9050408
Zuo, J., Tang, C., Li, C., Yuan, C., & Chen, A. (2002). Time series prediction based on gene 
expression programming. International Conference on Advances in WebAge Information & 
Management, 3129(1), 55–56.
324

About the Contributors
Nilanjan Dey is an assistant prof. at the Department of Information Technology, 
Techno India College of Technology, Kolkata, W.B., India. He holds an honorary 
position of Visiting Scientist at Global Biomedical Technologies Inc., CA, USA 
and Research Scientist of Laboratory of Applied Mathematical Modeling in Hu-
man Physiology, Territorial Organization of- Scientific and Engineering Unions, 
BULGARIA. Associate Researcher of Laboratoire RIADI, University of Manouba, 
TUNISIA. His research topic is Medical Imaging, Soft computing, Data mining, 
Machine learning, Rough set, Computer Aided Diagnosis, Atherosclerosis. He has 
16 books and 300 international conferences and journal papers. He is the Editor-
in-Chief of International Journal of Ambient Computing and Intelligence (IGI 
Global), US, International Journal of Rough Sets and Data Analysis (IGI Global), 
US, and the International Journal of Synthetic Emotions (IJSE), IGI Global, US. 
Series Editor of Advances in Geospatial Technologies (AGT) Book Series, (IGI 
Global), US, Executive Editor of International Journal of Image Mining (IJIM), 
Inderscience, and Associated Editor of IEEE Access and International Journal of 
Service Science, Management, Engineering and Technology, IGI Global. He is a 
life member of IE, UACEE, ISOC.
* * *
B. Anand received his B.E degree in Electrical and Electronics Engineering 
in 2001 from Government College of Engineering, Tirunelveli and M.E. degree in 
Power Systems Engineering from Annamalai University in 2002 and Ph.D. degree 
in Electrical Engineering from Anna University, Chennai in 2011. Since 2003, he 
has been with the department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Hindus-
than College of Engineering and Technology, Coimbatore, Tamilnadu, INDIA. 
Currently, he is an Associate Professor. His research interests are Power System 
Control, Optimization, and application of computational intelligence to power system 
problems and he published more than 75 papers in National/International journals 
and conferences. He is IEEE member, SSI and ISTE.
325

About the Contributors
Amira S. Ashour received the B.Eng. degree in Electrical Engineering from 
Faculty of Engineering, Tanta University, Egypt in 1997, M.Sc. in Image Process-
ing in 2001 and Ph.D. in Smart Antenna in 2005 from Faculty of Engineering, 
Tanta University, Egypt. In 2005, she has appointed as a Lecturer in Electronics 
and Electrical Communications Engineering at Tanta University where she is now 
Assistant Professor and Head of Department-EEC. She has been the Vice Chair 
of Computer Engineering Department, Computers and Information Technology 
College, Taif University, KSA for one year from 2015. She has been the vice chair 
of CS department, CIT college, Taif University, KSA for 5 years. Her research in-
terests are Smart antenna, Direction of arrival estimation, Targets tracking, Image 
processing, Medical imaging, Machine learning, Signal/image/video processing, 
Image analysis, Computer vision, and Optimization. She has 6 books and about 70 
published journal papers. She is an Editor-in-Chief for the International Journal 
of Synthetic Emotions (IJSE), IGI Global, US. She is an Associate Editor for the 
IJRSDA, IGI Global, US as well as the IJACI, IGI Global, US. She is an Editorial 
Board Member of the International Journal of Image Mining (IJIM), Inderscience.
H. S. Behera has completed his ME (Computer Science & Engineering) from 
National Institute of Technology, Rourkela, India, and Ph.D. (Engineering) from Biju 
Pattanaik University of Technology. His area of interest includes data mining and 
soft- computing, software engineering, distributed system. Dr. Behera has more than 
200 research publications in National and International journals and conferences. 
Currently he is working as Associate Professor, department of computer science 
engineering & information technology, VSS University of Technology, Burla, India. 
He has more than 20 years of experiences in teaching as well as research.
Jamal Benhra received his PhD in Automatic and Production Engineering from 
National Higher School of Electricity and Mechanics (ENSEM), Casablanca in 2007. 
He has his Habilitation to drive Researchs in Industrial Engineering from Science 
and Technology University, SETTAT in 2011. He is Professor and responsible of 
Industrial Engineering Department in National Higher School of Electricity and 
Mechanics (ENSEM), Hassan II University, Casablanca, Morocco. His current 
main research interests concern Modeling, Robot, Optimization, Meta-heuristic, 
and Supply Chain Management.
Said Benkachcha received his DESA in Laboratory of Mechanics of Structures 
and Materials, LMSM, of ENSEM – Casablanca in 2006. In 2011 He joined the 
Laboratory of Computer Systems and Renewable Energy (LISER) of the ENSEM 
Hassan II University, Casablanca, Morocco. His current research field is demand 
forecasting and collaborative warehouse management.
326

About the Contributors
Shouvik Chakraborty currently pursuing Ph.D. in Computer Science and En-
gineering from the University of Kalyani. He completed his M.Tech in Computer 
Science and Engineering from the University of Kalyani, Nadia, West Bengal, India in 
2016. He completed his B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering from Hooghly 
Engineering & Technology College under Maulana Abul Kalam Azad University 
of Technology (Formerly known as West Bengal University of Technology), West 
Bengal, India in 2014. He has received AICTE National Fellowship during Master 
of Technology. He secured First class First position in Master of Technology. He 
is a member of International Association of Computer Science and Information 
Technology, Singapore, International Association of Engineers, Student Member, 
Institute of Research Engineers and Doctors (Universal Association of Computer 
and Electronics Engineers), USA, Governing body member, Chinsurah Computer 
Academy, India. His research interests include Soft and Evolutionary Computing, 
Digital Image Processing, Bio-medical Image Analysis, Pattern Recognition, Ma-
chine Learning and Optimization Techniques. He has published two book chapters 
and published and presented many research papers in different international and 
national journals and conferences.
Sankhadeep Chatterjee is currently pursuing M.Tech in Computer science 
& Engineering from University of Calcutta, Kolkata, West Bengal, India. He has 
completed his B.Tech in Computer science and Engineering from Maulana Abul 
Kalam Azad University of Technology (Formerly Known as West Bengal University 
of Technology) on 2015 and joined Calcutta University. He received National Fel-
lowship during Master of Technology (2015 - 2017). His research interests include: 
Machine Learning, Pattern Recognition, Optimization Techniques and Image Pro-
cessing. He has attended several International Conferences and has published his 
research works in several reputed International Journals. He has published 2 book 
chapters. He is a Student Member of Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers 
(IEEE), member of International Association of Engineers (IAENG), Hong Kong. 
He is a member of several International societies. He acted as a regular reviewer of 
IEEE Access, International Journal of Ambient Computing and Intelligence (IJACI), 
International Journal of Synthetic Emotions (IJSE), International Journal of Rough 
Sets and Data Analysis (IJRSDA) and several International Conferences.
D. Deepak Chowdary was born in Srikakulam, India in 1978. He received his 
Bachelor degree in Electrical and Electronics Engineering from College of Engi-
neering, Gandhi Institute of Technology And Management (GITAM) Visakapatnam, 
Andhra Pradesh, India in 2000, the Master degree in Electrical Power Engineering 
from the College of Engineering, JNTU, Hyderabad in 2006 and He received his 
Doctoral degree from Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad in 
327

About the Contributors
2014. He is presently working as Professor & Principal, Dr.L.Bullayya College of 
Engineering (for Women), Resapuvanipalem, Visakhapatnam. His research interests 
include gas insulated substations, FACTS devices, Power System Stability analysis, 
fuzzy logic and neural network applications, distributed generation, Partial Discharge 
Studies and Bearing less drives. He has published several research papers in national 
and international conferences and journals. He is a member of ISTE and IE.
Sanjoy Das completed his B.E. from Regional Engineering College, Durgapur, 
M.E. from Bengal Engineering College (Deemed Univ.), and Howrah, Ph.D. from 
Bengal Engineering and Science University, Shibpur. Currently he is working as 
Associate Professor in Dept. of Engineering and Technological Studies, University 
of Kalyani. His research interests are Tribology and Optimization Techniques.
Krishna Gopal Dhal completed his B.Tech and M. Tech from Kalyani Govern-
ment Engineering College, Nadia, West Bengal, India. Currently he is working as 
Assistant Professor in Dept. of Computer Sc. & Application, Midnapore College 
(Autonomous), West Bengal, India. His research interests are image processing and 
Nature inspired Metaheuristics.
Hicham El Hassani received his engineer degree of Industrial Engineering 
in the National School of applied sciences in 2009. Since 2009, he works at the 
Hassania School of Public Works Casablanca. In 2011 He joined the Laboratory 
of Computer Systems and Renewable Energy (LISER) of the ENSEM Hassan II 
University Casablanca Morocco. He received his PhD thesis in 2016 in Industrial 
Engineering in ENSEM Casablanca Morocco. His current research field is Model-
ing Simulation and Optimization of global supply chain including environmental 
concerns and reverse logistic, Meta-heuristic, and Supply Chain Management.
R. Gowri, MCA, M.Phil, is pursuing full- time research in Department of Com-
puter Science, Periyar University, Salem, India for the past 2 years. She is a UGC-
NET JRF candidate doing research under guidance of Dr. R. Rathipriya, Assistant 
Professor, Department of Computer Science, Periyar University, Salem.
K. Jagatheesan received his B.E degree in Electrical and Electronics Engineering 
in 2009 from Hindusthan College of Engineering and Technology, Coimbatore and 
M.E. degree in Applied Electronics in 2012 from Paavai College of Engineering, 
Namakkal, and Ph.D. Degree in Information and Communication Engineering from 
Anna University Chennai in 2017.Currently, he is an Assistant Professor in Paavai 
college of Engineering with the department of Electrical and Electronic Engineer-
328

About the Contributors
ing. His area of interest includes Advanced Control System, Electrical Machines 
and Power system modeling and control and he published more than 35 papers in 
National/International journals and conferences. He is an Associate Member of 
UACEE, Member of SCIEI, IACSIT, IAENG, ISRD and Graduate Student Member 
of IEEE.
G. V. Nagesh Kumar was born in Visakhapatnam, India in 1977. He gradu-
ated College of Engineering, Gandhi Institute of Technology and Management, 
Visakhapatnam, India, Masters Degree from the College of Engineering, Andhra 
University, Visakhapatnam. He received his Doctoral degree from Jawaharlal Nehru 
Technological University, Hyderabad. He is presently working as Professor in the 
Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Vignans Institute of Infor-
mation Technology, Visakhapatnam. His research interests include gas insulated 
substations, FACTS devices, Power System Stability analysis, fuzzy logic and 
neural network applications, distributed generation, Partial Discharge Studies and 
Bearing less drives. He has published more than 250 research papers in national and 
international conferences and journals. He received “Sastra Award”, “Best Paper 
Award” and “Best Researcher Award”. He is a member of various societies, ISTE, 
IEEE, IE and System Society of India. He is also a reviewer for IEEE Transactions 
on Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation, Power Systems and a member on Board of 
several conferences and journals.
Kalyani Mali is a full Professor at the Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering, University of Kalyani, Nadia. She was the Head of CSE department 
4 times and recently during the period 2014 to 2016. She has more than 25 years 
of research experience and more than 23 years of teaching experience. She has 
completed her PhD on the topic Modeling of Heterogeneous Data in Data Mining. 
Her research interests include pattern recognition, data mining, bioinformatics, soft 
computing and multimedia.
B. B. Misra is currently working as Dean (Research) at Silicon Institute of Tech-
nology, Bhubaneswar, India. He received Bachelor degree from Kanpur University, 
India, Masters in Computer Science from Utkal University, Bhubaneswar, India 
and Ph.D. in Engineering from Biju Pattanaik University of Technology, Rourkela, 
India. He has done his Post Doctoral Research at AJOU University, South Korea. His 
areas of interests include Data Mining, Bioinformatics, Bio-inspired Computation 
and Computational Intelligence. He has published one book, three book chapters 
and more than 150 papers in different journals and conferences. He has been a key 
note speaker and session chair of different national and international conferences.
329

About the Contributors
K. N. Balasubramanya Murthy received his Bachelor’s degree from the Dept. 
of Electrical Power Engineering, University of Mysore, India, Masters in the Dept. 
of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India and Ph.D. 
in the Dept. of Computer Science & Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, 
Chennai, India. He is currently the Vice-Chancellor of PES University, Bangalore 
and Director of PES Institute of Technology. He is currently serving as a member of 
a committee constituted by Karnataka Knowledge Council (KKC) for recommend-
ing mechanisms to enhance employability of engineering graduates. His research 
interest includes Networks & Security, Wireless Networks, Parallel Algorithms and 
Soft Computing.
Keerthiraj Nagaraj is currently pursuing PhD in the field of wireless and mobile 
networks from Electrical and Computer Engineering department at University of 
Florida, Gainesville, USA. He completed M.S from the department of Electrical and 
Computer Engineering at University of Florida, USA, and B.E from the department 
of Electronics and Communication Engineering at PES Institute of Technology, Ban-
galore, India. His research interests lie in the fields of Wireless and mobile networks, 
Mobile social networks, Social network analysis, Wireless localization and Nature 
inspired algorithms. You can reach him at keerthi (dot) n250 at gmail (dot) com.
Sarat Chandra Nayak holds a Ph.D. degree in Computer Engineering from 
VSSUT, Burla, India and M. Tech. in Computer Science from Utkal University, 
Bhubaneswar, India. His research interests are Data Mining, Soft Computing, Pre-
dictive Systems, Financial Time Series Forecasting, Computational Intelligence, 
Evolutionary Computation, and Classification. He has more than 30 research articles 
in reputed International journals and conferences, and 4 book chapters in his credit. 
He has 10 years of experience in teaching and research. Dr. Nayak currently associ-
ated with computer science and engineering department as a Professor at Kommuri 
Pratap Reddy Institute of Technology, Hyderabad, India.
Vahid Pourmostaghimi was born in Tabriz, Iran, in Jan 1982. He received the 
B.S. Degree in Manufacturing Engineering in 2006 and the M.Sc. Degree in Manu-
facturing Engineering in 2009 from the University of Tabriz, Iran. He is currently 
a Ph.D. student of Manufacturing Engineering at University of Tabriz, Faculty of 
Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering. His focused area of research is adap-
tive control optimization, intelligent machining, predictive modelling in machining 
processes using metaheuristic methods.
330

About the Contributors
R. Rathipriya, M.Sc, M.Phil, MCA, Ph.D, is an Assistant Professor in the 
Department of Computer Science, Periyar University, Salem for past 9 years. She 
has 11 years of teaching experience and 9 years of research experience. She has 
produced more than 50 research contributions in National and International Journals 
and Conferences.
Ram P. Rustagi received his M.Tech degree from the Indian Institute of Sci-
ence, Bangalore, India. He received his PhD in the Department of Computer Sci-
ence & Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, India. He is currently a 
Professor in the Department of Computer Science & Engineering, PES University, 
Bangalore, India. Previously he had served several industries like Kirusa Software 
Pvt Ltd, Pronto Networks Inc., Abeona Networks, Inc., Savera Systems Inc, and 
C-DoT. He has filed two patents. His areas of interest include Software Defined 
Networking, Vehicular Clouds, Web Archiving, Cyber security, Audio WiFi. He is 
a senior member of IEEE.
J. Sangeetha is pursuing her Ph.D. from Visvesvaraya Technological University, 
Belgaum, India. She is currently working as Associate Professor, in the Department 
of Computer Science & Engineering at PES University, Bangalore, India. She re-
ceived her Master’s in Information Technology from Bangalore University, India 
and Bachelor’s degree from the Department of Computer Science & Engineering, 
from Bangalore University, India. Her research interest includes Mobile Comput-
ing, Wireless Networks, Networks and Security and Nature Inspired Algorithms.
Sarbartha Sarkar is currently pursuing M.Tech in Tunneling and Underground 
Space Technology in Indian Institute of Technology (Indian School of Mines), 
Dhanbad. He completed his B.Tech in Civil Engineering from Hooghly Engineer-
ing & Technology College. He has published his research works in peer reviewed 
International journals. His research interest is RC Structure, Environmental Engi-
neering and Tunnel engineering.
Soumya Sen is an Assistant professor in A. K. Choudhury School of Information 
Technology under University of Calcutta since March, 2009. He has been awarded 
with Ph.D. (Tech) degree in 2016 from Department of Computer Science & Engineer-
ing, University of Calcutta. He obtained his M. Tech. Degree in Computer science 
& Engineering from University of Calcutta in 2007. Prior to this he completed his 
M.Sc in Computer & Information Science in the year 2005 also from University of 
Calcutta. Before joining A. K. Choudhury School of Information Technology Dr. 
331

About the Contributors
Sen also worked in IBM India Pvt. Ltd and RS Software. His industrial expertiza-
tion includes ERP & Data Warehouse. Currently his research area interests are Data 
Warehouse & OLAP Tool, Big Data, Service Engineering, Distributed Database. He 
has around 25 research papers published in Peer reviewed journals and International 
Conferences. He has 3 patents registered in USA, Japan & South Korea. He has 
published also published a book with Springer, Germany. His research collabora-
tions include Institutes like Ca’ Foscari University, Italy; Winona State University, 
USA; National Institute of Technology, Duragapur, India etc.
Polamraju V. S. Sobhan was born in Ongole, A.P, India in 1977. He received 
his B.Tech. in Electrical and Electrical Engineering from SVH COE, Nagarjuna 
University, India in 1999 and M.E. degree in Control Systems from College of 
Engineering, Andhra University, India in 2002. He is pursuing Ph.D. from JNT 
University, Kakinada, India. Presently he is working as an Associate Professor in 
the Department of Electrical and Electrical Engineering, VFSTR University, Guntur, 
India since 2006. His research interests are Optimisation, Controller design, Active 
magnetic bearings and bearingless drives.
B. Venkateswararao was born in Ramabhadrapuram, India in 1978. He received 
his Bachelor degree in Electrical and Electronics Engineering from College of Engi-
neering, Gandhi Institute of Technology And Management(GITAM) Visakapatnam, 
Andhra Pradesh, India in 2000, the Master degree in Electrical Power Engineering 
from the College of Engineering, JNTU, Hyderabad in 2007 and He received his 
Doctoral degree from Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad in 
2015. He is presently working as Associate Professor in the Department of Electri-
cal and Electronics Engineering, V R Siddhartha Engineering College, Vijayawada. 
His research interests are Power system stability analysis, FACTS devices, Power 
system control and power system optimization. He has published several research 
papers in national and international conferences and journals. He is a member of 
ISTE and IE.
Mohammad Zadshakoyan was born in Maragheh, Iran, in May 1964. He 
received his B.S. Degree in Mechanical Engineering from University of Tabriz in 
1987 and the M.Sc. Degree in Mechanical Engineering from the University of Bor-
deaux, France, in 1994. He received the Ph.D. Degree in Manufacturing Engineering 
from University of Bordeaux, France, in 1998. He is now Assistant Professor in the 
faculty of Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering at University of Tabriz. His 
research interests include adaptive control, intelligent machining, mechatronic in 
manufacturing systems.
332

333
Index
2-way clustering 95-99, 108, 110, 113
A
Amino Acid 107, 116-117
Ant Colony Optimization 144, 164, 170, 
185, 191-193, 195, 198, 206, 236, 286
ARCH 233, 263
ARIMA 233, 263
Artificial intelligence 141, 143, 185-186
Artificial Neural Network 37, 46, 53, 57, 
64, 125, 144-145, 147-155, 194, 231, 
233-235, 237, 263, 265, 267, 272, 
276, 278
ASONN-GA 38, 231-232, 242-244, 248-
249, 251-254, 257-258, 263
Automatic Generation Control 164
B
BAT algorithm 2, 6, 12-14, 17-20, 22, 24-
25, 29, 33, 74, 194
bio-inspired 95, 97, 99-101, 105-107, 112-
113, 144-145, 152-153, 155, 206, 234
biomedical image analysis 143-147, 150-
155
BSE 235, 237, 245, 251-252, 263
C
chaotic sequence 73-74, 79, 88, 93
classification 37-38, 41, 118, 144-145, 147, 
151-155, 163, 186, 188, 195, 197, 
218, 234-236, 265-266, 271, 286
clustering 73, 95-99, 108-110, 113, 128, 
153, 186-187, 195, 197-198, 208, 235
color image enhancement 84, 88
combinatorial optimization 38, 41, 208-
209, 229
Computed Tomography 143, 185, 187, 196
Computer aided diagnosis 144
Constant Bit Rate Based Traffic 70
crater wear 118-121, 125, 127-129, 131, 
133, 141
CSA 1, 4, 17, 29, 33
cuckoo search algorithm 1-2, 4-6, 16-19, 
22, 24, 29, 33
cutting parameters 129, 133
cutting process 118-120, 125-126, 129
D
DE 2, 4, 6, 33, 71, 73, 75, 78-79, 83-85, 
87-88, 101, 206, 235, 263
E
EA 4, 128, 235, 263
Edge recombination Crossover (ERX) 205, 
220
Empirical Value 70
exchange rate forecasting 245
expression tree 42, 45, 48-49, 51-52, 56-
57, 61-62, 70
F
FA 1, 15, 33, 73-74, 187
FACTS 1-3, 5, 7, 27-28, 33
FACTS Devices or FACTS Controllers 27, 
33
Feature Extraction 144, 150, 163, 286

334 
Index
feature selection 144, 152, 163
file transfer application 35, 39, 47, 54-59, 
63-64, 70
Financial time series forecasting 231
firefly algorithm 1-4, 6, 15, 17-19, 22, 24, 
29, 33, 73, 187, 192, 197, 235
FLANN 237, 263
Fractal Dimension 71, 75-76, 78, 93
G
Gamut Problem 87, 94
GARCH 233, 263
Gene Expression Programming 34, 37-38, 
41, 47-48, 64
Genetic Algorithm (GA) 3-4, 38, 41, 71, 
73-74, 83, 85, 95, 98, 100-102, 105-
106, 113, 121-122, 141, 144-145, 
153-154, 187, 192, 195-196, 198, 
205-207, 210, 213-215, 218, 220-222, 
231-232, 234-240, 242-244, 248-249, 
257, 263-265, 267-270, 274-275, 279, 
286
H
Higher Order Neural Network 236-237, 
258, 263
Homologous proteins 116
Hue 84, 87, 94
I
image analysis 96, 143-147, 150-155, 163, 
186, 198
image enhancement 4, 72-74, 82, 84, 87-
88, 94
image processing 3, 71-73, 128, 130, 149, 
154-155, 163, 186-187, 194-195
image segmentation 4, 144, 148-149, 163, 
185-187, 196-198
interconnected power systems 165, 169
L
linking function 41, 43, 45, 48, 51, 56, 61, 
70
Logo representation 100, 110-111, 117
M
machining 118-120, 126, 128-129, 135, 
141-142
MAE 249, 263
magnetic resonance imaging 143, 163, 
185, 187
manufacturing 118-120, 125, 128-129, 135
medical image analysis 144-145, 186
medical imaging 143-144, 163, 198
Medical Modalities 163
meta-heuristic algorithms 185, 266-267, 
280
meta-heuristic model 117
Meta-Heuristics 118, 128, 141, 148-149, 
191, 205-207, 229, 272
MLP 234-237, 240-241, 248-249, 251, 
254, 257, 263
MLR 247, 263
Multi-Layer Perceptron Neural Network 
39, 46, 53, 64
Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm 269
mutation rate 41, 43, 48, 70, 125, 205, 215
N
Neural Network 4, 37-39, 46, 53, 64, 73, 
144, 147-149, 151, 165, 194, 231-233, 
236-237, 242-243, 257, 263, 267, 286
NP-hard 205-209
NP-Hardness 229
O
OPF 1-6, 10, 24, 33
optimization 1, 4-6, 12, 15-17, 24, 27-29, 
33, 35, 38, 41, 71, 73, 75, 78, 88, 
95, 97-103, 105-106, 117, 120-122, 
127-128, 141, 144, 147-149, 151-153, 
164-165, 170-171, 182, 185, 187, 
190-195, 197-198, 205-209, 211, 229, 
234-237, 249, 257, 263, 265-270, 
272-274, 276, 280, 286
optimization algorithms 1, 6, 12, 24, 29, 
73, 117, 128, 187, 191, 198, 207, 280, 
286
optimization methods 205, 267, 286

335
Index
P
Partially matched crossover (PMX) 205, 
220
Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) 4, 71, 
73-74, 83, 85, 95, 98-100, 102-103, 
105-107, 109, 113, 144, 153-154, 165, 
187, 191-193, 195, 198, 206, 234-236, 
263, 265, 267, 270, 274, 276, 286
Predictive Modeling 118, 141
Protein Motif 95, 98-100, 113, 117
protein sequence 98, 108, 116-117
PSO 4, 71, 73-74, 83, 85, 98-100, 102, 
105-107, 109, 113, 144, 153-154, 165, 
187, 193, 195, 206, 234-236, 263, 
267, 270, 274, 276
Q
QILV 71, 75-78
R
RBF 152, 235, 263
recombination rate 41, 43, 48, 70
RNN 38, 248-249, 251, 254, 257, 263
r-opt 205, 213, 218, 220
Routing Problem Optimization 229
S
secondary structure 98, 108, 113
sensitivity analysis 34, 39, 47-48, 58, 61, 
64, 70
Significant Amino Acid (SAA) 117
soft computing 166, 185-186, 234, 236
SONN 263
stock market forecasting 232, 236
supply chain 205, 222, 230
symbolic regression 41, 43-44, 49, 64, 70
T
tool wear 118-120, 125-129, 131, 135, 
141-142
transposition rate 41, 43, 48, 70
traveling salesman problem (TSP) 205
turning 118-120, 128, 131, 133, 142
U
UPFC 1-8, 10, 17-25, 27, 29, 33
V
Venus Flytrap Optimization (VFO) 98, 100
Volunteered Geographic Information 
(VGI) 230
W
water quality prediction 264-266, 279-280
WiMAX 34-40, 42, 47-48, 63-64, 70
WiMAX network 34-40, 42, 47-48, 63-64

