
GLOBAL
BUSINESS
Third Edition
Mike W. Peng, Ph.D.
Jindal Chair of Global Business Strategy 
Executive Director, Center for Global Business 
Jindal School of Management 
University of Texas at Dallas 
Fellow, Academy of International Business
Australia  Brazil  Japan  Korea  Mexico  Singapore  Spain  United Kingdom  United States
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights restrictions, some third party content may be suppressed. Editorial 
review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. The publisher reserves the right to 
remove content from this title at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it. For valuable information on pricing, previous
editions, changes to current editions, and alternate formats, please visit www.cengage.com/highered to search by
ISBN#, author, title, or keyword for materials in your areas of interest.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Printed in the United States of America  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 16 15 14 13 12
© 2014, 2011 South-Western, Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright herein 
may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by any means 
graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited to photocopying, 
recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, web distribution, information networks, 
or information storage and retrieval systems, except as permitted under 
Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without the prior 
written permission of the publisher.
Cengage Learning WebTutor™ is a trademark of Cengage Learning.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2012949032
ISBN-13: 978-1-133-48593-3
ISBN-10: 1-133-48593-6
South-Western 
5191 Natorp Boulevard 
Mason, OH 45040 
USA
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson ­Education, Ltd.
For your course and learning solutions, visit  www.cengage.com 
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our preferred  
online store www.cengagebrain.com
Global Business, Third Edition
Mike W. Peng
Senior Vice President, LRS/Acquisitions & 
Solutions Planning: Jack W. Calhoun
Editorial Director, Business & Economics: 
Erin Joyner
Senior Acquisitions Editor: Michele Rhoades
Developmental Editor: Jennifer King
Editorial Assistant: Tamara Grega
Senior Content Project Managers: 
Emily Nesheim and Tamborah Moore
Media Editor: Rob Ellington
Manufacturing Planner: Ron Montgomery
Rights Acquisitions Specialist: Amber Hosea
Production Service: MPS Limited
Sr. Art Director: Stacy Jenkins Shirley
Cover and Internal Designer: Itzhack Shelomi
Cover Images: © Jack Hollingsworth/
Getty Images, © BlueLine Pictures/Getty 
Images, © Ko Chi Keung Alfred/RedLink/Corbis
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at  
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706
For permission to use material from this text or product,  
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions  
Further permissions questions can be emailed to 
permissionrequest@cengage.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

To Agnes, Grace, and James
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Preface	
ix
About the Author	
xix
Part 1 Laying Foundations	
1
Chapter 1: Globalizing Business	
2
Chapter 2: Understanding Formal Institutions: Politics, Laws,  
and Economics	
32
Chapter 3: Emphasizing Informal Institutions: Cultures, Ethics,  
and Norms	
62
Chapter 4: Leveraging Resources and Capabilities	
92
PengAtlas 1	
118
Integrative Cases	
124
Part 2 Acquiring Tools	
139
Chapter 5: Trading Internationally	
140
Chapter 6: Investing Abroad Directly	
174
Chapter 7: Dealing With Foreign Exchange	
204
Chapter 8: Capitalizing on Global and Regional Integration	
232
PengAtlas 2	
264
Integrative Cases	
270
Part 3 Strategizing around the Globe	
285
Chapter 9: Growing and Internationalizing the Entrepreneurial Firm	
286
Chapter 10: Entering Foreign Markets 	
310
Chapter 11: Managing Global Competitive Dynamics	
336
Chapter 12: Making Alliances and Acquisitions Work	
364
Chapter 13: Strategizing, Structuring, and Learning around the World	
394
PengAtlas 3	
424
Integrative Cases	
428
Part 4 Building Functional Excellence	
465
Chapter 14: Competing on Marketing and Supply Chain Management	
466
Chapter 15: Managing Human Resources Globally	
492
Brief Contents
iv
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Brief Contents	
v
Chapter 16: Financing and Governing the Corporation Globally	
522
Chapter 17: Managing Corporate Social Responsibility Globally	
552
PengAtlas 4	
578
Integrative Cases	
582
Glossary	
598
Name Index	
607
Organization Index	
617
Subject Index	
621
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Preface	
ix
About the Author	
xix
Part 1 Laying Foundations	
1
Chapter 1: Globalizing Business	
2
What Is Global Business?	
4
Why Study Global Business?	
10
A Unified Framework	
14
What Is Globalization?	
18
Global Business and Globalization  
at a Crossroads	
21
Organization of the Book	
25
Chapter 2: Understanding Formal  
Institutions: Politics, Laws, and Economics	
32
Understanding Institutions	
35
What Do Institutions Do?	
36
An Institution-Based View of Global Business	
38
Political Systems	
40
Legal Systems	
43
Economic Systems	
47
Debates and Extensions	
48
Management Savvy	
54
Chapter 3: Emphasizing Informal Institutions: 
Cultures, Ethics, and Norms	
62
Where Do Informal Institutions Come From?	
64
Culture	
65
Cultural Differences	
70
Ethics	
78
Norms and Ethical Challenges	
80
Debates and Extensions	
81
Management Savvy	
84
Chapter 4: Leveraging Resources and  
Capabilities	
92
Understanding Resources and Capabilities	
94
Resources, Capabilities, and the Value Chain	
96
From SWOT to VRIO	
100
Debates and Extensions	
104
Management Savvy	
109
Part 1 Integrative Cases	
124
1.1	 Coca-Cola in Africa	
124
1.2	 Whose Law Is Bigger: Arbitrating  
Government-Firm Disputes in the EU	
126
1.3	 Fighting Counterfeit Motion Pictures	
128
1.4	 Brazil’s Embraer: From State-Owned  
Enterprise to Global Leader	
131
1.5	 Microsoft in China	
136
Part 2 Acquiring Tools	
139
Chapter 5: Trading Internationally	
140
Why Do Nations Trade?	
143
Theories of International Trade	
145
Realities of International Trade	
158
Debates and Extensions	
163
Management Savvy	
166
Chapter 6: Investing Abroad Directly	
174
Understanding the FDI Vocabulary	
176
Why Do Firms Become MNEs  
by Engaging in FDI?	
180
Realities of FDI	
186
How MNEs and Host Governments Bargain	
190
Debates and Extensions	
192
Management Savvy	
195
Chapter 7: Dealing with Foreign Exchange	
204
What Determines Foreign Exchange Rates?	
206
Evolution of the International Monetary  
System	
214
Strategic Responses to  
Foreign Exchange Movements	
218
Debates and Extensions	
221
Management Savvy	
225
Table of Contents
vi
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 11: Managing Global Competitive 
Dynamics	
336
Competition, Cooperation, and Collusion	
339
Institutions Governing Domestic and  
International Competition	
343
Resources Influencing Competitive Dynamics	
346
Attacks, Counterattacks, and Signaling	
350
Local Firms versus Multinational Enterprises	
351
Debates and Extensions	
352
Management Savvy	
356
Chapter 12: Making Alliances and  
Acquisitions Work	
364
Defining Alliances and Acquisitions	
367
Institutions, Resources, Alliances, and  
Acquisitions	
368
Formation of Alliances	
374
Evolution and Dissolution of Alliances	
376
Performance of Alliances	
378
Motives for Acquisitions	
379
Performance of Acquisitions	
383
Debates and Extensions	
384
Management Savvy	
386
Chapter 13: Strategizing, Structuring, and  
Learning around the World	
394
Multinational Strategies and Structures	
396
How Institutions and Resources Affect  
Multinational Strategies, Structures, and  
Learning	
404
Worldwide Learning, Innovation,  
and Knowledge Management	
408
Debates and Extensions	
412
Management Savvy	
415
Part 3 Integrative Cases	
428
3.1	 Wikimart: Building a Russian Version of  
Amazon	
428
3.2	Private Military Companies	
431
3.3	Amazon, Bookoff, and the Japanese  
Bookselling Industry	
435
3.4	Huawei’s Intellectual Property War	
438
3.5	Is A Diamond (Cartel) Forever?	
446
3.6	The TNK-BP Joint Venture	
452
Chapter 8: Capitalizing on Global and  
Regional Integration	
232
Global Economic Integration	
234
Organizing World Trade	
237
Regional Economic Integration	
240
Regional Economic Integration in Europe	
242
Regional Economic Integration in the  
Americas	
248
Regional Economic Integration in the  
Asia Pacific	
250
Regional Economic Integration in Africa	
252
Debates and Extensions	
253
Management Savvy	
256
Part 2 Integrative Cases	
270
2.1	 Canada and the United States Fight  
Over Pigs	
270
2.2	Foreign Direct Investment in the Indian  
Retail Industry	
272
2.3	The Fate of Opel	
274
2.4	Jobek do Brasil’s Foreign Exchange  
Challenges	
276
2.5	The EU–Korea Free Trade Agreement 	
279
Part 3 Strategizing around the  
Globe	
285
Chapter 9: Growing and Internationalizing  
the Entrepreneurial Firm	
286
Entrepreneurship and Entrepreneurial  
Firms	
289
Institutions, Resources, and  
Entrepreneurship	
289
Growing the Entrepreneurial Firm	
293
Internationalizing the Entrepreneurial Firm	
298
Debates and Extensions	
301
Management Savvy	
303
Chapter 10: Entering Foreign Markets	
310
Overcoming the Liability of Foreignness	
312
Where to Enter?	
315
When to Enter?	
318
How to Enter?	
320
Debates and Extensions	
326
Management Savvy	
329
Contents	
vii
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3.7	 Geely’s Acquisition of Volvo	
455
3.8	Hilton Welcomes Chinese Travelers  
at Home and Abroad	
459
Part 4 Building Functional  
Excellence	
465
Chapter 14: Competing on Marketing and  
Supply Chain Management	
466
Three of the Four Ps in Marketing	
468
From Distribution Channel to  
Supply Chain Management	
474
The Triple As in Supply Chain Management	
475
How Institutions and Resources Affect  
Marketing and Supply Chain Management	 478
Debates and Extensions	
481
Management Savvy	
483
Chapter 15: Managing Human Resources  
Globally	
492
Staffing	
495
Training and Development	
500
Compensation and Performance Appraisal	
502
Labor Relations	
505
Institutions, Resources, and  
Human Resource Management	
506
Debates and Extensions	
511
Management Savvy	
513
Chapter 16: Financing and Governing the  
Corporation Globally	
522
Financing Decisions	
525
Owners	
526
Managers	
528
Board of Directors	
532
Governance Mechanisms as a Package	
534
A Global Perspective	
536
Institutions, Resources, and Corporate  
Finance and Governance	
538
Debates and Extensions	
543
Management Savvy	
544
Chapter 17: Managing Corporate Social 
Responsibility Globally	
552
A Stakeholder View of the Firm	
555
Institutions, Resources, and  
Corporate Social Responsibility	
561
Debates and Extensions	
568
Management Savvy	
569
Part 4 Integrative Cases	
582
4.1	 ESET: From a “Living-Room” Firm  
to a Global Player in the Antivirus  
Software Industry	
582
4.2	Dallas Versus Delhi	
586
4.3	Microfinance: Macro Success or  
Global Mess?	
587
4.4	Sino Iron: Engaging Stakeholders  
in Australia	
589
4.5	Foxconn	
595
Glossary	
598
Name Index	
607
Organization Index	
617
Subject Index	
621
viii	
Contents
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Preface
The first two editions of Global Business aspired to set a new standard for interna-
tional business (IB) textbooks. Based on the enthusiastic support from students 
and instructors in Australia, Brazil, Britain, Canada, China, Egypt, France, Hong 
Kong, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Lithuania, Malaysia, Puerto Rico, Russia, 
Slovenia, South Africa, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, and the United States, the 
first two editions achieved unprecedented success. A Chinese translation is now 
available and a European adaptation (coauthored with Klaus Meyer) has been suc-
cessfully launched. In short, Global Business is global. 
The third edition aspires to do even better. It continues the market-winning 
framework centered on one big question and two core perspectives pioneered in 
the first edition, and has been thoroughly updated to capture the rapidly moving 
research and events of the past few years. Written for undergraduate and MBA 
students around the world, the third edition will continue to make IB teaching and 
learning more (1) engaging, (2) comprehensive, (3) fun, and (4) relevant.
More Engaging
As an innovation in IB textbooks, a unified framework integrates all chapters. 
Given the wide range of topics in IB, most textbooks present the discipline in a 
fashion that “Today is Tuesday, it must be Luxembourg.” Very rarely do authors 
address: “Why Luxembourg today?” More important, why IB? What is the big ques-
tion in IB? Our unified framework suggests that the discipline can be united 
by one big question and two core perspectives. The big question is: What deter-
mines the success and failure of firms around the globe? To address this question, 
Global Business introduces two core perspectives, (1) the institution-based view 
and (2) the resource-based view, in all chapters. It is this relentless focus on our 
big question and core perspectives that enables this book to engage a variety of 
IB topics in an integrated fashion. This provides unparalleled continuity in the 
learning process. 
Global Business further engages readers through an evidence-based approach. I 
have endeavored to draw on the latest research rather than the latest fads. As an 
active researcher myself, I have developed the unified framework not because it 
just popped up in my head when I wrote the book. Rather, this is an extension of 
my own research that consistently takes on the big question and leverages the two 
core perspectives.1 
1 For the big question, see M. W. Peng, 2004, Identifying the big question in international business research, Journal of 
International Business Studies, 35: 99–108. For the institution-based view, see M. W. Peng, S. L. Sun, B. Pinkham, & 
H. Chen, 2009, The institution-based view as a third leg for a strategy tripod, Academy of Management Perspectives, 
23(3): 63–81; M. W. Peng, D. Wang, & Y. Jiang, 2008, An institution-based view of international business strategy: A focus 
on emerging economies, Journal of International Business Studies, 39: 920–936. For the resource-based view, see 
M. W. Peng, 2001, The resource-based view and international business, Journal of Management, 27: 803–829.
ix
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

x	
Preface
Another vehicle to engage students is debates. Most textbooks present knowledge 
“as is” and ignore debates. But obviously our field has no shortage of debates. It is 
the responsibility of textbook authors to engage students by introducing cutting-
edge debates. Thus, I have written a beefy “Debates and Extensions” section for 
every chapter. 
Finally, this book engages students by packing rigor with accessibility. There 
is no “dumbing down.” No other competing IB textbook exposes students to an 
article on how to save Europe by the Managing Director of the International 
Monetary Fund (In Focus 8.1), a commentary on China’s ten years in the World 
Trade Organization by the US Ambassador to China (Emerging Markets 8.1), and 
a Harvard Business Review article on China’s outward foreign direct investment 
(authored by me—Emerging Markets 6.1). These are not excerpts but full-blown, 
original articles—the first in an IB (and, in fact, in any management) textbook. 
These highly readable short pieces directly give students a flavor of the original 
insights.
More Comprehensive
Global Business offers the most comprehensive and innovative coverage of IB topics 
available on the market. Unique chapters not found in other IB textbooks are:
  	 Chapter 9 on entrepreneurship and small firms’ internationalization.
  	 Chapter 11 on global competitive dynamics.
  	 Chapter 16 on corporate finance and governance.
  	 Chapter 17 on corporate social responsibility (in addition to one full-blown 
chapter on ethics, cultures, and norms, Chapter 3).
  	 Half of Chapter 12 (alliances and acquisitions) deals with the inadequately 
covered topic of acquisitions. Approximately 70% of market entries based 
on foreign direct investment (FDI) around the world use acquisitions. Yet, 
none of the other IB textbooks has a chapter on acquisitions—clearly, a 
missing gap.
The most comprehensive topical coverage is made possible by drawing on the 
latest and most comprehensive range of the research literature. Specifically, I have 
accelerated my own research, publishing a total of 30 articles since 2010 after I 
finished the second edition.2 I have drawn on such latest research to inject cutting-
edge thinking into the third edition. 
In addition, I have also endeavored to consult numerous specialty journals. For 
example, the trade and finance chapters (Chapters 5–7) draw on the American Eco-
nomic Review, Journal of Economic Literature, and Quarterly Journal of Economics. The 
entrepreneurship chapter (Chapter 9) consults with the Journal of Business Venturing 
and Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice. The marketing and supply chain chapter 
(Chapter 14) draws heavily from the Journal of Marketing, Journal of International Mar-
keting, and Journal of Operations Management. The corporate finance and governance 
chapter (Chapter 16) is visibly guided by research published in the Journal of Finance 
and Journal of Financial Economics. 
The end result is the unparalleled, most comprehensive set of evidence-based 
insights on the IB market. While citing every article is not possible, I am confident 
2 All my articles are listed at www.mikepeng.com and www.utdallas.edu/~mikepeng. Go to “Journal Articles.”
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Preface	
xi
that I have left no major streams of research untouched. Feel free to check the 
Name Index to verify this claim. 
Finally, the third edition of Global Business continues to have a global set of 
cases contributed by scholars around the world—an innovation on the IB market. 
Virtually all other IB textbooks have cases written by book authors. In comparison, 
this book has been blessed by a global community of case contributors who are 
based in Austria, Brazil, China, France, Germany, Hong Kong, India, and the United 
States. Many are experts who are located in, or are from, the countries in which the 
cases take place. For example, we now have a Brazil case penned by a Brazil-based 
author (see the Integrative Case on Jobek do Brasil), and two China cases written by 
China-based authors (see the Integrative Cases on Geely’s acquisition of Volvo and 
Sino Iron in Australia). This edition also features a Russia case contributed by the 
world’s top two leading experts on Russian management (see the Integrative Case 
on Wikimart). The end result is an unparalleled, diverse collection of case materials 
that will significantly enhance IB teaching and learning around the world.
More Fun
If you fear that this book must be very boring because it draws so heavily on cur-
rent research, you are wrong. I have used a clear, engaging, conversational style to 
tell the “story.” Relative to rival books, my chapters are generally more lively and 
shorter. Some reviewers have commented that reading Global Business is like read-
ing a “good magazine.” A large number of interesting anecdotes have been woven  
into the text. In addition to examples from the business world, non-traditional 
(“outside-the-box”) examples range from ancient Chinese military writings to mu-
tually assured destruction (MAD) strategy during the Cold War, from Shakespeare’s 
The Merchant of Venice to Tolstoy’s Anna Karenina. Popular movies such as A Few Good 
Men, Devil’s Advocate, and Legally Blonde are also featured. In addition, numerous 
Opening Cases, Closing Cases, and In Focus boxes spice up the book. Check out 
the following fun-filled features:
Partying in Saudi Arabia (Chapter 3 Opening Case)
Adding value to the dirtiest job online (In Focus 4.2)
Why are US exports so competitive? (Chapter 5 Opening Case)
A sticky business in Singapore (In Focus 5.1)
Cry for me, Argentina (Chapter 6 Closing Case)
The Greek tragedy (Chapter 8 Closing Case)
The world’s best place to make Viagra (In Focus 10.1)
A fox in the hen house (In Focus 11.2)
Brazil’s Whopper deal (Emerging Markets 12.2)
Mickey goes to Shanghai (Chapter 13 Opening Case)
Wolf wars (Chapter 17 Closing Case)
Milton Friedman goes global (Emerging Markets 17.1)
There is one Video Case from BBC News to support every chapter. While vir-
tually all competing books have some videos, none has a video package that is so 
integrated with the learning objectives of every chapter.
Finally, as a new feature introduced since the second edition, PengAtlas allows 
you to conduct IB research using informative maps and other geographic and 
cultural literacy tools to enhance your learning.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xii	
Preface
More Relevant
So what? Chapters in most textbooks leave students to figure out the crucial “So 
what?” question for themselves. In contrast, I conclude every chapter with an 
action-packed section titled “Management Savvy.” Each section has at least one 
table (or one teachable slide) that clearly summarizes the key learning points from 
a practical standpoint. No other competing IB book is so savvy and so relevant.
Further, ethics is a theme that cuts through the book, with at least one “Ethical 
Dilemma” feature and a series of Critical Discussion Questions on ethics in each 
chapter. Finally, many chapters offer career advice for students. For example:
  	 Chapter 1 In Focus 1.3 directly addresses a question many students would ask: 
What language and what fields should I study?
  	 Chapter 4 develops a resource-based view of the individual—that is, about 
you, the student. The upshot? You want to make yourself into an “untouch-
able” who adds valuable, rare, and hard-to-imitate capabilities indispensable 
to an organization. In other words, you want to make sure your job cannot be 
outsourced.
  	 Chapter 15 offers tips on how to strategically and proactively invest in your 
career now—as a student—for future international career opportunities.
What’s New in the Third Edition?
Most importantly, the third edition has (1) highlighted the executive voice by draw-
ing more heavily from CEOs and other business leaders, (2) dedicated more space 
to emerging economies, and (3) enhanced the quantity and variety of cases.
First, since Global Business aims to train a new generation of global business lead-
ers, the third edition has featured more extensive quotes and perspectives from 
global business leaders. These are longer and more visibly prominent break-out 
quotes—not merely single quotes typically embedded (or “buried”) in paragraphs. 
In Chapter 1 alone, you will enjoy such insightful quotes from (1) GE’s current 
chairman and CEO and (2) GE’s former chairman and CEO. In later chapters, the 
following global business leaders will share their thoughts with you:
Applied Materials’ human resource executive
Argentina’s president 
Bayer North America’s CEO
Dow Chemical’s CEO 
IBM’s CEO
IBM’s chief procurement officer
IMF’s managing director—a full article
TNK-BP’s chairman and CEO and Alfa Group’s founder
US Ambassador to China—a full article
US Secretary of Justice (representing the Department of Justice’s challenge of 
AT&T’s proposed merger with T- Mobile)
US Secretary of Treasury (on the US-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue)
Whole Foods’ co-founder and CEO
WTO’s director-general
Second, this edition builds on Global Business’s previous strengths by more prom-
inently highlighting global business challenges in and out of emerging economies. 
This is both a reflection of the global realities in which emerging economies have 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Preface	
xiii
played a more prominent role and a reflection of my own strong research interest in 
emerging economies. Specifically, in the third edition, (1) a new Emerging Markets in-
chapter feature is launched in every chapter, and (2) 18 out of 23 (78%) of the longer 
Integrative Cases deal with emerging economies (including one case on Central and 
Eastern Europe, two cases each on Africa, Brazil, Russia, and India, and six on China).
Third, in response to students’ and professors’ enthusiasm about the wide-
ranging and globally relevant cases in previous editions, the third edition has fur-
ther enhanced the quantity and variety of cases. The number of Integrative Cases 
has increased from 15 to 23—a 53% increase. The variety has also been enhanced 
not only in terms of the geographic diversity noted above, but also in terms of the 
mix of longer cases and shorter cases. In addition, I have pushed myself to partici-
pate more actively in case writing. Therefore, I am very proud to report that of the 
23 Integrative Cases in the third edition, I personally wrote 10 (43%). This com-
pares very favorably to the one Integrative Case out of a total of 15 that I personally 
authored in the second edition (representing a mere 7%).
Of course, in addition to these new features, every chapter has been thoroughly 
updated. Of the 23 Integrative Cases, 19 (83%) are new to this edition. PengAtlas 
maps have also been updated to capture the latest statistics. 
The new BBC News Video Cases provide current, real-world examples of key 
course topics. The set covers such diverse countries as Brazil, China, Cuba, Dubai, 
India, Thailand, and Uruguay, and features a broad array of industries from high-
tech manufacturing to goat farming. 
Support Materials
A full set of supplements is available for students and adopting instructors, all de-
signed to facilitate ease of learning, teaching, and testing. 
Global Business CourseMate. Cengage Learning’s Global Business CourseMate 
brings course concepts to life with interactive learning, study, and exam prepara-
tion tools that support the printed textbook. Through this website, available for 
an additional fee, students will have access to their own set of PowerPoint® slides, 
flashcards, and games, as well as the Learning Objectives and Glossary for quick 
reviews. A set of auto-gradable, interactive quizzes (prepared by Timothy R. Muth 
of Florida Institute of Technology) will allow students to instantly gauge their 
comprehension of the material. The quizzes are all tagged to the book’s Learn-
ing Objectives, Bloom’s taxonomy, and national standards. Finally, Global Business 
CourseMate includes interactive maps that delve more deeply into key concepts 
presented in the book.
Product Support Website. The flashcards, Learning Objectives, and Glossary 
are available for quick reference on our complimentary student product support 
website.
Webtutor on BlackBoard® and Webtutor on WebCT.™ Available on two differ-
ent platforms, Global Business Webtutor enhances students’ understanding of the 
material by featuring the Opening Cases and Video Cases, as well as the Glossary, 
study flashcards, and interactive maps that delve more deeply into key concepts 
presented in the book.
CengageNOW™ Course Management System. Designed by instructors 
for instructors, CengageNOW™ mirrors the natural teaching workflow with an 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xiv	
Preface
easy-to-use online suite of services and resources, all in one program. With this 
system, instructors can easily plan their courses, manage student assignments, 
automatically grade, teach with dynamic technology, and assess student progress 
with pre- and post-tests tagged to course outcomes and national standards. For 
students, study tools include flashcards, PowerPoint® slides, media quizzes, guided 
cases, and a set of quizzes based on interactive maps that enhance comprehen-
sion of the material and develop cultural and geographic literacy. Diagnostic tools 
create a personalized study plan for each student that focuses their study efforts. 
CengageNOW™ operates seamlessly with WebCT™, Blackboard®, and other 
course management tools.
Global Economic Watch. Cengage Learning’s Global Economic Watch helps 
instructors bring these pivotal current events into the classroom through a 
powerful, continuously updated online suite of content, discussion forums, testing 
tools, and more. The Watch, a first-of-its-kind resource, stimulates discussion and 
understanding of the global downturn with easily integrated teaching solutions:
  	 A thorough overview and timeline of events leading up to the global economic 
crisis are included in the ebook module, Impact of the Global Economic Crisis on 
Small Business
  	 A content-rich blog of breaking news, expert analysis, and commentary—
updated multiple times daily—plus links to many other blogs 
  	 A powerful real-time database of hundreds of relevant and vetted journal, 
newspaper, and periodical articles, videos, and podcasts—updated four times 
every day
  	 Discussion and testing content, PowerPoint® slides on key topics, sample 
syllabi, and other teaching resources
History is happening now, so bring it into the classroom with The Watch at  
www.cengage.com/thewatch.
Instructor’s Resource CD (IRCD). Instructors will find all of the teaching 
resources they need to plan, teach, grade, and assess student understanding and 
progress at their fingertips with this all-in-one resource for Global Business. The 
IRCD contains: 
  	 Instructor’s Manual—This valuable, time-saving Instructor’s Manual in-
cludes comprehensive resources to streamline course preparation, including 
teaching suggestions, lecture notes, answers to all chapter questions, and 
Integrative Case discussion guides. Also included are discussion guidelines 
and answers for the Video Cases, prepared by Carol Decker.
  	 Test Bank—The Global Business Test Bank in ExamView® software allows 
instructors to create customized texts by choosing from 35 True/False, 
35 Multiple Choice, and at least 8 short answer/essay questions for each of 
the 17 chapters. Ranging in difficulty, all questions have been tagged to the 
text’s Learning Objectives, Bloom’s taxonomy, and other national standards 
to ensure that students are meeting the course criteria.
  	 PowerPoint® Slides—This comprehensive set of more than 250 Powerpoint® 
slides will assist instructors in the presentation of the chapter material, en-
abling students to synthesize key global concepts.
Global Business DVD. Perhaps one of the most exciting and compelling bonus 
features of this program, these 17 short and powerful video clips, produced by BBC 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Preface	
xv
News, provide current and relevant real-world examples. The set covers such di-
verse countries as Brazil, China, Cuba, Dubai, India, Thailand, and Uruguay, and 
features a broad array of industries from high-tech manufacturing to goat farming.
Instructor Product Support Website. For those instructors who prefer to access 
supplements online, the Instructor’s Manual, PowerPoint® slides, and Test Bank are 
also available through the instructor’s product support website.
Acknowledgments
As Global Business launches its third edition, I first want to thank all the customers—
professors, instructors, and students around the world who have made the book’s 
success possible. A special thank-you goes to my friend and colleague, Klaus Meyer 
(China Europe International Business School), who spearheaded the develop-
ment of International Business, which was tailored for European (or, more broadly, 
European, Middle Eastern, and African [EMEA]) students. Klaus has made Global 
Business more global.
At UT Dallas, I thank my colleagues Dan Bochsler, Larry Chasteen, Tev Dalgic, 
Van Dam, Greg Dess, Dave Ford, Richard Harrison, Maria Hasenhuttl, Charlie 
Hazzard, Marilyn Kaplan, Seung-Hyun Lee, Elizabeth Lim, John Lin, Livia Markóczy, 
Joe Picken, Roberto Ragozzino, Orlando Richard, Jane Salk, Mary Vice, Eric Tsang, 
and Habte Woldu, as well as the supportive leadership team—Hasan Pirkul (dean), 
Varghese Jacob (associate dean), and Greg Dess (area coordinator). I also thank my 
two PhD students, Brian Pinkham (now at Texas Christian University) and Steve 
Sauerwald, for their research assistance. Three PhD students (Canan Mutlu, Brian 
Pinkham, and Weichieh Su) and five MBA students (Simon Ebenezer, Matthew 
Lafever, Katie Metzler, Katie Ryan, and Chris Spartz) authored excellent case materials. 
At South-Western Cengage Learning, I thank the “Peng team:” Erin Joyner, 
Publisher; Michele Rhoades, Senior Acquisitions Editor; Jennifer King, Developmen-
tal Editor; Emily Nesheim and Tamborah Moore, Senior Content Project Managers; 
Jonathan Monahan, Marketing Manager; Stacy Shirley, Senior Art Director; and 
Tamara Grega, Editorial Assistant.
In the academic community, I thank Ben Kedia (University of Memphis) for 
inviting me to conduct faculty training workshops in Memphis every year since 
1999, and Michael Pustay (Texas A&M University) for co-teaching these workshops 
with me—widely known as the “M&M Show” in the IB field. Discussions with over 
200  colleagues who came to these faculty workshops over the last decade have 
helped shape this book into a better product. I also appreciate the meticulous and 
excellent comments from the reviewers:
Nadeem M. Firoz (Montclair State University) 
Andrew Fleck (Fox Valley Technical College)
Anna Helm (George Washington University)
P. Michael McLain (Hampton University)
Mark Quinn (Xavier University of Louisiana)
Al Saber (Friends University)
Sudhir Sachdev (Farmingdale State College)
Continued thanks to the reviewers of the previous editions:
Syed Ahmed (Cameron University)
Richard Ajayi (University of Central Florida, Orlando)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xvi	
Preface
Basil Al-Hashimi (Mesa Community College)
Verl Anderson (Dixie State College of Utah)
Peter L. Banfe (Ohio Northern University)
Lawrence A. Beer (Arizona State University)
Tefvik Dalgic (University of Texas at Dallas)
Tim R. Davis (Cleveland State University)
George DeFeis (Monroe College, Bronx)
Ping Deng (Maryville University)
Norb Elbert (Eastern Kentucky University)
Joe Horton (University of Central Arkansas)
Samira Hussein (Johnson County Community College)
Ann L. Langlois (Palm Beach Atlantic University)
Lianlian Lin (California State Polytechnic University, Pomona, California)
Ted London (University of Michigan)
Martin Meznar (Arizona State University, West)
Dilip Mirchandani (Rowan University)
Timothy R. Muth (Florida Institute of Technology)
Don A. Okhomina (Fayetteville State University)
William Piper (Alcorn State University)
Charles A. Rarick (Barry University)
Tom Roehl (Western Washington University)
Bala Subramanian (Morgan State University)
Gladys Torres-Baumgarten (Kean University)
Susan Trussler (University of Scranton)
William R. Wilkerson (University of Virginia)
Attila Yaprak (Wayne State University)
In addition, I thank many colleagues who provided informal feedback to me 
on the book. Space constraints here force me to only acknowledge colleagues who 
wrote me since the second edition, since colleagues who wrote me earlier were 
thanked in earlier editions.
Paul Beamish (University of Western Ontario, Canada)
Santanu Borah (University of North Alabama, USA)
Thierry Brusselle (Chaffey Community College, USA)
Lauren Carey (University of Miami, USA)
Ping Deng (Maryville University, USA)
Todd Fitzgerald (Saint Joseph’s University, USA)
Dennis Garvis (Washington and Lee University, USA)
John Gerace (Chestnut Hill College, USA)
Mike Geringer (Ohio University, USA)
C. Gopinath (Suffolk University, USA)
Charlie Hazzard (University of Texas at Dallas, USA)
Chad Hilton (University of Alabama, USA)
Anisul Islam (University of Houston, USA)
Basil Janavaras (Minnesota State University, USA)
Marshall Shibing Jiang (Brock University, Canada)
Somnath Lahiri (Illinois State University, USA)
Ann Langlois (Palm Beach Atlantic University, USA)
Lianlian Lin (California State Polytechnic University, USA)
Dong Liu (Georgia Institute of Technology, USA)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Preface	
xvii
David Liu (George Fox University, USA)
Ted London (University of Michigan, USA)
Charles Mambula (Langston University, USA)
Daniel McCarthy (Northeastern University, USA)
Hemant Merchant (Florida Atlantic University, USA)
Debmalya Mukherjee (University of Akron, USA)
Asmat Nizam (Universiti Utara, Malaysia)
Kenny Oh (University of Missouri at St. Louis, USA)
Eydis Olsen (Drexel University, USA)
Sheila Puffer (Northeastern University, USA)
Gongming Qian (Chinese University of Hong Kong, China)
David Reid (Seattle University, USA)
Surekha Rao (Indiana University Northwest, USA)
Al Rosenbloom (Dominican University, USA)
Anne Smith (University of Tennessee, USA)
Clyde Stoltenberg (Wichita State University, USA)
Steve Strombeck (Azusa Pacific University, USA)
Sunny Li Sun (University of Missouri at Kansas City, USA)
Qingjiu (Tom) Tao (James Madison University, USA)
Vas Taras (University of North Carolina at Greensboro, USA)
Rajaram Veliyath (Kennesaw State University, USA)
Jose Vargas-Hernandez (Universidad de Guadalajara, Mexico)
Loren Vickery (Western Oregon University, USA)
George White (Old Dominion University, USA)
Habte Woldu (University of Texas at Dallas, USA)
Richard Young (Minnesota State University, USA)
Wu Zhan (University of Sydney, Australia)
I also want to thank three very special colleagues: Liu Yi (Shanghai Jiaotong 
University), Xie En, and Wang Longwei (Xi’an Jiaotong University) in China. They 
loved the book so much that they were willing to endure the pain of translating it 
into Chinese. Their hard work has enabled Global Business to reach wider audiences 
globally. For the third edition, 28 colleagues graciously contributed cases:
Christoph Barmeyer (Passau University, Germany)
Dirk Michael Boehe (Insper Institute of Education and Research, Brazil)
Charles Byles (Virginia Commonwealth University, USA) 
Peggy Chaudhry (Villanova University, USA)
Jessica Chelekis (University of Southern Denmark, Denmark)
Yuan Yi Chen (Hong Kong Baptist University, China)
Zhu Chen (PFC Energy, Beijing, China)
Simon Ebenezer (University of Texas at Dallas, USA)
Juan España (National University, USA)
Steven Globerman (Western Washington University, USA)
Matthew Lafever (University of Texas at Dallas, USA)
Ulrike Mayrhoder (University Lyon 3, France)
Daniel McCarthy (Northeastern University, USA)
Katie Metzler (University of Texas at Dallas, USA)
Klaus Meyer (China Europe International Business School, China)
Susan Mudambi (Temple University, USA)
Canan Mutlu (University of Texas at Dallas, USA)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xviii	
Preface
Brian Pinkham (Texas Christian University, USA)
Sheila Puffer (Northeastern University, USA)
Katie Ryan (University of Texas at Dallas, USA)
Arnold Schuh (Vienna University of Economics and Business, Austria)
Chris Spartz (University of Texas at Dallas, USA)
Charles Stevens (University of Wyoming, USA)
Weichieh Su (University of Texas at Dallas, USA)
Sunny Li Sun (University of Missouri at Kansas City, USA)
Michael Young (Hong Kong Baptist University, China)
Yanli Zhang (Montclair State University, USA)
Alan Zimmerman (City University of New York, USA)
In addition, the work of the following prominent authors was reprinted to grace 
the pages of this book:
Rohit Deshpande (Harvard Business School) and Anjali Raina (HBS India 
Research Center, India)—coauthor of “The Ordinary Heroes of the Taj” 
Mikhail Fridman (TNK-BP and Alfa Group, Russia)—chairman and CEO of 
TNK-BP and founder of Alfa Group
Vijay Govindarajan  and Chris Trimble (Dartmouth College)—coauthor of 
Reverse Innovation
Christine Lagarde (International Monetary Fund)—Managing Director of 
the IMF
Gary Locke (US Embassy, Beijing, China)—US Ambassador to China
Michael Porter (Harvard Business School) and Mark Kramer (FSG)—coauthor 
of “Creating Shared Value”
Jack Welch and Suzy Welch (BusinessWeek)—Jack is the retired chairman and 
CEO of GE and Suzy is a former editor of Harvard Business Review
Last, but by no means least, I thank my wife Agnes, my daughter Grace, and my 
son James—to whom this book is dedicated. I have named Agnes CEO, CFO, CIO, 
CTO, and CPO for our family, the last of which is coined by me, which stands for 
“chief parenting officer.” When the first edition was conceived, Grace was three, 
and James one. When the second edition came out, Grace declared a career inter-
est in being a rock star, and James a race car driver. Now my ten-year-old Grace, 
already a voracious reader and writer, can help me edit, and my eight-year-old 
James can help me enter grades. Grace is writing and editing her 17th short story, 
called My Magic Life, and James is very interested in creating Lego models. For now, 
Grace wants to be a lawyer, and James a banker. As a third-generation professor in 
my family, I can’t help but wonder whether one (or both) of them will become a 
fourth-generation professor. To all of you, my thanks and my love.
MWP
December 1, 2012
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

About the Author
Mike W. Peng is the Jindal Chair of Global Business Strategy at the Jindal School 
of Management, University of Texas at Dallas, a National Science Foundation 
CAREER Award winner, and a Fellow of the Academy of International Business. He 
is also Executive Director of the Center for Global Business, which he founded. At 
UT Dallas, he has been the number-one contributor to the 45 top journals tracked 
by Financial Times, which has ranked UT Dallas as a top-20 school in research world-
wide and its MBA and EMBA programs increasingly in the top tier.
Professor Peng holds a bachelor’s degree from Winona State University, 
Minnesota, and a PhD degree from the University of Washington, Seattle. Between 
2005 and 2011, he was the first Provost’s Distinguished Professor at UT Dallas, a 
chair position that was created to attract him to join the faculty. He had previously 
been an associate professor (with tenure) at the Ohio State University. Prior to 
that, he had served on the faculty at the Chinese University of Hong Kong and the 
University of Hawaii. He has taught in five states in the United States (Hawaii, Ohio, 
Tennessee, Texas, and Washington) as well as China, Hong Kong, and Vietnam. 
He has also held visiting or courtesy appointments in Australia, Britain, China, 
Denmark, Hong Kong, and the United States. In addition to these countries, he 
has presented papers in Austria, Brazil, France, Germany, Japan, Macau, Puerto 
Rico, Singapore, South Korea, Switzerland, and Taiwan.
Professor Peng is one of the most prolific and most influential scholars in inter-
national business (IB). During the decade 1996–2006, he was the top-seven con-
tributor to IB’s number-one premier outlet: Journal of International Business Studies. 
His research is also among some of the most widely cited—both the United Nations 
and the World Bank have cited his work. A Journal of Management article found him 
to be among the top 65 most widely cited management scholars, and an Academy of 
Management Perspectives study found him to be the fourth most influential manage-
ment scholar both inside and outside of academia (measured by academic citations 
and non-edu Google webpages) among professors who obtained their PhD since 
1991. Overall, Professor Peng has published over 100 articles in leading journals, 
over 30 pieces in non-refereed outlets, and five books. Since the launch of Global 
Business’s second edition, he has published not only in top IB journals, such as 
the Academy of Management Journal, Journal of International Business Studies, Journal of 
World Business, and Strategic Management Journal, but also in leading outlets in op-
erations (   Journal of Operations Management), entrepreneurship (   Journal of Business 
Venturing and Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice), and human resources (Interna-
tional Journal of Human Resource Management).
Professor Peng’s market leading textbooks, Global Business, Global Strategy, and 
GLOBAL, are studied in over 30 countries and have been translated into Chinese, 
Spanish, and Portuguese. A European adaptation, International Business (with Klaus 
Meyer), has been successfully launched.
Professor Peng is active in leadership positions. He has served on the edito-
rial boards of AMJ, AMR, JIBS, JMS, JWB, and SMJ, and guest-edited a special 
xix
courtesy of Mike Peng
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xx	
About the Author
issue for the JMS. At the Academy of International Business (AIB), he co-chaired 
the AIB/JIBS Frontiers Conference in San Diego (2006), guest-edited a JIBS 
special issue (2010), chaired the Emerging and Transition Economies track for 
the Nagoya conference (2011), and chaired the Richard Farmer Best Disserta-
tion Award Committee for the Washington conference (2012). In 2012, he was 
elected to be a Fellow of the AIB, joining a distinguished group of about 80 senior 
scholars who made most significant contributions to IB. At the Strategic Manage-
ment Society (SMS), he was elected to chair the Global Strategy Interest Group. 
He also co-chaired the SMS Special Conference on China in Shanghai (2007). 
He served one term as Editor-in-Chief of the Asia Pacific Journal of Management. 
During his editorial tenure, he managed the doubling of submission numbers 
and the successful bid to enter the Social Sciences Citation Index (SSCI), which 
reported APJM’s first citation impact to be 3.36 and rated it as the top 18 among 
140 management journals for 2010.
Professor Peng is also an active consultant, trainer, and keynote speaker. He 
has provided on-the-job training to over 300 professors. He has consulted and 
been a keynote speaker for multinational enterprises (such as AstraZeneca, Berlitz, 
KOSTA, Nationwide, SAFRAN, and Texas Instruments), non-profit organiza-
tions (such as Greater Dallas Asian American Chamber of Commerce and World 
Affairs Council of Dallas-Fort Worth), educational and funding organizations 
(such as Harvard University Kennedy School of Government, Hong Kong Research 
Grants Council, National Science Foundation of the United States, Social Sciences 
and Humanities Research Council of Canada, and the University of Memphis), and 
national and international organizations (such as the US-China Business Council, 
US Navy, and World Bank).
Professor Peng has attracted close to $1 million in external funding. His hon-
ors include a National Science Foundation CAREER Grant, a US Small Business 
Administration Best Paper Award, a (lifetime) Distinguished Scholar Award from 
the Southwestern Academy of Management, and a (lifetime) Scholarly Contribu-
tion Award from the International Association for Chinese Management Research. 
He has been quoted in The Economist, Newsweek, Dallas Morning News, Smart Business 
Dallas, Atlanta Journal-Constitution, The Exporter Magazine, The World Journal, Business 
Times (Singapore), Sing Tao Daily (Vancouver), and Brasil Econômico (São Paulo), and 
on the Voice of America.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Laying Foundations
Chapters
	
1	 Globalizing Business
	
2	 Understanding Formal Institutions: Politics, 
Laws, and Economics
	
3	 Emphasizing Informal Institutions: Cultures, 
Ethics, and Norms
	
4	 Leveraging Resources and Capabilities
p a r t
1
Digital Art/Spirit/Corbis
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
	 1-1	 explain the concepts of international 
business and global business, with a focus 
on emerging economies.
	 1-2	 give three reasons why it is important to 
study global business.
	 1-3	 articulate one fundamental question and 
two core perspectives in the study of global 
business.
	 1-4	 identify three ways of understanding what 
globalization is.
	 1-5	 state the size of the global economy and its 
broad trends and understand your likely bias 
in the globalization debate.
F.P.O.
Chapter
1
India Pictures RM/Dinodia Photos/Alamy Limited
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Globalizing Business
In 1994, when Mahindra & Mahindra (M&M) arrived 
in the United States, it was already a powerhouse in 
its native India. The company, founded as a steelmaker 
in 1945, had entered the agriculture market nearly 
20 years later, partnering with International Harvester 
to manufacture a line of sturdy 35-horsepower tractors 
under the Mahindra name.
The Mahindra tractors became very popular in 
India. They were affordably priced and fuel efficient, 
two qualities highly valued by thrifty Indian farmers, 
and the machines were sized appropriately for small 
Indian farms. Over the years, M&M continued to in-
novate to perfect its offerings, and its tractors prolif-
erated throughout India’s vast agricultural regions. 
The Mahindra brand became well established and 
respected. By the mid-1990s, the company was one 
of India’s top tractor manufacturers—and it was ready 
for new challenges. The lucrative US market beckoned.
When Mahindra USA (MUSA) opened for busi-
ness, Deere & Company—famous for its John Deere 
brand—was the dominant player. Deere’s bread and 
butter were enormous machines ranging as high as 
600 horsepower for industrial-scale agribusiness. 
Rather than trying to develop a product that could com-
pete head-on with Deere, M&M aimed for a smaller 
agricultural niche, one in which it could grow and make 
the most of its strengths.
Mahindra figured its little tractor would be perfect for 
hobby farmers, landscapers, and building contractors. 
The machine was sturdy, extremely reliable, and priced to 
sell.  With a few modifications for the US market—such 
as supersized seats and larger brake pedals to accommo-
date larger American bodies—Mahindra was good to go.
But the company was far from home and hardly a 
household name. The few Americans who had heard 
of the brand thought of it variously as “red,” “foreign,” 
or “cheap.” Even domestic competitors were barely 
aware of the newcomer. Deere gave more of its atten-
tion to Case and New Holland than to Mahindra. Fly-
ing below the radar, MUSA decided to make its mark 
through personalized service.
MUSA built close relationships with small dealer-
ships, particular family-run operations. Rather than saddle 
dealers with expensive inventory, MUSA allowed them 
to run on a just-in-time basis, offering to deliver a tractor 
within 24 to 48 hours of receiving the order. MUSA also 
facilitated financing. In return, Mahindra benefited from 
the trust the dealers enjoyed in their communities.
MUSA also built close relationships with custom-
ers. Some 10% to 15% of M&M tractor buyers got 
phone calls from the company’s president, who 
asked whether they were pleased with the buying 
experience and their new tractors. The company also 
offered special incentives—horticultural scholarships, 
O p e n i n g  C a s e
Emerging Markets: Mahindra & Mahindra versus John Deere
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
for example—to neglected market segments such as 
female hobby farmers.
This high-touch strategy paid off handsomely. 
MUSA’s US sales growth averaged 40% per year from 
1999 to 2006. This prompted David C. Everitt, president 
of Deere’s agricultural division, to remark that Mahindra 
“could someday pass Deere in global unit sales.”
Deere responded with short-lived—and seemingly 
desperate—cash incentives to induce Mahindra buy-
ers to trade for a Deere. This had the unintended effect 
of promoting M&M’s brand (“And we didn’t even pay 
for it,” said Anjou Choudhari, CEO of M&M’s farm 
equipment sector from 2005 to 2010). Mahindra fired 
back with an ad featuring the headline: “Deere John, I 
have found someone new.”
As Mahindra enjoyed growing success in America, 
Deere struggled to gain a foothold in India. Unlike 
Mahindra, which had innovated both its product and 
its processes for the US market, Deere tried to tempt 
Indian farmers with the same product that had under-
written its success at home. The strategy did not work, 
and Deere was forced to re-engineer its thinking as 
well as its product.
“We gave a wake-up call to John Deere,” noted 
Choudhari. “Our global threat was one of the motiva-
tions for Deere to design a low-horsepower tractor—in 
India and for India.”
In the meantime, M&M has become the number-
one tractor maker worldwide, as measured by units 
sold.
Source: This case was written by Professors Vijay Govindarajan and 
Chris Trimble (both at the Tuck School of Business, Dartmouth College). 
It was an excerpt from V. Govindarajan & C. Trimble, 2012, Reverse Innova-
tion (pp. 10–11), Boston: Harvard Business Review Press.
How do firms such as Mahindra & Mahindra and Deere compete in India, the United 
States, and elsewhere? What determines the success and failure of these firms—and 
numerous others—around the world? This book will address these and other impor-
tant questions on global business.
1-1 What Is Global Business?
1-1a Defining International Business and Global Business
Traditionally, international business (IB) is defined as a business (or firm) that en-
gages in international (cross-border) economic activities. It can also refer to the 
action of doing business abroad. The previous generation of IB textbooks almost 
always takes the foreign entrant’s perspective. Consequently, such books deal with 
issues such as how to enter foreign markets and how to select alliance partners. The 
most frequently discussed foreign entrant is the multinational enterprise (MNE), de-
fined as a firm that engages in foreign direct investment (FDI) by directly investing 
in, controlling, and managing value-added activities in other countries.1 Using our 
Opening Case, traditional IB textbooks would focus on how MNEs such as Deere 
enter India by undertaking FDI there. MNEs and their cross-border activities are, 
of course, important, but they only cover one side of IB—the foreign side. Students 
educated by these books often come away with the impression that the other side 
of IB—namely, domestic firms—does not exist. Of course, that is not true. Do-
mestic firms such as Mahindra & Mahindra do not just sit around in the face of 
foreign entrants. Domestic firms actively compete and/or collaborate with foreign 
entrants such as International Harvester. Sometimes strong domestic firms such as 
Mahindra & Mahindra have also gone overseas themselves. Overall, focusing on 
the foreign entrant side captures only one side of the coin at best.2
There are two key words in IB: international (I) and business (B).3 However, 
many previous textbooks focus on the international aspect (the foreign entrant) to 
such an extent that the business part (which also includes domestic business) almost 
Learning Objective
Explain the concepts of 
international business and 
global business, with a focus on 
emerging economies.
1-1
International business (IB)
(1) A business (or firm) that 
engages in international (cross-
border) economic activities and/
or (2) the action of doing busi-
ness abroad.
Multinational enterprise (MNE)
A firm that engages in foreign 
direct investment (FDI).
Foreign direct investment (FDI)
Investment in, controlling, and 
managing value-added activities 
in other countries.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 1   Globalizing Business	
5
disappears. This is unfortunate, because IB is fundamentally about B in addition to 
being I. To put it differently, the IB course in the undergraduate and MBA curri-
cula at numerous business schools is probably the only one with the word “business” 
in its title. All other courses you take are labeled management, marketing, finance, 
and so on, representing one functional area but not the overall picture of business. 
Does it matter? Of course! It means that your IB course is an integrative course that 
has the potential to provide you with an overall business perspective (rather than a 
functional view) grounded in a global environment. Consequently, it makes sense 
that your textbook should give you both the I and B parts, not just the I part.
To cover both the I and the B parts, global business is defined in this book as 
business around the globe—thus, the title of this book is Global Business (not IB). 
In other words, global business includes both (1) international (cross-border) busi-
ness activities covered by traditional IB books and (2) domestic business activities. 
Such deliberate blurring of the traditional boundaries separating international 
and domestic business is increasingly important today, because many previously 
national (domestic) markets are now globalized.
Consider the competition in college textbooks, such as this Global Business book 
you are studying now. Not long ago, competition among college business textbook 
publishers was primarily on a nation-by-nation basis. The Big Three—South-Western 
Cengage Learning (our publisher, which is the biggest in the college business textbook 
market), Prentice Hall, and McGraw-Hill—primarily competed in the United States. 
A different set of publishers competed in other countries. As a result, most textbooks 
studied by British students would be authored by British professors and published by 
British publishers, most textbooks studied by Brazilian students would be authored 
by Brazilian professors and published by Brazilian publishers, and so on. Now South-
Western Cengage Learning (under British and Canadian ownership), Pearson Pren-
tice Hall (under British ownership), and McGraw-Hill (still under US ownership) 
have significantly globalized their competition, thanks to the rising demand for high-
quality business textbooks in English. Around the globe, they are competing against 
each other in many markets, publishing in multiple languages and versions. For in-
stance, Global Business and its sister books, Global Strategy, GLOBAL (paperback), and 
International Business (an adaptation for the European market), are published by dif-
ferent subsidiaries in Chinese, Spanish, and Portuguese in addition to English, reach-
ing customers in over 30 countries. Despite such worldwide spread of competition, in 
each market—down to each school—textbook publishers have to compete locally. In 
other words, no professor teaches globally, and all students study locally. This means 
that Global Business has to win adoption from every class, every semester. Overall, it 
becomes difficult to tell in this competition what is international and what is domestic. 
Thus, “global” seems to be a better word to capture the essence of this competition.
1-1b Global Business and Emerging Economies
Global Business also differs from other books on IB because most focus on competi-
tion in developed economies. Here, by contrast, we devote extensive space to com-
petitive battles waged throughout emerging economies, a term that has gradually 
replaced the term “developing countries” since the 1990s. Another commonly used 
term is emerging markets (see PengAtlas Map 1.1). How important are emerging 
economies? Collectively, they now contribute approximately 45% of the global 
gross domestic product (GDP), as shown in Figure 1.1. Note that this percentage is 
adjusted for purchasing power parity (PPP), which is an adjustment to reflect the dif-
ferences in cost of living (see In Focus 1.1). Using official (nominal) exchange rates 
Global business
Business around the globe.
Emerging economies
A term that has gradually re-
placed the term “developing 
countries” since the 1990s.
Emerging markets
A term that is often used in-
terchangeably with “emerging 
economies.”
Gross domestic product (GDP)
The sum of value added by 
resident firms, households, and 
governments operating in an 
economy.
Purchasing power parity (PPP)
A conversion that determines 
the equivalent amount of goods 
and services that different 
currencies can purchase.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
Figure 1.1
The Contributions of Emerging Economies Relative to Developed 
Economies (World %)
80
90
100
60
70
50
40
30
20
10
0
Developed economies
FDI outﬂows
GDP (nominal
exchange rates)
Exports of goods
and services
FDI inﬂows
GDP (purchasing
power parity)
Population
BRIC
Emerging economies excluding
BRIC
Sources: Data extracted from (1) United Nations, 2011, World Investment Report 2011, New York and Geneva: UN; 
(2) World Bank, 2012, World Development Indicators database, Washington: World Bank. All data refer to 2011.
GDP, GNP, GNI, PPP—there is a bewildering variety of 
acronyms that are used to measure economic develop-
ment. It is useful to set these terms straight before pro-
ceeding. Gross domestic product (GDP) is measured as 
the sum of value added by resident firms, households, 
and governments operating in an economy. For exam-
ple, the value added by foreign-owned firms operating 
in Mexico would be counted as part of Mexico’s GDP. 
However, the earnings of non-resident sources that are 
sent back to Mexico (such as earnings of Mexicans who 
do not live and work in Mexico and dividends received 
by Mexicans who own non-Mexican stocks) are not in-
cluded in Mexico’s GDP. One measure that captures this 
is gross national product (GNP). More recently, the World 
Bank and other international organizations have used 
a new term, gross national income (GNI), to supersede 
GNP. Conceptually, there is no difference between GNI 
and GNP. What exactly is GNI/GNP? It comprises GDP 
plus income from non-resident sources abroad.
While GDP, GNP, and now GNI are often used as 
yardsticks of economic development, differences in 
cost of living make such a direct comparison less mean-
ingful. A dollar of spending in, say, Thailand can buy a 
lot more than in Japan. Therefore, conversion based 
on purchasing power parity (PPP) is often necessary. 
The PPP between two countries is the rate at which 
the currency of one country needs to be converted 
into that of a second country to ensure that a given 
amount of the first country’s currency will purchase 
the same volume of goods and services in the second 
country (see Chapter 7 for details). According to the In-
ternational Monetary Fund (IMF), the Swiss per capita 
GDP is $81,161 based on official (nominal) exchange 
rates—higher than the US per capita GDP of $48,387. 
However, everything is more expensive in Switzerland. 
A Big Mac costs $6.81 in Switzerland versus $4.20 in 
the United States. Thus, Switzerland’s per capita GDP 
based on PPP becomes $43,370—lower than the US 
per capita GDP based on PPP, $48,387 (the IMF uses 
the United States as benchmark in PPP calculation). On 
a worldwide basis, measured at official exchange rates, 
emerging economies’ share of global GDP is approxi-
mately 26%. However, measured at PPP, it is about 
43% of the global GDP. Overall, when you read statis-
tics about GDP, GNP, and GNI, always pay attention to 
whether these numbers are based on official exchange 
rates or PPP, which can make a huge difference.
Sources: Based on (1) Economist, 2012, Big Mac index, January 
14: 93; (2) Economist, 2006, Grossly distorted picture, February 11: 72; 
(3) International Monetary Fund, 2012, World Economic Outlook, April, 
Washington, DC: IMF.
Setting the Terms Straight
IN Focus 1.1 
Gross national product (GNP)
GDP plus income from non-
resident sources abroad.
Gross national income (GNI)
GDP plus income from non-
resident sources abroad. GNI 
is the term used by the World 
Bank and other international 
organizations to supersede the 
term GNP.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 1   Globalizing Business	
7
without adjusting for PPP, emerging economies contribute about 26% of the global 
GDP. Why is there such a huge difference between the two measures? Because the 
cost of living (such as housing and haircuts) in emerging economies tends to be 
lower than that in developed economies. For instance, one dollar spent in Mexico 
can buy a lot more than one dollar spent in the United States.
Table 1.1 lists the 33 countries that are classified as “developed economies.” 
The rest of the world (more than 150 countries) can be broadly labeled as 
“emerging economies.” Of these emerging economies, Brazil, Russia, India, and 
China—commonly referred to as BRIC—command more attention. As a group, 
they generate 17% of world exports, absorb 16% of FDI inflows, and contribute 
28% of world GDP (on a PPP basis). Commanding a lion’s share, BRIC contrib-
ute 62% of the GDP of all emerging economies (on a PPP basis). BRIC also 
generate 8% of world FDI outflows. MNEs from BRIC (such as Mahindra & 
Mahindra in the Opening Case) are increasingly visible in making investments 
and acquiring firms around the world.4 Clearly, major emerging economies (es-
pecially BRIC) and their firms have become a force to be reckoned with in global 
business.5 In addition to BRIC, other interesting terms include BRICS (BRIC + 
South Africa), BRICM (BRIC + Mexico), and BRICET (BRIC + Eastern Europe 
and Turkey).
Does it make sense to group so many countries with tremendous diversity 
in terms of history, geography, politics, and economics together as “emerging 
economies”? As compared to developed economies, the label of “emerging econo-
mies,” rightly or wrongly, has emphasized the presumably homogenous nature of 
so many different countries. While this single label has been useful, more recent 
research has endeavored to enrich it.6
Specifically, the two dimensions illustrated in Figure 1.2 can help us differenti-
ate various emerging economies.7 Vertically, the development of market-supporting 
political, legal, and economic institutions has been noted as a crucial dimension of 
BRIC
Brazil, Russia, India, and China. 
Table 1.1
Classifying Developed Economies versus Emerging Economies
33 developed economies as classified by the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
Australia
Hong Kong
Portugal
Austria
Iceland
Singapore
Belgium
Ireland
Slovak Republic
Canada
Israel
Slovenia
Cyprus
Italy
South Korea
Czech Republic
Japan
Spain
Denmark
Luxembourg
Sweden
Finland
Malta
Switzerland
France
Netherlands
Taiwan
Germany
New Zealand
United Kingdom
Greece
Norway
United States
All the other 149 economies are classified by the IMF as emerging economies
Source: IMF, www.imf.org. The IMF recognizes 182 countries and economies. It labels developed economies “advanced economies” and labels emerging 
economies “emerging and developing economies.”
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
institutional transitions in many emerging economies.8 Horizontally, the develop-
ment of infrastructure and factor markets is also crucial.
Stereotypical or traditional emerging economies suffer from both the lack 
of institutional development and the lack of infrastructure and factor market 
development. Most emerging economies 20 years ago would have fit this descrip-
tion. Today, some emerging economies that have made relatively little progress 
along these two dimensions (such as Belarus and Zimbabwe) still exist.
However, a lot has changed. A great deal of institutional development and in-
frastructure and factor market development have taken place. Such wide-ranging 
development has resulted in the emergence of a class of mid-range emerging econo-
mies that differ from both traditional emerging economies and developed econ-
omies. For example, the top down approach to government found in China has 
facilitated infrastructure and factor market development. But China’s political and 
market institutions tend to be underdeveloped relative to physical infrastructure. 
Alternatively, India has strong political institutions supporting market institutions 
(although there is still significant corruption in government bureaucracies). While 
Indian government policy reforms have facilitated better market institutions and 
associated economic development, world-class physical infrastructure is lacking. In 
the middle area of Figure 1.2, Brazil and Russia can be placed as examples. In these 
mid-range emerging economies, there are some democratic political institutions 
(despite the recent setback in Russia—see Chapter 2 Opening Case) and some in-
frastructure and factor market development. Finally, some economies have clearly 
graduated from the “emerging” phase and become what we call “newly developed 
economies.” South Korea may be an exemplar country as it has more balanced 
development in both institutional development and infrastructure/factor markets.
1-1c Base of the Pyramid and Reverse Innovation
The global economy can be viewed as a pyramid (Figure 1.3). The top consists 
of about one billion people with per capita annual income of $20,000 or higher. 
Mid-Range
Emerging
Economies
(e.g., INDIA)
Mid-Range
Emerging
Economies
(e.g., CHINA)
Traditional
Emerging
Economies
(e.g., BELARUS)
Less
Infrastructure and Factor Market Development
Institutional Development
More
Weak
Strong
Newly
Developed
Economies
(e.g., SOUTH
KOREA)
Figure 1.2
A Typology of Emerging Economies
Source: Adapted from R. Hoskisson, M. Wright, I. Filatotchev, & M. W. Peng, 2013, Emerging multinationals from 
mid-range economies: The influence of institutions and factor markets, Journal of Management Studies (in press).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 1   Globalizing Business	
9
These are mostly people who live in the developed economies in the Triad, which 
consists of North America, Western Europe, and Japan. Another billion people 
earning $2,000 to $20,000 per year make up the second tier. The vast majority of 
humanity—about five billion people—earn less than $2,000 per year and com-
prise the base of the pyramid (BOP). Most MNEs focus on the top and second tiers 
and end up ignoring the base of the pyramid.9 An increasing number of such low-
income countries have shown a great deal of economic opportunities as income 
levels have risen (see the Closing Case). More Western MNEs, such as GE, are in-
vesting aggressively in the base of the pyramid and leveraging their investment to 
tackle markets in both emerging and developed economies.
One interesting recent development out of emerging economies is reverse 
innovation—an innovation that is adopted first in emerging economies and 
then diffused around the world.10 Traditionally, innovations are generated by 
Triad-based multinationals with the needs and wants of rich customers at the 
top of the pyramid in mind. When such multinationals entered lower-income 
economies, they tended to simplify the product features and lower the prices. 
In other words, the innovation flow is top down. However, as Deere & Company 
found out in India, its large-horsepower tractors designed for American 
farmers were a poor fit for the very different needs and wants of Indian 
farmers. Despite Deere’s efforts to simplify the product and reduce the price, 
the price was still too high in India. Instead, Mahindra & Mahindra brought its 
widely popular small-horsepower tractors that were developed in India to the 
United States, and carved out a growing niche that eventually propelled it to 
be the world’s largest tractor maker by units sold (see the Opening Case). In 
response, Deere abandoned its US tractor designs and “went native” in India, 
by launching a local design team charged with developing something from 
scratch—with the needs and wants of farmers in India (or, more broadly, in 
emerging economies) in mind. The result was a 35-horsepower tractor that 
Triad
North America, Western Europe, 
and Japan.
Base of the pyramid (BOP)
Economies where people make 
less than $2,000 per capita per 
year.
Reverse innovation
An innovation that is adopted 
first in emerging economies 
and is then diffused around the 
world.
Base of the Pyramid
Per capita GDP/GNI < $2,000
Approximately ﬁve billion people
Second Tier
Per capita GDP/GNI $2,000–$20,000
Approximately one billion people
Top Tier
Per capita GDP/GNI > $20,000
Approximately one billion people
Sources: Adapted from (1) C. K. Prahalad & S. Hart, 2002, The fortune at the bottom of the pyramid, Strategy+Business, 
26: 54-67; (2) S. Hart, 2005, Capitalism at the Crossroads (p. 111), Philadelphia: Wharton School Publishing.
Figure 1.3
The Global Economic Pyramid
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
Table 1.2
Why Study Global Business?
  	 Enhance your employability and advance your career in the global economy
  	 Better preparation for possible expatriate assignments abroad
  	 Stronger competence in interacting with foreign suppliers, partners, and competitors and 
in working for foreign-owned employers in your own country
was competitive not only with Mahindra in India, but also in the United States 
and elsewhere. In both cases, the origin of new innovations is from the base 
of the pyramid. The flow of innovation is bottom up—in other words, reverse  
innovation.
The reverse innovation movement suggests that emerging economies are no 
longer merely low-cost production locations or attractive new markets (hence the 
term “emerging markets”). They are also sources of new innovations that may not 
only grow out of BOP markets, but also have the potential to go uphill to penetrate 
into the top of the global economic pyramid. In a Harvard Business Review article, 
Jeff Immelt, chairman and CEO of a leading practitioner of reverse innovation, 
GE, noted:
To be honest, the company is also embracing reverse innovation for defensive rea-
sons. If GE doesn’t come up with innovations in poor countries and take them glob-
al, new competitors from the developing world—like Mindray, Suzlon, Goldwind, 
and Haier—will. . . GE has tremendous respect for traditional rivals like Siemens, 
Philips, and Rolls-Royce. But it knows how to compete with them; they will never 
destroy GE. By introducing products that create a new price-performance paradigm, 
however, the emerging giants very well could. Reverse innovation isn’t optional; it 
is oxygen.11
As advised by GE’s Immelt, today’s students—and tomorrow’s business leaders—
will ignore the opportunities and challenges at the base of the pyramid at their own 
peril. This book will help ensure that you will not ignore these opportunities.
1-2 Why Study Global Business?
Global business (or IB) is one of the most exciting, most challenging, and most 
relevant subjects offered by business schools. Why study it? There are at least 
three compelling reasons why you should study global business—and study hard 
(Table 1.2).
First, mastering global business knowledge helps advance your employability 
and career in an increasingly competitive global economy. Take a look at the Open-
ing Day Quiz in Table 1.3. Can you answer all the questions correctly? If not, you 
will definitely benefit from studying global business.
The answer to Question 1 is empirical—that is, based on data. You should guess 
first and then look at the label of your shirt yourself or ask a friend to help you. The 
key here is international trade. Do you wear a shirt made in your own country or 
another country? Why?
In Question 2, smart students typically ask whether the mobile device (such 
as a smartphone or an iPad) means the motherboard or the components. My 
answer is: “I mean the whole device, all the production that went into making 
Learning Objective
Give three reasons why it 
is important to study global 
business.
1-2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 1   Globalizing Business	
11
the machine.” Then some students would respond: “But they could be made 
in different countries!” My point exactly. Specifically, the point here is to 
appreciate the complexity of a global value chain, with different countries 
making different components and handling different tasks. Such a value chain 
is typically managed by an MNE, such as Apple, Dell, Foxconn, HP, Lenovo, or 
Samsung. The capabilities necessary to organize a global supply chain hints at 
the importance of resources and capabilities—one of the two key themes of this 
book.
Question 3 is deceptively simple. Unfortunately, 100% of my own students—
ranging from undergraduates to PhDs—miss it. Surprise! The Group of 20 (G-20) 
only has 19 member countries. The 20th member is the European Union (EU)—a 
regional bloc, not a single country (see PengAtlas Map 1.1). Ideally, why the G-20 is 
formed in such an interesting way will make you more curious about how the rules 
of the game are made around the world. In this case, why are 19 countries in, but 
numerous others are out? What is special about the EU? Why are other regional 
blocs not included in the G-20? What about the G-7? What about other groups of 
countries (see Figure 1.4)? A focus on the rules of the game—more technically, 
institutions—is another key theme of the book.
Question 4 will really frighten you. Some students would typically clarify: “Do 
you mean the few security guards looking after the closed plant?” “Not necessarily,” 
I would point out. “The question is: How many jobs will be kept by the company?” 
Students would eventually get it: even adding a few jobs as security guards at the 
closed plant, the most optimistic estimates are that only 30 to 50 jobs may be kept. 
Yes, you guessed it, these jobs typically are high-level positions such as the CEO, 
CFO, CIO, factory director, and chief engineer. These managers will be sent by the 
MNE to start up operations in an emerging economy. You need to realize that in a 
2,000-employee plant, even if you may be the 51st-highest-ranked employee, your 
fate may be the same as the 2,000th employee. You really need to work hard and 
work smart to position yourself as one of the top 50 (preferably one of the top 30). 
Doing well in this class and mastering global business knowledge may help make 
it happen.
Group of 20 (G-20)
The group of 19 major countries 
plus the European Union (EU) 
whose leaders meet on a 
biannual basis to solve global 
economic problems.
Table 1.3
Opening Day Quiz
1. Which country made the shirt you are wearing?	
2. Which country made your mobile communication device?
(A) China	
(A) China
(B) Malaysia	
(B) Germany
(C) Mexico	
(C) Singapore
(D) Romania	
(D) Taiwan
(E) US	
(E) US
3. How many countries does the G-20 have? 	
4. A 2,000-employee manufacturing plant is closing in a 
developed economy, and production is moving to an 
emerging economy. How many of the 2,000 jobs will 
the company keep?
	
(A) 0
	
(B) 5–10
	
(C) 10–20
	
(D) 20–30
	
(E) 30–50
(A) 20
(B) 21
(C) 22
(D) 19
(E) 18
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
In addition to the first reason to equip you with relevant knowledge, the 
second compelling reason why you should study global business is related to 
Question 4. Because many ambitious students aspire to join the top ranks of 
large firms, expertise in global business is often a prerequisite. Today, it is 
increasingly difficult, if not impossible, to find top managers at large firms 
without significant global competence. Of course, eventually hands-on global 
experience, not merely knowledge acquired from this course, will be required. 
However, mastery of the knowledge of, and demonstration of interest in, global 
business during your education will set you apart as a more ideal candidate 
to be selected as an expatriate manager
(or “expat”)—a manager who works 
abroad—to gain such an experience (see 
Chapter 15 for details).
Thanks to globalization, low-level jobs 
not only command lower salaries but are 
also more vulnerable. However, high-level 
jobs, especially those held by expats, are 
both financially rewarding and relatively 
secure. Expats often command a signifi-
cant international premium in compensa-
tion—a significant pay raise when work-
ing overseas. In US firms, an expat’s total 
compensation package is approximately 
$250,000 to $300,000 (including perks 
and benefits; not all is take-home pay). 
When they return to the United States 
after a tour of duty (usually two to three 
Expatriate manager
A manager who works abroad, 
or “expat” for short.
International premium
A significant pay raise when 
working overseas.
Brazil
India
South
Africa
Brunei
Cambodia
Indonesia
Laos
Malaysia
Myanmar
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand
Vietnam
Italy
France
Germany
Japan
UK
Canada
USA
Shanghai Co-op 
Organization
BRIC
IBSA
ASEAN +3
G7
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyztan
Tajikistan
Uzbekistan
Russia
China
Argentina
Australia
Mexico
Turkey
European
Union
G20
Japan
South Korea
Figure 1.4
Country Groupings in the 21st Century
Source: Adapted from C. Dhanaraj & T. Khanna, 2011, Transforming mental models on emerging markets (p. 696), 
Academy of Management Learning and Education, 10(4): 684-701. G7 = Group of Seven; G20 = Group of Twenty; 
BRIC = Brazil, Russia, India, and China; IBSA = India-Brazil-South Africa Dialogue Forum; Shanghai Co-op Orga-
nization = Shanghai Co-operation Organization; ASEAN = Association of Southeast Asian Nations. © Academy of 
Management.
wavebreakmedia ltd/,2010/Used under license from Shutterstock.com
What are some of the benefits you may enjoy as an 
expatriate manager?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 1   Globalizing Business	
13
years), a firm that does not provide attractive career opportunities to experi-
enced expats often finds that they are lured away by competitor firms. Competi-
tor firms also want to globalize their business, and tapping into the expertise and 
experience of these former expats makes such expansion more likely to succeed. 
And yes, to hire away these internationally experienced managers, competitor 
firms have to pay an even larger premium. This indeed is a virtuous cycle.
This hypothetical example is designed to motivate you to study hard so that 
someday, you may become one of these sought-after globe-trotting managers. But 
even if you don’t want to be an expat, we assume that you don’t want to join the army 
of the unemployed due to factory closings and business failures.
Lastly, even if you do not aspire to compete for the top job at a large company 
and instead work at a small firm or are self-employed, you may find yourself dealing 
with foreign-owned suppliers and buyers, competing with foreign-invested firms in 
your home market, or perhaps even selling and investing overseas. Alternatively, 
you may find yourself working for a foreign-owned firm, your domestic employer 
acquired by a foreign player, or your unit ordered to shut down for global consoli-
dation. Any of these is a likely scenario, because approximately 80 million people 
worldwide—including 18 million Chinese, six million Americans, and one million 
British—are employed by foreign-owned firms. Understanding how global business 
decisions are made may facilitate your own career in such firms. If there is a stra-
tegic rationale to downsize your unit, you want to be prepared and start polishing 
your résumé right away. In other words, it is your career that is at stake. Don’t be 
the last in the know!
In short, in this age of global competition, “how do you keep from being 
Bangalored or Shanghaied” (that is, having your job being outsourced to India 
or China)?12 To avoid the fate humorously portrayed in Figure 1.5, a good place to 
Figure 1.5
Jobs Outsourced
Source: Harvard Business Review, 2012, April: 34.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
start is to study hard and do well in your IB course. Also, don’t forget to put this 
course on your résumé!
1-3 A Unified Framework
Global business is a vast subject area. It is one of the few courses that will 
make you appreciate why your university requires you to take a number of 
seemingly unrelated courses in general education. We will draw on major social 
sciences, such as economics, geography, history, political science, psychology, 
and sociology. We will also draw on a number of business disciplines, such 
as strategy, finance, and marketing. The study of global business is thus very 
interdisciplinary. It is quite easy to lose sight of the forest while scrutinizing 
various trees or even branches. The subject is not difficult, and most students 
find it to be fun. The number-one student complaint (based on previous 
student feedback) is that there is an overwhelming amount of information. 
Honestly, this is also my number-one complaint as your author. You may have to 
read and learn this material, but I have to bring it all together in a way that is 
understandable and in a (relatively) compact book that does not go on and on 
and on for 900 pages.
To make your learning more focused, more manageable, and (hopefully) 
more fun, in this section we will develop a unified framework (shown in 
Figure 1.6). This will provide great continuity to facilitate your learning. Spe-
cifically, we will discipline ourselves by focusing on only one most fundamen-
tal question and two core perspectives. A fundamental question acts to define 
a field and to orient the attention of students, practitioners, and scholars in a 
certain direction. Our “big question” is: What determines the success and fail-
ure of firms around the globe?13 To answer this question, we will introduce only 
two core perspectives throughout this book: (1) an institution-based view 
and (2) a resource-based view.14 The remainder of this section outlines this  
framework.
Learning Objective
Articulate one fundamental 
question and two core 
perspectives in the study of 
global business.
1-3
Fundamental question:
What determines the
success and failure
of ﬁrms around the globe?
Resource-based view:
Firm-speciﬁc
resources and
capabilities
Institution-based view:
Formal and informal
rules of the
game
Figure 1.6
A Unified Framework for Global Business
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 1   Globalizing Business	
15
1-3a One Fundamental Question
What is it that we do in global business? Why is it so important that practically all 
students in business schools around the world are either required or recommended 
to take this course? While there are certainly a lot of questions to raise, a relentless 
interest in what determines the success and failure of firms around the globe serves 
to focus the energy of our field. Global business is fundamentally about not limit-
ing yourself to your home country. It is about treating the entire global economy as 
your potential playground (or battlefield). Some firms may be successful domesti-
cally but fail miserably overseas. Other firms successfully translate their strengths 
from their home markets to other countries. If you were expected to lead your 
firm’s efforts to enter a particular foreign market, wouldn’t you want to find out 
what drives the success and failure of other firms in that market?
Overall, the focus on firm performance around the globe defines the field of 
global business (or IB) more than anything else. Numerous other questions and 
topics all relate in one way or another to this most fundamental question. There-
fore, all chapters in this book will be centered on this consistent theme: What de-
termines the success and failure of firms around the globe?
1-3b First Core Perspective: An Institution-Based View15
An institution-based view suggests that the success and failure of firms are enabled 
and constrained by institutions. By institutions, we mean the rules of the game. 
Doing business around the globe requires intimate knowledge about both formal 
rules (such as laws) and informal rules (such as values) that govern competition in 
various countries. If you establish a firm in a given country, you will work within 
that country’s institutional framework, which consists of the formal and informal 
institutions that govern individual and firm behavior. Firms that do not do their 
homework and thus remain ignorant of the rules of the game in a certain country 
are not likely to emerge as winners.
Formal institutions include laws, regulations, and rules. For example, 
Hong Kong’s laws are well-known for treating all comers, whether from neighbor-
ing mainland China (whose firms are still technically regarded as “non-domestic”) 
or far-away Chile, the same as they treat indigenous Hong Kong firms. Such equal 
treatment enhances the potential odds for foreign firms’ success. It is thus not sur-
prising that Hong Kong attracts a lot of outside firms. Other rules of the game 
discriminate against foreign firms and undermine their chances for success. India’s 
recent attraction as a site for FDI was only possible after it changed its FDI regula-
tions from confrontational to accommodating. Prior to 1991, India’s rules severely 
discriminated against foreign firms. As a result, few foreign firms bothered to show 
up, and the few that did had a hard time. For example, in the 1970s, the Indian gov-
ernment demanded that Coca-Cola either hand over the recipe for its secret syrup, 
which it does not even share with the US government, or get out of India. Painfully, 
Coca-Cola chose to leave India. Its return to India since the 1990s speaks volumes 
about how much the rules of the game have changed in India.
Informal institutions include cultures, ethics, and norms. They also play an 
important part in shaping the success and failure of firms around the globe. For 
example, individualistic societies, particularly the English-speaking countries such 
as Australia, Britain, and the United States, tend to have a relatively higher level of 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

16	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
entrepreneurship as reflected in the number of business start-ups. Why? Because 
the act of founding a new firm is a widely accepted practice in individualistic societ-
ies. Conversely, collectivistic societies such as Japan often have a hard time foster-
ing entrepreneurship. Most people there refuse to stick their neck out to found new 
businesses because it is contrary to the norm.16
Overall, an institution-based view suggests that institutions shed a great deal 
of light on what drives firm performance around the globe.17 Next, we turn to our 
second core perspective.
1-3c Second Core Perspective: A Resource-Based View18
The institution-based view suggests that the success and failure of firms around 
the globe are largely determined by their environments. This is certainly correct. 
Indeed, India did not attract much FDI prior to 1991 and Japan does not nurture 
a lot of internationally competitive start-ups because of their institutions. However, 
insightful as this perspective is, there is a major drawback. If we push this view 
to its logical extreme, then firm performance around the globe would be entirely 
determined by environments. The validity of this extreme version is certainly ques-
tionable.
The resource-based view helps overcome this drawback. While the institution-
based view primarily deals with the external environment, the resource-based view 
focuses on a firm’s internal resources and capabilities. It starts with a simple observa-
tion: In harsh, unattractive environments, most firms either suffer or exit. However, 
against all odds, a few superstars thrive in these environments. For example, despite 
the former Soviet Union’s obvious hostility toward the United States during the 
Cold War, PepsiCo began successfully operating in the former Soviet Union in the 
1970s (!). Most of the major airlines have been losing money since September 11, 
2001. But a small number of players, such as Southwest in the United States, Ryanair 
in Ireland, and Hainan Airlines in China, have been raking in profits year after 
year. In the fiercely competitive fashion industry, Zara has been defying gravity 
(see In Focus 1.2). How can these firms succeed in such challenging environments? 
What is special about them? A short answer is that PepsiCo, Southwest, Ryanair, 
Hainan, and Zara must have certain valuable and unique firm-specific resources and 
capabilities that are not shared by competitors in the same environments.
Doing business outside one’s home country is challenging. Foreign firms have 
to overcome a liability of foreignness, which is the inherent disadvantage that foreign 
firms experience in host countries because of their non-native status.19 Just think 
about all the differences in regulations, languages, cultures, and norms. Think 
about the odds against Mahindra & Mahindra when it tried to eat some of John 
Deere’s lunch in the American heartland (see the Opening Case). Against such 
significant odds, the primary weapons that foreign firms such as Mahindra & 
Mahindra employ are overwhelming resources and capabilities that can offset their 
liability of foreignness.20 Today, many of us take it for granted that the best-selling 
car in the United States rotates between the Toyota Camry and the Honda Civic, 
that Coca-Cola is the best-selling soft drink in Mexico, and that Microsoft Word 
is the world’s number-one word-processing software. We really shouldn’t. Why? 
Because it is not natural for these foreign firms to dominate non-native markets. 
These firms must possess some very rare and powerful firm-specific resources and 
capabilities that drive these remarkable success stories and are the envy of their 
rivals around the globe. This is a key theme of the resource-based view, which 
Liability of foreignness
The inherent disadvantage that 
foreign firms experience in host 
countries because of their non-
native status.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 1   Globalizing Business	
17
Zara is one of the hottest fashion chains. Founded 
in 1975, Zara’s parent, Inditex, has become a lead-
ing global apparel retailer. Since its initial public of-
fering (IPO) in 2001, Inditex quadrupled its sales (to 
$19.1 billion or €13.8 billion) and profits. It doubled the 
number of its stores of eight brands, of which Zara 
contributes two-thirds of total sales. Zara succeeds 
by first breaking and then rewriting industry rules—
also known as industry norms.
Rule number one: The origin of a fashion house 
usually carries some cachet. However, Zara does not 
hail from Italy or France—it is from Spain. Even within 
Spain, Zara is not based in a cosmopolitan city like 
Barcelona or Madrid. It is headquartered in Arteixo, 
a town of only 25,000 people in a remote corner of 
northwestern Spain that a majority of this book’s 
readers would have never heard of. Yet, Zara is active 
not only throughout Europe, but also in Asia and North 
America. As of 2012, the total number of stores is 
over 4,200 in 64 countries. Zara stores occupy some 
of the priciest top locations: Champs-Elysées in Paris, 
Ginza in Tokyo, Fifth Avenue in New York, Galleria in 
Dallas, and Huaihai Road in Shanghai.
Rule number two: Avoid stock-outs (a store run-
ning out of items in demand). Zara’s answer? Occa-
sional shortages contribute to an urge to buy now. 
With new items arriving at stores twice a week, 
experienced Zara shoppers know that “If you see 
something and don’t buy it, you can forget about 
coming back for it because it will be gone.” The 
small batch of merchandise during a short window 
of opportunity for purchasing motivates shoppers to 
visit Zara stores more frequently. In London, shop-
pers visit other stores an average of four times a 
year, but frequent Zara 17 times a year. There is a 
good reason to do so: Zara makes about 20,000 
items per year, about triple what Gap does. “At Gap, 
everything is the same,” says one Zara fan, “and 
buying from Zara, you’ll never end up looking like 
someone else.”
Rule number three: Bombarding shoppers with 
ads is a must. Gap and H&M spend on average 3% 
to 4% of their sales on ads. Zara begs to differ: It 
devotes just 0.3% of its sales to ads. The high traffic 
in the stores alleviates some needs for advertising in 
the media, most of which only serves as a reminder 
to visit the stores.
Rule number four: Outsource. Gap and H&M 
do not own any production facilities. However, out-
sourcing production (mostly to Asia) requires a long 
lead time, usually several months. Again, Zara has 
decisively deviated from the norm. By concentrating 
(more than half of) its production in-house (in Spain, 
Portugal, and Morocco), Zara has developed a super-
responsive supply chain. It designs, produces, and 
delivers a new garment to its stores worldwide in a 
mere 15 days, a pace that is unheard of in the industry. 
The best speed the rivals can achieve is two months. 
Outsourcing may not necessarily be “low cost,” be-
cause errors in prediction can easily lead to unsold in-
ventory, forcing retailers to offer steep discounts. The 
industry average is to offer 40% discounts across all 
merchandise. In contrast, Zara sells more at full price 
and, when it discounts, it averages only 15%.
Rule number five: Strive for efficiency through 
large batches. In contrast, Zara intentionally deals with 
small batches. Because of its flexibility, Zara does not 
worry about “missing the boat” for a season. When 
new trends emerge, Zara can react quickly. More 
interestingly, Zara runs its supply chain like clock-
work with a fast but predictable rhythm: Every store 
places orders on Tuesday/Wednesday and Friday/
Saturday. Trucks and cargo flights run on established 
schedules—like a bus service. From Spain, shipments 
Zara Deviates from Industry Norms
IN Focus 1.2 
Bloomberg/Getty Images.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

18	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
focuses on how winning firms acquire and develop such unique and enviable 
resources and capabilities and how competitor firms imitate and then innovate in 
an effort to outcompete the winning firms.
1-3d A Consistent Theme
Given our focus on the fundamental question of what determines the success and 
failure of firms around the globe, we will develop a unified framework by organiz-
ing the material in every chapter according to the two core perspectives, namely, 
the institution-based and resource-based views. With our unified framework—an 
innovation in IB textbooks—we will not only explore the global business “trees,” 
but also see the global business “forest.”
1-4 What Is Globalization?
Globalization, generally speaking, is the close integration of countries and peoples 
of the world. This abstract five-syllable word is now frequently heard and debated. 
Those who approve of globalization count its contributions to include greater eco-
nomic growth and standards of living, increased technology sharing, and more 
extensive cultural integration. Critics argue that globalization undermines wages 
in rich countries, exploits workers in poor countries, grants MNEs too much power, 
and destroys the environment. So, what exactly is globalization? This section out-
lines three views on globalization, recommends the pendulum view, and introduces 
the idea of semiglobalization.
1-4a Three Views on Globalization
Depending on what sources you read, globalization could be
 	 a new force sweeping through the world in recent times
 	 a long-run historical evolution since the dawn of human history
 	 a pendulum that swings from one extreme to another from time to time
An understanding of these views helps put the debate about globalization in 
perspective. First, opponents of globalization suggest that it is a new phenomenon 
Learning Objective
Identify three ways of 
understanding what 
globalization is.
1-4
Globalization
The close integration of coun-
tries and peoples of the world.
reach most European stores in 24 hours, US stores in 
48 hours, and Asian stores in 72 hours. Not only do 
store staff know exactly when shipments will arrive, 
regular customers know it too, thus motivating them 
to check out the new merchandise more frequently 
on those days, which are known as “Z days” in some 
cities.
Zara has no shortage of competitors. Why has no 
one successfully copied its business model of “fast 
fashion”? “I would love to organize our business like 
Inditex [Zara’s parent],” noted an executive from Gap, 
“but I would have to knock my company down and 
rebuild it from scratch.” This does not mean Gap and 
other rivals are not trying to copy Zara. The question is 
how long it takes for rivals to out-Zara Zara.
Sources: Based on (1) BusinessWeek, 2009, 100 best global brands, 
September 28: 44-60; (2) BusinessWeek, 2006, Fashion conquis-
tador, September 4: 38-39; (3) Economist, 2012, Fashion forward, 
March 24: 63-64; (4) K. Ferdows, M. Lewis, & J. Machuca, 2004, 
Rapid-fire fulfillment, Harvard Business Review, November: 104-110; 
(5) www.zara.com.
IN Focus 1.2 (continued)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 1   Globalizing Business	
19
beginning in the late 20th century, driven by recent technological innovations 
and a Western ideology focused on exploiting and dominating the world through 
MNEs. The arguments against globalization focus on environmental stress, social 
injustice, and sweatshop labor but present few clearly worked-out alternatives to the 
present economic order. Nevertheless, anti-globalization advocates and protesters 
often argue that globalization needs to be slowed down, if not stopped.21
A second view contends that globalization has always been part and parcel of 
human history. Historians are debating whether globalization started 2,000 or 
8,000 years ago. The earliest traces of MNEs have been discovered in Assyrian, 
Phoenician, and Roman times.22 International competition from low-cost countries 
is nothing new. In the first century a.d., the Roman emperor Tiberius was so 
concerned about the massive quantity of low-cost Chinese silk imports that he 
imposed the world’s first known import quota of textiles.23 Today’s most successful 
MNEs do not come close to wielding the historical clout of some MNEs, such as 
Britain’s East India Company during colonial times. In a nutshell, globalization is 
nothing new and will probably always exist.
A third view suggests that globalization is the “closer integration of the 
countries and peoples of the world which has been brought about by the enormous 
reduction of the costs of transportation and communication, and the breaking 
down of artificial barriers to the flows of goods, services, capital, knowledge, 
and (to a lesser extent) people across borders.”24 Globalization is neither recent 
nor one-directional. It is, more accurately, a process similar to the swing of a 
pendulum.
1-4b The Pendulum View on Globalization
The pendulum view probably makes the most sense because it can help us under-
stand the ups and downs of globalization. The current era of globalization origi-
nated in the aftermath of World War II, when major Western countries committed 
to global trade and investment. However, between the 1950s and the 1970s, this 
view was not widely shared. Communist countries, such as China and the Soviet 
Union, sought to develop self-sufficiency. Many non-communist developing coun-
tries, such as Brazil, India, and Mexico, focused on fostering and protecting do-
mestic industries. But refusing to participate in global trade and investment ended 
up breeding uncompetitive industries. In contrast, four developing economies in 
Asia—Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan—earned their stripes as 
the “Four Tigers” by participating in the global economy. They became the only 
economies once recognized as less developed (low-income) by the World Bank to 
have subsequently achieved developed (high-income) status (see Table 1.1).
Inspired by the Four Tigers, more and more countries and regions—such as 
China in the late 1970s, Latin America in the mid-1980s, Central and Eastern 
Europe in the late 1980s, and India in the 1990s—realized that joining the world 
economy was a must. As these countries started to emerge as new players in the 
world economy, they become collectively known as “emerging economies.” As a 
result, globalization rapidly accelerated.
However, globalization, like a pendulum, is unable to keep going in one direc-
tion. Rapid globalization in the 1990s and the 2000s saw some significant back-
lash. First, the rapid growth of globalization led to the historically inaccurate view 
that globalization is new. Second, it created fear among many people in devel-
oped economies that they would lose jobs. Emerging economies not only seem 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

20	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
to attract many low-end manufacturing jobs away from developed economies, but 
they also increasingly appear to threaten some high-end jobs. Finally, some factions 
in emerging economies complained against the onslaught of MNEs, alleging that 
they destroy local companies as well as local cultures, values, and environments.
While small-scale acts of vandalizing McDonald’s restaurants are reported 
in a variety of countries, the December 1999 anti-globalization protests in Se-
attle and the September 2001 terrorist attacks in New York and Washington have 
been undoubtedly the most visible and most extreme acts of anti-globalization 
forces at work. As a result, international travel was curtailed, and global trade 
and investment flows slowed in the early 2000s. Then in the mid-2000s, however, 
worldwide GDP, cross-border trade, and per capita GDP all soared to historically 
high levels.
Unfortunately, the party suddenly ended in 2008. The 2008–2009 global 
economic crisis was unlike anything the world had seen since the Great De-
pression (1929–1933). The year 2008 showed, for better or worse, how intercon-
nected the global economy has become. Deteriorating housing markets in the 
United States, fueled by unsustainable subprime lending practices, led to mas-
sive government bailouts of financial services firms. Initially, most of the world 
probably shared the sentiment expressed by Brazilian President Luiz Inacio 
Lula da Silva that the crisis would be “Bush’s crisis” (referring to President 
George W. Bush) and would have nothing to do with “us.” However, the crisis 
quickly spread around the world, forcing numerous governments to bail out 
their own troubled banks. Global output, trade, and investment plummeted, 
while unemployment skyrocketed. The 2008–2009 crisis became known as the 
Great Recession. Rightly or wrongly, many people blamed globalization for the 
Great Recession.
After unprecedented intervention in developed economies where governments 
ended up being many banks’ largest shareholders, confidence was growing that the 
global economy had turned the corner and that the recession was ending.25 How-
ever, starting in 2010, the Greek debt crisis and then the broader PIGS debt crisis 
(“PIGS” refers to Portugal, Ireland or Italy, Greece, and Spain) erupted. Fiscally 
more responsible EU countries that adopted the euro as the common currency, 
such as Germany and France, felt compelled to bail out the countries in crisis. The 
already slow recovery in Europe thus became slower, and unemployment hovered 
at very high levels (see Chapter 8).
Overall, economic recovery is likely to be slow in developed economies, whereas 
emerging economies are likely to rebound faster. The recession reminds all firms 
and managers of the importance of risk management—the identification and as-
sessment of risks and the preparation to minimize the impact of high-risk, unfor-
tunate events.26 As a technique to prepare and plan for multiple scenarios (either 
high risk or low risk), scenario planning is now extensively used by firms around 
the world.27 For example, many European firms have been preparing for a possible 
(but unlikely) scenario that Greece (or Germany) may leave the euro zone. As far 
as the direction of economic globalization is concerned, the recovery may see more 
protectionist measures, since the stimulus packages and job creation schemes of 
various governments often emphasize “buy national” (such as “buy American”) and 
“hire locals.” In short, the pendulum is swinging back.
Like the proverbial elephant, globalization is seen by everyone yet rarely com-
prehended. The sudden ferocity of the 2008–2009 crisis surprised everybody—
ranging from central bankers to academic experts. Remember all of us felt sorry 
Risk management
The identification and assess-
ment of risks and the preparation 
to minimize the impact of high-
risk, unfortunate events.
Scenario planning
A technique to prepare and plan 
for multiple scenarios (either 
high or low risk).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 1   Globalizing Business	
21
when we read the story of a bunch of blind men trying to figure out the shape and 
form of the elephant. We really shouldn’t. Although we are not blind, our task is 
more challenging than the blind men who study a standing animal. Our beast—
globalization—does not stand still and often rapidly moves, back and forth (!). Yet, 
we try to live with it, avoid being crushed by it, and even attempt to profit from it. 
Overall, relative to the other two views, the view of globalization as a pendulum is 
more balanced and more realistic. In other words, globalization has both rosy and 
dark sides, and it changes over time.
1-4c Semiglobalization
Despite the debate over it, globalization is not complete. Do we really live in a glo-
balized world? Are selling and investing abroad just as easy as at home? Obviously 
not. Most measures of market integration, such as trade and FDI, have recently 
scaled new heights but still fall far short of pointing to a single, globally integrated 
market. In other words, what we have may be labeled semiglobalization, which is 
more complex than extremes of total isolation and total globalization. Semiglobal-
ization suggests that barriers to market integration at borders are high but not high 
enough to insulate countries from each other completely.28
Semiglobalization calls for more than one way of doing business around the 
globe. Total isolation on a nation-state basis would suggest localization—a strategy 
of treating each country as a unique market. So an MNE marketing products to 
100 countries will need to come up with 100 versions of local cars or drinks. This 
approach is clearly too costly. Total globalization, on the other hand, would lead 
to standardization—a strategy of treating the entire world as one market. The 
MNE in our previous example can just market one version of “world car” or “world 
drink.” But the world obviously is not that simple. Between total isolation and total 
globalization, semiglobalization has no single right strategy, resulting in a wide 
variety of experimentations. Overall, (semi)globalization is neither to be opposed 
as a menace nor to be celebrated as a panacea; it is to be engaged.
1-5 Global Business and Globalization  
at a Crossroads
Twenty-first century business leaders are facing an enormous challenge. This book 
provides a basic guide to meeting that challenge. As a backdrop for the remainder 
of this book, this section makes two points. First, a basic understanding of the 
global economy is necessary. Second, it is important to critically examine your own 
personal views and biases regarding globalization.
1-5a A Glance at the Global Economy
The global economy at the beginning of the 21st century is an approximately 
$60 trillion economy (total global GDP calculated at official, nominal exchange 
rates). While there is no need to memorize a lot of statistics, it is useful to remem-
ber this $60 trillion figure to put things in perspective.
One frequent observation in the globalization debate is the enormous size of 
MNEs. If the largest MNE, Wal-Mart, were an independent country, it would be 
the 22nd largest economy—its sales are smaller than Indonesia’s GDP but larger 
Semiglobalization
A perspective that suggests that 
barriers to market integration at 
borders are high, but not high 
enough to insulate countries 
from each other completely.
Learning Objective
State the size of the global 
economy and its broad trends 
and understand your likely bias 
in the globalization debate.
1-5
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

22	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
than Poland’s. The sales of the largest EU-based MNE, BP, were larger than the 
GDP of each of the following EU member countries: Norway, Denmark, Greece, 
and Ireland. The sales of the largest Asia Pacific–based MNE, Sinopec, were larger 
than the GDP of each of the following Asia Pacific countries: Malaysia, Singapore, 
and New Zealand. Today, over 77,000 MNEs control at least 770,000 subsidiaries 
overseas.29 Total annual sales for the largest 500 MNEs exceed $20 trillion (about 
one third of global output). Table 1.4 documents the change in the makeup of the 
500 largest MNEs. In general, MNEs from the Triad dominate the list. The United 
States has generally contributed about one third of these firms, and has experi-
enced some reduction in numbers recently. The EU has maintained a reasonably 
steady share of about one third of these firms. From its heyday in the 1990s, Japan 
has experienced the most dramatic variation (roughly corresponding to its eco-
nomic boom and bust with several years of delay).
Among MNEs from emerging economies, those from BRIC contribute 83 firms 
to the Fortune Global 500 list, which is more than the number of Fortune Global 
firms from Japan. In particular, MNEs from China have come on strong.30 Beijing is 
now headquarters to 41 Fortune Global 500 firms, more than New York’s 27. MNEs 
based in emerging economies are often regarded as “Third World multinationals,” 
“dragon multinationals,” or simply “emerging multinationals.”31 Clearly, Western 
rivals cannot afford to ignore these new MNEs, and students studying this book 
need to pay attention to these emerging multinationals.
1-5b The Globalization Debate and You
As a future business leader, you are not a detached reader (see In Focus 1.3). 
The globalization debate directly affects your future.32 Therefore, it is imperative 
that you participate in the globalization debate instead of letting other people 
Table 1.4
Recent Changes in the Fortune Global 500
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
Developed economies
United States
170
162
153
140
139
133
European Union
165
165
170
163
161
149
Japan
70
67
64
68
71
68
Switzerland
12
13
14
15
15
15
Canada
14
16
14
14
11
11
Australia
8
8
8
9
8
8
Emerging economies
China
20
24
29
37
46
61
India
6
6
7
7
8
8
Brazil
4
5
5
6
7
7
Russia
5
4
5
8
6
7
BRIC
35
39
46
58
67
83
Sources: The most recent Fortune Global 500 list (for 2010) was published in Fortune, July 25, 2011.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 1   Globalizing Business	
23
make decisions on globalization that will significantly affect your career, your 
consumption, and your country. It is important to know your own biases when 
joining the debate. By the very act of taking an IB course and reading this book, 
you probably already have some pro-globalization biases, compared to non-
business majors elsewhere on campus and the general public in your country.
You are not alone. In the last several decades, most executives, policy makers, 
and scholars in both developed and emerging economies, who are generally held 
to be the elite in these societies, are biased toward acknowledging the benefits 
of globalization. Although it has long been known that globalization carries both 
benefits and costs, many of the elite have failed to take into sufficient account the 
social, political, and environmental costs associated with globalization. However, 
just because the elite share certain perspectives on globalization does not mean 
that most other members of the society share the same views. Unfortunately, many 
of the elite fail to understand the limits of their beliefs and mistakenly assume that 
the rest of the world thinks like them. To the extent that powerful economic and 
political institutions are largely controlled by the elite in almost every country, it 
is not surprising that some anti-globalization groups, feeling powerless, end up 
resorting to unconventional tactics such as mass protests to make their point.
Many of the opponents of globalization are nongovernmental organizations 
(NGOs) such as environmentalists, human rights activists, and consumer groups. 
Nongovernmental 
organization (NGO)
An organization that is not 
affiliated with governments.
On September 3, 2007, Markéta Straková of Tabor, 
the Czech Republic, wrote to BusinessWeek colum-
nists Jack Welch and Suzy Welch:
I am thinking of studying Portuguese, but in 
your opinion, what language should I learn to 
succeed in the world of business? And what 
fields of study hold the most potential?
Jack Welch was the former chairman and CEO of 
General Electric (GE), and Suzy Welch was the former 
editor of Harvard Business Review. They wrote back 
in the same issue of BusinessWeek:
You’re on to something with Portuguese, since 
it will give you a leg up in several markets with 
good potential, such as Brazil and some emerg-
ing African nations. Spanish is also a good 
choice, as it will allow you to operate with more 
ease throughout Latin America, and, increas-
ingly, the United States. But for our money—
and if you can manage the much higher order of 
commitment—Chinese is the language to learn. 
China is already an economic powerhouse. It 
will only gain strength. Anyone who can do busi-
ness there with the speed and intimacy that flu-
ency affords will earn a real competitive edge.
As for what to study—and if you want to be 
where the action is now and for the next couple 
of decades—consider the industries focused 
on alternative sources of energy. Or learn ev-
erything you can about the confluence of three 
fields: biotechnology, information technology, 
and nanotechnology. For the foreseeable future, 
the therapies, machines, devices, and other 
products and services that these fields bring to 
market will revolutionize society—and business.
That said, when it comes to picking an edu-
cation field and ultimately a career, absolutely 
nothing beats pursuing the path that truly fas-
cinates your brain, engages your energy, and 
touches your soul. Whatever you do, do what 
turns your crank. Otherwise your job will always 
be just work, and how dreary is that?
What Language and What Fields Should I Study?
IN Focus 1.3 
Source: http://www.businessweek.com/stories/2007-09-02/from-hero-
to-zero.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

24	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
Ignoring them will be a grave failure when do-
ing business around the globe. Instead of view-
ing NGOs as opponents, many firms view them 
as partners. NGOs do raise a valid point when 
they insist that firms, especially MNEs, should 
have a broader concern for the various stake-
holders affected by the MNEs’ actions around 
the world. At present, this view is increasingly 
moving from the peripheral to the mainstream 
(see Chapters 3 and 17).
It is certainly interesting, and perhaps 
alarming, to note that as would-be business 
leaders who will shape the global economy in 
the future, current business school students 
already exhibit values and beliefs in favor of 
globalization similar to those held by execu-
tives, policy makers, and scholars and different from those held by the general 
public. Shown in Table 1.5, US business students have significantly more positive 
(almost one-sided) views toward globalization than the general public. While these 
data are based on US business students, my lectures around the world suggest that 
most business students around the world—regardless of their nationality—seem to 
share such positive views on globalization. This is not surprising. Both self-selection 
to study business and socialization within the curriculum, in which free trade is 
widely regarded as positive, may lead to certain attitudes in favor of globalization. 
Consequently, business students tend to focus more on the economic gains of glo-
balization and less on its darker sides.
Current and would-be business leaders need to be aware of their own biases 
embodied in such one-sided views toward globalization. Since business schools 
aspire to train future business leaders by indoctrinating students with the domi-
nant values that managers hold, these results suggest that business schools may 
have largely succeeded in this mission. However, to the extent that current man-
agers (and professors) have strategic blind spots, these findings are potentially 
alarming. They reveal that business students already share these blind spots. De-
spite possible self-selection in choosing to major in business, there is no denying 
that student values are shaped, at least in part, by the educational experience that 
business schools provide. Knowing such limitations, business school professors 
and students need to work especially hard to break out of this mental straitjacket.
Table 1.5
Views on Globalization: General Public versus Business Students
Percentage answering “good” for the question: Overall,  
do you think globalization is good or bad for
General public1 
(N = 1,024)
Business students2  
(N = 494)
US consumers like you
68%
96%
US companies
63%
77%
The US economy
64%
88%
Strengthening poor countries’ economies
75%
82%
Sources: Based on (1) A. Bernstein, 2000, Backlash against globalization, BusinessWeek, April 24: 43; (2) M. W. Peng & H. Shin, 2008, How do future business 
leaders view globalization? (p. 179), Thunderbird International Business Review, 50 (3): 175-182. All differences are statistically significant.
Why do protestors like these object to globalization? 
Shalunts/Shutterstock
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 1   Globalizing Business	
25
In order to combat the widespread tendency to have one-sided, rosy views, a 
significant portion of this book is devoted to the numerous debates that surround 
globalization.33 Beyond the globalization debate that this chapter considers, 
debates are systematically introduced in every chapter to provoke more critical 
thinking and discussion. Virtually all textbooks uncritically present knowledge 
“as is” and ignore the fact that the field is alive with numerous debates. No doubt, 
debates drive practice and research forward. Therefore, it is imperative that you 
be exposed to cutting-edge debates and encouraged to form your own views. In 
addition, ethics is emphasized throughout the book. A featured Ethical Dilemma 
can be found in every chapter. Two whole chapters are devoted to ethics, norms, 
and cultures (Chapter 3) and corporate social responsibility (Chapter 17).
 Organization of the Book
This book has four parts. Part I is foundations. Following this chapter, Chapters 2, 3, 
and 4 address the two leading perspectives—namely, institution-based and resource-
based views. Part II covers tools, focusing on trade (Chapter 5), foreign investment 
(Chapter 6), foreign exchange (Chapter 7), and global and regional integration 
(Chapter 8). Part III sheds light on strategy. We start with the internationalization of 
small, entrepreneurial firms (Chapter 9), followed by ways to enter foreign markets 
(Chapter 10), to manage competitive dynamics (Chapter 11), to make alliances and 
acquisitions work (Chapter 12), and to strategize, structure, and learn (Chapter 13). 
Finally, Part IV builds excellence in different functional areas: marketing and supply 
chain (Chapter 14), human resource management (Chapter 15), finance and cor-
porate governance (Chapter 16), and corporate social responsibility (Chapter 17).
C h a p t e r  S u m m a r y
	 1.1	 Explain the concepts of international business and global business, with a 
focus on emerging economies.
 	 IB is typically defined as (1) a business (firm) that engages in international 
(cross-border) economic activities, and (2) the action of doing business abroad.
 	 Global business is defined in this book as business around the globe.
 	 This book has gone beyond competition in developed economies by devot-
ing extensive space to competitive battles waged in emerging economies 
and the base of the global economic pyramid.
 	 An interesting recent development out of emerging economies is reverse 
innovation.
	 1.2	 Give three reasons why it is important to study global business.
 	 Enhance your employability and advance your career in the global econo-
my by equipping yourself with global business knowledge.
 	 Better preparation for possible expatriate assignments abroad.
 	 Stronger competence in interacting with foreign suppliers, partners, and com-
petitors and in working for foreign-owned employers in your own country.
	 1.3	 Articulate one fundamental question and two core perspectives in the study 
of global business.
 	 IB’s most fundamental question is: What determines the success and failure 
of firms around the globe?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

26	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
 	 The two core perspectives are (1) the institution-based view and (2) the 
resource-based view.
 	 We develop a unified framework by organizing materials in every chapter 
according to the two perspectives guided by the fundamental question.
	 1.4	 Identify three ways of understanding what globalization is.
 	 Some view globalization as a recent phenomenon, and others believe that it 
has been a one-directional evolution since the dawn of human history.
 	 We suggest that globalization is best viewed as a process similar to the swing 
of a pendulum.
	 1.5	 State the size of the global economy and its broad trends, and understand 
your likely bias in the globalization debate.
 	 The total size of global GDP (calculated at the official, nominal exchange 
rate) is approximately $60 trillion.
 	 MNEs, especially large ones from developed economies, are sizable economic 
entities.
 	 Current and would-be business leaders need to be aware of their own hid-
den pro-globalization bias.
K e y  T e r m s
Base of the pyramid 9
BRIC 7
Emerging economies 5
Emerging markets 5
Expatriate manager 
(expat) 12
Foreign direct investment 
(FDI) 4
Global business 5
Globalization 18
Gross domestic 
product (GDP) 5
Gross national income 
(GNI) 6
Gross national product 
(GNP) 6
Group of 20 (G-20) 11
International business 
(IB) 4
International  
premium 12
Liability of foreignness 16
Multinational enterprise 
(MNE) 4
Nongovernmental 
organization  
(NGO) 23
Purchasing power 
parity (PPP) 5
Reverse innovation 9
Risk management 20
Scenario planning 20
Semiglobalization 21
Triad 9
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 What is the traditional definition of IB? How is global business defined in 
this book?
	 2.	 Compare PengAtlas Maps 2.1 (Top Merchandise Importers and Exporters), 
2.2 (Top Service Importers and Exporters), and 2.3 (FDI Inflows and Out-
flows) and note that the United States is number one in all categories except 
one. What is it? Many people feel that is a big problem; do you? In your opin-
ion, what—if anything—should be done about that?
	 3.	 Compare PengAtlas Maps 2.1 (Top Merchandise Importers and Exporters), 
2.2 (Top Service Importers and Exporters), and 2.3 (FDI Inflows and Out-
flows) once again and note the BRIC countries that are referenced in this 
chapter. Which of the BRIC countries is most often among the categories in 
those maps? Do you think that the long-term trend will be for that country to 
continue to become more important and perhaps surpass the United States, 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 1   Globalizing Business	
27
or do you think that it may decline, and one of the other BRIC countries will 
become more important? Why? 
	 4.	 ON CULTURE: Not all people in your country support globalization, and 
some say it is because they feel that globalization is an economic threat. 
However, to what extent they may also feel that it is a threat to their culture? 
What about you? To what extent do you feel that globalization is either an 
economic or cultural threat to your country?
	 5.	 Discuss the importance of emerging economies in the global economy. Use 
current news.
	 6.	 What is your interest in studying global business? How do you think it may 
help you succeed in the future?
	 7.	 If you were to work as an expatriate manager, where would you like to go, 
and what type of work would you like to do? Why?
	 8.	 How would you describe an institution-based view of global business?
	 9.	 How would you describe a resource-based view of global business?
	 10.	 After comparing the three views of globalization, which seems the most sen-
sible to you and why?
	 11.	 What is semiglobalization, and what factors contribute to it?
	 12.	 Do those who protest against globalization make any valid point(s) that all 
people, whether for or against globalization, should consider?
	 13.	 You may view yourself as objective and neutral regarding globalization, but 
do you sense any bias that you may have, one way or the other? What bias 
most likely exists on the part of other students taking this course?
	 14.	 Given the size of the global economy and the size of some of the large cor-
porations, do you think it is possible to carve out a niche that you can exploit 
as a small businessperson? Or do you feel that the most practical way to 
participate in the global economy is to do so as an employee or manager in 
a global corporation?
C r i t i c a l  D i s c u s s i o n  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 A classmate says: “Global business is relevant for top executives such as 
CEOs in large companies. I am just a lowly student who will struggle to gain 
an entry-level job, probably in a small domestic company. Why should I care 
about it?” How do you convince your classmate that global business is some-
thing to care about?
	 2.	 ON CULTURE: Thomas Friedman, in his book The World is Flat (2005), 
suggests that the world is flattening—meaning that it is increasingly 
interconnected by new technology such as the Internet. This can raise the 
poor from poverty, nurture a worldwide middle class, and even spread 
democracy. On the other hand, this presents significant challenges for 
developed economies, whose employees may feel threatened by competition 
from low-cost countries. How does this flattening world affect you?
	 3.	 ON ETHICS: What are some of the darker sides (in other words, costs) as-
sociated with globalization? How can business leaders make sure that the 
benefits of their various actions (such as outsourcing) outweigh their draw-
backs (such as job losses in developed economies)?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

28	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
	 4.	 ON ETHICS: Some argue that aggressively investing in emerging economies 
is not only economically beneficial but also highly ethical, because it could 
lift many people out of poverty (see the Closing Case). However, others cau-
tion that in the absence of reasonable hopes of decent profits, rushing to 
emerging economies is reckless. How would you participate in this debate?  
G l o b a l  A c t i o n
	 1.	 Chemical companies are among the largest firms worldwide. Two approaches 
to evaluating their operations are by capital spending and by research 
and development (R&D) spending. Access a resource that provides this 
information about top global chemical producers. Then compare the top 
five capital-spending and R&D-spending chemical companies. Are any 
companies found on both lists? What insights does this information provide?
	 2.	 One important aspect of globalization is the fundamental stability of the 
global economic order currently in place. Thus, FDI intentions can be influ-
enced by its perceived sustainability to some degree. Identify the three most 
important issues related to global economic stability over the next 20 years. 
Be sure to discuss the sample surveyed to provide the appropriate frame of 
reference for discussion.
V i d e o  C a s e
After watching the video on New Balance, discuss the following:
	 1.	 What will determine the success or failure of New Balance?
	 2.	 What view of globalization is suggested through the New Balance Company?
	 3.	 What impact will emerging economies and the Trans-Pacific Partnership 
have on New Balance?
	 4.	 With regard to New Balance, what are the costs and benefits of globalization?
	 5.	 Is globalization the solution to profitability?
Consumers in remote areas of emerging economies 
have limited opportunities to buy global brands, and 
even fewer opportunities to connect to the supply 
chains of MNEs. Direct sales companies such as 
Avon are growing their markets and profits by tapping 
the potential of buyers and sellers at the base of 
the pyramid. An estimated one billion consumers, 
between the poorest of the poor and the rising 
middle class, spend up to one-third of their income 
on personal care items, electronics, and snack food. 
These consumers often differ greatly in interests 
and behaviors from consumers in urban centers. By 
EMERGING MARKETS: Direct Selling at the Base of the Pyramid 
Ethical 
Dilemma
C l o s i n g  C a s e
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 1   Globalizing Business	
29
working in direct sales, millions of women are gaining 
skills and experience as micro-entrepreneurs, and 
while doing so, are changing social norms and ideas 
of global beauty.
Direct sales companies employ more than two 
million people in Brazil. A team of researchers took 
an in-depth look at women who work in direct sales 
in the municipality of Ponta de Pedras, on Marajó 
Island in the remote lower Amazon. This local econ-
omy revolves largely around seasonal agricultural 
production of the açaí fruit, with almost no job oppor-
tunities for women before MNE direct sales compa-
nies entered the marketplace. Traveling to homes by 
canoe and by road, the women sell beauty products 
from US-based Avon and the more expensive Brazil-
based Natura, and inexpensive household goods and 
clothing from the Brazilian catalog company Hermes. 
In an area with approximately 12,000–13,000 female 
residents, Avon has around 175 direct sales repre-
sentatives, Hermes counts around 200, and Natura 
has between 15 and 20.
The MNE direct sales companies overcome 
roadblocks by leveraging the representatives’ keen 
awareness of local consumer tastes, brand prefer-
ences, and complex local business norms and prac-
tices. The representatives disseminate information 
about new products and translate product informa-
tion into terms that are relevant to their customers. 
To be effective, they identify meaningful segments, 
within which they exercise some flexibility in sup-
pressing or promoting differences between the 
global brands and the local products. Almost all of 
the women consider their work “successful” if they 
are able to make a small profit or break even. Most 
direct sales representatives earn on average 80 reais 
(approximately $35) per order, which they typically 
send in once a month or every other month. For di-
rect sales representatives in Ponta de Pedras, the 
income they earn is not meant to support their fam-
ily, but it is a crucial secondary income over which 
they have sole control. They use this money to pro-
vide clothing for their children and to purchase new 
products for themselves, which can translate into 
a sense of empowerment and an enhanced role 
in the family and community. Soon after building 
their initial network, many representatives start to 
represent other companies. Since the economy re-
volves around the agricultural season, there is also 
a season for increased sales. This seasonal cycle is 
one of their most difficult challenges. The only way 
to make any sales in Ponta de Pedras is to offer in-
formal credit, typically allowing customers to pay up 
front for one-half or one-third of the cost, and then 
pay the remaining amount owed at a later date. As 
the local Avon coordinator stated, “If she doesn’t sell 
on credit, she’s not going to sell anything. All of her 
products will stay with her.”
Product catalogs and television commercials 
promote the glamour of the cosmetics and beauty 
products in Brazil, but some representatives and 
customers have very little exposure to television, 
print media and the Internet, or urban lifestyles. The 
identification with values and brands falls along a 
continuum from global to local. This identification 
is affected by the levels of exposure to media, the 
degree of urban-rural circulation, and the patterns 
of urban-rural communication. Building from their 
community roots, the sales representatives create 
a channel for discussing the relevant differences 
between local, traditional products and modern, 
global consumer brands. Local values can be 
expressed with the simultaneous identification of 
global and local standards. For example, perfumes, 
colognes, soaps, and lotions are the most popular 
beauty products in Ponta de Pedras, and most 
residents purchase these products from both 
Avon and Natura representatives. Smelling good is 
culturally very important in the Amazon, coinciding 
with other practices such as frequent bathing—
on average, three to four times per day. Make-up 
H. John Maier Jr./Contributor/Getty Images
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

30	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
and cosmetics, on the other hand, do not connect 
nearly as much with local values, but wearing make-
up is an index of identification with global beauty 
standards.
The direct sales representatives play a bridging 
role between local and global ideals of beauty and 
fashion. Through interpersonal discussions, these 
female entrepreneurs form and leverage a success-
ful system in which customers can simultaneously 
identify with global ideals of beauty and femininity, 
and express their locally based differences, ideals, 
and values. This system is more dynamic, interactive, 
and customized than what traditional, store-based 
retailing offers. Overall, the direct sales networks 
in remote areas reconcile local and global values on 
beauty and femininity for customers, create stronger 
brand relationships to the benefit of the MNEs, and 
help to improve the income and quality of life of the 
many individuals involved.
Case Discussion Questions:
	 1.	 What are the advantages to a consumer in the 
remote Amazon of buying a beauty product from 
a direct sales representative, over buying the 
product from a retail store in the nearest town?
	 2.	 What are some of the “rules of game” affecting 
an Avon representative in the remote Amazon?
	 3.	 Natura and Avon are direct competitors in this 
market. Compare and contrast their resources 
and capabilities.
	 4.	 ON ETHICS: Avon knows that many of its sellers 
will not make large profits. Comment on the eth-
ics of the business model.
	 5.	 ON ETHICS: Some critics question whether it is 
ethical to aggressively market “non-essentials” 
(such as cosmetics) to very low income customers 
who may end up spending up to one-third of their 
income on such items. What do you think?
[Journal acronyms] AMP—Academy of Management Perspectives; 
AMR—Academy of Management Review; APJM—Asia Pacific Journal 
of Management; BW—BusinessWeek (before 2010) or Bloomberg Busi-
nessweek (since 2010); GSJ—Global Strategy Journal; HBR—Harvard 
Business Review; JBV—Journal of Business Venturing; JIBS—Journal of 
International Business Studies; JIM—Journal of International Manage-
ment; JM—Journal of Management; JMS—Journal of Management Stud-
ies; JWB— Journal of World Business; MBR—Multinational Business 
Review; MIR—Management International Review; SMJ—Strategic Man-
agement Journal
1 This definition of the MNE can be found in R. Caves, 1996, Mul-
tinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis, 2nd ed. (p. 1), New York: 
Cambridge University Press; J. Dunning, 1993, Multinational Enter-
prises and the Global Economy (p. 30), Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
Other terms are multinational corporation (MNC) and transnational 
corporation (TNC), which are often used interchangeably with 
MNE. To avoid confusion, in this book, we will use MNE.
2 O. Shenkar, 2004, One more time: International business in a 
global economy (p. 165), JIBS, 35: 161–171. See also J. Boddewyn, 
B. Toyne, & Z. Martinez, 2004, The meanings of “international man-
agement,” MIR, 44: 195–215; J.-F. Hennart, 2009, Down with MNE-
centric models! JIBS, 40: 1432–1454.
3 C. Pitellis, 2009, IB at 50, AIB Insights, 9 (1): 2–8.
4 A. Bhattacharya & D. Michael, 2008, How local companies keep 
multinationals at bay, HBR, March: 85–95; A. Cuervo-Cazurra, 
2007, Sequence of value-added activities in the multinationaliza-
tion of developing country firms, JIM, 13: 258–277; B. Elango & 
C. Pattnaik, 2007, Building capabilities for international opera-
tions through networks, JIBS, 38: 541–555; I. Filatotchev, R. Strange, 
J. Piesse, & Y. Lien, 2007, FDI by firms from newly industrialized 
economies in emerging markets, JIBS, 38: 556–572; M. Garg & 
A. Delios, 2007, Survival of the foreign subsidiaries of TMNCs, 
JIM, 13: 278–295; S. Klein & A. Worcke, 2007, Emerging global con-
tenders, JIM, 13: 319–337; N. Kumar, 2009, How emerging giants  
are rewriting the rules of M&A, HBR, May: 115–121; P. Li, 2007, Toward 
an integrated theory of multinational evolution, JIM, 13: 296–318; 
Y. Luo & R. Tung, 2007, International expansion of emerging market 
enterprises, JIBS, 38: 481–498; D. Yiu, C. Lau, & G. Bruton, 2007, In-
ternational venturing by emerging economy firms, JIBS, 38: 519–540.
5 B. Aybar & A. Ficici, 2009, Cross-border acquisitions and firm val-
ue, JIBS, 40: 1317–1338; L. Cui & F. Jiang, 2010, Behind ownership 
decision of Chinese outward FDI, APJM, 27: 751–774; P. Deng, 2009, 
Why do Chinese firms tend to acquire strategic assets in interna-
tional expansion? JWB, 44: 74–84; P. Gammeltoft, H. Barnard, & 
A. Madhok, 2010, Emerging multinationals, emerging theory, JIM, 
16: 95–101; G. Gao, J. Murray, M. Kotabe, & J. Lu, 2010, A “strategy tri-
pod” perspective on export behaviors, JIBS, 41: 377–396; M. Guillen 
& E. Carcia-Canal, 2009, The American model of the multinational 
firm and the “new” multinationals from emerging economies, AMP, 
23: 23–35; S. Gubbi, P. Aulakh, S. Ray, M. Sarkar, & R. Chittoor, 
2010, Do international acquisitions by emerging-economy firms  
N O T E S
Sources: This case was written by Professors Jessica Chelekis (University of Southern Denmark) and Susan M. Mudambi (Temple University). © Jessica 
Chelekis and Susan M. Mudambi. Reprinted with permission. It was based on (1) J. Chelekis & S. M. Mudambi, 2010, MNCs and micro-entrepreneurship in 
emerging economies: The case of Avon in the Amazon, Journal of International Management, 16: 412-424; (2) R. Wilk, 1995, The local and the global in the 
political economy of beauty: From Miss Belize to Miss World, Review of International Political Economy, 2(1): 117–134; (3) World Federation of Direct Selling 
Associations (WFDSA), 2009, International statistics, http://www.wfdsa.org/statistics.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 1   Globalizing Business	
31
create shareholder value? JIBS, 41: 387–418; S. Sun, M. W. Peng, 
B. Ren, & D. Yan, 2012, A comparative ownership advantage frame-
work for cross-border M&As, JWB, 47: 4–16.
6 R. Sharma, 2012, Breakout Nations, New York: Norton.
7 R. Hoskisson, M. Wright, I. Filatotchev, & M. W. Peng, 2013, Emerg-
ing multinationals from mid-range economies, JMS (in press).
8 M. W. Peng, 2003, Institutional transitions and strategic choices, 
AMR, 28: 275–296.
9 T. London, 2009, Making better investments at the base of the pyr-
amid, HBR, May: 106–113; T. London & S. Hart, 2004, Reinventing 
strategies for emerging markets, JIBS, 35: 350–370; C. K. Prahalad, 
2005, The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid, Philadelphia: Wharton 
School Publishing.
10 V. Govindarajan & C. Trimble, 2012, Reverse Innovation (p. 4), 
Boston: Harvard Business Review Press.
11 J. Immelt, V. Govindarajan, & C. Trimble, 2009, How GE is dis-
rupting itself, HBR, October: 56–65.
12 BW, 2007, The changing talent game (p. 68), August 20: 68–71.
13 M. W. Peng, 2004, Identifying the big question in international 
business research, JIBS, 35: 99–108.
14 K. Meyer, S. Estrin, S. Bhaumik, & M. W. Peng, 2009, Institutions, 
resources, and entry strategies in emerging economies, SMJ, 30: 
61–80.
15 J. Dunning & S. Lundan, 2008, Institutions and the OLI paradigm 
of the multinational enterprise, APJM, 25: 573–593; M. W. Peng, 
S. Sun, B. Pinkham, & H. Chen, 2009, The institution-based view 
as a third leg for a strategy tripod, AMP, 23: 63–81; M. W. Peng, 
D. Wang, & Y. Jiang, 2008, An institution-based view of international 
business strategy, JIBS, 39: 920–936.
16 S. Lee, Y. Yamakawa, M. W. Peng, & J. Barney, 2011, How do bank-
ruptcy laws affect entrepreneurship development around the world? 
JBV, 26: 505–520.
17 J. Cantwell, J. Dunning, & S. Lundan, 2010, An evolutionary ap-
proach to understanding international business activity, JIBS, 41: 
567–586; B. Kim & J. Prescott, 2005, Deregulatory forms, variations 
in the speed of governance adaptation, and firm performance, 
AMR, 30: 414–425.
18 M. W. Peng, 2001, The resource-based view and international 
business, JM, 27: 803–829.
19 J. Johanson & J. Vahlne, 2009, The Uppsala internationalization 
process model revisited: From liability of foreignness to liability of 
outsidership, JIBS, 40: 1411–1431.
20 H. Barnard, 2010, Overcoming the liability of foreignness with-
out strong firm capabilities, JIM, 16: 165–176.
21 BW, 2006, Free trade can be too free, July 3: 102–104; H. Chang, 
2008, Bad Samaritans, New York: Bloomsbury; A. Giddens, 1999, 
Runaway World, London: Profile.
22 K. Moore & D. Lewis, 2009, The Origins of Globalization, New York: 
Routledge.
23 D. Yergin & J. Stanislaw, 2002, The Commanding Heights (p. 385), 
New York: Simon & Schuster.
24 J. Stiglitz, 2002, Globalization and Its Discontents (p. 9), New York: 
Norton.
25 M. W. Peng, R. Bhagat, & S. Chang, 2010, Asia and global busi-
ness, JIBS, 41: 373–376.
26 L. Purda, 2008, Risk perception and the financial system, JIBS, 
39: 1178–1196; N. Taleb, D. Goldstein, & M. Spitznagel, 2009, The six 
mistakes executives make in risk management, HBR, October: 78–81.
27 S. Lee & M. Makhija, 2009, The effect of domestic uncertainty 
on the real options value of international investments, JIBS, 40: 
405–420.
28 P. Ghemawat, 2003, Semiglobalization and international business 
strategy, JIBS, 34: 138–152.
29 United Nations (UN), 2010, World Investment Report 2010 (p. 10), 
New York and Geneva: UN.
30 M. W. Peng, 2012, The global strategy of emerging multinationals 
from China, GSJ, 2: 97–107.
31 P. Aulakh, 2007, Emerging multinationals from developing econ-
omies, JIM, 13: 235–240; J. Mathews, 2006, Dragon multinationals 
as new features of globalization in the 21st century, APJM, 23: 5–27; 
R. Ramamurti & J. Singh (eds.), 2009, Emerging Multinationals from 
Emerging Markets, New York: Cambridge University Press.
32 T. Friedman, 2005, The World Is Flat, New York: Farrar, Straus, & 
Giroux; R. Rajan, 2010, Fautlines, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press.
33 M. W. Peng, S. Sun, & D. Blevins, 2011, The social responsibility of 
international business scholars, MBR, 19: 106–119; D. Rodrik, 2011, 
The Globalization Paradox, New York: Norton.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

F.P.O.
RIA Novosti Kremlin, Dmitry Astakhov, Presidential Press Service/AP Images
Chapter
2
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
	 2-1	 explain the concept of institutions and their 
key role in reducing uncertainty.
	 2-2	 articulate the two core propositions 
underpinning an institution-based view of 
global business.
	 2-3	 identify the basic differences between 
democracy and totalitarianism.
	 2-4	 outline the differences among civil law, 
common law, and theocratic law.
	 2-5	 understand the importance of property 
rights and intellectual property rights.
	 2-6	 appreciate the differences among market 
economy, command economy, and mixed 
economy.
	 2-7	 participate in two leading debates 
concerning politics, laws, and economics.
	 2-8	 draw implications for action.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Understanding Formal 
Institutions: Politics, 
Laws, and Economics
Russia is not the Soviet Union. But what is it? Most of 
the news we read (in the West) on Russia seems nega-
tive. Corruption is widespread (Russia ranks 146th out of 
180 countries according to Transparency International). 
National mood seems gloomy. More than half of the 
entrepreneurs and college students surveyed in Russia 
indicate an interest in living abroad (although few will ac-
tually emigrate). In 2004, Russia was downgraded from 
“Partly Free” to “Not Free”—on a 1-3 scale of “Free,” 
“Partly Free,” and “Not Free”—by Freedom House, a 
leading nongovernmental organization (NGO) promot-
ing democracy. In 2012, Vladimir Putin was re-elected as 
president (after serving as president for two terms be-
tween 2000 and 2008 and as prime minister between 
2008 and 2012). The election was largely symbolic as 
all viable candidates were not allowed to run against 
him. Widespread protests against Putin broke out. In 
the international community, commentators bearish on 
Russia have suggested kicking Russia out of the BRIC 
group given its alleged lack of dynamism, and focusing 
more business attention on China, India, and Brazil.
Is Russia really that bad? The answer is: No! While 
Russia’s GDP is smaller than China’s and Brazil’s, it is 
larger than India’s. Russia’s per capita GDP, approxi-
mately $16,000 (at purchasing power parity), is one-
third higher than Brazil’s, three times China’s, and five 
times India’s. Simply put, Russia is too big and too rich to 
ignore. None of the high-tech giants (such as Cisco, HP, 
and Intel) and industrial and consumer goods firms (such 
as Carrefour, Danone, IKEA, Nestlé, PepsiCo, and Unile-
ver) has announced plans to quit Russia. Russia’s eco-
nomic growth may not be as fast as China’s or India’s, 
but it will certainly be higher than US or EU growth. 
Although Russia has yet to become a member of the 
World Trade Organization (WTO), it exports more than 
30% of its GDP, in contrast to 26% for China, 25% for In-
dia, and 13% for Brazil, all of which are WTO members. 
Despite all the media attention on outward foreign direct 
investment (OFDI) coming from China (and, to a lesser 
extent, from India), Russia is the single largest foreign 
direct investor among BRIC countries. Russia’s OFDI 
stock is larger than Brazil’s, India’s, and, yes, China’s.
Because Russia is so large and complex, how to 
“read” Russia has remained a constant debate. The de-
bate centers on political, economic, and legal dimensions. 
Politically, Russia has indeed become less democratic. 
Understandably, certain segments of the population (es-
pecially the better educated), inspired by more liberal ide-
als, are disappointed by the return of Putin, who is viewed 
as status quo, unable to bring about political reform. But 
a more relevant question is: Is Russia better off under 
Putin’s more authoritarian rule since 2000, compared 
with Boris Yeltsin’s more democratic (and more chaotic) 
rule in the 1990s? Russia under Putin between 2000 and 
O p e n i n g  C a s e
Emerging Markets: The Peril and Promise of Russia
Ethical 
Dilemma
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

34	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
2008 grew 7% annually, whereas Russia under Yeltsin 
during the 1990s experienced a catastrophic economic 
decline. Anyone complaining about Putin’s authoritarian 
manners should be reminded of the remarkable contrast 
between the ways the state tackled two major crises in 
1998 and 2008. In 1998, the Yeltsin government defaulted 
on its debt and devalued the ruble. In 2008, when the 
global financial tsunami hit, the Putin government tapped 
into a stabilization fund (supported by oil and gas exports) 
to prevent a sharp devaluation of the ruble, launched a 
$200 billion stimulus package, injected liquidity into the 
banking system, and bailed out some key companies. 
None of the above was possible in 1998, because the 
Yeltsin government was hopelessly drowning in debt.
Economically, the Russian economy indeed has 
great room for development. It is overly dependent on 
oil and gas exports, and not sufficiently innovative to 
charge ahead. In the World Economic Forum’s Global 
Competitiveness Report, Russia ranks only 51st in inno-
vation (out of 133 countries), behind China (26th) and In-
dia (30th). Dmitry Medvedev, who served as president 
between 2008 and 2012 (while Putin was prime 
minister), published an article in 2009 titled “Russia 
Forward!” “Should we drag a primitive economy based 
on raw materials and endemic corruption into the fu-
ture?” he asked. In 2010, Medvedev, an avid iPad user, 
created a major center for innovation in Skolkovo in the 
Moscow suburbs as well as numerous technoparks and 
special economic zones throughout the country.
Legally, establishing the rule of law that respects pri-
vate property is one of the priorities. In a society whereby 
nobody had any significant private property until recent-
ly, how a small number of individuals became super-rich 
oligarchs (tycoons) almost overnight is intriguing. By the 
2000s, the top ten families or groups owned 60% of 
Russia’s total market capitalization. Should the govern-
ment protect private property if it is acquired through 
illegitimate or “gray” means? Most oligarchs obtained 
their wealth during the chaotic 1990s. Since these oli-
garchs have acquired wealth, they have demanded that 
the government respect and protect their private assets. 
The government thus faces a dilemma: Redistributing 
wealth by confiscating assets from the oligarchs creates 
more uncertainty, whereas respecting and protecting 
the property rights of the oligarchs results in more re-
sentment among the population. Thus far, except when 
a few oligarchs, notably Mikhail Khodorkovsky, have 
threatened to politically challenge the government, the 
government has sided with the oligarchs. The oligarchs 
quickly learned to play by Putin’s two simple rules: (1) do 
not get involved in politics and (2) pay your taxes. Mind-
ing their own business, oligarchs run their firms more 
efficiently than other types of business owners (except 
foreign owners) in Russia.
Where exactly is Russia heading? One school of 
thought argues that it will depend on whether the (new) 
Putin presidency will deliver. It is important not to gener-
alize from the anti-Putin protests in Moscow to the rest 
of Russia. In March 2012, while Putin received 64% of 
the vote nationwide, he only received less than 50% in 
Moscow. While more people in Moscow are better edu-
cated and more liberal, the rest of the country may be 
more traditionalist. In Putin’s earlier presidency, he prom-
ised and largely delivered higher incomes and stronger 
stability. This time, Putin promised large pay increases 
for the military, teachers, and doctors (a promise that 
no American president has been able to make in recent 
times), and he is likely to deliver again. Another school of 
thought argues that despite its former superpower sta-
tus, Russia has become a “normal,” middle-income coun-
try. Democracies in this income range (think of Argentina 
in 1990 and Mexico in 2000) are rough around the edges. 
They tend to have corrupt governments, high income 
inequality, concentrated corporate ownership, and turbu-
lent economic performance. In all these aspects, Russia 
may be quite “normal.” However, these flaws are not nec-
essarily incompatible with further political, economic, and 
legal progress down the road. At the end of day, despite 
the often negative reporting on Russia, big political risks, 
such as reverting back to the old Soviet regime, seem 
reasonably remote. Putin has said repeatedly: “One who 
does not regret the passing of the Soviet Union has no 
heart; one who wants to bring it back has no brain.”
Sources: I thank Professors Dan McCarthy and Sheila Puffer (Northeastern 
University) for their helpful comments on this case. Based on (1) R. Abdelal, 
2010, The promise and peril of Russia’s resurgent state, Harvard Busi-
ness Review, January: 125–129; (2) Economist, 2011, Another great leap 
forward? March 13: 27–28; (3) Economist, 2011, The long life of Homo 
sovieticus, December 10: 27–29; (4) Economist, 2011, Time to shove off, 
September 10: 27–29; (5) Economist, 2012, Moscow doesn’t believe in 
tears, March 10: 62–63; (6) Economist, 2012, Moscow spring, February 11: 
12; (7) Economist, 2012, The beginning of the end of Putin, March 3: 15; 
(8) S. Michailova, S. Puffer, & D. McCarthy, 2012, Russia: As solid as a 
BRIC? Critical Perspectives on International Business; (9)  S. Puffer & 
D. McCarthy, 2007, Can Russia’s state-managed, network capitalism 
be competitive? Journal of World Business, 42: 1–13; (10) A. Shleifer & 
D. Treisman, 2005, A normal country: Russia after communism, Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, 19: 151–174; (11) www.freedomhouse.org.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2   Understanding Formal Institutions: Politics, Laws, and Economics	
35
Why is Western news reporting on Russia so negative? Does Russia really have a 
democracy (see PengAtlas Map 1.2)? Does it matter? Is democracy the best political 
system to develop Russia’s economy? Does Russia have the rule of law? If your firm is 
considering investing in emerging economies, should it consider Russia? As the Open-
ing Case illustrates, answers to these questions boil down to institutions, popularly 
known as the “rules of the game.” As economic players, firms play by these rules. 
However, institutions are not static, and they may change, resulting in institutional 
transitions—“fundamental and comprehensive changes introduced to the formal and 
informal rules of the game that affect firms as players.”1 Russia’s institutional transi-
tions from a communist totalitarian state to a market economy with regular elections 
(never mind the imperfections) are certainly extraordinary.
Overall, the success and failure of firms around the globe are, to a large extent, de-
termined by firms’ ability to understand and take advantage of the different rules of the 
game. In other words, how firms play the game and win (or lose), at least in part, depends 
on how the rules are made, enforced, and changed. This calls for firms to constantly mon-
itor, decode, and adapt to the changing rules of the game in order to survive and prosper. 
As a result, such an institution-based view has emerged as a leading perspective on 
global business.2 This chapter first introduces the institution-based view. Then, it focuses 
on formal institutions (such as political systems, legal systems, and economic systems). 
Informal institutions (such as cultures, ethics, and norms) will be discussed in Chapter 3.
2-1 Understanding Institutions
Building on the “rules of the game” metaphor, Douglass North, a Nobel laure-
ate in economics, more formally defines institutions as “the humanly devised con-
straints that structure human interaction.”3 An institutional framework is made up 
of formal and informal institutions governing individual and firm behavior. These 
institutions are supported by three “pillars” identified by Richard Scott, a leading 
sociologist. They are (1) regulatory, (2) normative, and (3) cognitive pillars.4
Shown in Table 2.1, formal institutions include laws, regulations, and rules. 
Their primary supportive pillar, the regulatory pillar, is the coercive power of 
governments. For example, while many individuals and companies may pay taxes 
out of their patriotic duty, a larger number of them do so in fear of the coercive 
power of the government if they are caught not paying.
On the other hand, informal institutions include norms, cultures, and ethics. 
The two main supportive pillars are normative and cognitive. The normative pillar 
refers to how the values, beliefs, and actions of other relevant players—collectively 
Learning Objective
Explain the concept of 
institutions and their key role in 
reducing uncertainty.
2-1
Table 2.1
Dimensions of Institutions
Degree of formality
Examples
Supportive pillars
Formal institutions
  	 Laws
  	 Regulatory (coercive)
  	 Regulations
  	 Rules
Informal institutions
  	 Norms
  	 Normative
  	 Cultures
  	 Cognitive
  	 Ethics
Institutions
Formal and informal rules of the 
game.
Institutional transitions
Fundamental and comprehen-
sive changes introduced to the 
formal and informal rules of 
the game that affect firms as 
players.
Institution-based view
A leading perspective in global 
business that suggests that 
the success and failure of firms 
are enabled and constrained by 
institutions.
Institutional framework
Formal and informal institutions 
governing individual and firm 
behavior.
Formal institutions
Institutions represented by laws, 
regulations, and rules.
Regulatory pillar
The coercive power of 
governments.
Informal institutions
Institutions represented by 
cultures, ethics, and norms.
Normative pillar
The mechanism through which 
norms influence individual and 
firm behavior.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

36	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
known as norms—influence the behavior of focal individuals and firms.5 The 
recent norms centered on rushing to invest in China and India have prompted 
many Western firms to imitate each other without a clear understanding of how 
to make such moves work. Cautious managers resisting such “herding” are often 
confronted by board members and investors: “Why are we not in China and India?” 
In other words, “Why don’t you follow the norm?”
Also supporting informal institutions, the cognitive pillar refers to the internal-
ized, taken-for-granted values and beliefs that guide behavior.6 For example, what 
triggered whistleblowers to report Enron’s wrongdoing was their belief in what’s 
right and wrong. While most employees may not feel comfortable with organiza-
tional wrongdoing, the norm is not to “rock the boat.” Essentially, whistleblowers 
choose to follow their internalized personal beliefs on what is right by overcoming 
the norm that encourages silence.
How do these three forms of supportive pillars combine to shape individual and 
firm behavior? Let us use two examples—one at the individual level and another at 
the firm level. First, speed limit formally defines how fast drivers can go. However, 
many drivers adjust their speed depending on the speed of other vehicles—a form 
of normative pillar. When some drivers are ticketed by police because they drive 
above the legal speed limit, they protest: “We are barely keeping up with traffic!” 
This statement indicates that they do not have a clear cognitive pillar regarding 
what is the right speed (never mind the posted speed limit signs); they often let oth-
er drivers define the right speed. Second, in 2008, a year during which Wall Street 
had to be bailed out by trillions of taxpayer dollars, Wall Street executives paid 
themselves $18 billion in bonuses. The resulting public outcry was understand-
able. However, by paying themselves so handsomely, these executives did not com-
mit any crime or engage in any wrongdoing. Therefore, the regulatory pillar had 
little teeth. Rather, this was a case of major clashes between the normative pillar 
and cognitive pillar held by these executives. In the minds of these executives sup-
ported by their own cognitive pillar, they deserved such bonuses. What they failed 
to read was the normative pressure coming from an angry public.
2-2 What Do Institutions Do?
While institutions do many things, their key role, in two words, is to reduce uncertainty.7 
By signaling which conduct is legitimate and which is not, institutions constrain the 
range of acceptable actions. In short, institutions reduce uncertainty, which can be 
potentially devastating.8 Political uncertainty, such as terrorist attacks and ethnic 
riots, may render long-range planning obsolete. Political deadlocks in Washington 
have made the US government “less stable, less effective, and less predictable,” which 
led Standard & Poor’s to downgrade its triple A credit rating to AA+.9 In Focus 2.1 
illustrates some pitfalls of such a lack of predictability. Economic uncertainty such 
as failure to carry out contractual obligations may result in economic losses. During 
the Great Recession, a number of firms, such as Dow Chemical and Trump Holdings, 
argued that the “unprecedented economic crisis” should let them off the hook.10 Force 
majeure is a long-standing legal doctrine that excuses firms from living up to the terms 
of a deal in the event of natural disasters or other calamities. But is the economic 
crisis a force majeure? If the argument prevails, critics contend, then every debtor in a 
country suffering economic crisis can avoid paying debts. While these arguments are 
debated in court battles, a great deal of economic uncertainty looms on the horizon.
Norms
Values, beliefs, and actions of 
relevant players that influence 
the focal individuals and firms.
Cognitive pillar
The internalized (or taken-for-
granted) values and beliefs 
that guide individual and firm 
behavior.
Learning Objective
Articulate the two core 
propositions underpinning an 
institution-based view of global 
business.
2-2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2   Understanding Formal Institutions: Politics, Laws, and Economics	
37
Uncertainty surrounding economic transactions can lead to transaction costs, 
which are defined as costs associated with economic transactions—or, more 
broadly, costs of doing business. Oliver Williamson, a leading theorist who won the 
Nobel Prize in economics in 2009, refers to frictions in mechanical systems: “Do 
the gears mesh, are the parts lubricated, is there needless slippage or other loss 
of energy?” He goes on to suggest that transaction costs can be regarded as “the 
economic counterpart of frictions: Do the parties to exchange operate harmoni-
ously, or are there frequent misunderstandings and conflicts?”11
Transaction costs
The costs associated with 
economic transactions or, more 
broadly, the costs of doing 
business.
As formal institutions, regulations are supposed to 
reduce uncertainty. However, the recent proliferation 
of regulations in the United States seems to enhance 
uncertainty. The Dodd-Frank law of 2010 has become 
Exhibit A in this debate. Its aim is noble: to prevent 
another financial crisis by improving transparency 
and forbidding banks from taking on excessive risk. 
But at 848 pages, it is simply too complex. Hardly 
anyone in America has read Dodd-Frank. Voracious 
Chinese officials, who pay close attention to regu-
latory developments elsewhere, half-jokingly shared 
with an Economist correspondent that nobody out-
side Beijing has the stomach to read Dodd-Frank in 
full, and the Economist correspondent protested be-
cause at least one Economist colleague in New York, 
in order to work on one report, read all 848 pages of 
verbiage.
It is not just the mammoth length, but also the 
uncertainty embedded in Dodd-Frank that makes it 
very scary to the business community. Of the 400 
specific rules it mandates, only 93 have been final-
ized and the rest is yet to be filled in. So, US financial 
services firms must cope with a law that is “partly un-
intelligible and partly unknowable.” When uncertainty 
is gradually removed, the true nature of the beast be-
comes striking. For example, sections 404 and 406 
of Dodd-Frank only consume a couple of pages. In 
October 2011 regulators finally transformed these 
few pages into a form that hedge funds and other 
financial services firms must fill out: that form itself 
goes on and on and on to 192 pages (!). It would cost 
each firm $100,000–$150,000 the first time it is filled 
out, and $40,000 every year after.
Given the princely sums hedge funds make, per-
haps they should just cough up the costs and get 
the form filled out. But the larger point is whether 
the benefits outweigh the costs of such complicat-
ed rule-making. In comparison, the 1864 law that 
set up America’s banking system went to 29 pages. 
The Federal Reserve Act of 1913 was only 32 pages. 
The Glass-Steagall law, which was a response to the 
earlier Wall Street crash of 1929, ran to only 37 pages. 
Dodd-Frank is 23 times longer than Glass-Steagall.
Although extreme in its length, Dodd-Frank is 
part of wider trend of increasingly complicated rule-
making and ever increasing costs of compliance. The 
Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) law, enacted a decade ago to 
prevent Enron-style frauds, have made it so hard to list 
shares on US stock exchanges that US firms increas-
ingly list elsewhere or go private, whereas foreign firms 
shy away from US listings. The upshot? US share of 
global initial public offerings (IPOs) dropped from 67% 
in 2002 (when SOX passed) to 16% in 2011. Obama’s 
health care reform law of 2010 generates 30 minutes 
of paperwork for every hour spent treating a patient. 
BB&T, a regional bank, disclosed the following in its 
annual filing to the SEC: “Additional regulations result-
ing from Dodd-Frank may materially adversely affect 
BB&T’s business, financial condition, or results of op-
erations.” Given that banks and numerous other firms 
have to lay off employees to stay afloat, one has to won-
der how many jobs have been (or will be) destroyed by 
these new regulations. Not surprisingly, the Economist 
has nicknamed Dodd-Frank “Dodd-Frankenstein.”
Sources: Based on (1) Economist, 2012, Over-regulated America, 
February 18: 9; (2) Economist, 2012, Too big not to fail, February 18: 22–24.
Regulating America
IN Focus 2.1 
Ethical 
Dilemma
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

38	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
 One important source of transaction costs is opportunism, defined as self-
interest seeking with guile. Examples include misleading, cheating, and confus-
ing other parties in transactions that will increase transaction costs. Attempting 
to reduce such transaction costs, institutional frameworks increase certainty by 
spelling out the rules of the game so that violations (such as failure to fulfill a 
contract) can be mitigated with relative ease (such as through formal arbitration 
and courts).
Without stable institutional frameworks, transaction costs may become prohibi-
tively high, to the extent that certain transactions simply would not take place. For 
example, in the absence of credible institutional frameworks that protect investors, 
domestic investors may choose to put their money abroad. Although Africa is starv-
ing for capital, rich people in Africa put a striking 39% of their assets outside of 
Africa.12 Similarly, rich Russians often choose to purchase a soccer club in London 
or a seaside villa in Cyprus, instead of investing in Russia.
Institutions are not static. Institutional transitions are widespread in the world. 
Institutional transitions in some emerging economies, particularly those moving 
from central planning to market competition (such as China, Poland, Russia, and 
Vietnam), are so pervasive that these countries are simply called “transition econo-
mies” (a subset of “emerging economies”). Institutional transitions in countries such 
as China, Cuba (see the Closing Case), India, Russia (see the Opening Case), and 
South Africa create both huge challenges and tremendous opportunities for do-
mestic and international firms.13
Having outlined the definitions of various institutions and their supportive 
pillars as well as their key role in uncertainty reduction, next we will introduce the 
first core perspective on global business—an institution-based view.
2-3 An Institution-Based View of Global Business
Shown in Figure 2.1, an institution-based view focuses on the dynamic interac-
tion between institutions and firms, and considers firm behaviors as the outcome 
of such an interaction.14 Specifically, firm behaviors are often a reflection of the 
formal and informal constraints of a particular institutional framework.15 In short, 
institutions matter.
Opportunism
The act of seeking self-interest 
with guile.
Learning Objective
Identify the basic differences 
between democracy and 
totalitarianism.
2-3
Figure 2.1
Institutions, Firms, and Firm Behaviors
Institutions
Firms 
Firm
Behavior
Dynamic
Interaction
Industry conditions 
and ﬁrm-speciﬁc
resources and capabilities
Formal and
informal
constraints
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2   Understanding Formal Institutions: Politics, Laws, and Economics	
39
How do institutions matter? The institution-based view suggests two core 
propositions (Table 2.2). First, managers and firms rationally pursue their interests 
and make choices within institutional constraints. In Brazil, government tax 
revenues at all levels reach 35% of GDP, much higher than the average for emerging 
economies. (For example, Mexico’s is 18% and China’s is 16%.) Not surprisingly, the 
gray market in Brazil accounts for a much higher percentage of the economy than 
in Mexico and China.16 Likewise, in the United States, the Obama administration’s 
proposal to tax the overseas earnings of US-based multinationals, which are 
currently exempt from US taxes, met fierce resistance from the business community. 
Having already paid overseas taxes, US-based multinationals naturally resented 
having to pay $190 billion extra US taxes, when their global competitors pay lower 
taxes. “Doesn’t the Obama administration recognize that most big US companies 
are multinationals that happen to be headquartered in the United States?” asked 
Duncan Niederauer, CEO of NYSE Euronext in a BusinessWeek interview.17 One case 
in point is Seagate Technology, a formerly Silicon Valley-based disk-drive maker 
that incorporated in the Cayman Islands a few years ago.18 Avoidance of such a 
financial hit was one of the reasons behind Seagate’s move, and more US-based 
multinationals are likely to follow Seagate. Both Brazilian firms’ migration to the 
gray market and US firms’ interest in migrating overseas are rational responses 
when they pursue their interests within formal institutional constraints in these 
countries.
Obviously, nobody has perfect rationality—possessing all the knowledge under 
all circumstances. So, Proposition 1 specifically concerns bounded rationality, 
which refers to the necessity of making rational decisions in the absence of 
complete information.19 Without prior experience, many managers from emerg-
ing multinationals from BRIC are getting their feet wet overseas. Numerous in-
dividuals getting involved in counterfeiting do not know exactly what they are 
getting into. So, emerging multinationals often burn cash overseas, and coun-
terfeiters sometimes land in jail, which are examples of these decision makers’ 
bounded rationality.
The second proposition is that while formal and informal institutions combine 
to govern firm behavior, in situations where formal constraints are unclear or fail, 
informal constraints play a larger role in reducing uncertainty and providing con-
stancy to managers and firms. For example, since the formal regime collapsed with 
the disappearance of the former Soviet Union, it has been largely the informal con-
straints, based on personal relationships and connections (called blat in Russian) 
among managers and officials, that have facilitated the growth of many entrepre-
neurial firms.20 In today’s Russia, there are informal but clear rules of engagement 
for oligarchs, such as avoiding politics and paying taxes (see the Opening Case).
Bounded rationality
The necessity of making rational 
decisions in the absence of 
complete information.
Table 2.2
Two Core Propositions of the Institution-Based View
Proposition 1
Managers and firms rationally pursue their interests and make choices 
within the formal and informal constraints in a given institutional 
framework
Proposition 2
While formal and informal institutions combine to govern firm 
behavior, in situations where formal constraints are unclear or fail, 
informal constraints will play a larger role in reducing uncertainty and 
providing constancy to managers and firms
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

40	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
Many observers have the impression that relying on informal connections is 
only relevant to firms in emerging economies and that firms in developed econo-
mies only pursue “market-based” strategies. This is far from the truth. Even in 
developed economies, formal rules only make up a small (although important) 
part of institutional constraints, and informal constraints are pervasive. Just as 
firms compete in product markets, they also fiercely compete in the political mar-
ketplace characterized by informal relationships.21 Basically, if a firm cannot be a 
market leader, it may still beat the competition on another ground—namely, the 
non-market, political environment. In September 2008, a rapidly falling Merrill 
Lynch was able to sell itself to Bank of America for a hefty $50 billion. Supported by 
US government officials, this megadeal was arranged over 48 hours (shorter than 
the time most people take to decide on which cars to buy), and the negotiations 
took place inside the Federal Reserve building in New York. In contrast, Lehman 
Brothers failed to secure government support and had to drop dead by filing for 
bankruptcy. Overall, the skillful use of a country’s institutional frameworks to ac-
quire advantage is at the heart of the institution-based view.
While there are numerous formal and informal institutions, in this chapter we 
focus on formal institutions (informal institutions will be covered in Chapter 3). 
Chief among formal institutions are (1) political systems, (2) legal systems, and 
(3) economic systems. Each is briefly introduced next.
2-4 Political Systems
A political system refers to the rules of the game on how a country is governed 
politically. At the broadest level, there are two primary political systems: (1) democ-
racy and (2) totalitarianism. This section first outlines these two systems and then 
discusses their ramifications for political risk.
2-4a Democracy
Democracy is a political system in which citizens elect representatives to govern the 
country on their behalf. Usually, the political party with the majority of votes (such 
as Putin’s United Russia party illustrated in the Opening Case) wins and forms a gov-
ernment. Democracy was pioneered by Athenians in ancient Greece. In today’s world, 
Britain has the longest experience of running a democ-
racy (since the founding of its Parliament in the 1200s), 
and India has the largest democracy (by population).
One fundamental aspect of democracy that is rel-
evant to the effective conduct of global business is an 
individual’s right to freedom of expression and orga-
nization. For example, starting up a firm is an act of 
economic expression, essentially telling the rest of the 
world: “I want to be my own boss! And I want to make 
some money!” In most modern democracies, this right 
to organize economically has not only been extended 
to domestic individuals to firms, but also to foreign in-
dividuals and firms that come to do business. While 
those of us fortunate enough to be brought up in a de-
mocracy take for granted the right to found a firm, we 
Learning Objective
Outline the differences among 
civil law, common law, and 
theocratic law.
2-4
Political system
The rules of the game on how a 
country is governed politically.
Democracy
A political system in which 
citizens elect representatives 
to govern the country on their 
behalf.
AP Photo/Damian Dovarganes
What fundamental aspect of democracy is 
relevant to the conduct of global business?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2   Understanding Formal Institutions: Politics, Laws, and Economics	
41
should be reminded that this may not necessarily be the case under other political 
systems. Before the 1980s, if someone had dared to formally found a firm in the for-
mer Soviet Union, he or she would have been arrested and shot by the authorities.
2-4b Totalitarianism
The opposite end of democracy is totalitarianism (also known as dictatorship), 
which is defined as a political system in which one person or party exercises abso-
lute political control over the population. This section outlines four major types of 
totalitarianism.
 	 Communist totalitarianism centers on a communist party. This system was 
embraced throughout Central and Eastern Europe and the former Soviet 
Union until the late 1980s. It is still practiced in China, Cuba (see the Closing 
Case), Laos, North Korea, and Vietnam.
 	 Right-wing totalitarianism is characterized by its intense hatred against 
communism. One party, typically backed by the military, restricts political 
freedom, arguing that such freedom would lead to communism. In postwar 
decades, the Philippines, South Africa, South Korea, Taiwan, and most Latin 
American countries practiced right-wing totalitarianism. Most of these coun-
tries have recently become democracies.
 	 Theocratic totalitarianism refers to the monopolization of political power in 
the hands of one religious party or group. Iran and Saudi Arabia are leading 
examples.
 	 Tribal totalitarianism refers to one tribe or ethnic group (which may or may 
not be the majority of the population) monopolizing political power and op-
pressing other tribes or ethnic groups. Rwanda’s bloodbath in the 1990s was 
due to some of the most brutal practices of tribal totalitarianism.
2-4c Political Risk
While the degree of hostility toward business varies among different types of totali-
tarianism (some can be more pro-business than others), totalitarianism in general 
is not as good for business as democracy. Totalitarian countries often experience 
wars, riots, protests, chaos, and breakdowns, which result in higher political risk—
risk associated with political changes that may negatively impact domestic and for-
eign firms (see Emerging Markets 2.1).22 The most extreme political risk may lead 
to nationalization (expropriation) of foreign assets. This happened in many totali-
tarian countries from the 1950s through the 1970s. It has not become a thing of the 
past. Zimbabwe has recently demanded that foreign mining companies cede 51% 
of their equity without compensation.23 It is hardly surprising that foreign mining 
companies are sick and tired and would rather go to “greener pastures” elsewhere.
Firms operating in democracies also confront political risk. However, such risk 
is qualitatively lower than that in totalitarian states. For example, Quebec’s poten-
tial independence from the rest of Canada creates some political risk. Although 
firms highly exposed to Quebec experience some drop in their stock price, there is 
no general collapse of stock price in Canada or flight of capital out of the country.24 
Investors are confident that should Quebec become independent, the Canadian 
democracy is mature enough to manage the break-up process in a relatively non-
disruptive way.
Totalitarianism (dictatorship)
A political system in which one 
person or party exercises ab-
solute political control over the 
population.
Political risk
Risk associated with political 
changes that may negatively im-
pact domestic and foreign firms.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

42	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
The Middle East is not known for political stability. 
Yet, multinational oil companies typically have to work 
with totalitarian governments in this oil-rich region if 
these multinationals desire to have a presence there. 
One crucial question is: What should these firms do 
when political risk rises?
In 2011, this question turned from being a theoreti-
cal one to a highly practical one. Starting in Tunisia and 
Egypt, a series of protests and uprisings engulfed the 
region since January 2011. The spring of 2011 quickly 
earned a special name, the Arab Spring, which will be 
recorded as a turning point in the history of the Middle 
East.
Nowhere are the decisions made by multinational 
executives more hair-raising than in Libya. Before 
2011, Libya was Africa’s third largest and the world’s 
17th largest oil producer, pumping out 1.6 million bar-
rels (about 2% of world total) per day. Over 85% of 
its crude oil was exported. About a third went to Italy, 
14% to Germany, 10% each to France and China, and 
5% to the United States. Libya’s state-owned National 
Oil Corporation (NOC) accounted for approximately 
50% of the oil output, and the rest was produced 
by ENI of Italy, Statoil of Norway, Repsol of Spain, 
Wintershall (a subsidiary of BASF) of Germany, OMV  
of Austria, Gazprom of Russia, Sinopec of China, and 
ConocoPhillips, Occidental Petroleum, Marathon, 
and Hess of the United States. In addition, BP of 
Britain, Shell of the Netherlands, and ExxonMobil of 
the United States had signed leases but were still in 
exploration stages and were not producing oil when 
violence broke out.
The high-stakes drama in Libya started in 
February 2011, when protesters and government 
forces clashed. The confrontation quickly became 
a civil war between the rebel-controlled east (cen-
tered on Benghazi) and the government-controlled 
west (centered on Tripoli, the capital). As violence 
escalated, foreign governments ordered evacuations 
of their nationals, and so did multinational oil com-
panies. Multinationals either completely shut down 
their production or left the remaining Libyans to run 
the uncertain operations.
In March 2011, in the face of a humanitarian di-
saster that would be unleashed by government forces 
approaching Benghazi, air strikes were launched by al-
lied forces. Spearheaded by the French, UK, and US 
forces in the initial salvos, the allied forces eventually 
included militaries from 17 countries. There were 13 
from NATO countries, three from the Arab League 
(Jordan, Qatar, and United Arab Emirates), and one 
country that is neither a member of NATO nor the 
Arab League, Sweden.
The two recent revolutions in Tunisia and Egypt 
were quick and had relatively low casualties. They 
lasted a couple of weeks and resulted in the depar-
ture of their dictators at a cost of about 200 deaths in 
Tunisia and 800 in Egypt. International forces did not 
intervene militarily. However, the civil war in Libya, in-
volving allied air strikes, was significantly longer and 
bloodier, with casualties estimated to be between 
20,000 and 30,000.
While the decision to evacuate expatriates (foreign 
nationals) and shut down production was relatively 
straightforward, executives caught in the middle of 
all of the above had to scratch their heads regarding 
what to do next. Attacks on oil fields by the rebels, 
by the pro-Qaddafi forces, and by the allies were all 
reported but seldom confirmed. Executives not only 
had fiduciary (required by law) responsibility to safe-
guard shareholders’ assets, but also moral and ethi-
cal responsibility to look after employees and their 
families. Most employees were Libyan and were not 
evacuated. About the remaining assets and employ-
ees in Libya, the CEO of Austria’s OMV told reporters 
in April 2011: “We have no precise information at all; 
we have no official contact at all; we are dependent on 
random contact.”
Managing Political Risk in Libya
E m e r g i n g  M a r k e t s  2 . 1
Ethical 
Dilemma
Danny Lehman/Corbis; Björn Meyer/sitox/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2   Understanding Formal Institutions: Politics, Laws, and Economics	
43
Obviously, when two countries are at each other’s throats, we can forget about 
doing business between them (perhaps other than smuggling).25 No two democ-
racies have reportedly gone to war with each other. Thus, the recent advance of 
democracy and retreat of totalitarianism is highly beneficial for global business. It 
is not a coincidence that globalization took off in the 1990s, a period during which 
both communist and right-wing totalitarianism significantly lost its power and de-
mocracy expanded around the world.
2-5 Legal Systems
A legal system refers to the formal rules of the game on how a country’s laws are 
enacted and enforced. By specifying the do’s and don’ts, a legal system reduces 
transaction costs by minimizing uncertainty and combating opportunism. This 
section first introduces the three legal traditions and then discusses crucial issues 
associated with property rights and intellectual property.
2-5a Civil Law, Common Law, and Theocratic Law
Laws in different countries typically are not enacted from scratch, but are often 
transplanted—voluntarily or otherwise—from three legal traditions (or legal fami-
lies): (1) civil law, (2) common law, and (3) theocratic law (Table 2.3). Each is briefly 
introduced here.
Civil law was derived from Roman law and strengthened by Napoleon’s France. 
It is “the oldest, the most influential, and the most widely distributed around the 
world.”26 It uses comprehensive statutes and codes as a primary means to form legal 
judgments. Over 80 countries practice civil law.
Common law, which is English in origin, is shaped by precedents and traditions 
from previous judicial decisions. Common law has spread to all English-speaking 
countries and their (former) colonies.
Relative to civil law, common law has more flexibility because judges have to re-
solve specific disputes based on their interpretation of the law, and such interpretation 
Learning Objective
Understand the importance of 
property rights and intellectual 
property rights.
2-5
Legal system
The rules of the game on how a 
country’s laws are enacted and 
enforced.
Civil law
A legal tradition that uses com-
prehensive statutes and codes 
as a primary means to form legal 
judgments.
Common law
A legal tradition that is shaped 
by precedents and traditions 
from previous judicial decisions.
Italy’s ENI, a big player in Libya, walked a fine line 
between the rebels and the regime. While ENI shut 
down most production and talked with the rebels, it 
still supplied natural gas to the government-controlled 
Tripoli. ENI presumably did this to hedge its bets while 
the Qaddafi regime hung on and also to fulfill some 
of its ethical responsibility to its gas clients stuck in 
a war zone. When the Italian government called for 
Qaddafi’s ouster and Italian fighters were dropping 
bombs on government forces, ENI’s balancing act 
was extraordinarily challenging. ENI “risks angering 
both sides no matter what they do,” noted an expert.
US firms ConocoPhillips, Marathon, and Hess 
took a different approach, which was totally passive. 
They kept plans and opinions to themselves. Typical 
of an “ostrich” approach, a ConocoPhillips spokesman 
in April 2011 told reporters: “We do not have anyone 
available to discuss Libya.”
After eight months of fighting, Qaddafi was cap-
tured and killed in October 2011. Then the rebels, who 
had organized as the National Transitional Council, de-
clared an end to the Libyan civil war. How oil compa-
nies pick up the pieces remains to be seen.
Sources: Based on (1) Al Jazeera, 2011, NTC declares liberation of Libya, October 23; (2) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2011, Where has Libya’s oil gone? 
April 18: 11–12; (3) Economist, 2011, Islam and the Arab revolutions, April 2: 11; (4) Economist, 2011, The colonel is not beaten yet, April 2: 41–42.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

44	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
may give new meaning to the law, which will shape future cases. Civil law has less 
flexibility because judges only have the power to apply the law. On the other hand, 
civil law is less confrontational, because comprehensive statutes and codes serve to 
guide judges. You may have seen common law in action in Hollywood movies such 
as A Few Good Men, Devil’s Advocate, and Legally Blonde. Common law is more con-
frontational, because plaintiffs and defendants, through their lawyers, must argue 
and help judges to favorably interpret the law largely based on precedents. This 
confrontation is great material for movies. In contrast, you probably have rarely 
seen a civil law court in action in a movie—you have not missed much, because civil 
law lacks the drama and its proceedings tend to be boring. In addition, contracts 
in common law countries tend to be long and detailed to cover all possible con-
tingencies, because common law tends to be relatively underdefined. In contrast, 
contracts in civil law countries are usually shorter and less specific because many 
issues typically articulated in common law contracts are already covered in compre-
hensive civil law codes.
The third legal family is theocratic law, a legal system based on religious teach-
ings. Examples include Jewish law and Islamic law. Although Jewish law is followed 
by some elements of the Israeli population, it is not formally embraced by the Israeli 
government. Islamic law is the only surviving example of a theocratic legal system 
that is formally practiced by some governments, such as those in Iran and Saudi 
Arabia. Despite popular characterization that Islam is anti-business, it is important 
to note that Mohammed was a merchant trader and the tenants of Islam are pro-
business in general. However, the holy book of Islam, the Koran, advises against 
certain business practices. In Saudi Arabia, McDonald’s operates “ladies only” res-
taurants to be in compliance with the Koran’s ban on direct, face-to-face contact 
between men and women (who often wear a veil) in public. Also in Saudi Arabia, 
banks have to maintain two retail branches: One for male customers manned by 
men and another for female customers staffed by women. This requirement obvi-
ously increases the property, overhead, and personnel costs. To reduce costs, some 
foreign banks, such as HSBC, staff their back office operations with both male and 
female employees who work side by side.27
Overall, as an important component of the first, regulatory pillar, legal systems 
are a crucial component of the institutional framework. They directly impose do’s 
and don’ts on businesses around the globe. Overall, under the broad scope of a 
legal system, there are numerous components. Two of these, property rights and 
intellectual property, are discussed next.
Theocratic law
A legal system based on 
religious teachings.
Table 2.3
Three Legal Traditions1
Civil law countries 
Common law countries
Theocratic law countries
Argentina, Austria,  
Belgium, Brazil, Chile, 
China, Egypt, France, 
Germany, Greece, 
Indonesia, Italy, Japan, 
Mexico, Netherlands, 
Russia, South Korea, 
Sweden, Switzerland, 
Taiwan
Australia, Canada, Hong 
Kong, India, Ireland,  
Israel, Kenya, Malaysia, 
New Zealand,  
Nigeria, Singapore,  
South Africa, Sri Lanka, 
United Kingdom, United 
States, Zimbabwe
Iran, Saudi Arabia,  
United Arab Emirates2
1 The countries are examples and do not exhaustively represent all countries practicing a particular legal system.
2 Certain parts of Dubai (an emirate within the UAE), such as the Dubai International Finance Center, practice 
common law.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2   Understanding Formal Institutions: Politics, Laws, and Economics	
45
2-5b Property Rights
Regardless of which legal family a country’s legal system belongs to, one of the most 
fundamental economic functions that a legal system serves is to protect property 
rights—the legal rights to use an economic property (resource) and to derive in-
come and other benefits from it. Examples of property include homes, offices, and 
factories. (Intellectual property will be discussed in the next section.)
What difference do property rights supported by a functioning legal system 
make? A lot. Why did developed economies become developed (remember, for 
example, the United States was a “developing” or “emerging” economy 100 years 
ago)? While there are many answers, a leading answer, which is most forcefully put 
forward by Hernando de Soto, a Peruvian economist, focuses on the role played 
by formal institutions, particularly the protection of property rights afforded by 
a functioning legal system.28 In Africa, only approximately 1% of land is formally 
registered.29 In developed economies, every parcel of land, every building, and 
every trademark is represented in a property document that entitles the owner to 
derive income and other benefits from it, and prosecute violators through legal 
means. Because of the stability and predictability of such a legal system, tangible 
property can lead to an invisible, parallel life alongside its material existence. It 
can be used as collateral for credit. For example, the single most important source 
of funds for new start-ups in the United States is the mortgage of entrepreneurs’ 
houses.
However, if you live in a house but cannot produce a title document specify-
ing that you are the legal owner of the house (which is a very common situation 
throughout the developing world, especially in shanty towns), no bank in the world 
will allow you to use your house as collateral for credit. To start up a new firm, you 
end up having to borrow funds from family members, friends, and other acquain-
tances through informal means. But funds through informal means are almost cer-
tainly more limited than funds that could have been provided formally by banks. 
As a result, in the aggregate, because of such under-funding, the average firm size 
in the developing world is smaller than that in the developed world. Such insecure 
property rights also result in using technologies that employ little fixed capital and 
do not entail long-term investment (such as R&D). These characteristics do not 
bode well in global competition, where leading firms reap benefits from economies 
of scale, capital-intensive technologies, and sustained investment in R&D. What 
the developing world lacks and desperately needs is formal protection of property 
rights in order to facilitate economic growth.
2-5c Intellectual Property Rights
While the term “property” traditionally refers to tangible pieces of property (such as 
land), intellectual property specifically refers to intangible property that is the result 
of intellectual activity (such as books, videos, and websites). Intellectual property 
(IP) rights are rights associated with the ownership of intellectual property. They 
primarily include rights associated with (1) patents, (2) copyrights, and (3) trade-
marks.
 	 Patents are legal rights awarded by government authorities to inventors of 
new products or processes, who are given exclusive (monopoly) rights to 
derive income from such inventions through activities such as manufactur-
ing, licensing, or selling.
Property rights
The legal rights to use an 
economic property (resource) 
and to derive income and 
benefits from it.
Intellectual property
Intangible property that is the 
result of intellectual activity.
Intellectual property (IP) rights
Rights associated with the own-
ership of intellectual property.
Patent
Exclusive legal right of inventors 
of new products or pro- cesses 
to derive income from such 
inventions.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

46	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
 	 Copyrights are the exclusive legal rights of authors and publishers to publish 
and disseminate their works (such as this book).
 	 Trademarks are the exclusive legal rights of firms to use specific names, 
brands, and designs to differentiate their products from others.
Because IP rights are usually asserted and protected on a country-by-country 
basis, one pressing issue arises internationally: How can IP rights be protected 
when countries have uneven levels of rights enforcement? The Paris Convention 
for the Protection of Industrial Property is the “gold standard” for a higher level 
of IP rights protection. Adopting the Paris Convention is required in order to 
become a signatory country to the WTO’s Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects 
of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) (see Chapter 8). Given the global 
differences in the formal rules, much stricter IP rights protection is provided by 
TRIPS. Once countries join TRIPS, firms are often forced to pay more attention 
to innovation.
IP rights need to be asserted and enforced through a formal system, which is 
designed to provide an incentive for people and firms to innovate and to punish 
violators. However, the intangible nature of IP rights makes their protection dif-
ficult.30 Around the world, piracy—unauthorized use of intellectual property—is 
widespread, ranging from unauthorized sharing of music files to deliberate coun-
terfeiting of branded products. Different countries have developed “distinctive 
competencies.” For example, China is known for fake DVDs and Rolexes. Russia is 
a powerhouse for counterfeit software. Ukraine is famous for bootlegged optical 
discs. Paraguay is well known for imitation cigarettes. Italy is a leading producer 
of counterfeit luxury goods. Florida has developed a strong reputation for fake 
aircraft parts.31
Overall, an institution-based view suggests that the key to understanding IP 
rights violation is to realize that IP violators are not amoral monsters, but ordinary 
people and firms. Given an institutional environment of weak IP rights protection, 
IP violators have made a rational decision by investing in skills and knowledge in 
this business (Proposition 1 in Table 2.2). When filling out a survey asking, “What 
is your dream career?,” no high-school graduate will answer: “My dream career 
is counterfeiting.” Nevertheless, thousands 
of individuals and firms voluntarily choose 
to be involved in this business worldwide. 
Stronger IP protection may reduce their in-
centive to do so. For example, counterfeit-
ers in China will be criminally prosecuted 
only if their profits exceed approximately 
$10,000. No counterfeiters are dumb 
enough to keep records showing they make 
that much money. If they are caught and 
are found to make less than $10,000, they 
can usually get away with a $1,000 fine, 
which is widely regarded as a (small) cost 
of doing business. However, IP reforms to 
criminalize all counterfeiting activities re-
gardless of the amount of profits, which 
have been discussed in China, may signifi-
cantly reduce counterfeiters’ incentive.
Copyright
Exclusive legal right of authors 
and publishers to publish and 
disseminate their work.
Trademark
Exclusive legal right of firms 
to use specific names, brands, 
and designs to differentiate 
their products from others.
Piracy
Unauthorized use of intellectual 
property.
What other examples of pirated intellectual property can 
you think of?
Lynnette Peizer/Alamy
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2   Understanding Formal Institutions: Politics, Laws, and Economics	
47
2-6 Economic Systems
An economic system refers to the rules of the game on how a country is governed 
economically. At the two ends of a spectrum, we can find (1) a market economy and 
(2) a command economy. In between, there is a mixed economy.
A pure market economy is characterized by the “invisible hand” of market forces 
first noted by Adam Smith in The Wealth of Nations in 1776. The government takes 
a hands-off approach known as laissez faire. Specifically, all factors of production 
should be privately owned. The government should only perform functions that 
the private sector cannot perform (such as providing roads and defense).
A pure command economy is defined by a government taking, in the words of 
Lenin, the “commanding height” in the economy. All factors of production should 
be government-owned or state-owned, and all supply, demand, and pricing are 
planned by the government. During the heydays of communism, the former Soviet 
Union and China approached such an ideal.
A mixed economy, by definition, has elements of both a market economy and a 
command economy. It boils down to the relative distribution of market forces ver-
sus command forces. In practice, no country has ever completely embraced Adam 
Smith’s ideal laissez faire. Here is a quiz: Which economy has the highest degree of 
economic freedom (the lowest degree of government intervention in the econo-
my)? Hint: Given extensive government intervention since 2008, it is obviously not 
the United States (see In Focus 2.1). A series of surveys report that it is Hong Kong 
(the post-1997 handover to Chinese sovereignty does not make a difference).32 The 
crucial point here is that even in Hong Kong, there is still some noticeable govern-
ment intervention in the economy. During the aftermath of the 1997 economic cri-
sis, when the share prices of all Hong Kong listed firms took a nose dive, the Hong 
Kong government took a highly controversial action. It used government funds 
to purchase 10% of the shares of all the “blue chip” firms listed under the Hang 
Seng index. This action did slow down the sliding of share prices and stabilized 
the economy, but it turned all the “blue chip” firms into state-owned enterprises 
(SOEs)—at least 10% owned by the state. At the height of the global financial crisis 
in 2008 and 2009, most governments in developed economies took similar action 
by bailing out their banks and turning them into SOEs.
Likewise, no country has ever practiced a complete command economy, despite 
the efforts of communist zealots throughout the Eastern bloc during the Cold War. 
Poland never nationalized its agriculture. Hungarians were known to have second 
(and private!) jobs while all of them theoretically only worked for the state. Black 
markets hawking agricultural produce existed in practically all communist coun-
tries. While the former Soviet Union and Central and Eastern European coun-
tries threw away communism, even ongoing practitioners of communism, such as 
China, Cuba (see the Closing Case), and Vietnam, have embraced market reforms. 
Even North Korea is now interested in attracting foreign investment.
The economic system of most countries is a mixed economy. When we say a 
country has a “market economy,” it is really a shorthand version for a country that 
organizes its economy mostly (but not completely) by market forces and that still 
has certain elements of a command economy. China, Russia, Sweden, and the 
United States all claim to have a “market economy,” but the meaning is different 
in each country. In short, “free markets” are not totally “free” (see In Focus 2.1). 
It boils down to a matter of degree. Overall, it may be prudent to drop the “F” 
word (“free”) from the term “free market economy.” Instead, it makes sense to 
Learning Objective
Appreciate the differences 
among market economy, 
command economy, and mixed 
economy.
2-6
Economic system
Rules of the game on how 
a country is governed 
economically.
Market economy
An economy that is character-
ized by the “invisible hand” of 
market forces.
Command economy
An economy that is character-
ized by government owner-
ship and control of factors of 
production.
Mixed economy
An economy that has elements 
of both a market economy and a 
command economy.
State-owned enterprise (SOE)
A firm owned and controlled by 
the state (government).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

48	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
acknowledge that there is a variety of capitalism, with each version of “market 
economy” differing in some ways.33
2-7 Debates and Extensions
Formal institutions such as political, legal, and economic systems represent some of 
the broadest and most comprehensive forces affecting global business. They provoke 
some significant debates. In this section, we focus on two major debates: (1) drivers 
of economic development and (2) private ownership versus state ownership.
2-7a Drivers of Economic Development:  
Culture, Geography, or Institutions?
The differences in economic development around the globe are striking (see 
PengAtlas maps 1.1, 3.4, and 3.5). The highest and lowest per capita income 
countries are Norway ($76,450) and Burundi ($110), respectively. Why are some 
countries such as Norway so developed (rich), and some African countries such as 
Burundi so underdeveloped (poor)? More generally, what drives economic devel-
opment in different countries?
Scholars and policy makers have debated this important question since Adam 
Smith’s time.34 Various debate points boil down to three explanations: (1) culture, 
(2) geography, and (3) institutions. The culture side argues that rich countries 
tend to have smarter and harder-working populations driven by a stronger moti-
vation for economic success (such as the Protestant work ethic identified by Max 
Weber—see Chapter 3). However, it is difficult to imagine that on average, Norwe-
gians are nearly 700 times smarter and harder at work than Burundians. This line of 
thinking, bordering on racism, is no longer acceptable in the 21st century.
The geography school of thought in this debate suggests that rich countries 
(such as the United States) tend to be well endowed with natural resources. How-
ever, one can easily point out that some poor countries (such as the Democratic 
Republic of Congo [Zaire]) also possess rich natural resources, and that some rich 
countries (such as Denmark and Japan) are very poor in natural resources. In ad-
dition, some countries are believed to be cursed by their poor geographic location, 
which may be landlocked (such as Malawi) and/or located near the hot equator zone 
infested with tropical diseases (such as Burundi). This argument is not convincing 
either, because some landlocked countries are phenomenally well developed (such 
as Switzerland), and some countries near the equator have accomplished enviable 
growth (such as Singapore). Geography is important, but not destiny.
Finally, institutional scholars argue that institutions are “the basic determinants 
of the performance of an economy.”35 Because institutions provide the incentive 
structure of a society, formal political, legal, and economic systems have a significant 
impact on economic development by affecting the incentives and the costs of do-
ing business.36 In short, rich countries are rich because they have developed better 
market-supporting institutional frameworks. Specifically, several points can be made:
 	 It is economically advantageous for individuals and firms to grow and special-
ize in order to capture the gains from trade. This is the “division of labor” 
thesis first advanced by Adam Smith (see Chapter 5).
 	 A lack of strong formal, market-supporting institutions forces individuals to 
trade on an informal basis with a small neighboring group and forces firms 
Learning Objective
Participate in two leading 
debates concerning politics, 
laws, and economics.
2-7
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2   Understanding Formal Institutions: Politics, Laws, and Economics	
49
to remain small, thus foregoing the gains from a sharper division of labor by 
trading on a large scale with distant partners. For example, most of the trans-
actions in Africa are local in nature, and most firms are small. Over 40% of 
Africa’s economy is reportedly informal, the highest proportion in the world.37
 	 Emergence of formal, market-supporting institutions encourages individuals 
to specialize and firms to grow in size to capture the gains from complicated 
long-distance trade (such as transactions with distant, foreign countries). As 
China’s market institutions progress, many Chinese firms have grown their size.
 	 When formal, market-supporting institutions protect property rights, they will 
fuel more innovation, entrepreneurship, and thus economic growth. While 
spontaneous innovation existed throughout history, why has its pace acceler-
ated significantly since the Industrial Revolution starting in the 1700s? In no 
small measure, this was because of the Statute of Monopolies enacted in Great 
Britain in 1624, which was the world’s first patent law to formally protect the 
IP rights of inventors and make innovation financially lucrative.38 This law has 
been imitated around the world. Its impact is still felt today, as we now expect 
continuous innovation to be the norm. This would not have happened had there 
not been a system of strong protection of IP rights. Why do we now routinely 
expect IT products to double their computing power roughly every two years? 
The answer is certainly not because humans (or even IT geniuses) are two times 
smarter every two years—the key is institutions affording better and stronger 
IP protection that fuels such relentless (and, yes, routine!) innovation.39
These arguments, of course, are the backbone of the institution-based view of 
global business. Championed by Douglass North, the Nobel laureate quoted ear-
lier, this side has clearly won the debate on the drivers of economic development. 
However, the debate does not end, because it is still unclear exactly what kind of 
political system facilitates economic development.
Is a democracy conducive to economic growth? While champions of democracy 
shout, “Yes,” the fastest-growing major economy in the last three decades, China, 
remains totalitarian. The growth rate of India, the world’s largest democracy, in 
the same period is only about half of China’s. In another example, Russia grew 
faster under Putin’s more authoritarian rule during the 2000s compared with the 
1990s, when Russia was presumably more democratic under Yeltsin (see the Open-
ing Case). On the other hand, no one can seriously argue for a case for totalitari-
anism in order to facilitate economic development. In an influential 2012 publica-
tion concerned about the decline of US competitiveness and the rise of Chinese 
competitiveness, strategy guru Michael Porter nevertheless wrote, “We do not want 
to copy China, whose speed comes partly from a political system unacceptable to 
Americans.”40 The few examples of “benign” totalitarian regimes that delivered 
strong economic growth, such as South Korea and Taiwan, have become democra-
cies in the last two decades. Overall, there is no doubt that democracy has spread 
around the world (from 69 countries in the 1980s to 117 in the 2000s). However, 
whether democracy necessarily leads to strong economic development is still sub-
ject to debate (see the Opening Case).
2-7b Private Ownership versus State Ownership41
Private ownership is good. State ownership is bad. Although crude, these two state-
ments fairly accurately summarize the intellectual and political reasoning behind 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

50	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
Table 2.4
Private Ownership versus State Ownership
Private ownership
State ownership
Objective of the firm
Maximize profits for private owners who are 
capitalists (and maximize shareholder value 
for shareholders if the firm is publicly listed).
Optimal balance for a “fair” deal for all 
stakeholders. Maximizing profits is not the 
sole objective of the firm. Protecting jobs and 
minimizing social unrest are legitimate goals.
Establishment of the firm
Entry is determined by entrepreneurs, 
owners, and investors.
Entry is determined by government officials 
and bureaucrats.
Financing of the firm
Financing is from private sources (and public 
shareholders if the firm is publicly traded).
Financing is from state sources (such as direct 
subsidiaries or banks owned or controlled by 
governments).
Liquidation of the firm
Exit is forced by competition. A firm has 
to declare bankruptcy or be acquired if it 
becomes financially insolvent.
Exit is determined by government officials 
and bureaucrats. Firms deemed “too big to 
fail” may be supported by taxpayer dollars 
indefinitely.
Appointment and dismissal 
of management
Management appointments are made by 
owners and investors, largely based on merit.
Management appointments are made by 
government officials and bureaucrats who 
may also use non-economic criteria.
Compensation  
of management
Managers’ compensation is determined by 
competitive market forces. Managers tend to 
be paid more under private ownership.
Managers’ compensation is determined 
politically with some consideration given to a 
sense of fairness and legitimacy in the eyes 
of the public. Managers tend to be paid less 
under state ownership.
Sources: Extracted from text in (1) M. W. Peng, 2000, Business Strategies in Transition Economies (p. 19), Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; (2) M. W. Peng, G. Bruton, & 
C. Stan, 2012, Theories of the (state-owned) firm, working paper, University of Texas at Dallas.
three decades of privatization around the world between 1980 and 2008. Table 2.4 
summarizes the key differences between private ownership and state ownership. As 
providers of capital, private owners are otherwise known as capitalists, and their 
central role in the economic system gives birth to the term “capitalism.” State own-
ership emphasizes the social and public nature of economic ownership, and leads 
to the coinage of the term “socialism.” Obviously, both forms of ownership have 
their own pros and cons. The debate is about which form of ownership is better—
whether the pros outweigh the cons.
The debate on private versus state ownership has underpinned much of the 
global economic evolution since the early 20th century. The Great Depression 
(1929–1933) was seen as a failure of capitalism and led numerous elites in devel-
oping countries and a non-trivial number of scholars in developed economies to 
favor the Soviet-style socialism centered on state ownership. As a result, the postwar 
decades saw an increase in state ownership and a decline in private ownership. 
State ownership was not only extensive throughout the former Eastern bloc (the 
former Soviet Union, Central and Eastern Europe, China, and Vietnam), but was 
also widely embraced throughout developed economies in Western Europe. By the 
early 1980s, close to half of the GDP in major Western European countries such as 
Britain, France, and Italy was contributed by SOEs.
Experience throughout the former Eastern bloc and Western Europe indicated 
that SOEs typically suffer from a lack of accountability and a lack of economic ef-
ficiency (see the Closing Case). SOEs were known to feature relatively equal pay 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2   Understanding Formal Institutions: Politics, Laws, and Economics	
51
between the managers and the rank and file. Since 
extra work did not translate into extra pay, employees 
had little incentive to improve the quality and efficien-
cy of their work. Given the generally low pay and the 
non-demanding work environment, formerly Soviet 
SOE employees summed it up well: “They pretend to 
pay us, and we pretend to work.”42
As Britain’s prime minister, Margaret Thatcher 
privatized a majority of British SOEs in the 1980s. 
Very soon, SOEs throughout Central and Eastern 
Europe followed suit. After the former Soviet Union 
collapsed, the new Russian government unleashed 
some of the most aggressive privatization schemes 
in the 1990s. Eventually, the privatization movement 
became global. In no small part, such a global move-
ment was championed by the Washington Consensus, 
spearheaded by two Washington-based international organizations: the Interna-
tional Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank. One core value of the Washing-
ton Consensus is the unquestioned belief in the superiority of private ownership 
over state ownership. The widespread privatization movement suggested that the 
Washington Consensus clearly won the day—or it seemed.
But in 2008, the pendulum suddenly swung back (see Chapter 1). During the 
unprecedented recession, many governments in developed economies bailed out 
numerous failing private firms using public funds, effectively turning them into 
SOEs. As a result, all of the arguments in favor of private ownership and “free mar-
ket” capitalism collapsed. Since SOEs had such a dreadful reputation (essentially 
a “dirty word”), the US government has refused to acknowledge that it has SOEs. 
Instead, it admits that the United States has “government-sponsored enterprises” 
(GSEs) such as General Motors (nicknamed “Government Motors”) and Citigroup 
(nicknamed “Citigovernment”).
Conceptually, what are the differences between SOEs and GSEs? Hardly any! 
The right column in Table 2.4 is based on my own research on the “classical” 
SOEs in pre-reform China and Russia published more than a decade ago. This 
column also accurately summarizes what is happening in developed economies 
featuring GSEs now. For example, protecting jobs is one of the stated goals 
behind bailouts. Entry and exit are determined by government officials, and 
some firms that have been clearly run into the ground, such as AIG and GM, 
are deemed “too big to fail” and are bailed out with taxpayer dollars. The US 
government has forced the exit of GM’s former chairman and CEO, and is now 
directly involved in the appointment of executives at GM and other GSEs. Not 
surprisingly, the US government is now drafting rules to regulate executive 
compensation.
One crucial concern is that despite noble goals to rescue the economy, pro-
tect jobs, and fight recession, government bailouts may encourage moral hazard—
recklessness when people and organizations (including firms and governments) 
do not have to face the full consequences of their actions.43 In other words, capi-
talism without the risk of failure becomes socialism. It is long known that man-
agers in SOEs face a “soft budget constraint” in that they can always dip into 
state coffers to cover their losses.44 When managers in private firms who make 
Washington Consensus
A view centered on the unques-
tioned belief in the superiority 
of private ownership over state 
ownership in economic policy 
making, which is often spear-
headed by two Washington-
based international organiza-
tions: the International Monetary 
Fund and the World Bank.
Moral hazard
Recklessness when people and 
organizations (including firms 
and governments) do not have 
to face the full consequences of 
their actions.
Are the income and jobs of these automobile 
manufacturing workers in China affected by the 
move toward privatization in that country?
AP Photo/Elizabeth Dalziel
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

52	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
risky decisions to “bet the farm” find out these decisions have turned sour but 
their firms will not go under—thanks to generous bailouts—they are likely to 
embrace more risk in the future. In other words, bailouts foster the kind of think-
ing among managers regarding state coffers and taxpayer dollars: “Heads I win, 
tails you lose.” Per Proposition 1 (Table 2.2), these managers are being perfectly 
rational: Taking on risks, if successful, will enrich their private firms, their owners 
(shareholders), and themselves; if unsuccessful, the government will come to the 
rescue. Having bailed out failing private firms once, governments that not long 
ago were the strongest champions of “free markets” now increasingly find it hard 
to draw the line.
Far from being swept to the dustbin of history, SOEs as an organizational form 
have shown some amazing longevity. Today, SOEs represent approximately 10% of 
the global GDP. Even in developed (OECD member) countries, they command 5% 
of the GDP.45 From the ashes of the Washington Consensus emerged a Beijing Con-
sensus, which centers on state ownership and government intervention. Anchored 
by SOEs, China over the past 30 years has grown its GDP by 9.5% per year and its 
international trade volume by 18% per year. SOEs represent 80% of China’s stock 
market capitalization. But China is not alone. In Russia the figure is 62% and in 
Brazil 38%.46 Overall, nine of the top 15 largest initial public offerings (IPOs) since 
2005 are SOEs (Table 2.5). For policymakers in developed economies, one impor-
tant dimension of this debate is about how to view the incoming investments from 
state-owned entities such as sovereign wealth funds (SWFs) from emerging econo-
mies (see Emerging Markets 2.2).
Beijing Consensus
A view that questions Washington 
Consensus’ belief in the superi-
ority of private ownership over 
state ownership in economic 
policy making, which is often 
associated with the position held 
by the Chinese government.
Sovereign wealth funds (SWFs)
A state-owned investment 
fund composed of financial 
assets such as stocks, bonds, 
real estate, or other financial 
instruments funded by foreign 
exchange assets.
Table 2.5
State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs) Represent 9 of the 15 Largest Initial Public Offerings (IPOs) since 2005
Company
Industry
Year
Value ($ billion)
Agricultural Bank of China (SOE)
Finance
2010
22.1
Industrial & Commercial Bank of China (SOE)
Finance
2006
21.9
AIA (Hong Kong)
Insurance
2010
20.5
Visa (United States)
Finance
2008
19.7
General Motors (United States) (SOE)
Automotive
2010
18.1
Bank of China (SOE)
Finance
2006
11.2
Dai-ichi Life Insurance (Japan)
Insurance
2010
11.1
Rosneft (Russia) (SOE)
Oil & gas
2006
10.7
Glencore International (Switzerland)
Mining
2011
10.0
China Construction Bank (SOE)
Finance
2005
9.2
Electricité de France (SOE)
Utility & energy
2005
9.0
VTB Group (Russia) (SOE)
Finance
2007
8.0
Banco Santander Brasil
Finance
2009
7.5
China State Construction Engineering Corporation (SOE)
Construction
2009
7.3
Iberdrola Renovables (Spain)
Utility & energy
2007
6.6
Source: Adapted from Economist, 2012, New masters of universe (p. 8), Special Report: State Capitalism, January 21: 8.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2   Understanding Formal Institutions: Politics, Laws, and Economics	
53
A sovereign wealth fund (SWF) is a state-owned in-
vestment fund composed of financial assets such as 
stocks, bonds, real estate, or other financial instru-
ments funded by foreign exchange assets. Invest-
ment funds that we now call SWFs were first created 
in 1953 by Kuwait. Both the United States and Canada 
have had their own SWFs (at least at the state and 
provincial level, such as the Alaska Permanent Fund 
and Alberta Heritage Fund).
In the recent crisis, SWFs came to the rescue. 
They represent approximately 10% of global invest-
ment flows. For example, in 2007, the Abu Dhabi 
Investment Authority injected $7.5 billion (4.9% of 
equity) into Citigroup. In 2008, China Investment 
Corporation (CIC) invested $5 billion for a 10% equity 
stake in Morgan Stanley. While most SWFs make rela-
tively passive investments, some have become more 
active, direct investors as they hold larger stakes in 
recipients.
Such large-scale investments have ignited the de-
bate on SWFs. On the one hand, SWFs have brought 
much-needed cash to rescue desperate Western 
firms. On the other hand, concerns are raised by host 
countries, which are typically developed economies. 
One primary concern is national security in that SWFs 
may be politically (as opposed to commercially) moti-
vated. Another concern is SWFs’ inadequate transpar-
ency. Governments in several developed economies, 
in fear of the “threats” from SWFs, have been erect-
ing anti-SWF measures to defend their companies.
Foreign investment certainly has both benefits and 
costs to host countries. However, in the absence of any 
evidence that the costs outweigh benefits, the rush to 
erect anti-SWF barriers is indicative of protectionist (or, 
some may argue, even racist) sentiments. For execu-
tives at hard-pressed Western firms, it would not seem 
sensible to ask for government bailouts on the one 
hand, and to reject cash from SWFs on the other hand. 
Most SWF investment is essentially free cash with few 
strings attached. For example, CIC, which now holds 
10% of Morgan Stanley equity, did not demand a board 
seat or a management role. For Western policymakers, 
it makes little sense to spend taxpayers’ dollars to bail 
out failed firms, run huge budget deficits, and then turn 
away SWFs. Commenting on inbound Chinese invest-
ment in the United States (including SWF investment), 
an American expert (Steve Globerman) and a Canadian 
expert (Daniel Shapiro) note:
It seems feckless on the part of US policymakers 
to stigmatize Chinese investment in the United 
States based upon imprecise and likely exagger-
ated estimates of the relevant costs and risks of 
that investment.
At least some US policymakers agree. In the 
September/October 2008 issue of Foreign Affairs, then-
Secretary of the Treasury Henry Paulson commented:
These concerns [on Chinese investment] are 
misplaced . . . the United States would do well 
to encourage such investment from anywhere 
in the world—including China—because it rep-
resents a vote of confidence in the US economy 
and it promotes growth, jobs, and productivity in 
the United States.
Lastly, thanks to the financial crisis in 2008-2009, 
recent SWF investment in developed economies suf-
fered major losses. Such a “double whammy”—both 
the political backlash and the economic losses—has 
severely discouraged SWFs. As a result, the reces-
sion put a premium on maintaining a welcoming cli-
mate. As part of the efforts to foster such a welcom-
ing climate in times of great political and economic 
anxiety, both US and Chinese governments confirmed 
the following in the US-China Strategic and Economic 
Dialogue (S&ED) in July 2009:
The United States confirms that the Commit-
tee on Foreign Investment in the United States 
Welcoming versus Restricting Sovereign Wealth Fund Investments
E m e r g i n g  M a r k e t s  2 . 2
Ethical 
Dilemma
Danny Lehman/Corbis; Björn Meyer/sitox/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

54	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
(CFIUS) process ensures the consistent and fair 
treatment of all foreign investment without prej-
udice to the place of origin. The United States 
welcomes sovereign wealth fund investment, 
including that from China. China stresses that 
investment decisions by its state-owned invest-
ment firms will be based solely on commercial 
grounds.
Beyond bilateral negotiations such as the US-China 
S&ED, in September 2008, major SWFs of the world at 
a summit in Santiago, Chile, agreed to a voluntary code 
of conduct known as the Santiago Principles. These prin-
ciples are designed to alleviate some of the concerns 
for host countries of SWF investment and to enhance 
the transparency of such investment. These principles 
represent an important milestone of SWFs’ evolution.
Sources: Based on (1) V. Fotak & W. Megginson, 2009, Are SWFs welcome now? Columbia FDI Perspectives, No. 9, July 21, www.vcc.columbia.edu; 
(2) S. Globerman & D. Shapiro, 2009, Economic and strategic considerations surrounding Chinese FDI in the United States (p. 180), Asia Pacific Jour-
nal of Management, 26: 163–183; (3) H. Paulson, 2008, The right way to engage China. Foreign Affairs, September/October, www.foreignaffairs.org; 
(4) Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute, 2012, About sovereign wealth fund, www.swfinstitute.org; (5) United Nations (UN), 2010, World Investment Report 
2010 (p. xviii), New York and Geneva: UN; (6) US Department of the Treasury, 2009, The First US-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue Economic Track 
Joint Fact Sheet, July 28, Washington.
Table 2.6
Implications for Action
  	 When entering a new country, do your homework by having a thorough understanding of 
the formal institutions governing firm behavior.
  	 When doing business in countries with a strong propensity for informal relational 
exchanges, insisting on formalizing the contract right away may backfire.
2-8 Management Savvy
Focusing on formal institutions, this chapter has sketched the contours of an 
institution-based view of global business, which is one of the two core perspec-
tives we introduce throughout this book. (Chapter 3 will reinforce this view with a 
focus on informal institutions.) How does the institution-based view help us answer 
the fundamental question that is of utmost managerial concern around the globe: 
What determines the success and failure of firms around the globe? In a nutshell, 
this chapter suggests that firm performance is, at least in part, determined by the 
institutional frameworks governing firm behavior. It is the growth of the firm that, 
in the aggregate, leads to the growth of the economy. Not surprisingly, most devel-
oped economies are supported by strong, effective, and market-supporting formal 
institutions, and most underdeveloped economies are pulled back by weak, inef-
fective, and market-distorting formal institutions. In other words, when markets 
work smoothly in developed economies, formal market-supporting institutions are 
almost invisible and taken for granted. However, when markets work poorly, the 
absence of strong formal institutions may become conspicuous.
For managers doing business around the globe, this chapter suggests two broad 
implications for action (Table 2.6). First, managerial choices are made rationally 
within the constraints of a given institutional framework. Therefore, when entering 
a new country, managers need to do their homework by having a thorough under-
standing of the formal institutions affecting their business. The rules for doing 
business in a democratic market economy are certainly different from the rules 
in a totalitarian command economy. In short, “when in Rome, do as the Romans 
do.” While this is a good start, managers also need to understand why “Romans” do 
Learning Objective
Draw implications for action.
2-8
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2   Understanding Formal Institutions: Politics, Laws, and Economics	
55
things in a certain way by studying the formal and informal institutions governing 
“Roman” behavior.47 Of course, merely mastering the rules of the game will not be 
enough. The firm will also need to develop firm-specific resources and capabilities 
to take advantage of the rules of game. In the midst of a horrific recession, Merrill 
Lynch’s skillful maneuvers to save itself and Lehman Brothers’ failed attempt to 
garner political support serve as two cases in point.
Second, while this chapter has focused on the role of formal institutions, man-
agers should follow the advice of the second proposition of the institution-based 
view: In situations where formal constraints are unclear or fail, informal con-
straints (such as relationship norms) will play a larger role in reducing uncertainty. 
This means that when doing business in countries with a strong propensity for 
informal, relational exchanges, insisting on formalizing the contract right away 
may backfire.48 Because these countries often have relatively weak legal systems, 
personal relationship building is often used to substitute for the lack of strong 
legal protection.49 Attitudes such as “business first, relationship afterwards” (have 
a drink after the negotiation) may clash with the norm the other way around (lav-
ish entertainment first, talk about business later). For example, we often hear that 
because of their culture, the Chinese prefer to cultivate personal relationships 
(guanxi) first. This is not entirely true, because in the absence of a strong legal 
and regulatory regime in China, investing in personal relationships up front may 
simply be the initial cost one has to pay if interested in eventually doing business 
together. Such investment in personal relationships is a must in countries ranging 
from Argentina to Zimbabwe. The broad range of these countries with different 
cultural traditions suggests that the interest in cultivating what the Chinese call 
guanxi, which is a word found in almost every culture (such as blat in Russia and 
guan he in Vietnam), is not likely to be driven by culture alone, but more signifi-
cantly by common institutional characteristics—in particular, the lack of formal 
market-supporting institutions.
C h a p t e r  S u m m a r y
	 2.1	 Explain the concept of institutions and their key role in reducing uncertainty.
 	 Institutions are commonly defined as the rules of the game.
 	 Institutions have formal and informal components, each with different sup-
portive pillars.
 	 Their key function is to reduce uncertainty, curtail transaction costs, and 
combat opportunism.
	 2.2	 Articulate the two core propositions underpinning an institution-based 
view of global business.
 	 Proposition 1: Managers and firms rationally pursue their interests and 
make choices within formal and informal institutional constraints in a 
given institutional framework.
 	 Proposition 2: When formal constraints are unclear or fail, informal con-
straints will play a larger role.
	2.3	 Identify the basic differences between democracy and totalitarianism.
 	 Democracy is a political system in which citizens elect representatives to 
govern the country.
 	 Totalitarianism is a political system in which one person or party exercises 
absolute political control.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

56	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
	 2.4	 Outline the differences among civil law, common law, and theocratic law.
 	 Civil law uses comprehensive statutes and codes as a primary means to form 
legal judgments.
 	 Common law is shaped by precedents and traditions from previous judicial 
decisions.
 	 Theocratic law is a legal system based on religious teachings, such as 
Islamic law.
	2.5	 Understand the importance of property rights and intellectual property 
rights.
 	 Property rights are legal rights to use an economic resource and to derive 
income and other benefits from it.
 	 Intellectual property refers to intangible property that is the result of intel-
lectual activity.
	 2.6	 Appreciate the differences among market economy, command economy, 
and mixed economy.
 	 A pure market economy is characterized by laissez faire and total control by 
market forces.
 	 A pure command economy is defined by government ownership and con-
trol of all means of production.
 	 Most countries operate mixed economies, with a different emphasis on 
market versus command forces.
	 2.7	 Participate in two leading debates concerning politics, laws, and economics.
(1) What drives economic development: Culture, geography, or institu-
tions? (2) Private ownership versus state ownership.
	 2.8	 Draw implications for action.
 	 Have a thorough understanding of the formal institutions before entering 
a country.
 	 Insisting on formalizing the contract in initial negotiations may backfire in 
some countries.
Beijing Consensus 52
Bounded rationality 39
Civil law 43
Cognitive pillar 36
Command economy 47
Common law 43
Copyright 46
Democracy 40
Economic system 47
Formal institutions 35
Informal institutions 35
Institutional framework 35
Institutional transitions 35
Institutions 35
Institution-based view 35
Intellectual property 45
Intellectual property (IP) 
rights 45
Legal system 43
Market economy 47
Mixed economy 47
Moral hazard 51
Norms 36
Normative pillar 35
Opportunism 38
Patent 45
Piracy 46
Political risk 41
Political system 40
Property rights 45
Regulatory pillar 35
Sovereign wealth  
fund (SWF) 52
State-owned enterprise 
(SOE) 47
Theocratic law 44
Totalitarianism 
(dictatorship) 41
Trademark 46
Transaction costs 37
Washington Consensus 51
K e y  T e r m s
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2   Understanding Formal Institutions: Politics, Laws, and Economics	
57
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 ON CULTURE: Is there any relationship between the culture of a given coun-
try and the extent to which it will likely have a dynamic, growing economy? 
Are there cultures that would be more likely to limit economic growth and 
even result in poverty? Defend your answer.
	 2.	 Compare PengAtlas Maps 1.1 (Developed Economies and Emerging Econo-
mies) and Map 1.2 (Political Freedom Around the World). To what extent do 
developed economies tend to have a high level of political freedom—or is 
there any relationship? If there is a relationship, is it causal or coincidental? 
Explain.
	 3.	 Compare PengAtlas Map 1.3 (Legal Systems Around the World) and Map 1.1. 
In your opinion, what stands out to you regarding each category of legal 
system? Are there any relationships? If so, are they causal or coincidental? 
Defend your answer.
	 4.	 How can the rules of the game reduce uncertainty?
	 5.	 Do rules of the game promote or prevent opportunism? Defend your answer.
	 6.	 Do you agree that managers and firms really pursue their interests? Why or 
why not?
	 7.	 What are examples of informal constraints that affect global business 
firms?
	 8.	 What are the pros and cons of expanding into a democratic country?
	 9.	 What are the pros and cons of expanding into a totalitarian country?
	 10.	 Would you rather do business in a country that uses civil law or common 
law? Why?
	 11.	 What are some of the issues to consider before doing business in a 
theocracy?
	 12.	 What is the relationship between property rights and economic 
development?
	 13.	 Why is it important to protect IP rights?
	 14.	 Under what circumstances would it be easier to do business in a command 
economy than a market economy?
	 15.	 Many view the United States as a mixed economy. In your opinion, is the mix 
changing? If so, how? Is it shifting more to a command economy or a market 
economy? Defend your answer.
	 16.	 In your opinion, which is most important to economic development—
culture, geography, or institutions? Defend your answer.
	 17.	 Given whatever plans you have for the future, do you feel you would have 
the greatest likelihood of success in a firm under private ownership or state 
ownership? Why?
	 18.	 Why is it important to understand formal institutions before entering a 
country? Explain by using an example.
	 19.	 ON CULTURE: Why is understanding of human relations within a culture 
sometimes more important than legal expertise?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

58	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
C r i t i c a l  D i s c u s s i o n  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 How do you explain your country’s economic success (or failure)?
	 2.	 What is your view on the debate between private ownership and state 
ownership?
	 3.	 ON ETHICS: As manager, you discover that your firm’s products are coun-
terfeited by small family firms that employ child labor in rural Bangladesh. 
You are aware of the corporate plan to phase out the products soon. You 
also realize that once you report to the authorities, these firms will be shut 
down, employees will be out of work, and families and children will be 
starving. How do you proceed?
	 4.	 ON ETHICS: Your multinational is the largest foreign investor and enjoys 
good profits in (1) Sudan where government forces are reportedly 
cracking down on rebels and killing civilians, and (2) Vietnam where 
religious leaders are reportedly being prosecuted. As country manager, 
you understand that your firm is pressured by activists to exit these 
countries. The alleged government actions, which you personally find 
distasteful, are not directly related to your operations. How would you 
proceed?
G l o b a l  A c t i o n 
	 1.	 Evaluating political risk is an important element of country risk analysis. 
In fact, your personal interest relates to countries in the Middle East and 
North Africa region that have a high political risk. Provide a brief overview 
of the region and the reasoning behind assessing these countries that have 
been assessed with high political risk. From this list, which country has the 
highest overall country risk?
	 2.	 Since you work for a diversified multinational corporation, economic 
risk across different sectors of the world economy is an integral part 
of analysis as it indicates the future business prospects for specific 
industries. Evaluate the risk assessment of three industry sectors that are 
available to analyze. Prepare a report, and provide a recommendation 
concerning which industry and region would be most beneficial to your 
company.
V i d e o  C a s e
After watching the video on India and China’s economies, discuss the following:
	 1.	 What impact do the political systems of each country have on their efforts 
toward globalization?
	 2.	 How do IP rights differ between India and China? What distinctive compe-
tencies in IP exist for India and China?
	 3.	 Describe how India and China are market economies.
	 4.	 Does India have an opportunity to overtake China? Why or why not?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2   Understanding Formal Institutions: Politics, Laws, and Economics	
59
Cuba is the only practitioner of communism in the 
Western Hemisphere. Five decades of communism 
have delivered some accomplishments. Life expec-
tancy (at 79 years) is on par with that of the United 
States, and Cuba has more doctors per person than 
Britain and France. Social benefits cover everyone 
from cradle to grave, providing free world-class health 
care and education in addition to free pensions and 
funerals. However, people are poor and income is low. 
The average monthly wage is only $19. Food is often 
in shortage, forcing the government to ration food. 
Cuba’s 11 million people enjoy only 600,000 cars that 
have an average age of 15 years. Half of them belong 
to the state.
Raúl Castro, the younger brother of the 85-year-old 
leader Fidel Castro, took over as Cuba’s president in 
2008 and as first secretary of the Communist Party 
in 2011. (For compositional simplicity, this case will 
refer to each Castro brother by his first name.) Raúl 
has been busy, transferring a substantial chunk of 
the state-owned enterprises (SOEs) to private hands, 
freeing about 130 political prisoners, and signing the 
UN convention on human rights, something that Fidel 
had refused to do. While change seems to be in the 
air, there are limits—after all, Raúl is also a Castro. 
Neither “reform” nor “transition” is allowed to be 
mentioned. These words immediately bring back the 
painful memory of the collapse of the Soviet Union, 
which overnight withdrew subsidies and traumatized 
Cuba’s leaders. Instead, the changes are labeled “up-
dating,” in which “non-state actors” and “co-opera-
tives” will be tolerated. “But,” noted the Economist, 
“whatever the language, this means an emerging pri-
vate sector.”
Thanks to the Soviet collapse, the Cuban econo-
my shrank by a painful 35% between 1989 and 1993. 
In desperation, Fidel declared a national emergency, 
opened Cuba for foreign direct investment (FDI) and 
mass tourism, and legalized small family business-
es and the use of the dollar. He also found a new 
benefactor, Venezuela president Hugo Chávez, who 
provided Cuba with cheap oil. In exchange, Fidel sent 
20,000 doctors and professionals to work in Venezu-
ela. As a result, the regime’s demise, widely predicted 
by the anti-Castro Cuban American community, did 
not materialize. After surviving the emergency, Fidel 
went back to the old ways. Many family businesses 
and foreign ventures were shut down, and the dollar 
ceased to be legal tender in 2004.
This time, Raúl has proclaimed that changes are 
here to stay. While Fidel has a massive ego and is 
famously ideological, Raúl is more modest and more 
pragmatic. Raúl seems to realize that Cuban commu-
nism lives on borrowed time. The economy is terribly 
unproductive. Cuba has a legendary agricultural past—
think of its world-famous cigars and sugar. However, 
state ownership of farms has been disastrous. Output 
per head of sugar in 2012 has dropped to an eighth of 
its level in 1958. State farms control 75% of arable 
land, but 45% of this lies idle. Raúl has allowed pri-
vate farmers and co-ops to lease idle state land. Yet, 
private farmers have a hard time scraping a living off 
the land. This is not because the land is not fertile; it 
is. It is because of the grip of Acopio, the state-owned 
monopoly supplier of seeds, fertilizer, and equipment 
as well as the monopoly purchaser of farm produce. 
There is hardly a market to motivate farmers to try 
harder.
Emerging Markets: The Future of Cuba
Ethical 
Dilemma
C l o s i n g  C a s e
Ismael Francisco/Prensa Latina/AP Images
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

60	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
In manufacturing and services, SOEs are also noto-
rious for shoddy quality and low pay. But there is one 
advantage in working for SOEs: plenty of opportunities 
to pilfer (steal) supplies from the workplace. Employ-
ees’ justification goes like this: The SOE belongs to the 
state, which belongs to the people—that is, us. Since 
our wages are so low, we should feel free to take home 
the stuff that, after all, belongs to us anyway (!). Experi-
menting on a limited scale, Raúl has allowed private 
entrepreneurs to own and operate small shops such as 
barber shops, beauty parlors, and restaurants, as well 
as private taxis. Although by global standards, these 
entrepreneurial opportunities are extremely limited, 
they nevertheless have attracted well-educated (but 
starving) professionals, such as teachers, doctors, and 
accountants, to join the private sector. For example, a 
doctor who used to make $23 per month can now take 
home $40 in an improvised craft shop.
Slowly but surely, outside influence has arrived. 
While US firms cannot do business in Cuba, multination-
als from Brazil, Canada, China, and Spain have no such 
institution-based barriers. In 2012, 2.7 million tourists (a 
record) visited Cuba. While the US embargo is still tech-
nically in effect, from Miami, eight flights—technically 
labeled “charter” (not regularly scheduled) flights—go to 
Havana every day. Although still healthy, Raúl is already 
80. The days of the Castros running the show in Cuba are 
clearly numbered. What does the future hold for Cuba?
Case Discussion Questions:
	 1.	 Why has state ownership of farms resulted in a 
disaster in Cuban farming?
	 2.	 ON ETHICS: What are the norms governing 
employee behavior in Cuban SOEs? Are these 
norms right or wrong?
	 3.	 The Economist predicted that “whatever the in-
tentions of Cuba’s communist leaders, they will 
find it impossible to prevent the island from mov-
ing to some form of capitalism.” Do you agree or 
disagree?
	 4.	 Should foreign firms be interested in entering 
Cuba?
Sources: Based on (1) Economist, 2012, Edging toward capitalism, March 24: 7–9; (2) Economist, 2012, Revolution in retreat, March 24: 3–4; 
(3) Economist, 2012, The deal’s off, March 24: 5–7; (4) Economist, 2012, The Miami mirror, March 24: 10–11.
N O T E S
[Journal acronyms] AER—American Economic Review; AME—Acad-
emy of Management Executive; AMJ—Academy of Management Journal; 
AMP—Academy of Management Perspectives; AMR—Academy of Man-
agement Review; APJM—Asia Pacific Journal of Management; B&P—
Business & Politics; BW—BusinessWeek (before 2010) or Bloomberg 
Businessweek (since 2010); HBR—Harvard Business Review; JBV—
Journal of Business Venturing; JEL—Journal of Economic Literature; 
JEP—Journal of Economic Perspectives; JIBS—Journal of International 
Business Studies; JMS—Journal of Management Studies; JPE—Journal 
of Political Economy; JWB—Journal of World Business; SMJ—Strategic 
Management Journal; WSJ—Wall Street Journal
1 M. W. Peng, 2003, Institutional transitions and strategic choices 
(p. 275), AMR, 28: 275–296.
2 M. W. Peng, S. Sun, B. Pinkham, & H. Chen, 2009, The institution-
based view as a third leg for a strategy tripod, AMP, 23: 63–81; M. 
W. Peng, D. Wang, & Y. Jiang, 2008, An institution-based view of 
international business strategy, JIBS, 39: 920–936.
3 D. North, 1990, Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Perfor-
mance (p. 3), New York: Norton.
4 W. R. Scott, 1995, Institutions and Organizations, Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage.
5 D. Philippe & R. Durand, 2011, The impact of norm-conforming 
behaviors on firm reputation, SMJ, 32: 969–993.
6 S. Hannah, B. Avolio, & D. May, 2011, Moral maturation and 
moral conation, AMR, 36: 663–685; S. Nadkarni & P. Barr, 2008, 
Environmental context, managerial cognition, and strategic action, 
SMJ, 29: 1395–1427; B. Tyler & D. Gnyawali, 2009, Managerial collec-
tive cognitions, JMS, 46: 93–126.
7 M. W. Peng, 2000, Business Strategies in Transition Economies (pp. 
42–44), Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
8 O. Branzai & S. Abdelnour, 2010, Another day, another dollar, 
JIBS, 41: 804–825; M. Czinkota, G. Knight, P. Liesch, & J. Steen, 
2010, Terrorism and international business, JIBS, 41: 826–843; 
H. de Soto, 2011, The destruction of economic facts, BW, May 2: 
60–63; T. Khoury & M. W. Peng, 2011, Does institutional reform 
of intellectual property rights lead to more inbound FDI? JWB, 46: 
337–345; S. Lee, Y. Yamakawa, M. W. Peng, & J. Barney, 2011, How do 
bankruptcy laws affect entrepreneurship development around the 
world? JBV, 28: 505–520.
9 Economist, 2011, Looking for someone to blame, August 13: 25–26.
10 BW, 2009, The financial crisis excuse, February 23: 32.
11 O. Williamson, 1985, The Economic Institutions of Capitalism (pp. 1–2), 
New York: Free Press.
12 P. Collier & J. Gunning, 1999, Explaining African economic per-
formance, JEL, 37: 64–111.
13 A. Cuervo-Cazurra & L. Dau, 2009, Promarket reforms and 
firm profitability in developing countries, AMJ, 52: 1348–1368; 
G. McDermott, R. Corredoira, & G. Kruse, 2009, Public-private 
institutions as catalysts of upgrading in emerging market societ-
ies, AMJ, 52: 1270–1296; M. Wright, I. Filatotchev, R. Hoskisson, & 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2   Understanding Formal Institutions: Politics, Laws, and Economics	
61
M. W. Peng, 2005, Strategy research in emerging economies, JMS, 
42: 1–33.
14 M. W. Peng, 2002, Towards an institution-based view of business 
strategy, APJM, 19: 251–267; C. Stevens & J. Cooper, 2010, A behav-
ioral theory of governments’ ability to make credible commitments 
to firms, APJM, 27: 587–610.
15 A. Chacar, W. Newburry, & B. Vissa, 2010, Bringing institutions 
into performance persistence research, JIBS, 41: 1119–1140; R. 
Coeurderoy & G. Murray, 2008, Regulatory environments and the 
location decision, JIBS, 39: 670–687; K. Huang & F. Murray, 2009, 
Does patent strategy shape the long-run supply of public knowl-
edge? AMJ, 52: 1193–1221; S. Julian, J. Ofori-Dankwa, & R. Justis, 
2008, Understanding strategic responses to interest group pres-
sures, SMJ, 29: 963–984; T. Kochan, M. Guillen, L. Hunter, & S. 
O’Mahony, 2008, Public policy and management research, AMJ, 
52: 1088–1100; T. Kostova, K. Roth, & M. T. Dacin, 2008, Institu-
tional theory in the study of multinational corporations, AMR, 33: 
994–1006; B. Lee, 2009, The infrastructure of collective action 
and policy content diffusion in the organic food industry, AMJ, 52: 
1247–1269; C. Marquis & Z. Huang, 2009, The contingent nature of 
public policy and the growth of US commercial banking, AMJ, 52: 
1222–1246; K. Pajunen, 2008, Institutions and flows of foreign direct 
investment, JIBS, 39: 652–669; T. Tong, T. Alessandri, J. Reuer, & 
A. Chintakananda, 2008, How much does country matter? JIBS, 39: 
387–405.
16 Economist, 2007, Heavy going (p. 5), April 14: 5–7.
17 BW, 2009, NYSE chief Duncan Niederauer on Obama and busi-
ness (p. 15), June 8: 15–16.
18 BW, 2009, The overseas tax squeeze, May 18: 18–20.
19 D. Ariely, 2009, The end of rational economics, HBR, July: 78–84; 
P. Rosenzweig, 2010, Robert S. McNamara and the evolution of mod-
ern management, HBR, December: 87–93.
20 M. W. Peng, 2001, How entrepreneurs create wealth in transition 
economies, AME, 15: 95–108; S. Puffer & D. McCarthy, 2007, Can 
Russia’s state-managed, network capitalism be competitive? JWB, 42: 
1–13.
21 L. Capron & O. Chatain, 2008, Competitors’ resource-oriented 
strategies, AMR, 33: 97–121; G. Holburn & R. Bergh, 2008, Making 
friends in hostile environments, AMR, 33: 521–540; S. Lux, T. Crook, 
& D. Woehr, 2011, Mixing business with politics, JM, 37: 223–247; C. 
Oliver & I. Holzinger, 2008, The effectiveness of strategic political 
management, AMR, 33: 496–520; M. Ozer & S. Lee, 2009, When do 
firms prefer individual action to collective action in the pursuit of cor-
porate political strategy? B&P, 11: 1–21.
22 W. Henisz, E. Mansfield, & M. von Glinow, 2010, Conflict, secu-
rity, and political risk, JIBS, 41: 759–764; J. Oetzel & K. Getz, 2012, 
Why and how might firms respond strategically to violent conflict? 
JIBS, 43: 166–186.
23 Economist, 2012, Wish you were mine, February 11: 51–52.
24 M. Beaulieu, J. Cosset, & N. Essaddam, 2005, The impact of politi-
cal risk on the volatility of stock returns, JIBS, 36: 701–718.
25 R. Click & R. Weiner, 2010, Resource nationalism meets the mar-
ket, JIBS, 41: 783–803; Q. Li & T. Vashchilko, 2010, Dyadic military 
conflict, security alliances, and bilateral FDI flows, JIBS, 41: 765–782.
26 R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, & R. Vishny, 1998, 
Law and finance (p. 1118), JPE, 106: 1113–1155.
27 The author’s interview, Middle East Women’s Delegation visiting 
the University of Texas at Dallas, January 23, 2006.
28 H. de Soto, 2000, The Mystery of Capital, New York: Basic Books.
29 W. Easterly, 2008, Institutions: Top down or bottom up? AER, 98: 
95–99.
30 P. Chaudhry & A. Zimmerman, 2009, The Economics of Counterfeit 
Trade, Berlin: Springer; C. Hill, 2007, Digital piracy, APJM, 24: 9–25.
31 M. W. Peng, 2006, Dealing with counterfeiting, in M. W. Peng, 
Global Strategy (pp. 137–138), Cincinnati: South-Western Cengage 
Learning.
32 Heritage Foundation, www.heritage.org.
33 M. Carney, E. Gedajlovic, & X. Yang, 2009, Varieties of Asian 
capitalism, APJM, 26: 361–380; P. Hall & D. Soskice, 2001, Varieties of 
Capitalism, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
34 A. Deaton, 2010, Understanding the mechanisms of economic 
development, JEP, 24: 3–16; D. Ray, 2010, Uneven growth, JEP, 24: 
45–60; D. Radrik, 2010, Diagnostics before prescription, JEP, 24: 
33–44; M. Rosenzweig, 2010, Microeconomic approaches to devel-
opment, JEP, 24: 81–96.
35 D. North, 2005, Understanding the Process of Economic Change (p. 
48), Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
36 D. Acemoglu, 2010, Theory, general equilibrium, and political 
economy in development economics, JEP, 24: 17–32; D. Acemoglu 
& J. Robinson, 2012, Why Nations Fail, New York: Crown; R. Barro 
& X. Sala-i-Martin, 2003, Economic Growth, Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
37 Economist, 2005, Doing business in Africa, July 2: 61.
38 D. North, 1981, Structure and Change in Economic History (p. 164), 
New York: Norton.
39 Y. Lu, E. Tsang, & M. W. Peng, 2008, Knowledge management and 
innovation in the Asia Pacific (p. 359), APJM, 25: 361–374.
40 M. Porter & J. Rivkin, 2012, Choosing the United States (p. 90), 
HBR, March: 80–93.
41 State ownership is also often referred to as “public ownership.” 
However, since a lot of privately owned firms are publicly listed and 
traded that can cause confusion, I have decided to use “state owner-
ship” here to minimize confusion.
42 M. W. Peng, 2000, Business Strategies in Transition Economies (p. 24), 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
43 P. Bernstein, 2009, The moral hazard economy, HBR, July-August: 
101–102; S. Harrington, 2009, Moral hazard and the meltdown, WSJ, 
May 23, online.wsj.com.
44 J. Kornai, 1992, The Socialist System, Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-
versity Press.
45 M. W. Peng, G. Bruton, & C. Stan, 2012, Theories of the (state-
owned) firm, Working paper, University of Texas at Dallas.
46 Economist, 2012, The rise of state capitalism, January 21: 11.
47 R. Orr & W.R. Scott, 2008, Institutional exceptions on global 
projects, JIBS, 39: 562–588.
48 D. Malhotra, 2009, When contracts destroy trust, HBR, May: 25.
49 C. Su, Z. Yang, G. Zhuang, N. Zhou, & W. Dou, 2009, Interper-
sonal influence as an alternative channel behavior in emerging mar-
kets, JIBS, 40: 668–689.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Tor Eigeland/Alamy
Chapter 
3 
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
	 3-1	 define what culture is and articulate its four 
main manifestations: language, religion, 
social structure, and education.
	 3-2	 discuss how cultures systematically differ 
from each other.
	 3-3	 understand the importance of ethics and 
ways to combat corruption.
	 3-4	 identify norms associated with strategic 
responses when firms deal with ethical 
challenges.
	 3-5	 participate in three leading debates 
concerning cultures, ethics, and norms.
	 3-6	 draw implications for action.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Emphasizing Informal 
Institutions: Cultures, 
Ethics, and Norms
The Swiss unit of French engineering giant Alstom 
builds infrastructure projects, especially power sta-
tions, all over the world. As is typical for engineering 
and construction firms, Alstom sends its engineers 
out, often on short-term expatriate assignments for 
a few months. These construction projects are typi-
cally in remote locations far away from major cities, 
and the engineers have to become accustomed to 
working with a local workforce and living in the lo-
cal community. They thus have to learn to adapt—
quickly.
Cultural differences often become most evident 
when people enjoy social events ranging from lunch 
meetings to parties. A Swiss Alstom engineer recalls 
his experience when partying with colleagues in Saudi 
Arabia:
Once there was a farewell for someone from  
the building site. On this occasion, there was a 
little celebration. We were told, at midday, that 
there would be a party after work. We waited and 
were wondering what would happen, where they 
would do it, and if they would bring something. 
There were neither chairs nor tables. Around 
2 PM, they came with huge aluminum tablets, 
the size of a wagon wheel, filled up with rice, 
and in the middle a huge piece of mutton, grilled 
mutton. Finally, three or four of these tablets  
were on the floor of the workshop. They just put 
them on the floor! Of course we had cleaned up 
before. They came dressed in their celebratory 
dresses, and we expected some sort of cer-
emony. But they just sat down on the floor in 
the white gowns, around the tablets, and started 
eating.
The [Swiss] colleague who was with me was 
a vegetarian. He said, “I won’t squat on the floor 
like that, and I won’t eat anything either.” Every-
one had a piece of mutton in his hand—it was 
incredible. One would hold the mutton, and an-
other pulled out a chunk and passed it to me: 
“Here, mutton, that’s good, you must eat!” We 
had no plates, nothing. Everyone grabbed from 
the party bowl, and scooped out a handful of 
rice. And now, my mate said: “I won’t squat on 
the floor like that.” I said, “Come on, let’s just sit 
down. You don’t have to eat mutton, but you can 
at least do as if you are.”
Our Saudi colleagues were very happy that 
we were there, and that they could invite us 
for this meal. It was important to them that we 
would participate. We had known these people 
from work, but still, initially, the atmosphere 
was a bit uncomfortable. We didn’t know how to 
behave. But then, after we sat down, and meat  
O p e n i n g  C a s e
Emerging Markets: Partying in Saudi Arabia
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

64	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
Why does partying in Saudi Arabia involve people picking meat from the same piece of 
mutton and scooping rice with their bare hands? Why did one Swiss colleague initially 
feel uncomfortable? Why did the other Swiss colleague (the author) have a different 
attitude when participating in this “strange” party? Why did the Saudi colleagues have 
immense joy when hearing Swiss colleagues speak a few words of Arabic? After the 
party, did the Saudi and Swiss colleagues work more closely and effectively? More 
fundamentally, what informal institutions govern individual behavior and firm behavior 
in different countries?
This chapter continues our coverage of the institution-based view, which began 
with formal institutions in Chapter 2. Here we focus on informal institutions represent-
ed by cultures, ethics, and norms. As informal institutions, cultures, ethics, and norms 
play an important part in shaping the success and failure of firms around the globe. 
Remember that the institution-based view suggests two propositions. First, manag-
ers and firms rationally pursue their interests within a given institutional framework. 
Second, in situations where formal institutions are unclear or fail, informal institutions 
play a larger role in reducing uncertainty. The first proposition deals with both formal 
and informal institutions. The second proposition hinges on the informal institutions 
we are about to discuss. As the Opening Case shows, informal institutions are about 
more than just how to wine and dine properly. Informal institutions can facilitate better 
relationships among people who come from different backgrounds, which is why they 
deserve a great deal of our attention.1
Where Do Informal Institutions Come From?
Recall that any institutional framework consists of formal and informal institutions. 
While formal institutions such as politics, laws, and economics (see Chapter 2) are 
important, they make up a small (although important) part of the “rules of the 
game” that govern individual and firm behavior. As pervasive features of every 
economy, informal institutions can be found almost everywhere.2
Where do informal institutions come from? They come from socially trans-
mitted information and are a part of the heritage that we call cultures, ethics, 
and norms. Those within a society tend to perceive their own culture, ethics, 
and norms as “natural, rational, and morally right.”3 This self-centered mentality 
is known as ethnocentrism. For example, many Americans believe in “American 
exceptionalism”—that is, the United States is exceptionally well endowed to lead 
the world. The Chinese call China zhong guo, which literally means “country in the 
Ethnocentrism
A self-centered mentality held 
by a group of people who per-
ceive their own culture, ethics, 
and norms as natural, rational, 
and morally right.
was passed around, it became real interesting. 
We talked and relaxed. My mate also sat down 
and afterwards he said he enjoyed it very much. 
The English vocabulary of those people was 
quite limited, so we had to talk “with hands and 
feet.” Even so, we were chatting about work, 
what kind of rice this was, and what was in the 
rice. It was typical Saudi rice with raisins and the 
taste was quite fantastic. We couldn’t talk much, 
the language barrier was just there. But then 
we picked up a few bits of Arabic, and the next 
morning we could say “Good morning” in Arabic. 
Everyday a word more, they had immense joy 
hearing us speak Arabic.
Source: N. Felix, 2007, Dann hat man es gewusst, und dann war gut 
(p. 30), in M. Spisak and H. Stalder (eds.), In der Fremde (pp. 29–37). 
Bern, Switzerland: Haupt. The original was in German, and was translated 
by Professor Klaus Meyer (China Europe International Business School). 
© Haupt Bern. Reproduced with permission. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3   Emphasizing Informal Institutions: Cultures, Ethics, and Norms	
65
middle” or “middle kingdom.” Ancient Scandinavians called their country by a 
similar name (midgaard).
Recall from Chapter 2 that informal institutions are underpinned by the two 
normative and cognitive pillars, while formal institutions are supported by the reg-
ulatory pillar. While the regulatory pillar clearly specifies the do’s and don’ts, in-
formal institutions, by definition, are more elusive. Yet, they are no less important. 
Thus, it is imperative that we pay attention to the three major aspects of informal 
institutions highlighted in this chapter: culture, ethics, and norms.
3-1 Culture
Out of many informal institutions, culture probably is most frequently discussed. 
This section first defines culture, and then highlights four major components.
3-1a Definition of Culture
Among hundreds of definitions of culture, we will use the definition proposed by 
the world’s foremost cross-cultural expert, Geert Hofstede, a Dutch professor. He 
defines culture as “the collective programming of the mind which distinguishes 
the members of one group or category of people from another.”4 Before proceed-
ing, it is important to clarify two points to minimize confusion. First, although it 
is customary to talk about American culture or Brazilian culture, there is no strict 
one-to-one correspondence between cultures and nation-states. Within many mul-
tiethnic countries such as Belgium, Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Russia, South 
Africa, Switzerland, and the United States, many subcultures exist.5 Emerging 
Markets 3.1 shows that North Vietnam and South Vietnam, continue to be differ-
ent even 40 years after unification. Second, there are many layers of culture, such 
as regional, ethnic, and religious cultures. Within a firm, one may find a specific 
organizational culture (such as the IKEA culture). Having acknowledged the valid-
ity of these two points, we will follow Hofstede by using the term “culture” when 
discussing national culture—unless otherwise noted. This is not only a matter of ex-
pediency, but also a reflection of the institutional realities of the world with about 
200 nation-states.
Each one of us is a walking encyclopedia of our own culture. Due to space 
constraints, we only highlight four major components of culture: (1) language, 
(2) religion, (3) social structure, and (4) education.
3-1b Language
Among approximately 6,000 languages in the world, Chinese is the largest lan-
guage in terms of the number of native speakers.6 English is a distant second, fol-
lowed closely by Hindi and Spanish (Figure 3.1). Yet, the dominance of English as 
a global business language, known as the lingua franca in the jargon, is unmistak-
able.7 This is driven by two factors. First, English-speaking countries contribute the 
largest share of global output (Figure 3.2). Such economic dominance not only 
drives trade and investment ties between English-speaking countries and the rest of 
the world, but also generates a constant stream of products and services marketed 
in English—think about the ubiquitous Hollywood movie, the Economist magazine, 
and Google.
Learning Objective
Define what culture is and 
articulate its four main 
manifestations: language, 
religion, social structure, and 
education.
3-1
Culture
The collective programming of 
the mind that distinguishes the 
members of one group or cat-
egory of people from another.
Lingua franca
A global business language.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

66	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
Second, recent globalization has called for the use of one common language. 
Countries sharing a common official language obviously will find it easier and 
cheaper to trade with each other. Interestingly, countries that do not share a 
common official language—as long as they share a common foreign language—
may still benefit from increased trade and investment. In European countries 
where English is not an official language, the ability to speak English fluently helps 
facilitate bilateral trade significantly. Hypothetically, if English proficiency in all 
European countries were to increase by 10% (while keeping UK and Irish profi-
ciency levels constant), intra-Europe trade would grow by 15%. Bringing up the 
English proficiency of all Europeans to the level of the Dutch (which is very high) 
would boost intra-Europe trade by 70%.8
Around the world, non-native speakers of English who can master English, such 
as the Taiwanese-born Hollywood director Ang Lee, Icelandic-born singer Björk, 
and Colombian-born pop star Shakira, increasingly command a premium in jobs 
and compensation. This fuels the rising interest in English. The European Union 
(EU) insists that documents be translated into all official languages. The 23 official 
languages for 27 member countries make this requirement almost impossible to 
In 2015, Vietnam celebrates 40 years of unification. In 
1975, North Vietnam “liberated” South Vietnam and 
renamed Saigon, capital city of the South, Ho Chi Minh 
City. With different dialects, food, and weather, the two 
regions have always been very different. Northerners 
are considered serious and bookish, while Southerners 
tend to be flexible and flamboyant—similar to the 
stereotypes of Scandinavians and Mediterraneans in 
Europe. The Vietnam War (which the Vietnamese call 
the “American War”) exacerbated these differences. 
North Vietnam has been under communist rule since 
1954. South Vietnam has had much more recent expe-
rience with capitalism. The diaspora of Southerners, 
who fled from the Northern communists in the 1970s, 
has become the Viet Kieu—overseas Vietnamese. Viet 
Kieu have flocked to the South since the beginning 
of the Doi Moi (market liberalization) policy in 1986. 
Despite the harsh communist re-education programs 
to cleanse the Southerners of capitalist values, the 
economic center of gravity remains in the South. Ho 
Chi Minh City, with 9% of the nation’s population, has 
recently contributed 17% of national output, 30% of 
foreign investment, and 40% of exports. Its per capita 
income is four times the national average.
Four decades after the war, Ho Chi Minh City’s sky-
line is again emblazoned with American brands such as 
Citigroup and Sheraton. In 2004, when United Airlines 
resumed flights to Ho Chi Minh City, it was pleasantly 
surprised to find that the city’s airport code was still 
SGN. When I taught in the country’s first Executive MBA 
(EMBA) program (consisting of both Northerners and 
Southerners) in Hanoi in 1997, my South Vietnamese 
EMBA students advised me: “No need to call that 
city Ho Chi Minh City. It has too many words. Every-
body just calls it Saigon in the South.” It seems that in 
Vietnam—war or peace—old habits die hard.
North Vietnam versus South Vietnam 
E m e r g i n g  M a r k e t s  3 . 1
Sources: Based on (1) Author’s interviews; (2) Business Times (Hanoi), 2012, City GDP growth rate rises in first quarter, April 6, businesstimes.com.vn; 
(3) Economist, 2005, America lost, capitalism won, April 30: 37–38; (4) K. Meyer & H. Nguyen, 2005, Foreign investment strategies and sub-national 
institutions in emerging markets: Evidence from Vietnam, Journal of Management Studies, 42: 63–93; (5) D. Ralston, V. T. Nguyen, & N. Napier, 1999, 
A comparative study of the work values of North and South Vietnamese managers, Journal of International Business Studies, 30: 655–672.
Danny Lehman/Corbis; Björn Meyer/sitox/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3   Emphasizing Informal Institutions: Cultures, Ethics, and Norms	
67
Figure 3.2
Native Speakers of Top Six Languages as Percentage of Contribution 
to World Output
Sources: Author’s estimates based on data in World Bank, 2009, World Development Indicators database 
(www.worldbank.org).
English (40%)
Japanese (13%)
German (7%)
Chinese (6%)
French (6%)
Spanish (4%)
Others (24%)
Figure 3.1
Native Speakers of Top Six Languages as Percentage of World 
Population
Sources: Author’s estimates based on data in (1) The Economist Atlas, 2005, London: The Economist Books; 
(2) D. Graddol, 2004, The future of language, Science, 303: 1329–1331; (3) S. Huntington, 1996, The Clash of Civiliza-
tions and the Remaking of World Order, New York: Simon & Schuster. Only native speakers (people who speak a 
language as a first language/mother tongue) are included in our calculations.
Chinese (20%)
English (6%)
Hindi (5%)
Spanish (5%)
Arabic (4%)
Russian (4%)
Others (56%)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

68	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
satisfy. For example, hardly anyone can fluently translate Estonian into Portuguese. 
An Estonian document needs to be translated into English, which then can be 
translated into Portuguese. Translators well versed in English, thus, are in much 
greater demand.
On the other hand, the dominance of English, which does give native speakers 
of English a great deal of advantage in global business, may also lead to a disad-
vantage. An expatriate manager not knowing the local language misses a lot of 
cultural subtleties and can only interact with locals fluent in English. Weak (or no) 
ability in foreign languages makes it difficult (or impossible) to detect translation 
errors, which may result in embarrassments. For example, Coors Beer translated its 
slogan “Turn it loose!” into Spanish as “Drink Coors and get diarrhea!” Ford mar-
keted its Nova car in Latin America with disastrous results—“Nova” means “no go” 
in Spanish.9 To avoid such embarrassments, you will be better off if you can pick up 
at least one foreign language during your university studies.
3-1c Religion
Religion is another major manifestation of culture. Approximately 85% of the 
world’s population reportedly has some religious belief (see PengAtlas Map 1.4). 
The four leading religions are (1) Christianity (approximately 1.7 billion adherents), 
(2) Islam (1 billion), (3) Hinduism (750 million), and (4) Buddhism (350 million). 
Of course, not everybody claiming to be an adherent actively practices a religion. For 
instance, some Christians may go to church only once every year—during Christmas.
Because religious differences have led to numerous challenges, knowledge 
about religions is crucial even for non-religious managers. For example, in Christian 
countries, the Christmas season represents the peak in shopping and consump-
tion. In the United States, half of the toys are sold in one month before Christmas. 
Since (spoiled) kids in America consume half of the world’s toys and virtually all 
toys are made outside the United States (mostly in Asia), this means 25% of the 
world toy output is sold in one country in a month, thus creating severe production, 
distribution, and coordination challenges. For toy makers and stores, missing the 
boat from Asia, whose transit time is at least two weeks, can literally devastate an 
entire season (and probably the entire year).
Managers and firms ignorant of religious differences may end up with embar-
rassments and, worse, disasters. For example, a US firm blundered in Saudi Arabia 
by sending a meticulously prepared proposal bound with an expensive pigskin 
leather cover, hoping to impress the clients. The proposal was never read and soon 
rejected, because Muslims avoid pig products. The hope is that religiously sensitive 
managers and firms will avoid such blunders in the future.
3-1d Social Structure
Social structure refers to the way a society broadly organizes its members—with 
rigidity or flexibility. There are two key terms. Social stratification is the hierarchi-
cal arrangement of individuals into social categories (strata) such as classes, castes, 
and divisions within a society. Social mobility refers to the degree to which members 
from a lower social category can achieve a higher status. In general, highly strati-
fied societies have a low degree of social mobility. For example, India is well known 
for its caste system, in which individuals born into the lowest caste would have very 
little chance of breaking into the social circles and jobs occupied by members of 
Social structure
The way a society broadly 
organizes its members.
Social stratification
The hierarchical arrangement of 
individuals into social categories 
(strata) such as classes, castes, 
or divisions within a society.
Social mobility
The degree to which members 
from a lower social category can 
rise to a higher status.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3   Emphasizing Informal Institutions: Cultures, Ethics, and Norms	
69
the highest caste. Britain historically had a rigid class system with low social mobil-
ity. Only in newer environments, such as Australia, Canada, and the United States, 
could upwardly mobile but lower-class British individuals have greater chances of 
advancing socially and economically. It was this relatively loose social structure and 
high social mobility in the newly founded English-speaking colonies and countries 
that attracted waves of British immigrants from the lower social strata in the last 
several centuries.
Social structure is the outcome of a society’s formal and informal rules of the 
game that give birth to its norms and values. In China, pronounced social stratifica-
tion can be found along the urban-rural divide. While urban dwellers around the 
world often informally look down on rural residents (by calling them “rednecks” 
or “country bumpkins”), in China such discrimination is enhanced by formal laws 
known as the official residence (hukou) system. Approximately 80% of Chinese citi-
zens whose identification (ID) cards specify their official residence to be in rural 
areas have no health insurance, cannot compete for high-class urban jobs at state-
owned firms, and cannot send their children to urban schools—all of which are priv-
ileges enjoyed by urban dwellers. As migrant workers, many rural residents travel to 
urban areas to find low-end jobs and live in shanty towns. Although they may be un-
officially living in urban areas, they have very little hope of achieving social mobility.
Multinational enterprises (MNEs) operating in highly socially stratified coun-
tries need to be sensitive to local norms. The most suitable person for a job may 
not necessarily be the most technically qualified individual. Hiring managers from 
traditionally lower socioeconomic strata to supervise employees from more presti-
gious socioeconomic backgrounds may torpedo workplace morale and create hard 
feelings.
At the same time, it is important to note that all societies evolve. Even socially 
rigid societies such as India, Britain, and China have experienced institutional 
transitions that have facilitated social mobility in recent decades. For example, in 
India, the caste system has been legally banned (although it is still widely practiced 
informally). In the last two decades, Britain have been slowly moving toward a rela-
tively “classless” society similar to that of the United States. Likewise, the last three 
decades of economic reforms in China have made a large number of entrepreneurs 
with rural backgrounds very affluent. Owning companies and properties and creat-
ing jobs in urban areas, they can hardly care less about their lack of urban ID cards. 
While these entrepreneurs are clearly exceptions rather than the rule, they do help 
break down barriers for social mobility during China’s institutional transitions.
3-1e Education
Education is an important component of any culture (see PengAtlas Map 1.5). 
From an early age, schools teach children mainstream values and norms and fos-
ter a sense of cultural identity. In collectivistic societies, schools often foster col-
lectivistic values and emphasize the “right” answers in learning. In individualistic 
societies, schools emphasize individual initiatives and encourage more indepen-
dent thinking with a lot of questions with “no right or wrong answers”—think of 
all the debates introduced in this book.
In socially rigid societies, education—especially access to a small number of 
elite schools and universities—is one of the primary means to maintain social strat-
ification. In an effort to limit access, Cambridge and Oxford Universities, until 
recently, guaranteed a certain percentage of entry positions for graduates from  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

70	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
prestigious private schools (such as Eton). Here is a quiz: 
Which is the most selective university in the world? The 
answer is the Indian Institute of Management (IIM). 
Every year, its seven campuses accept only 1,500 students 
out of approximately 300,000 applicants—a 0.5% accep-
tance ratio (!). Such limited access to higher education 
opportunities fosters social stratification.
On the other hand, in socially mobile societies, ed-
ucation is typically one of the leading forces to break 
down social barriers. In Britain, the number of universi-
ties expanded from 46 to 84 in the 1990s and then to 115 
in the 2000s, resulting in significantly broader access 
to higher education by more members of the society. 
Britain is not alone in this regard. Overall, the dramatic 
expansion of higher education around the world in 
postwar decades has facilitated more social mobility.
In addition to language, religion, social structure, 
and education, there are numerous other manifesta-
tions of culture. However, if we keep going with these 
differences, this chapter—in fact, this book—may never 
end, given the tremendous differences around the 
world. Readers will be frustrated with a seemingly ran-
dom collection of the “rules of the game”: Do this in 
Muslim countries, don’t do that in Catholic countries, 
and so on. While all these are interesting “trees,” let us 
not forget that we are more interested in the “forest.” 
The point about seeing the “forest” is to understand how 
cultures are systematically different. This is done next.
3-2 Cultural Differences
Before reading this chapter, every reader already knows that cultures are differ-
ent. There is no controversy in stating that the Indian culture is different from the 
Indonesian culture. But how are the Indian and Indonesian cultures systematically 
different? This section outlines three different ways to understand cultural differ-
ences systematically: (1) context, (2) cluster, and (3) dimension approaches. Then, 
culture is linked with different firm behavior.
3-2a The Context Approach
Of the three main approaches probing into cultural differences, the context ap-
proach is the most straightforward, because it relies on a single dimension: con-
text.10 Context is the underlying background upon which social interaction takes 
place. Figure 3.3 outlines the spectrum of countries along the dimension of low 
context versus high context. In low-context cultures (such as North American and 
Western European countries), communication is usually taken at face value without 
much reliance on unspoken context. In other words, “No” means “No.” In contrast, 
in high-context cultures (such as Arab and Asian countries), communication relies 
a lot on the underlying unspoken context, which is as important as the words used. 
For example, “No” does not necessarily mean “No.”
Learning Objective
Discuss how cultures 
systematically differ from each 
other.
3-2
Context
The underlying background upon 
which social interaction takes 
place.
Low-context culture
A culture in which communica-
tion is usually taken at face value 
without much reliance on unspo-
ken context.
High-context culture
A culture in which communica-
tion relies a lot on the underlying 
unspoken context, which is as 
important as the words used.
How is higher education related to social 
stratification and culture?
© Chris Schmidt/iStockPhoto
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3   Emphasizing Informal Institutions: Cultures, Ethics, and Norms	
71
Why is context important? This is because failure to understand the differ-
ences in interaction styles may lead to misunderstanding. For instance, in Japan, 
a high-context culture, negotiators prefer not to flatly say “No” to a request. They 
will say something like “We will study it” or “We will get back to you later.” Their 
negotiation partners are supposed to understand the context of these responses 
that lack enthusiasm and figure out that these responses essentially mean “No” 
(although “No” is never mentioned). In the United States, a low-context culture, 
lawyers often participate in negotiations, by essentially attempting to remove the 
“context”—a contract should be as straightforward as possible, and parties are not 
supposed to “read between the lines.” Because of this reason, negotiators from 
high-context countries (such as China) often prefer not to involve lawyers until the 
very last phase of contract drafting. In high-context countries, initial rounds of ne-
gotiations are supposed to create the “context” for mutual trust and friendship. For 
individuals brought up in high-context cultures, decoding the context and acting 
accordingly are their second nature. Straightforward communication and confron-
tation, typical in low-context cultures, often baffle them.
3-2b The Cluster Approach
The cluster approach groups countries that share similar cultures together as one 
cluster. There are three influential sets of clusters (Table 3.1). The first is the Ronen 
and Shenkar clusters, proposed by management professors Simcha Ronen and 
Oded Shenkar.11 In alphabetical order, these clusters are: (1) Anglo, (2) Arabic, 
(3) Far Eastern, (4) Germanic, (5) Latin American, (6) Latin European, (7) Near 
Eastern, and (8) Nordic.
The second set of clusters is called the GLOBE clusters, named after the Global 
Leadership and Organizational Behavior Effectiveness project led by management 
professor Robert House.12 The GLOBE project identifies ten clusters, five of which 
use identical labels as the Ronen and Shenkar clusters: (1) Anglo, (2) Germanic 
Europe, (3) Latin American, (4) Latin Europe, and (5) Nordic Europe. In addition, 
GLOBE has (6) Confucian Asia, (7) Eastern Europe, (8) Middle East, (9) Southern 
Asia, and (10) Sub-Saharan Africa, which roughly (but not completely) correspond 
with the respective Ronen and Shenkar clusters.
The third set of clusters is the Huntington civilizations, popularized by po-
litical scientist Samuel Huntington. A civilization is “the highest cultural group-
ing of people and the broadest level of cultural identity people have.”13 Shown 
in Table  3.1, Huntington divides the world into eight civilizations: (1) African, 
(2) Confucian (Sinic), (3) Hindu, (4) Islamic, (5) Japanese, (6) Latin American, 
(7) Slavic-Orthodox, and (8) Western. While this classification shares a number 
of similarities with the Ronen and Shenkar and GLOBE clusters, Huntington’s 
Cluster
Countries that share similar 
cultures.
Civilization
The highest cultural grouping of 
people and the broadest level of 
cultural identity people have.
Figure 3.3
High-Context versus Low-Context Cultures
Chinese
Korean
Japanese
Arab
Spanish American,
British,
Canadian
Scandi-
navian
German,
Swiss
High-context cultures
Low-context cultures
High
context
Low
context
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

72	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
Western civilization is a very broad cluster that is subdivided into Anglo, Germanic, 
Latin Europe, and Nordic clusters by Ronen and Shenkar and GLOBE. In addi-
tion to such an uncontroversial classification scheme, Huntington has advanced 
a highly controversial idea that the Western civilization will clash with the Islamic 
and Confucian civilizations in the years to come.
For our purposes, we do not need to debate the validity of Huntington’s pro-
vocative thesis of the “clash of civilizations”—we will leave your political science or 
international relations classes to debate that. However, we do need to appreciate 
the underlying idea that people and firms are more comfortable doing business 
with other countries within the same cluster/civilization. This is because common 
language, history, religion, and customs within the same cluster/civilization reduce 
the liability of foreignness when operating abroad (see In Focus 3.1). For example, 
Hollywood movies are more likely to succeed in English-speaking countries. Most 
foreign investors in China are from Hong Kong and Taiwan—in other words, they 
are not very “foreign.”
Table 3.1
Cultural Clusters1
Ronen and Shenkar Clusters2
GLOBE Clusters3
Huntington Civilizations
Anglo
Anglo
Western (1)4
Arabic
Middle East
Islamic
Far East
Confucian Asia
Confucian (Sinic)
Germanic
Germanic Europe
Western (2)
Latin America
Latin America
Latin American
Latin Europe
Latin Europe
Western (3)
Near Eastern
Southern Asia
Hindu
Nordic
Nordic Europe
Western (4)
Central and Eastern Europe
Eastern Europe
Slavic-Orthodox
Sub-Saharan Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
African
Independents: Brazil, India, 
Israel, Japan
Japanese
1 This table is the first time these three major systems of cultural clusters have been compiled side by side. Viewing 
them together can allow us to see their similarities. However, there are also differences. Across the three systems 
(columns), even though clusters sometimes share the same labels, there are still differences. For example, Ronen and 
Shenkar’s Latin America cluster does not include Brazil (which is regarded as an “independent”), whereas GLOBE 
and Huntington’s Latin America includes Brazil.
2 Ronen and Shenkar originally classified eight clusters (in alphabetical order, from Anglo to Nordic), covering 44 coun-
tries. They placed Brazil, India, Israel, and Japan as “independents.” Upon consultation with Oded Shenkar, my col-
leagues and I more recently added Central and Eastern Europe and Sub-Saharan Africa as two new clusters—see 
Peng, Hill, and Wang (2000) cited as (3) below.
3 GLOBE includes ten clusters, covering 62 countries.
4 Huntington includes eight civilizations, in theory covering every country. For the Western civilization, he does not use 
such labels as Western 1, 2, 3, and 4 as in the table. They are added by the present author to establish some rough 
correspondence with the respective Ronen and Shenkar and GLOBE clusters.
Sources: Based on (1) S. Huntington, 1996, The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order, New York: 
Simon & Schuster; (2) R. House, P. Hanges, M. Javidan, P. Dorfman, & V. Gupta (eds.), 2004, Culture, Leader-
ship, and Organizations: The GLOBE Study of 62 Societies, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; (3) M. W. Peng, C. Hill, & 
D. Wang, 2000, Schumpeterian dynamics versus Williamsonian considerations, Journal of Management Studies, 
37: 167–184; (4) S. Ronen & O. Shenkar, 1985, Clustering countries on attitudinal dimension, Academy of Manage-
ment Review, 10: 435–454.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3   Emphasizing Informal Institutions: Cultures, Ethics, and Norms	
73
Learning Objective
Understand the importance 
of ethics and ways to combat 
corruption.
3.3
“Central Europe” is both an ancient concept and a 
modern one. As a modern concept, it has only been 
used widely in the last two decades after the end 
of the Cold War. Between 1945 and 1989, the Cold 
War fostered East-West conflicts and Europe was 
split in the middle by the Iron Curtain. As mem-
bers of the Warsaw Pact, (former) Czechoslovakia, 
Hungary, and Poland were widely regarded by peo-
ple outside the region as “Eastern European” (or 
simply Eastern or Soviet bloc) countries. In other 
words, the Cold War convention of bipolar terms of 
“East” and “West” did not permit thinking of any 
part of Europe in the middle that was neither East 
nor West.
The end of the Cold War and the removal of 
communism throughout the former Eastern Bloc 
facilitated new thinking. “Central Europe,” as part 
of a new region called “Central and Eastern Europe” 
(CEE), has become a widely used label both by people 
in this region and outsiders. So, what exactly is Central 
Europe? If this concept is meaningful, it has to be 
different from Western, Eastern, and Southeastern 
Europe (see PengAtlas Map 2.4). Two definitions have 
emerged. The first includes the former Eastern bloc 
countries of the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, 
and Slovakia, as well as Croatia and Slovenia (which 
broke away from the former Yugoslavia). These 
countries have long been influenced by Western 
European culture because they were converted to 
Roman Catholicism about 1,000 years ago. Western 
Christendom’s centuries-long confrontation with 
the Oriental and Islamic empire of the Ottoman 
Turks also helped define Central Europe as a cultural 
and historical region. This is because many battles 
against the Turks, fought by forces drawn throughout 
Europe, took place in this region, which was known as 
the “bulwark of Europe.” The common fate of these 
smaller countries, which lost their independence 
due to conquests by powerful neighbors such as 
Austrians, Germans, Russians, and Turks, also binds 
them together. A second definition of Central Europe 
is to not only include these countries mentioned in 
the first definition, but also add Germany and Austria, 
which historically and contemporarily have special 
relationships with the region. “Central Europe” as 
a historical concept grew out of a German term, 
Mitteleuropa, and German used to be the lingua 
franca among Central Europeans. Many of these 
independent countries used to be part of the Austrian 
(and between 1867 and 1918 Austrian-Hungarian) 
empire. Today, an increasing number of Germans and 
Austrians—together with Czechs, Hungarians, Poles, 
Slovaks, and Slovenes—call themselves “Central 
Europeans.”
Highlighting a common Central European identity 
is not just an academic exercise. It has profound geo-
political and business implications. The first defini-
tion enables Central Europeans to break away from 
the “Eastern Europe” (or Soviet bloc) image, and to 
position themselves as politically, economically, and 
socially more advanced relative to Russia and other 
former Soviet countries. This facilitated entrance 
into the European Union (EU). In 2004, the Czech 
Republic, Hungary, Poland, Slovakia, and Slovenia be-
came full-fledged EU members. Citizens from these 
countries can now travel freely, without passport con-
trol or visa headaches, into Austria, Germany, or any 
other EU country. The second definition facilitates 
many multinationals to establish their CEE headquar-
ters in Vienna, with responsibilities to cover the entire 
region.
However, as Central European countries be-
come more “normal” (after all, they have met all 
EU accession criteria and become members), many 
multinationals are rethinking why they even want to 
have a separate regional headquarters for CEE. Few 
multinationals bother to have a separate “Western 
Europe” headquarters. As the 2008–2009 global 
financial crisis and the 2010–2012 euro crisis (also 
known as the Greek crisis) hit, many multination-
als have been thinking about shutting down CEE 
headquarters to cut costs—or to set up a new 
regional headquarters in Moscow or St. Petersburg 
to emphasize the “R” in “BRIC.” In other words, 
if the EU represents the quintessential “West-
ern Europe,” then Central European countries, all 
IN Focus 3.1 
Defining Central Europe
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

74	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
3-2c The Dimension Approach
While both the context and cluster approaches are interesting, the dimension ap-
proach is more influential. The reasons for such influence are probably twofold. 
First, insightful as the context approach is, context only represents one dimension. 
What about other dimensions? Second, the cluster approach has relatively little 
to offer regarding differences of countries within one cluster. For example, what 
are the differences between Italy and Spain, both of which belong to the same 
Latin Europe cluster according to Ronen and Shenkar and GLOBE? By focusing 
on multiple dimensions of cultural differences both within and across clusters, the 
dimension approach has endeavored to overcome these limitations. While there 
are several competing frameworks,14 the work of Hofstede and his colleagues is by 
far the most influential and thus is our focus.
Hofstede and his colleagues have proposed five dimensions (Figure 3.4). First, 
power distance is the extent to which less powerful members within a country expect 
and accept that power is distributed unequally. For example, in high power distance 
Brazil, the richest 10% of the population receive approximately 50% of the national 
income, and everybody accepts this as “the way it is.” In low power distance Sweden, 
the richest 10% only get 22% of the national income. Even within the same cluster, 
there are major differences. For example, in the United States, subordinates often ad-
dress their bosses on a first-name basis, a reflection of a relatively low power distance. 
While this boss, Mary or Joe, still has the power to fire you, the distance appears to be 
shorter than if you had to address this person as Mrs. Y or Dr. Z. In low power distance 
American universities, all faculty members, including the lowest ranked assistant pro-
fessors, are commonly addressed as “Professor A.” In high power distance British uni-
versities, only full professors are allowed to be called “Professor B.” (Everybody else 
is called “Dr. C” or “Ms. D” if D does not have a PhD). German universities are per-
haps most extreme: Full professors with PhDs need to be honored as “Prof. Dr. X”— 
your author would be “Prof. Dr. Peng” if I were to work at a German university.
Second, individualism refers to the perspective that the identity of an individual is 
fundamentally his or her own, whereas collectivism refers to the idea that the identity 
of an individual is primarily based on the identity of his or her collective group (such 
as family, village, or company). In individualistic societies (led by the United States), 
ties between individuals are relatively loose and individual achievement and freedom 
are highly valued. In contrast, in collectivist societies (such as many countries in Af-
rica, Asia, and Latin America), ties between individuals are relatively close and col-
lective accomplishments are often sought after. In Chinese restaurants, most dishes 
are served “family style” to be shared by all the people around the table. In American 
Power distance
The extent to which less power-
ful members within a country 
expect and accept that power is 
distributed unequally.
Individualism
The idea that an individual’s 
identity is fundamentally his or 
her own.
Collectivism
The idea that an individual’s 
identity is fundamentally tied to 
the identity of his or her collec-
tive group.
of which are EU members now, may no longer 
need to be viewed as a “special” case with all the 
attention and affection lavished on them as in the 
immediate aftermath of the Cold War. The question 
currently confronting many policymakers, scholars, 
and managers in the region is: Other than being a 
historical, cultural, and geographical concept, what 
are the values of highlighting a Central European 
identity?
Sources: Based on (1) author’s interviews; (2) Z. Bakay, 2012, Overview 
of CEE economies and future outlook, presentation at CEE Research 
Conference, WU, Vienna, Austria, March; (3) L. Johnson, 1996, Central 
Europe, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press; (4) A. Schuh, 2012, 
Business and management research on CEE, presentation at CEE 
Research Conference, WU, Vienna, Austria, March.
IN Focus 3.1 (continued)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3   Emphasizing Informal Institutions: Cultures, Ethics, and Norms	
75
restaurants, most dishes are served “individual style” to be only enjoyed by particular 
persons who order them. Shown in our Opening Case, some Swiss engineers who 
came from an individualistic culture were astonished when partying with their collec-
tivistic colleagues in Saudi Arabia, where everybody would pick meat from the same 
piece of mutton and scoop rice from the same party bowl using their bare hands.
Third, the masculinity versus femininity dimension refers to sex role differentia-
tion. In every traditional society, men tend to have occupations that reward asser-
tiveness, such as politicians, soldiers, and executives. Women, on the other hand, 
usually work in caring professions, such as teaching and nursing, in addition to 
being homemakers. High-masculinity societies (led by Japan) continue to maintain 
such a sharp role differentiation along gender lines. In Saudi Arabia, women are not 
allowed to drive cars. In low masculinity societies (led by Sweden), women increas-
ingly become politicians, scientists, and soldiers (think about the movie GI Jane), 
and men frequently assume the role of nurses, teachers, and househusbands.
Fourth, uncertainty avoidance refers to the extent to which members in dif-
ferent cultures accept ambiguous situations and tolerate uncertainty. Members 
of high uncertainty avoidance cultures (led by Greece) place a premium on job 
security and retirement benefits. They also tend to resist change, which, by defi-
nition, is uncertain. Low uncertainty avoidance cultures (led by Singapore) are 
characterized by a greater willingness to take risk and less resistance to change.
Masculinity
A relatively strong form 
of societal-level sex role 
differentiation whereby men 
tend to have occupations that 
reward assertiveness and 
women tend to work in caring 
professions.
Femininity
A relatively weak form of 
societal-level sex role differen-
tiation whereby more women 
occupy positions that reward as-
sertiveness and more men work 
in caring professions.
Uncertainty avoidance
The extent to which members 
in a culture accept or avoid 
ambiguous situations and 
uncertainty.
Figure 3.4
Hofstede Dimensions of Culture
Sources: Based on (1) G. Hofstede, 1993, Cultural constraints in management theories, Academy of Management Executive, 7: 81–94; (2) G. Hosftede, 1997, 
Cultures and Organizations: Software of the Mind (pp. 25, 26, 53, 84, 113, 166), New York: McGraw-Hill. For newest update, see www.geerthofstede.com.
Individualism
Masculinity
Uncertainty Avoidance
Long-Term Orientation
Power Distance
95
50
40
90
10
Russia
35
67
66
31
65
Germany
80
20
50
60
118
China
40
91
62
46
29
USA
69
38
49
76
65
Brazil
54
46
95
80
92
Japan
31
71
8
29
33
Sweden
74
20
48
8
48
Singapore
55
14
50
70
0
Pakistan
To determine the cultural characteristics of a country, compare the 
number and vertical distance (higher means more) of that country on a 
particular cultural dimension (color coded and labeled on the right 
side of the exihibit) with those of other countries.  For example, with a 
score of 80, Japan has the second highest long-term orientation; it is 
exceeded only by China, which has a score of 118.  By contrast, with a 
score of 0, Pakistan has the weakest long-term orientation.  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

76	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
Finally, long-term orientation emphasizes perseverance and savings for future 
betterment. China, which has the world’s longest continuous written history of 
approximately 4,000 years and the highest contemporary savings rate, leads the 
pack. On the other hand, members of short-term orientation societies (led by 
Pakistan) prefer quick results and instant gratification.
Overall, Hofstede’s dimensions are interesting and informative. They are also 
largely supported by subsequent work. It is important to note that Hofstede’s di-
mensions are not perfect and have attracted some criticisms (see In Focus 3.2). 
However, it is fair to suggest that these dimensions represent a starting point for us 
trying to figure out the role of culture in global business.
Long-term orientation
Dimension of how much 
emphasis is placed on perse-
verance and savings for future 
betterment.
Despite the influence of Hofstede’s framework, it has 
attracted a number of criticisms:
 	
Cultural boundaries are not the same as national 
boundaries.
 	
Although Hofstede was careful to remove some 
of his own cultural biases, “the Dutch software” 
of his mind, as he acknowledged, “will remain 
evident to the careful reader.” Being more familiar 
with Western cultures, Hofstede might inevita-
bly be more familiar with dimensions relevant to 
Westerners. Thus, crucial dimensions relevant to 
Easterners (Asians) could be missed.
 	
Hofstede’s research was based on surveys of 
more than 116,000 IBM employees working at 
72 national subsidiaries from 1967 to 1973. This 
had both pros and cons. On the positive side, it 
took place not only in the same industry, but also 
in the same company. Otherwise, it would have 
been difficult to determine whether findings were 
due to differences in national cultures or industry or 
organizational cultures. However, because of such 
a single firm/single industry design, it was possible 
that Hofstede’s findings captured what was unique 
to that industry or to IBM. Given anti-American 
sentiments in some countries, some individuals 
might refuse to work for an American employer. 
Thus, it was difficult to ascertain whether employ-
ees working for IBM were true representatives of 
their respective national cultures.
 	
Because the original data are now 40 years old, 
critics contend that Hofstede’s framework would 
simply fail to capture aspects of recent cultural 
change.
Hofstede responded to all four criticisms. First, he 
acknowledged that his focus on national culture was 
a matter of expediency with all its trappings. Second, 
since the 1980s, Hofstede and colleagues relied on a 
questionnaire derived from cultural dimensions most 
relevant to the Chinese, and then translated it from 
Chinese to multiple languages. That was how he un-
covered the fifth dimension, long-term orientation 
(originally labeled “Confucian dynamism”). In response 
to the third and fourth criticisms, Hofstede pointed out 
a large number of more recent studies conducted by 
other scholars, using a variety of countries, industries, 
and firms. Most results were supportive of his find-
ings. Overall, while Hofstede’s work is not perfect, on 
balance, its values seem to outweigh its drawbacks.
Criticizing Hofstede’s Framework
IN Focus 3.2 
Sources: Based on (1) T. Fang, 2010, Asian management research needs 
more self-confidence: Reflection on Hofstede (2007) and beyond, Asia 
Pacific Journal of Management, 27: 155–170; (2)  G. Hofstede, 2006, 
What did GLOBE really measure? Journal of International Business 
Studies, 37: 882–896; (3) G. Hofstede, 2007, Asian management in 
the 21st century, Asia Pacific Journal of Management, 24: 411–420; 
(4) M. Javidan, R. House, P. Dorfman, P. Hanges, & M. Luque, 2006, 
Conceptualizing and measuring cultures and their consequences, Jour-
nal of International Business Studies, 37: 897–914; (5)  B. Kirkman, 
K. Lowe, & C. Gibson, 2006, A quarter century of Culture’s Conse-
quences, Journal of International Business Studies, 37: 285–320; 
(6) K. Leung, R. Bhagat, N. Buchan, M. Erez, & C. Gibson, 2005, Cul-
ture and international business, Journal of International Business Stud-
ies, 36: 357–378; (7)  R. Maseland & A. van Hoorn, 2009, Explaining 
the negative correlation between values and practices: A note on the 
Hofstede-GLOBE debate, Journal of International Business Studies, 40: 
527–532; (8) B. McSweeney, 2002, Hofstede’s model of national cul-
tural differences and their consequences, Human Relations, 55: 89–118; 
(9) L. Tang & P. Keveos, 2008, A framework to update Hofstede’s cultural 
value indices, Journal of International Business Studies, 39: 1045–1063.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3   Emphasizing Informal Institutions: Cultures, Ethics, and Norms	
77
3-2d Culture and Global Business
A great deal of global business activities are consistent with the context, cluster, and 
dimension approaches on cultural differences. For example, the average length of 
contracts is longer in low-context countries (such as Germany) than in high-context 
countries (such as Vietnam). This is because in high-context countries, a lot of 
agreements are unspoken and not necessarily put in a legal contract.
Also, as pointed out by the cluster approach, firms are a lot more serious in 
preparation when doing business with countries in other clusters, compared with 
how they deal with fellow countries within the same cluster. Recently, countless new 
books have been published on “how to do business in China.” Two decades ago, 
gurus wrote about “how to do business in Japan.” But has anyone ever seen a book 
in English on “how to do business in Canada”?
The Hofstede’s dimension approach is also often supported in the real world. 
For example, managers in high power distance countries, such as France and Italy, 
have a greater penchant for centralized authority. Solicitation of subordinate feed-
back and participation, widely practiced in low power distance Western countries 
(known as empowerment), is often regarded as a sign of weak leadership and low 
integrity in high power distance countries, such as Egypt, Russia, and Turkey.15
Individualism and collectivism also affect business activities. Individualist US 
firms may often try to differentiate themselves, whereas collectivist Japanese firms 
tend to follow each other. Because entrepreneurs “stick their neck out” by founding 
new firms, individualistic societies tend to foster a relatively higher level of entre-
preneurship.
Likewise, masculinity and femininity affect managerial behavior. The stereo-
typical manager in high-masculinity societies is “assertive, decisive, and ‘aggressive’ 
(only in masculine societies does this word carry a positive connotation),” whereas 
the stylized manager in high-femininity societies is “less visible, intuitive rather 
than decisive, and accustomed to seeking consensus.”16
Managers in low uncertainty avoidance countries (such as Britain) rely more on 
experience and training, whereas managers in high uncertainty avoidance coun-
tries (such as China) rely more on rules. In addition, cultures with a long-term 
orientation are likely to nurture firms with long horizons. For example, Japan’s 
Matsushita has a 250-year plan, which was put together in the 1930s.17 While this is 
certainly an extreme case, Japanese and Korean firms tend to focus more on the 
long term. In comparison, Western firms often focus on relatively short-term prof-
its (often on a quarterly basis).
Overall, there is strong evidence pointing out the importance of culture.18 Sen-
sitivity to cultural differences does not guarantee success, but can at least avoid 
blunders. For instance, a Chinese manufacturer exported to the West a premium 
brand of battery called White Elephant without knowing the meaning of this 
phrase in Western culture. In another example, when a French manager (a man) 
was transferred to a US subsidiary and met his American secretary (a woman) the 
first time, he greeted her with an effusive cheek-to-cheek kiss, a “Hello” that would 
be harmless in France. However, the secretary later filed a complaint for sexual ha-
rassment. More seriously, Mitsubishi Motors, coming from Japan, which leads the 
world in masculinity, encountered major problems when operating in the United 
States, where there is more female participation in the labor force (indicative of a 
high level of femininity). In 1998, its North American division paid $34 million to 
settle sexual harassment charges.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

78	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
3-3 Ethics
Cross-cultural differences can be interesting, but they can also be unethical, all de-
pending on the institutional frameworks in which firms are embedded. This topic 
is discussed in this section.
3-3a Definition and Impact of Ethics
Ethics refers to the principles, standards, and norms of conduct governing individ-
ual and firm behavior.19 Ethics is not only an important part of informal institutions, 
but is also deeply reflected in formal laws and regulations. To the extent that laws 
reflect a society’s minimum standards of conduct, there is a substantial overlap be-
tween what is ethical and legal, and between what is unethical and illegal. However, 
there is a gray area because what is legal may be unethical.
Recent scandals (such as Enron and Siemens) have pushed ethics to the forefront 
of global business discussions. Numerous firms have introduced a code of conduct—a 
set of guidelines for making ethical decisions.20 There is 
a debate on firms’ ethical motivations. A negative 
view suggests that firms may simply jump onto the 
ethics “bandwagon” under social pressures to appear 
more legitimate without necessarily becoming better. 
A positive view maintains that some firms may be 
self-motivated to “do it right” regardless of pressures. 
An instrumental view believes that good ethics may 
simply be a useful instrument to help make money.
Perhaps the best way to appreciate the value of 
ethics is to examine what happens after some crisis. 
As a “reservoir of goodwill,” the value of an ethi-
cal reputation is magnified during a time of crisis. 
After the November 26, 2008, terrorist attacks on 
the Taj Mahal Palace Hotel in Mumbai that killed 
31 people (including 20 guests), the hotel received 
only praise. Why? The surviving guests were over-
whelmed by employees’ dedication to duty and their desire to protect guests in 
the face of terrorist attacks. Eleven employees laid down their lives while helping 
between 1,200 and 1,500 guests safely escape. Paradoxically, catastrophes may 
allow more ethical firms such as the Taj, which are renowned for their integrity 
and customer service, to shine.21 The upshot seems to be that ethics pays.22
3-3b Managing Ethics Overseas
Managing ethics overseas is challenging, because what is ethical in one country 
may be unethical elsewhere.23 Facing such differences, how can managers prepare 
themselves?
Two schools of thought exist.24 First, ethical relativism refers to an extension of 
the cliché “When in Rome, do as the Romans do.” If women in Muslim countries are 
discriminated against, so what? Likewise, if industry rivals in China can fix prices, 
who cares? Isn’t that what “Romans” do in “Rome”? Second, ethical imperialism 
refers to the absolute belief that “There is only one set of Ethics (with the big E), 
and we have it.” Americans are especially renowned for believing that their ethical  
Learning Objective
Understand the importance 
of ethics and ways to combat 
corruption.
3-3
What do you think an employer’s code of conduct 
should say about respect for people’s religious 
beliefs and practices?
Cardinal/Corbis
Ethics
The principles, standards, and 
norms of conduct that govern 
individual and firm behavior.
Code of conduct
A set of guidelines for making 
ethical decisions.
Ethical relativism
A perspective that suggests that 
all ethical standards are relative.
Ethical imperialism
A perspective that suggests that 
“there is one set of Ethics (with 
a capital E) and we have it.”
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3   Emphasizing Informal Institutions: Cultures, Ethics, and Norms	
79
values should be applied universally. For example, since sexual discrimination and 
price fixing are wrong in the United States, they must be wrong everywhere else. In 
practice, however, neither of these schools of thought is realistic. At the extreme, 
ethical relativism would have to accept any local practice, whereas ethical imperial-
ism may cause resentment and backlash among locals.
Three “middle-of-the-road” guiding principles have been proposed by Thomas 
Donaldson, a business ethicist (Table 3.2). First, respect for human dignity and 
basic rights (such as those concerning health, safety, and the needs for education 
instead of working at a young age) should determine the absolute minimal ethical 
thresholds for all operations around the world.
Second, respect for local traditions suggests cultural sensitivity. If gifts are 
banned, foreign firms can forget about doing business in China and Japan. While it 
is illegal for corporations to hire employees’ children and relatives instead of more 
qualified applicants according to US equal opportunity laws, Indian companies 
routinely practice such nepotism, believing it strengthens employee loyalty. What 
should US companies setting up subsidiaries in India do? Donaldson advises that 
such nepotism is not necessarily wrong—at least in India.
Finally, respect for institutional context calls for a careful understanding of 
local institutions. Codes of conduct banning bribery are not very useful unless 
accompanied by guidelines for the scale of appropriate gift giving or receiving. 
Citigroup allows employees to accept non-cash gifts whose nominal value is less 
than $100. The Economist lets its journalists accept any non-cash gift that can be 
consumed in a single day—thus, a bottle of wine is acceptable, but a case of wine is 
not. Overall, these three principles, although far from perfect, can help managers 
improve the quality of their decisions.
3-3c Ethics and Corruption
Ethics helps to combat corruption, often defined as the abuse of public power for 
private benefits, usually in the form of bribery (in cash or in kind).25 Corruption dis-
torts the basis for competition that should be based on products and services, thus 
causing misallocation of resources and slowing economic development.26 Some evi-
dence reveals that corruption discourages foreign direct investment (FDI).27 If the 
level of corruption in Singapore (very low) were to increase to the level in Mexico 
(in the middle range), it reportedly would have the same negative effect on FDI 
inflows as raising the tax rate by 50%.28
Corruption is pervasive in many parts of the world. Many US firms complain 
that they are unfairly restricted by the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA), a law 
enacted in 1977 that bans bribery to foreign officials. They also point out that over-
seas bribery expenses were often tax-deductible (!) in many EU countries such as 
Corruption
The abuse of public power for 
private benefits, usually in the 
form of bribery.
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 
(FCPA)
A US law enacted in 1977 that 
bans bribery of foreign officials.
Table 3.2
Managing Ethics Overseas: Three “Middle-of-the-Road” Approaches
  	 Respect for human dignity and basic rights
  	 Respect for local traditions
  	 Respect for institutional context
Sources: Based on text in (1) T. Donaldson, 1996, Values in tension: Ethics away from home, Harvard Business 
Review, September-October: 4–11; (2) J. Weiss, 2006, Business Ethics, 4th ed., Cincinnati: South-Western 
Cengage Learning.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

80	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
Austria, France, Germany, and the Netherlands—at least until the late 1990s. How-
ever, even with the FCPA, there is no evidence that US firms are inherently more 
ethical than others. The FCPA itself was triggered by investigations of many corrupt 
US firms in the 1970s. Even the FCPA makes exceptions for small “grease” payments 
to get goods through customs abroad. Most alarmingly, a World Bank study reports 
that despite over three decades of FCPA enforcement, US firms actually “exhibit 
systematically higher levels of corruption” than other OECD firms (original italics).29
 Overall, the FCPA can be regarded as an institutional weapon in the fight against 
corruption.30 Recall that every institution has three supportive pillars: regulatory, nor-
mative, and cognitive (Table 2.1). Despite the FCPA’s formal regulatory “teeth,” for a 
long time, there was neither a normative pillar nor a cognitive pillar. The norms among 
other OECD firms used to be to pay bribes first and get a tax deduction later (!)—a 
clear sign of ethical relativism. Only in 1997 did the OECD Convention on Combat-
ing Bribery of Foreign Public Officials commit all member countries (essentially all 
developed economies) to criminalize bribery. It went into force in 1999. A more ambi-
tious campaign is the UN Convention against Corruption, signed by 106 countries 
in 2003 and activated in 2005. If every country criminalizes bribery and every firm 
resists corruption, their combined power will eradicate it. However, this will not hap-
pen unless FCPA-type legislation is institutionalized and enforced in every country.
3-4 Norms and Ethical Challenges
As an important informal institution, norms are the prevailing practices of rele-
vant players—the proverbial “everybody else”—that affect the focal individuals and 
firms. How firms strategically respond to ethical challenges is often driven, at least 
in part, by norms. Four broad strategic responses are: (1) reactive, (2) defensive, 
(3) accommodative, and (4) proactive strategies (see Table 3.3).
A reactive strategy is passive. When problems arise, denial is usually the first 
line of defense. In the absence of formal regulation, the need to take necessary 
action is neither internalized through cognitive beliefs nor becoming any norm in 
practice. For example, Ford marketed the Pinto car in the early 1970s, knowing that 
its gas tank had a fatal design flaw that could make the car susceptible to exploding 
in rear-end collisions. Citing high costs, Ford decided not to add an $11 per car im-
provement. Sure enough, accidents happened, and people were killed and burned 
in Pintos. Still, Ford refused to recall the Pinto for several years, and more lives 
were lost. Only in 1978, under intense formal pressures from the US government 
Learning Objective
Identify norms associated with 
strategic responses when firms 
deal with ethical challenges.
3-4
Table 3.3
Strategic Responses to Ethical Challenges
Strategic responses
Strategic Behaviors
Examples in the text
Reactive
Deny responsibility, do less 
than required
Ford Pinto fire (the 1970s)
Defensive
Admit responsibility but fight it, 
do the least that is required 
Nike (the 1990s)
Accommodative
Accept responsibility, do all that 
is required
Ford Explorer roll-overs (the 
2000s)
Proactive
Anticipate responsibility, do 
more than is required
BMW (the 1990s)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3   Emphasizing Informal Institutions: Cultures, Ethics, and Norms	
81
and informal pressures from the media and consumer groups, did Ford belatedly 
recall all 1.5 million Pintos.31
A defensive strategy focuses on regulatory compliance. In the absence of regu-
latory pressures, firms often fight informal pressures coming from the media and 
activists. In the 1990s, Nike was charged with running “sweatshops,” while these in-
cidents took place in its contractors’ factories in Indonesia and Vietnam. Although 
Nike did not own or manage those factories, its initial statement, “We don’t make 
shoes,” failed to convey any ethical responsibility. Only when several senators began 
to suggest legislative solutions did Nike become more serious.
An accommodative strategy features emerging organizational norms to accept 
responsibility and a set of increasingly internalized cognitive beliefs and values to-
ward making certain changes. These normative and cognitive values may be shared 
by a number of firms, thus leading to new industry norms. Recently, Nike and the 
entire sportswear industry became more accommodative.
In another example, in 2000, when Ford Explorer vehicles equipped with Fire-
stone tires had a large number of fatal roll-over accidents, Ford evidently took 
the painful lesson from its Pinto fire fiasco in the 1970s. It aggressively initiated 
a speedy recall, launched a media campaign featuring its CEO, and discontinued 
its 100-year-old relationship with Firestone. While critics argue that Ford’s accom-
modative strategy was to place blame squarely on Firestone, the institution-based 
view (especially Proposition 1 in Chapter 2) suggests that such highly rational ac-
tions are to be expected. Even if Ford’s public relations campaign was only “window 
dressing,” publicizing a set of ethical criteria against which it can be judged opens 
doors for more scrutiny by concerned stakeholders. It probably is fair to say that 
Ford became a better corporate citizen in 2000 than it was in 1975.
Finally, proactive firms anticipate institutional changes and do more than is re-
quired (see the Closing Case). In 1990, BMW anticipated its emerging responsibility 
associated with the German government’s proposed “take-back” policy, requiring 
automakers to design cars whose components can be taken back by the same manu-
facturers for recycling. BMW not only designed easier-to-disassemble cars, but also 
signed up the few high-quality dismantler firms as part of an exclusive recycling 
infrastructure. Further, BMW actively participated in public discussions and suc-
ceeded in establishing its approach as the German national standard for automo-
bile disassembly. Other automakers were thus required to follow BMW’s lead. But 
they had to either fight over lower-quality dismantlers or develop in-house disman-
tling infrastructure from scratch.32 Through such a proactive strategy, BMW set a 
new industry standard, facilitating the emergence of new environmentally friendly 
norms in both car design and recycling.
Overall, while there is probably a certain element of “window dressing,” the 
fact that proactive firms are going beyond the current regulatory requirements is 
indicative of the normative and cognitive beliefs held by many managers at these 
firms on the importance of doing the “right thing.”33
3-5 Debates and Extensions
Informal institutions such as cultures, ethics, and norms provoke a series of signifi-
cant debates. In this section, we focus on three of them: (1) Western values versus 
Eastern values, (2) cultural convergence versus divergence, and (3) opportunism 
versus individualism/collectivism.
Learning Objective
Participate in three leading 
debates concerning cultures, 
ethics, and norms.
3-5
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

82	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
3-5a Economic Development: Western Values  
versus Eastern Values
This is another component of the debate on the drivers of economic development 
first discussed in Chapter 2. Here our focus is on the role of informal cultural 
values. About 100 years ago, at the apex of Western power (which ruled the ma-
jority of Africans and Asians in colonies), German sociologist Max Weber argued 
that it was the Protestant work ethic that led to the “spirit of capitalism” and strong 
economic development. As a branch of Christianity (the other two branches are 
Catholic and Orthodox), Protestantism is widely practiced in English-speaking 
countries, Germany, the Netherlands, and Scandinavia. This is where the Industrial 
Revolution (and modern capitalism) took off. Weber suggested that the Protestant 
emphasis on hard work and frugality is necessary for capital accumulation—hence 
the term “capitalism.” Adherents of other religious beliefs, including Catholicism, 
are believed to lack such traits. At that time, Weber’s view was widely accepted.
Such belief in the superiority of Western values has recently been challenged 
by two sets of Eastern values: (1) Islamic and (2) Asian (Confucian). The first is the 
challenge from Islamic fundamentalism, which, rightly or wrongly, argues that it 
is Western dominance that causes the lackluster economic performance of Muslim 
countries. Aggressive marketing of Western products in these countries is seen as a 
cultural invasion. Islamic fundamentalists prefer to go “back to the roots” by mov-
ing away from Western influence. While the majority of Islamic fundamentalists 
are peaceful, a small number of radical fundamentalists have become terrorists 
(such as those involved in “9/11”).
A second challenge comes from East Asia, whose values center on Confucianism, 
which is based on the teachings of Confucius, an ancient Chinese scholar who lived 
more than 2,000 years ago. Confucianism is not a religion but a set of moral codes 
guiding interpersonal relationships, which emphasize respect, loyalty, and reciproc-
ity. A hundred years ago, Weber criticized Confucianism as a leading cause of Asian 
backwardness. However, winds change. In postwar decades, while Western economic 
growth has been stagnant, it is Confucian Asia—first led by Japan in the 1960s, then 
the four Tigers in the 1970s, and China since the 1980s—that has generated the fastest 
economic growth in the world and for the longest time. Interestingly, the same Con-
fucianism, trashed by Weber, has been widely viewed as the engine behind this “Asian 
economic miracle.” Not only do Asians proudly proclaim the validity of such “Asian 
values,” leading Western scholars increasingly endorse 
such a view. For example, Hofstede’s fifth dimension, long-
term orientation, was originally labeled simply as “Confu-
cian dynamism.” In 1993, the World Bank published a ma-
jor study, entitled The East Asian Miracle, with one key word: 
Confucianism.34
While Islamic fundamentalists prefer to drop out of 
the game of economic development, Asian value pro-
ponents claim to have beaten the West at its own game. 
However, any declaration of winning the game needs 
to be viewed with caution. By 1997, much of Asia was 
suddenly engulfed in a financial crisis. Then—guess 
what?—Confucianism was blamed by both Asians and 
non-Asians for having caused such hardship (!). Respect, 
loyalty, and reciprocity were suddenly viewed as inertia,  
Is this fast-food restaurant an example of Western 
values or Eastern values or a blending of the two?
Asia Photopress/Alamy Limited
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3   Emphasizing Informal Institutions: Cultures, Ethics, and Norms	
83
nepotism, and cronyism. Fast-forward to 2010: Asia had not only recovered from the 
1997 crisis, but had also quickly rebounded from the 2008–2009 recession.35 With 
the emergence of Confucian China as a global economic powerhouse, the Asian 
values gurus again are practicing their craft—although with a lower voice this time.
As we can see from this wide ranging debate, our understanding of the connection 
between cultural values and economic development is very superficial. To advocate 
certain cultural values as key to economic development may not be justified. A new gen-
eration of students and managers needs to be more sophisticated and guard against 
such ethnocentric thinking. One speculation is that if there will ever be an African eco-
nomic take-off, there will be no shortage of gurus pontificating on how the African cul-
tural values provide such a booster behind Africa’s yet-to-happen economic take-off.
3-5b Cultural Change: Convergence versus Divergence
Every culture evolves. A great debate thus erupts on the direction of cultural change. 
In this age of globalization, one side of the debate points out a great deal of con-
vergence, especially toward more “modern,” Western values such as individualism 
and consumerism. As evidence, convergence gurus point out the global interest in 
Western products such as Levi’s jeans, iPods, and MTV, especially among the youth.36
However, another side argues that Westernization in consumption does not nec-
essarily mean Westernization in values. In a most extreme example, on the night of 
September 10, 2001, terrorists enjoyed some American soft drinks, pizzas, and mov-
ies, and then went on to kill thousands of Americans the next day.37 More broadly, 
the popularity of Western brands in the Middle East does not change Muslim val-
ues. In another example, the increasing popularity of Asian foods (such as sushi) 
and games (such as Pokémon and Bakugan) in the West does not necessarily mean 
that Westerners are converging toward “Asian values.” In short, the world may con-
tinue to be characterized by cultural divergence.
A “middle-of-the-road” group makes two points. First, the end of the Cold 
War (see In Focus 3.2), the rise of the Internet, and the ascendance of English all 
offer evidence of some cultural convergence—at least on the surface and among 
the youth. For example, relative to average citizens, younger Chinese, Japanese, 
and Russian managers are becoming more individualistic and less collectivistic. 
Second, deep down, cultural divergence may continue to be the norm. Therefore, 
perhaps a better term is “crossvergence,” which acknowledges the validity of both 
sides of the debate.38 This idea suggests that when marketing products and ser-
vices to younger customers around the world, a more “global” approach (featuring 
uniform content and image) may work, whereas when dealing with older, more 
tradition-bound consumers, local adaptation may be a must.
3-5c Opportunism versus Individualism/Collectivism39
As noted in Chapter 2, opportunism is a major source of uncertainty that adds to 
transaction costs, and institutions emerge to combat opportunism.40 However, crit-
ics argue that emphasizing opportunism as “human nature” may backfire.41 If firm 
A insists on specifying minute details in a contract in order to prevent firm B from 
behaving opportunistically in the future, A is likely to be regarded by B as being not 
trustworthy and being opportunistic now. This is especially likely to be the case if 
B is from a high-context (or collectivist) society. Thus, A’s attempts to combat op-
portunism may beget opportunism.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

84	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
Transaction cost theorists acknowledge that opportunists are a minority in any 
population. However, theorists contend that because of the difficulty in identify-
ing such a minority of opportunists before they cause any damage, it is imperative 
to place safeguards that, unfortunately, treat everybody as a potential opportun-
ist. For example, thanks to the work of only 19 terrorists, millions of air travelers 
around the world since September 11, 2001, now have to put up with heightened 
security. Everybody hates it, but nobody argues that it is unnecessary. This debate, 
therefore, seems deadlocked.
One cultural dimension, individualism/collectivism, may hold the key to an im-
proved understanding of opportunism. One common stereotype is that players from 
collectivist societies (such as China) are more collaborative and trustworthy and that 
those from individualist societies (such as the United States) are more competitive 
and opportunistic.42 However, this is not necessarily the case. Collectivists are more 
collaborative only when dealing with in-group members—individuals and firms re-
garded as a part of their own collective. The flip side is that collectivists discriminate 
more harshly against out-group members—individuals and firms not regarded as part 
of “us.” On the other hand, individualists, who believe that every person (firm) is on 
his or her (its) own, make less distinction between in-group and out-group. Therefore, 
while individualists may indeed be more opportunistic than collectivists when dealing 
with in-group members (this fits the stereotype), collectivists may be more opportu-
nistic when dealing with out-group members. Thus, on balance, the average Chinese 
is not inherently more trustworthy than the average American. The Chinese motto 
regarding out-group members is: “Watch out for strangers. They will screw you!”
This helps explain why the United States, the leading individualist country, is 
among societies with a higher level of spontaneous trust, whereas there is greater 
interpersonal and interfirm distrust in the large society in China.43 This also ex-
plains why it is so important to establish guanxi (relationship) for individuals and 
firms in China; otherwise, life can be very challenging in a sea of strangers.
While this insight is not likely to help improve airport security screening, it can 
help managers and firms better deal with one another. Only through repeated social 
interactions can collectivists assess whether to accept newcomers as in-group mem-
bers. If foreigners who, by definition, are from an out-group refuse to show any inter-
est in joining the in-group, then it is fair to take advantage of them. For example, 
don’t ever refuse a friendly offer of food or drink from a Saudi businessman—that 
is considered an affront (see the Opening Case). Most of us do not realize that “Feel 
free to say no when offered food or drink” reflects the cultural underpinning of indi-
vidualism. This misunderstanding, in part, explains why many cross-culturally naïve 
Western managers and firms often cry out loud for being taken advantage of in col-
lectivist societies—they are simply being treated as “deserving” out-group members.44
3-6 Management Savvy
One leading contribution of the institution-based view is to emphasize the impor-
tance of informal institutions—cultures, ethics, and norms—as the bedrock propel-
ling or constraining business around the globe. How does this perspective answer our 
fundamental question: What determines the success and failure of firms around the 
globe? The institution-based view argues that firm performance is, at least in part, 
determined by the informal cultures, ethics, and norms governing firm behavior.
For savvy managers around the globe, this emphasis on informal institutions sug-
gests two broad implications. First, it is necessary to enhance cultural intelligence, 
defined as an individual’s ability to understand and adjust to new cultures.45 
In-group
Individuals and firms 
regarded as a part of “us.”
Out-group
Individuals and firms not 
regarded as a part of “us.”
Learning Objective
Draw implications for action.
3-6
Cultural intelligence
An individual’s ability to 
understand and adjust to new 
cultures.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3   Emphasizing Informal Institutions: Cultures, Ethics, and Norms	
85
Nobody can become an expert, the chameleon in Table 3.4, in all cultures. How-
ever, a genuine interest in foreign cultures will open your eyes. Acquisition of cul-
tural intelligence passes through three phases: (1) awareness, (2) knowledge, and 
(3) skills.46 Awareness refers to the recognition of both the pros and cons of your 
“mental software” and the appreciation of people from other cultures. Knowledge 
refers to the ability to identify the symbols, rituals, and taboos in other cultures—
also known as cross-cultural literacy. While you may not share (or may disagree) with 
their values, you will at least obtain a roadmap of the informal institutions govern-
ing their behavior. Finally, skills are based on awareness and knowledge, plus good 
practice (Table 3.5). Of course, culture is not everything. It is advisable not to read 
too much into culture, which is one of many variables affecting global business.47 
However, it is imprudent to ignore culture.
While skills can be taught, the most effective way is total immersion within a for-
eign culture. Even for gifted individuals, learning a new language and culture to func-
tion well at a managerial level will take at least several months of full-time studies. Most 
employers do not give their expatriates that much time to learn before sending them 
abroad. Thus, most expatriates are inadequately prepared, and the costs for firms, 
individuals, and families are tremendous (see Chapter 15). This means that you, a 
student studying this book, are advised to invest in your own career by picking up at 
least one foreign language, spending one semester (or year) abroad, and reaching 
out to make some international friends who are taking classes with you (and perhaps 
Table 3.4
Five Profiles of Cultural Intelligence
Profiles
Characteristics
The Local
A person who works well with people from similar backgrounds but does not work effectively 
with people from different cultural backgrounds.
The Analyst
A person who observes and learns from others and plans a strategy for interacting with people 
from different cultural backgrounds.
The Natural
A person who relies on intuition rather than on a systematic learning style when interacting 
with people from different cultural backgrounds.
The Mimic
A person who creates a comfort zone for people from different cultural backgrounds by 
adopting their general posture and communication style. This is not pure imitation, which may 
be regarded as mocking .
The Chameleon
A person who may be mistaken for a native of the foreign country. He or she may achieve results 
that natives cannot, due to his or her insider’s skills and outsider’s perspective. This is very rare.
Sources: Based on (1) P. C. Earley & S. Ang, 2003, Cultural Intelligence: Individual Interactions Across Cultures, Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press;  
(2) P. C. Earley & E. Mosakowski, 2004, Cultural intelligence, Harvard Business Review, October: 139–146.
Table 3.5
Implications for Action: Six Rules of Thumb When Venturing Overseas
  	 Be prepared
  	 Slow down
  	 Establish trust
  	 Understand the importance of language
  	 Respect cultural differences
  	 Understand that no culture is inherently superior in all aspects
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

86	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
sitting next to you). Such an investment during university studies will make you stand 
out among the crowd and propel your future career to new heights (see In Focus 1.3).
Second, managers need to be aware of the prevailing norms and their transi-
tions globally. The norms around the globe in the 21st century are more culturally 
sensitive and ethically demanding than, say, in the 1970s. This is not to suggest that 
every local norm needs to be followed. However, failing to understand and adapt to 
the changing norms by “sticking one’s neck out” in an insensitive and unethical way 
may lead to unsatisfactory or disastrous results. The best managers expect norms to 
shift over time by constantly deciphering the changes in the informal “rules of the 
game” and by taking advantage of new opportunities. How BMW managers proac-
tively shaped the automobile recycling norms serves as a case in point.
C h a p t e r  S u m m a r y
	 3.1	 Define what culture is and articulate its four main manifestations: language, 
religion, social structure, and education.
  	 Culture is the collective programming of the mind, which distinguishes 
one group from another.
  	 Managers and firms ignorant of foreign languages and religious traditions 
may end up with embarrassments and, worse, disasters when doing business 
around the globe.
  	 Highly stratified societies have a low degree of social mobility, and vice versa.
  	 Education fosters a sense of cultural identity by teaching children the main-
stream values and norms.
	 3.2	 Discuss how cultures systematically differ from each other.
  	 The context approach differentiates cultures based on the high-context 
versus low-context dimension.
  	 The cluster approach groups similar cultures together as clusters and civili-
zations.
  	 Hofstede and colleagues have identified five cultural dimensions: (1) power 
distance, (2) individualism/collectivism, (3) masculinity/femininity, (4) uncer-
tainty avoidance, and (5) long-term orientation.
	 3.3	 Understand the importance of ethics and ways to combat corruption.
  	 When managing ethics overseas, two schools of thought are ethical relativ-
ism and ethical imperialism.
  	 Three “middle-of-the-road” principles help guide managers make ethical 
decisions.
  	 The fight against corruption around the world is a long-term, global battle.
	 3.4	 Identify norms associated with strategic responses when firms deal with 
ethical challenges.
  	 When confronting ethical challenges, individual firms have four strategic choic-
es: (1) reactive, (2) defensive, (3) accommodative, and (4) proactive strategies.
	3.5	 Participate in three leading debates concerning cultures, ethics, and norms.
  	 (1) Western values versus Eastern values, (2) cultural convergence versus 
divergence, and (3) opportunism versus individualism/collectivism
	 3.6	 Draw implications for action.
  	 It is important to enhance cultural intelligence, leading to cross-cultural 
literacy.
  	 It is crucial to understand and adapt to the changing norms globally.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3   Emphasizing Informal Institutions: Cultures, Ethics, and Norms	
87
K e y  T e r m s
Civilization 71
Cluster 71
Code of conduct 78
Collectivism 74
Corruption 79
Context 70
Cultural intelligence 84
Culture 65
Ethical imperialism 78
Ethical relativism 78
Ethics 78
Ethnocentrism 64
Femininity 75
Foreign Corrupt 
Practices Act  
(FCPA) 79
High-context culture 70
Individualism 74
In-group 84
Lingua franca 65
Long-term orientation 76
Low-context culture 70
Masculinity 75
Out-group 84
Power distance 74
Social mobility 68
Social stratification 68
Social structure 68
Uncertainty avoidance 75
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 ON CULTURE:  As you review how cultures differ from each other, imagine that 
you want to develop a flexible and mobile work force that is not controlled by a 
given culture but could easily relocate to countries with a variety of different 
cultures. You want people who can easily and effectively fit in so as to be accept-
ed by employees and customers. In your opinion, what are some of the barriers 
or issues that you would encounter, and how might you achieve your objective?
	 2.	 Compare PengAtlas Map 1.4 (Religious Heritage) and Map 1.5 (Select World 
Literacy Rates Among Adults over Age 15). Which do you think has a more 
powerful effect in both the cultural and economic realm? Why? If your answer 
is “Both of the above,” is one of the two a bit more powerful in creating a uni-
fied culture, and the other more powerful in creating a dynamic economy? 
Explain your answer.
	 3.	 Compare PengAtlas Map 3.2 (Top Reformers in Doing Business) 2008–2009) 
with Maps 1.4 and 1.5. Are there any relationships between reformers and reli-
gious heritage? Why or why not? If there are any relationships, are they causal 
or coincidental? Any relationship between reformers and educational level? 
Why or why not? If there are any relationships, are they causal or coincidental? 
Defend your answer.
	 4.	 What might need to be considered in promoting from within in a highly 
stratified society? Explain.
	 5.	 ON CULTURE: Suppose the education system of a given country teaches 
values that can make it very difficult to do business profitably in the country. 
Is that an impossible barrier, or is there anything that can be done to change 
that or cope with it? Defend your answer.
	 6.	 Non-verbal communication (e.g., tone of voice, gestures, facial expressions) 
can be important in all cultures, but would it be more important in a high- 
context or low-context culture? Why?
	 7.	 What are the pros and cons of doing business in a culture characterized as 
individualistic?
	 8.	 What are the pros and cons of doing business in a culture characterized as 
collectivist?
	 9.	 Some countries have a long tradition of bribery for public officials. Is it 
“ethical imperialism” to prohibit companies in one’s own country from en-
gaging in bribery when doing business in countries with such traditions? Why?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

88	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
	 10.	 Why is the fight against corruption a long-term battle?
	 11.	 Does corruption always involve only money? If not, what else might be in-
volved?
	 12.	 Although a proactive strategy may always seem most desirable in dealing 
with ethical challenges, are there any circumstances under which a reactive 
strategy may be the best strategy or even the only strategy? Explain.
	 13.	 In dealing with changing global norms, does that mean that you should re-
ject your own values and go along with whatever now seems to be in vogue? 
Defend your answer.
C r i t i c a l  D i s c u s s i o n  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 ON CULTURE:  When you take an airline flight, the passenger sitting next to 
you tries to have a conversation with you. He or she asks, “What do you do?” 
You would like to be nice, but don’t want to give too much information about 
yourself (such as your name). How would you answer this question? A typical 
US manager may say: “I am a marketing manager”—without mentioning the 
employer. A typical Japanese manager may say: “I work for Honda.” Why are 
there such differences?
	 2.	 ON ETHICS: Suppose you work for a New Zealand company exporting a 
container of kiwis to Haiti or Iraq. The customs official informs you that 
there is a delay in clearing your container through customs, and it may last 
a month. However, if you are willing to pay an “expediting fee” of US$200, 
he will try to make it happen in one day. What are you going to do?
	 3.	 ON ETHICS: Most developed economies have some illegal immigrants. The 
United States has the largest number: approximately 10 million to 11 million. 
Without legal US identification documents, they cannot open bank accounts 
or buy houses. Many US firms have targeted this population, accepting their 
ID issued by their native countries and selling them products and services. 
Some Americans are furious with these business practices. Other Americans 
suggest that illegal immigrants represent a growth engine in an economy with 
relatively little growth elsewhere. How would you participate in this debate?
G l o b a l  A c t i o n
	 1.	 ON CULTURE: Religion is an integral component of your company’s opera-
tions because it manufacturers food products according to Islam’s Halal 
requirements. Top management wants information concerning the largest 
populations of Islam worldwide in order to develop the company’s distribu-
tion capabilities. Provide a report with any information relevant to this com-
pany-wide initiative. What recommendations can you provide to the company?
	 2.	 One approach to understanding corruption perceptions is to compare in-
formation across a variety of countries. As such, your company has had 
operations in South America for some time. However, there has not been an 
internal evaluation of perceived regional corruption to date. Therefore, you 
have been asked to provide insight on this topic for each country in South 
America. Based on an annual corruption perceptions index, develop a brief 
report and recommendations for the entire company.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3   Emphasizing Informal Institutions: Cultures, Ethics, and Norms	
89
V i d e o  C a s e
After watching the video on goat farming, discuss the following:
	 1.	 ON CULTURE: How might cultural differences impact the success of goat 
farming?
	 2.	 ON CULTURE: Does cultural convergence/cultural divergence exist with re-
gard to goat meat being used in restaurants?
	 3.	 How has opportunism and individual/collectivism contributed to the suc-
cess of goat farming?
	 4.	 Can cultural intelligence be unethical?
	 5.	 What future strategic actions should be taken to ensure the success of this 
industry?
Founded in 1870, Chiquita is a leading international 
producer, marketer, and distributor of bananas, other 
tropical fruits such as pineapples and avocadoes, as 
well as salads. Headquartered in Cincinnati, Ohio, 
Chiquita employs more than 21,000 people on six con-
tinents. Chiquita’s early history (when it was named 
the United Fruit Company) was better known as an 
aggressive and exploitative multinational that treated 
some of the Central American countries in which it op-
erated as “banana republics.” However, Chiquita’s re-
cent efforts to be a socially responsible firm have truly 
made it stand out among industry peers. Chiquita  
is committed to conducting business ethically—not 
only in compliance with the letter and spirit of the law, 
but also as an industry leader in doing the right things 
to do.
In Chiquita’s core product markets, it views its 
mission is “to help the world’s consumers broaden 
mindsets about nutrition and bring healthy, nutritious, 
and convenient foods that taste good and improve 
people’s lives.” Joining the army to fight obesity, 
Chiquita in 2011 became a strategic partner with the 
US Department of Agriculture (USDA) to promote 
the new MyPlate dietary guidelines. A large part of 
Chiquita’s corporate social responsibility (CSR) efforts 
involves how it treats employees and stakeholders 
around the world. More than a decade ago, Chiquita 
adopted the Social Accountability 8000 (SA8000) 
labor rights standard developed by Social Account-
ability International (SAI). SA8000 prohibits the use 
of child labor and forced labor, monitors health and 
safety measures, and promotes appropriate working 
Chiquita Sticks Its Bananas Out
C l o s i n g  C a s e
Ethical 
Dilemma
Martin Rogers/Corbis
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

90	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
hours and fair compensation. One crucial component 
of SA8000 is to reach a global agreement with local 
and international foodworkers’ unions. On the en-
vironmental dimension, Chiquita has been working 
with Rainforest Alliance since 1992. By 2000, 100% 
of the plantations owned by Chiquita were certified 
by Rainforest Alliance as engaging in sustainable 
farming practices. In 2011, in response to the de-
mands made by a green group called ForestEthics, 
Chiquita agreed not to buy fuel made from Canadian 
tar sands. Extracting oil from tar sands is energy-
intensive and dirty. Environmentalists worked vigor-
ously to block a pipeline—Keystone—which would 
carry such oil from Canada to the United States.
However, not all is rosy for Chiquita’s CSR efforts. 
Its agreement not to buy fuel made from Canadian tar 
sands provoked a pro-business lobby in Canada called 
EthicalOil.org to launch a boycott of Chiquita, with 
mounting losses (although Chiquita would not quan-
tify such losses). Its work with SA8000 and Rainforest 
Alliances adds to its cost—think about all the expens-
es involved in the hiring of so many people to engage 
in certification, auditing, and compliance. Neither 
Dole nor Del Monte, its two main rivals, bothers to 
follow Chiquita to sign a global union agreement, 
leaving Chiquita to be the high-cost (and less price-
competitive) producer. What has Chiquita received in 
return for all its good work? Big retailers increasingly 
dump Chiquita and place orders with Dole, Del Monte, 
and other smaller plantations whose environmental 
practices may not be as sustainable and whose labor 
practices may not be as worker-friendly as Chiquita. 
Driven by one of its core values, integrity (the other 
three are respect, opportunity, and responsibility), 
Chiquita in 2003 became the only American company 
to voluntarily admit to the US Department of Justice 
that it had paid protection money to Colombian para-
military militia that surrounded its plantations. The 
payoff for such honesty was a series of American and 
Colombian lawsuits against it.
Chiquita’s conspicuous lack of reward for its good 
deeds is frustrating. Even the head of the international 
foodworkers’ union was sympathetic, saying, “It’s not 
sustainable for any company in a competitive sector 
to make progress and gain no recognition for it.”
Case Discussion Questions:
	 1.	 ON ETHICS: Why has Chiquita chosen to be 
proactive along a number of CSR dimensions?
	 2.	 ON ETHICS: Why has Chiquita not been suc-
cessful in changing industry norms?
	 3.	 ON ETHICS: As Chiquita’s CEO, what are you 
going to recommend to the board?
	 4.	 ON ETHICS: As Dole’s or Del Monte’s CEO, 
what are you going to do in response to Chiquita’s 
moves?
Sources: Based on (1) Economist, 2012, Going bananas, March 31: 74; (2) www.chiquita.com.
[Journal acronyms] AMJ—Academy of Management Journal; AMR—
Academy of Management Review; APJM—Asia Pacific Journal of Manage-
ment; HBR—Harvard Business Review; JIBS—Journal of International 
Business Studies; JM—Journal of Management; JMS—Journal of Man-
agement Studies; JWB—Journal of World Business; MIR—Management 
International Review; PR—Personnel Review; RES—Review of Economics 
and Statistics; SMJ—Strategic Management Journal.
1 A. Katou, P. Budhwar, H. Woldu, & A. Al-Hamadi, 2010, Influence 
of ethical beliefs, national culture, and institutions on preferences 
for HRM in Oman, PR, 39: 728–745; J. Salk & M. Brannen, 2000, 
National culture, networks, and individual influence in a multina-
tional management team, AMJ, 43: 191–202; M. Witt & G. Redding, 
2009, Culture, meaning, and institutions, JIBS, 40: 859–885.
2 S. Nadkarni & P. Barr, 2008, Environmental context, manage-
rial cognition, and strategic action, SMJ, 29: 1395–1427; B. Olson, 
Y. Bao, & S. Parayitam, 2007, Strategic decision making within 
Chinese firms, JWB, 42: 35–46; B. Tyler & D. Gnyawali, 2009, Mana-
gerial collective cognitions, JMS, 46: 93–126.
3 G. Hofstede, 1997, Cultures and Organizations (p. xii), New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
4 Hofstede, 1997, Cultures and Organizations (p. 5).
5 C. Chan, S. Makino, & T. Isobe, 2010, Does sub-national region 
matter? SMJ, 31: 1226–1242; W. Shi, S. Sun, & M. W. Peng, 2013, 
Sub-national institutional contingencies, network positions, and IJV 
partner selection, JMS (in press).
6 D. Graddol, 2004, The future of language, Science, 303: 1329–1331.
7 W. Barner-Rasmussen & C. Aarnio, 2010, Shifting the faultlines 
of language, JWB, 46: 288–295; A. Harzing, K. Koster, & U. Magner, 
2011, Babel in business, JWB, 46: 279–287; J. Heikkila & A. Smale, 
2011, The effects of language standardization on the acceptance 
and use of e-HRM systems in foreign subsidiaries, JWB, 46: 305–313; 
J. Usunier, 2011, Language as a resource to access cross-cultural 
equivalence in quantitative management research, JWB, 46: 314–319; 
L. Zander, A. Mockaitis, & A. Harzing, 2011, Standardization and 
contextualization, JWB, 46: 296–304.
N O T E S
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3   Emphasizing Informal Institutions: Cultures, Ethics, and Norms	
91
8  J. Fidrmuc & J. Fidrmuc, 2009, Foreign languages and trade, work-
ing paper, Uxbridge, UK: Brunel University.
9 D. Ricks, 1999, Blunders in International Business, 3rd ed., Oxford, 
UK: Blackwell.
10 E. Hall & M. Hall, 1987, Hidden Differences, Garden City, NY: Dou-
bleday.
11 S. Ronen & O. Shenkar, 1985, Clustering countries on attitudinal 
dimension, AMR, 10: 435–454.
12 R. House, P. Hanges, M. Javidan, P. Dorfman, & V. Gupta (eds.), 
2004, Culture, Leadership, and Organizations: The GLOBE Study of 
62 Societies, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
13 S. Huntington, 1996, The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of 
World Order (p. 43), New York: Simon & Schuster.
14 S. Schwartz, 1994, Cultural dimensions of values, in U. Kim et al. 
(eds.), Individualism and Collectivism (pp. 85–119), Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage; F. Trompenaars, 1993, Riding the Waves of Culture, Chicago: 
Irwin.
15 C. Fey & I. Bjorkman, 2001, The effect of HRM practices on 
MNC subsidiary performance in Russia, JIBS, 32: 59–75; J. Parnell &  
T. Hatem, 1999, Behavioral differences between American and 
Egyptian managers, JMS, 36: 399–418; E. Pellegrini & T. Scandura, 
2006, Leader-member exchange (LMX), paternalism, and delega-
tion in the Turkish business context, JIBS, 37: 264–279.
16 Hofstede, 1997, Cultures and Organizations (p. 94).
17 C. Bartlett & S. Ghoshal, 1989, Managing Across Borders (p. 41), 
Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
18 X. Chen & S. Li, 2005, Cross-national differences in coopera-
tive decision-making in mixed-motive business contexts, JIBS, 36: 
622–636; R. Friedman, S. Chi, & L. Liu, 2006, An expectancy 
model of Chinese-American differences in conflict-avoiding, JIBS, 
37: 76–91; K. Lee, G. Yang, & J. Graham, 2006, Tension and trust 
in international business negotiations, JIBS, 37: 623–641; S. Lee, 
O. Shenkar, & J. Li, 2008, Cultural distance, investment flow, and 
control in cross-border cooperation, SMJ, 29: 1117–1125; L. Metcalf, 
A. Bird, M. Shankarmahesh, Z. Aycan, J. Larimo, & D. Valdelamar, 
2006, Cultural tendencies in negotiation, JWB, 41: 382–394; 
W. Newburry & N. Yakova, 2006, Standardization preferences, 
JIBS, 37: 44–60; G. Van der Vegt, E. Van de Vliert, & X. Huang, 
2005, Location-level links between diversity and innovative climate 
depend on national power distance, AMJ, 48: 1171–1182.
19 L. Trevino & K. Nelson, 2004, Managing Business Ethics, 3rd ed. 
(p. 13), New York: Wiley; L. Trevino, G. Weaver, & S. Reynolds, 2006, 
Behavioral ethics in organizations, JM, 32: 951–990.
20 R. Durand, H. Rao, & P. Monin, 2007, Code of conduct in French 
cuisine, SMJ, 28: 455–472; J. Stevens, H. K. Steensma, D. Harrison, & 
P. Cochran, 2005, Symbolic or substantive document? SMJ, 26: 181–195.
21 R. Deshpande & A. Raina, 2011, The ordinary heroes of the Taj, 
HBR, December: 119–123.
22 E. G. Love & M. Kraatz, 2009, Character, conformity, or the 
bottom line? AMJ, 52: 314–335.
23 D. McCarthy & S. Puffer, 2008, Interpreting the ethicality of cor-
porate governance decisions in Russia, AMR, 33: 11–31; A. Spicer, 
T. Dunfee, & W. Bailey, 2004, Does national context matter in 
ethical decision making? AMJ, 47: 610–620.
24 This section draws heavily from T. Donaldson, 1996, Values in 
tension, HBR, September–October: 4–11.
25 K. Martin, J. Cullen, J. Johnson, & K. Parboteeah, 2007, Deciding 
to bribe, AMJ, 50: 1401–1422.
26 C. Robertson & A. Watson, 2004, Corruption and change, SMJ, 
25: 385–396; S. Lee & K. Oh, 2007, Corruption in Asia, APJM, 24: 
97–114; S. Lee & S. Hong, 2012, Corruption and subsidiary profit-
ability, APJM (in press); J. H. Zhao, S. Kim, & J. Du, 2003, The impact 
of corruption and transparency on foreign direct investment, MIR, 
43: 41–62; J. Zhou & M. W. Peng, 2012, Does bribery help or hurt 
firm growth around the world? APJM (in press).
27 S. Globerman & D. Shapiro, 2003, Governance infrastructure 
and US foreign direct investment, JIBS, 34: 19–39.
28 S. Wei, 2000, How taxing is corruption on international inves-
tors? RES, 82: 1–11.
29 J. Hellman, G. Jones, & D. Kaufmann, 2002, Far from home: Do 
foreign investors import higher standards of governance in transi-
tion economies (p. 20), Working paper, Washington: World Bank 
(www.worldbank.org).
30 A. Cuervo-Cazzura, 2008, The effectiveness of laws against brib-
ery abroad, JIBS, 39: 634–651; C. Kwok & S. Tadesse, 2006, The MNC 
as an agent of change for host-country institutions, JIBS, 37: 767–785.
31 D. Gioia, 2004, Pinto fires, in Trevino & Nelson, 2004, Managing 
Business Ethics (pp. 105–108).
32 S. Hart, 2005, Capitalism at the Crossroads, Philadelphia: Wharton 
School Publishing.
33 M. Barnett & A. King, 2008, Good fences make good neighbors, 
AMJ, 51: 1150–1170; A. King, M. Lenox, & A. Terlaak, 2005, The stra-
tegic use of decentralized institutions, AMJ, 48: 1091–1106.
34  World Bank, 1993, The East Asian Miracle, Washington: World Bank.
35 M. W. Peng, R. Bhagat, & S. Chang, 2010, Asia and global busi-
ness, JIBS, 41: 373–376.
36 T. Levitt, 1983, The globalization of markets, HBR, May-June: 
92–102.
37 National Commission on Terrorist Attacks on the United States, 
2004, The 9/11 Report (p. 364), New York: St. Martin’s.
38 C. Carr, 2005, Are German, Japanese, and Anglo-Saxon strategic 
decision styles still divergent in the context of globalization? JMS, 
42: 1155–1188; G. Hirst, P. Budhwar, B. Cooper, M. West, C. Long, 
C. Xu, & H. Shipton, 2008, Cross-cultural variations in climate for 
autonomy, stress, and organizational productivity relationships, 
JIBS, 39: 1343–1358; S. Speck & A. Roy, 2008, The interrelationships 
between television viewing, values, and perceived well-being, JIBS, 
39: 1197–1219.
39 This section draws heavily from C. Chen, M. W. Peng, & P. Saparito, 
2002, Individualism, collectivism, and opportunism: A cultural per-
spective on transaction cost economics, JM, 28: 567–583.
40 O. Williamson, 1985, The Economic Institutions of Capitalism, 
New York: Free Press.
41 S. Ghoshal & P. Moran, 1996, Bad for practice, AMR, 21: 13–47.
42 J. Cullen, K.P. Parboteeah, & M. Hoegl, 2004, Cross-national dif-
ferences in managers’ willingness to justify ethically suspect behav-
iors, AMJ, 47: 411–421.
43 F. Fukuyama, 1995, Trust, New York: Free Press.
44 S. Goodman, 2009, Where East Eats West, Charleston, SC: Book-
Surge/Amazon.
45 J. Johnson, T. Lenartowicz, & S. Apud, 2006, Cross-cultural com-
petence in international business, JIBS, 37: 525–543; Y. Kandogan, 
2011, Determinants of individuals’ preference for cross-cultural 
literacy, JWB, 46: 328–336; A. Molinsky, 2012, Code switching be-
tween cultures, HBR, January: 140–141.
46 Hofstede, 1997, Cultures and Organizations (p. 230).
47 O. Shenkar, 2012, Beyond cultural distance, JIBS, 43: 12–17; 
K. Singh, 2007, The limited relevance of culture to strategy, APJM, 
24: 421–428; L. Tihanyi, D. Griffith, & C. Russell, 2005, The effect 
of cultural distance on entry mode choice, international diver-
sification, and MNE performance, JIBS, 36: 270–283; S. Zaheer, 
M. Shomaker, & L. Nachum, 2012, Distance without direction, JIBS, 
43: 18–27.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
	 4-1	 define resources and capabilities.
	 4-2	 explain how value is created from a firm’s 
resources and capabilities.
	 4-3	 articulate the difference between keeping 
an activity in-house and outsourcing it.
	 4-4	 understand how to use a VRIO framework.
	 4-5	 participate in two leading debates 
concerning leveraging resources and 
capabilities.
	 4-6	 draw implications for action.
Pcruciatti/Dreamstime
Chapter 
4 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Leveraging Resources  
and Capabilities
In January 2012, Eastman Kodak Company, commonly 
known as Kodak, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy pro-
tection. Founded in 1880, Kodak pioneered photo­
graphy technology and photographic film and brought 
them to the masses of the world. During most of 
the 20th century, Kodak held a dominant position in 
photographic film. In 1976, it enjoyed a 90% market 
share of photographic film and an 85% market share 
of camera sales in the United States. Until the 1990s, it 
had been regularly voted as one of the world’s top-five 
most valuable brands. The Kodak name in fact was so 
recognizable that its tagline, “Kodak moment,” entered 
everyday language as an important event worthy of 
capturing on film. It is hard to believe now, but Kodak 
was indeed the Google of its day.
So, what happened? Essentially, Kodak’s expertise 
in photographic film used to be valuable, unique, and 
hard-to-imitate. Its formidable organization, which in 
1988 employed a sizable army of 145,000, was able to 
deliver film rolls to the far corners of the world. But the 
digital revolution wiped out all these advantages.
In a world full of digital cameras made by Canon, 
Nikon, Sony, and Samsung, Kodak digital cameras had 
a small market share. To be sure, Kodak was not a late 
mover in digital technology. In fact, Kodak was the first 
mover: it invented the digital camera in 1975. But the 
popular perception that Kodak was a later mover in 
digital technology was largely correct. It only started 
marketing digital cameras in the early 2000s—too late.
In a nutshell, Kodak’s early success became its 
curse. Its seemingly unassailable competitive position 
fostered an unimaginative and complacent corporate 
culture that failed to anticipate the rapid diffusion of 
digital technology that literally ate its traditional market 
for lunch. In 1979, an internal guru on digital technology 
wrote a report to management that today reads like a 
prophecy. The report predicted how different segments 
of the market would migrate from film to digital, start-
ing with US government satellite reconnaissance, then 
professional photography, and finally the mass mar-
ket—by 2010. This penetrating report was only a few 
years off. Yet, tragically, both the digital camera inven-
tion and the prediction were ignored by Kodak manag-
ers, who could not imagine a world without film.
During the 1990s, instead of investing in digital 
technology, Kodak focused on its only viable rival at 
that time, Fujifilm. Refusing to outsource production 
to cut costs, Kodak kept making film by itself. In the 
2000s, Kodak belatedly built a digital camera business, 
which lasted only a few years before camera phones 
started to push aside single-purpose digital cameras. 
Kodak ended up losing $60 on every digital camera 
it sold. With a new CEO who had stepped in during 
2005, Kodak attempted to become a powerhouse of 
O p e n i n g  C a s e
Kodak’s Last Moment
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

94	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
Why was Kodak able to be the “Google of its day” in the 20th century? As competi-
tion moved from photographic film to digital technology, what did Kodak’s competitors, 
such as Canon, Nikon, Sony, Samsung, and even its archrival Fujifilm, have that Kodak 
did not have? The answer must be that certain resources and capabilities specific to 
the winning firms—Kodak in the 20th century and its rivals in the 21st century—were 
not shared by competitors. This insight has been developed into a resource-based 
view, which has emerged as one of the two core perspectives on global business.1
One leading tool in global business is SWOT analysis. A SWOT analysis determines 
a firm’s strengths (S), weaknesses (W), opportunities (O), and threats (T). In global 
business, the institution-based view deals with the external O and T, enabled and con-
strained by formal and informal rules of the game (see Chapters 2 and 3). The resource-
based view builds on the SWOT analysis,2 and concentrates on the internal S and W 
to identify and leverage sustainable competitive advantage.3 In this chapter, we first 
define resources and capabilities and then discuss the value chain analysis, concen-
trating on the decision to keep an activity in-house or outsource it. We then focus 
on value (V), rarity (R), imitability (I), and organization (O) through a VRIO framework. 
Debates and extensions follow.
4-1 Understanding Resources and Capabilities
One basic proposition of the resource-based view is that a firm consists of a bundle 
of productive resources and capabilities.4 Resources are defined as “the tangible 
and intangible assets a firm uses to choose and implement its strategies.”5 There is 
Resource-based view
A leading perspective in global 
business that posits that firm 
performance is fundamen-
tally driven by differences in 
firm-specific resources and 
capabilities.
SWOT analysis
A tool for determining a firm’s 
strengths (S), weaknesses (W), 
opportunities (O), and threats (T).
Resources
The tangible and intangible  
assets a firm uses to choose  
and implement its strategies.
Learning Objective
Define resources and 
capabilities.
4-1
digital printing. But with the technological tsunami first 
brought by digital cameras and then by camera phones, 
Kodak felt powerless to catch up. In January 2012, with 
its forces shrunk to only 18,000, Kodak gave up by fil-
ing for bankruptcy and listing $6.9 billion in liabilities. In 
February 2012, it announced that it would stop making 
digital cameras itself and would license its brand name 
to other camera manufacturers. Instead, it would focus 
on photo printing, through retail and online services as 
well as desktop inkjet devices.
In contrast, managers at Kodak’s archrival Fujifilm 
were quicker in unwinding the work of their previous 
generations. Since 2000, it has spent $9 billion to ac-
quire 40 companies, slashed costs and thousands of 
jobs, and diversified. Fujifilm viewed film to be a bit like 
skin: both contain collagen. Just as photos fade because 
of oxidation, cosmetics products preserve skin with anti-
oxidants. Deploying its collection of 200,000 chemical 
compounds, Fujifilm tapped into 4,000 of them that are 
related to anti-oxidants. Based on such research, Fujifilm 
launched a line of cosmetics, named Astalift, that it 
successfully sold in Asia and Europe. In addition, Fujifilm 
made optical films for LCD flat-panel screens. In this re-
gard, Fujifilm was decidedly “un-Japanese” as few large 
Japanese firms acted so fast, dismantled their traditional 
business, and went on an acquisition spree. In summary, 
the Economist noted that “surprisingly, Kodak acted like 
a stereotypical change-resistant Japanese firm, while 
Fujifilm acted like a flexible American film.” Commenting 
on Kodak’s last moment, the Economist concluded:
Unlike people, companies can in theory live for-
ever. But most die young. Fujifilm has mastered 
new tactics and survived. Film went from 60% 
of its profits in 2000 to basically nothing, yet it 
found new sources of revenue. Kodak, along 
with many a great company before, appears 
simply to have run its course. After 132 years it is 
posed, like an old photo, to fade away.
Sources: Based on (1) Eastman Kodak Company, 2011, 2010 Form 
10-K, New York: SEC; (2) Economist, 2012, The last Kodak moment? 
January 14: 63-64; (3) Economist, 2012, Turn around? January 21: 8; 
(4) www.kodak.com.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 4   Leveraging Resources and Capabilities	
95
some debate regarding the definition of capabilities. Some scholars define them 
as “a firm’s capacity to dynamically deploy resources,” suggesting a “dynamic 
capabilities” view that emphasizes a crucial distinction between resources and 
capabilities.6 
While scholars may debate the fine distinctions between resources and capa-
bilities, these distinctions are likely to “become badly blurred” in practice.7 Was 
Kodak’s R&D prowess a resource or capability? How about Fujifilm’s ability to turn 
around in response to the digital revolution? For current and would-be managers, 
the key is to understand how these attributes help improve firm performance, not 
to figure out whether they should be defined as resources or capabilities. There-
fore, in this book, we will use the terms “resources” and “capabilities” interchange-
ably and often in parallel. In other words, capabilities are defined here the same as 
resources.
All firms, even the smallest ones, possess a variety of resources and capabilities. 
How do we meaningfully classify such diversity? One useful way is to separate the 
resources and capabilities into two categories: tangible and intangible (Table 4.1). 
Tangible resources and capabilities are assets that are observable and easily 
quantified. They can be broadly organized in four categories: financial, physical, 
technological, and organizational resources and capabilities.
By definition, intangible resources and capabilities are harder to observe and 
more difficult (or even impossible) to quantify (see Table 4.1). Yet, it is widely 
Capability
The tangible and intangible 
assets a firm uses to choose 
and implement its strategies.
Tangible resources and 
capabilities
Assets that are observable and 
easily quantified.
Intangible resources and 
capabilities
Assets that are hard to observe 
and difficult (if not impossible)  
to quantify.
Table 4.1
Examples of Resources and Capabilities
Tangible resources  
and capabilities 
Examples
Financial
Ability to generate internal funds
Ability to raise external capital
Physical
Location of plants, offices, and equipment
Access to raw materials and distribution channels
Technological
Possession of patents, trademarks, copyrights, and trade 
secrets
Organizational
Formal planning, command, and control systems
Integrated management information systems
Intangible resources  
and capabilities
Examples
Human
Managerial talents
Organizational culture
Innovation
Research and development capabilities
Capacities for organizational innovation and change
Reputational
Perceptions of product quality, durability, and reliability
Reputation as a good employer
Reputation as a socially responsible corporate citizen
Sources: Adapted from (1) J. Barney, 1991, Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage, Journal of Man-
agement, 17: 101; (2) R. Hall, 1992, The strategic analysis of intangible resources, Strategic Management Journal, 
13: 135–144.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

96	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
acknowledged that they must be there, because no firm is likely to generate 
competitive advantage by relying on tangible resources and capabilities alone. Ex-
amples of intangible assets include human, innovation, and reputational resources 
and capabilities.
It is important to note that all resources and capabilities discussed here are 
merely examples and that they do not represent an exhaustive list. As firms forge 
ahead, discovery and leveraging of new resources and capabilities are likely. See In 
Focus 4.1 to see Honda’s efforts to leverage and extend its resources and capabili-
ties in engine technology to launch the HondaJet.
4-2/4-3 Resources, Capabilities, and the Value Chain
If a firm is a bundle of resources and capabilities, how do they come together to 
add value? A value chain analysis allows us to answer this question. Shown in Panel 
A of Figure 4.1, most goods and services are produced through a chain of vertical 
Learning Objective
Explain how value is created 
from a firm’s resources and 
capabilities.
4-2
Honda is renowned for leveraging its core competency 
in internal combustion engines by competing not only 
in automobiles and motorcycles, but also in boat en-
gines and lawn mowers. And now Honda is taking to 
the skies. Are you ready for a HondaJet? 
Having taken its maiden flight in 2003, HondaJet 
is now being introduced to the business jet (corpo-
rate aviation) market. Michimasa Fujino, president and 
CEO of Honda Aircraft Company, Inc., reports that 
the company will be delivering several aircraft to early 
customers in 2013, increasing production through-
out 2014, and reaching full production capacity—
approximately 70 to 100 small jets annually—in 2015.
Currently, however, the HondaJet is still under-
going extensive testing in the process of FAA and 
EASA certification. These tests are especially impor-
tant given that Honda is incorporating a number of 
technological innovations in aviation design. Perhaps 
the most notable of these is Honda’s over-the-wing 
engine-mount configuration, which Honda claims dra-
matically improves performance and fuel efficiency by 
reducing aerodynamic drag. The new design, which 
gives the HondaJet a distinctive appearance, also 
reduces noise and increases both cabin and cargo 
capacity. Another innovation is the “next generation” 
glass flight deck, which Honda describes as “the 
most advanced available in any light business jet.”
Honda Aircraft Company, a wholly owned subsid-
iary of American Honda Motors Inc., was founded in 
2006. At Honda Aircraft’s world headquarters campus 
in Piedmont Triad International Airport, Greensboro, 
North Carolina (near the birthplace of aviation, where 
the Wright brothers took their first flight), state-of-
the-art R&D and manufacturing work is being per-
formed. In a nutshell, the question now is: “How high 
can HondaJet fly?” 
Sources: Based on (1) K. Arcieri, 2012, Mass production of HondaJet 
expected later this year, The Business Journal, May 14, http://www 
.bizjournals.com/triad/news/2012/05/14/honda-aircraft-co-to-begin-
mass.html (accessed August 14, 2012); (2) R. Goyer, 2012), Honda jet 
makes progress, Flying Magazine, May 15, http://www.flyingmag.com/
aircraft/jets/honda-jet-makes-progress (accessed August 14, 2012);  
(3) http://hondajet.honda.com (accessed February 29, 2012).
Does Honda Know How to Fly?
IN Focus 4.1
AP Photos/PRNewsFoto/Honda
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 4   Leveraging Resources and Capabilities	
97
activities (from upstream to downstream) that add value—in short, a value chain. 
The value chain typically consists of two areas: primary activities and support 
activities.8
Each activity requires a number of resources and capabilities. Value chain 
analysis forces managers to think about firm resources and capabilities at 
a very micro, activity-based level.9 Given that no firm is likely to be good at all 
primary and support activities, the key is to examine whether the firm has re-
sources and capabilities to perform a particular activity in a manner superior to 
competitors—a process known as benchmarking in SWOT analysis. If managers 
find that their firm’s particular activity is unsatisfactory, a decision model (shown  
in Figure 4.2) can remedy the situation. In the first stage, managers ask, “Do we 
really need to perform this activity in-house?” Figure 4.3 introduces a framework 
to take a hard look at this question. The answer boils down to (1) whether an 
Value chain
A series of activities used in 
the production of goods and 
services that make a product or 
service more valuable.
Benchmarking
Examining whether a firm has 
resources and capabilities to 
perform a particular activity in a 
manner superior to competitors.
Figure 4.1
The Value Chain
Panel A. An Example of Value Chain with Firm Boundaries 
Support activities
Support activities
Primary activities
INPUT
Components
Final assembly
Marketing
OUTPUT
Research and
development
Infrastructure 
Logistics 
Human resources 
Primary activities
INPUT
Components
Final assembly
Marketing
OUTPUT
Research and
development
Infrastructure 
Logistics 
Human resources 
Panel B. An Example of Value Chain with Some Outsourcing 
Note: Dotted lines represent firm boundaries.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

98	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
Do we really need to
perform this activity
in-house?
Do we have the
resources and
capabilities that
add value in
a way better
than rivals do?
Outsource,
sell the unit,
or lease its services
to other ﬁrms
Yes
(keep doing it)
No
Yes
No
Acquiring necessary
resources and
capabilities in-house
Accessing resources
and capabilities through
strategic alliances
Figure 4.2
A Two-Stage Decision Model in Value Chain Analysis
activity is industry-specific or common across industries, and (2) whether this ac-
tivity is proprietary (firm-specific) or not. The answer is “No” when the activity is 
found in Cell 2 in Figure 4.3 with a great deal of commonality across industries 
and little need for keeping it proprietary—known in the recent jargon as a high de-
gree of commoditization. The answer may also be “No” if the activity is in Cell 1 in 
Figure 4.3, which is industry-specific but also with a high level of commoditization. 
Then, the firm may want to outsource this activity, sell the unit involved, or lease 
the unit’s services to other firms (see Figure 4.2). This is because operating mul-
tiple stages of uncompetitive activities in the value chain may be cumbersome and 
costly.
Commoditization
A process of market competition 
through which unique products 
that command high prices and 
high margins gradually lose their 
ability to do so, thus becoming 
commodities.
Cell 1
Outsource
Cell 2
Outsource
Cell 4
???
Cell 3
In-House
Common
across industries
Industry
speciﬁc
Industry speciﬁcity
High
commoditization
Proprietary
(ﬁrm-speciﬁc)
Commoditization
versus
proprietary nature
of the activity 
Figure 4.3
In-House versus Outsource
Note: At present, no clear guidelines exist for Cell 4, where firms either choose to perform activities in-house or outsource.
© Cengage Learning
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 4   Leveraging Resources and Capabilities	
99
Think about steel, definitely a crucial component for automobiles. But the 
question for automakers is: “Do we need to make steel by ourselves?” The require-
ments for steel are common across end-user industries—that is, the steel for auto-
makers is essentially the same for construction, defense, and other steel-consuming 
end-users (ignoring minor technical differences for the sake of our discussion). For 
automakers, while it is imperative to keep the automaking activity (especially en-
gine and final assembly) proprietary (Cell 3 in Figure 4.3), there is no need to keep 
steel making in-house. Therefore, although many automakers, such as Ford and 
GM, historically were involved in steel making, none of them does it now. In other 
words, steel making is outsourced and steel commoditized. In a similar fashion, 
Ford and GM no longer make glass, seats, or tires as they did before.
Outsourcing is defined as turning over an organizational activity to an outside 
supplier that will perform it on behalf of the focal firm.10 For example, many con-
sumer products companies (such as Nike), which possess strong capabilities in 
upstream activities (such as design) and downstream activities (such as market-
ing), have outsourced manufacturing to suppliers in low-cost countries. A total of 
80% of the value of Boeing’s new 787 Dreamliner is provided by outside suppli-
ers. This compares with 51% for existing Boeing aircraft.11 Recently, not only is 
manufacturing often outsourced, a number of service activities, such as IT, HR, 
and logistics, are also outsourced. The driving force is that many firms, which used 
to view certain activities as a very special part of their industries (such as airline 
reservations and bank call centers), now believe that these activities have relatively 
generic attributes that can be shared across industries. Of course, this changing 
mentality is fueled by the rise of service providers, such as IBM and Infosys in IT, 
Manpower in HR, Foxconn in contract manufacturing, and DHL in logistics. These 
specialist firms argue that such activities can be broken off from the various client 
firms (just as steel making was broken off from automakers decades ago) and lever-
aged to serve multiple clients with greater economies of scale.12 Such outsourcing 
enables client firms to become “leaner and meaner” organizations, which can bet-
ter focus on their core activities (see Figure 4.1 Panel B).
If the answer to the question, “Do we really need to perform this activity in-
house?” is “Yes” (Cell 3 in Figure 4.3), but the firm’s current resources and capabili-
ties are not up to the task, then there are two choices (see Figure 4.2). First, the 
firm may want to acquire and develop capabilities in-house so that it can perform 
this particular activity better.13 Second, if a firm does not have enough skills to 
develop these capabilities in-house, it may want to access them through alliances.
Conspicuously lacking in both Figures 4.2 and 4.3 is the geographic dimension—
domestic versus foreign locations.14 Because the two terms “outsourcing” and “off-
shoring” have emerged rather recently, there is a great deal of confusion, especially 
among some journalists, who often casually equate them. So, to minimize confu-
sion, we go from two terms to four terms in Figure 4.4, based on locations and 
modes (in-house versus outsource):15
 	 Offshoring—international/foreign outsourcing
 	 Onshoring—domestic outsourcing
 	 Captive sourcing—setting up subsidiaries to perform in-house work in foreign 
locations
 	 Domestic in-house activity
Outsourcing—especially offshoring—has no shortage of controversies and 
debates (see the Debates and Extensions section). Despite this set of new labels, 
Learning Objective
Articulate the difference 
between keeping an activity 
in-house and outsourcing it.
4-3
Outsourcing
Turning over an organizational 
activity to an outside supplier 
that will perform it on behalf of 
the focal firm.
Offshoring
Outsourcing to an international 
or foreign firm.
Onshoring 
Outsourcing to a domestic firm.
Captive sourcing
Setting up subsidiaries abroad so 
that the work done is in-house 
but the location is foreign.  
Also known as foreign direct 
investment (FDI).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

100	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
we need to be aware that “captive sourcing” is conceptually identical to foreign 
direct investment (FDI), which is nothing new in the world of global business (see 
Chapters 1 and 6 and PengAtlas Map 2.3 for details). We also need to be aware that 
“offshoring” and “onshoring” are simply international and domestic variants of out-
sourcing, respectively. While offshoring low-cost IT work to India, the Philippines, 
and other emerging economies has been widely practiced, interestingly, eastern 
Germany; northern France; and the Appalachian, Great Plains, and southern re-
gions of the United States have emerged as new hotbeds for onshoring.16 In job-
starved regions such as Michigan, high-quality IT workers may accept wages 35% 
lower than at headquarters in Silicon Valley.
One interesting lesson we can take away from Figure 4.4 is that even for a 
single firm, value-adding activities may be geographically dispersed around the 
world, taking advantage of the best locations and modes to perform certain ac-
tivities. For instance, a Dell laptop may be designed in the United States (domes-
tic in-house activity), its components may be produced in Taiwan (offshoring) 
as well as the United States (onshoring), and its final assembly may be done in 
China (captive sourcing/FDI). When customers call for help, the call center may 
be in India, Ireland, Jamaica, or the Philippines, manned by an outside service 
provider—Dell may have outsourced the service activities through offshoring.
Overall, a value chain analysis engages managers to ascertain a firm’s strengths 
and weaknesses on an activity-by-activity basis, relative to rivals, in a SWOT analysis. 
The recent proliferation of new labels is intimidating, causing some gurus to claim 
that “21st century offshoring really is different.”17 In reality, it is not. Under the skin 
of the new vocabulary, we still see the time-honored SWOT analysis at work. The 
next section introduces a framework on how to do this.
4-4 From Swot to Vrio18
Recent progress in the resource-based view has gone beyond the traditional SWOT 
analysis. The new work focuses on the value (V), rarity (R), imitability (I), and orga-
nizational (O) aspects of resources and capabilities, leading to a VRIO framework. 
Summarized in Table 4.2, addressing these four important questions has a number 
of ramifications for competitive advantage.
Learning Objective
Understand how to use a 
VRIO framework.
4-4
VRIO framework
The resource-based framework 
that focuses on the value (V), 
rarity (R), imitability (I), and 
organizational (O) aspects of 
resources and capabilities.
Mode of activity 
Cell 1
Captive
sourcing/FDI
Cell 3
Domestic
in-house
Cell 2
Offshoring
Cell 4
Onshoring
Location
of
activity
Foreign location 
Domestic location
In-House
Outsourcing
Figure 4.4
Location, Location, Location
Note: “Captive sourcing” is a new term, which is conceptually identical to “foreign direct investment” (FDI), a term widely 
used in global business. See Chapter 6 for details.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 4   Leveraging Resources and Capabilities	
101
4-4a Value
Do firm resources and capabilities add value? The preceding value chain analy-
sis suggests that this is the most fundamental question to start with.19 Only value-
adding resources can lead to competitive advantage (see In Focus 4.2), whereas 
non-value-adding capabilities may lead to competitive disadvantage. Shown by the 
Opening Case on Kodak, with changes in the competitive landscape, previous 
value-adding resources and capabilities may become obsolete. The evolution of 
IBM is another case in point. IBM historically excelled in making hardware, in-
cluding tabulating machines in the 1930s, mainframes in the 1960s, and PCs in 
the 1980s. However, as competition heated up, IBM’s capabilities in hardware not 
only added little value, but also increasingly stood in the way for it to move into new 
areas. Since the 1990s, IBM has been transformed into focusing on more lucrative 
software and services, where it has developed new value-adding capabilities, aiming 
to become an on-demand computing service provider for corporations. As part of 
this new strategy, IBM purchased Pricewaterhouse Coopers (PwC), a leading tech-
nology consulting firm, in 2002 and sold its PC division to Lenovo in 2004. In 2011, 
IBM proudly celebrated its 100th anniversary. The transformation and triumphs of 
IBM stand in radical contrast with the struggles and frustrations at another iconic 
American firm that is even older than IBM: Kodak (see the Opening Case).
The relationship between valuable resources and capabilities and firm per-
formance is straightforward. Instead of becoming strengths, non-value-adding 
resources and capabilities, such as IBM’s historical expertise in hardware, may 
become weaknesses. If firms are unable to get rid of non-value-adding assets, they 
are likely to suffer below-average performance.20 In the worst case, they may become 
extinct, a fate IBM narrowly skirted during the early 1990s and Kodak struggled to 
avoid (see the Opening Case). According to IBM’s new CEO Ginni Rometty:
Whatever business you’re in, it’s going to commoditize over time, so you have to keep 
moving it to a higher value and change.21
4-4b Rarity
Simply possessing valuable resources and capabilities may not be enough. The next 
question is: “How rare are valuable resources and capabilities?”22 At best, valuable 
Table 4.2
The VRIO Framework: Is a Resource or Capability . . .
Valuable?
Rare?
Costly to 
imitate?
Exploited by 
organization?
Competitive 
implications
Firm performance
No
—
—
No
Competitive 
disadvantage
Below average
Yes
No
—
Yes
Competitive parity
Average
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Temporary competitive 
advantage
Above average
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Sustained competitive 
advantage
Persistently above 
average
Sources: Adapted from (1) J. Barney, 2002, Gaining and Sustaining Competitive Advantage, 2nd ed. (p. 173), Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall; (2) R. Hoskisson,  
M. Hitt, & R.D. Ireland, 2004, Competing for Advantage (p. 118), Cincinnati: South-Western.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

102	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
but common resources and capabilities will lead to competitive parity but not an 
advantage. Consider the (nearly) identical aircraft made by Boeing and Airbus 
used by numerous airlines. They are certainly valuable, yet it is difficult to derive 
competitive advantage from these aircraft alone. Airlines have to work hard on how 
to use these same aircraft differently.
Only valuable and rare resources and capabilities have the potential to pro-
vide some temporary competitive advantage. Overall, the question of rarity is a 
reminder of the cliché: If everyone has it, you can’t make money from it. For ex-
ample, the quality of the American Big Three automakers is now comparable with 
the best Asian and European rivals. However, even in their home country, the Big 
Three’s quality improvements have not translated into stronger sales. Embarrass-
ingly, in 2009, both GM and Chrysler, despite the decent quality of their cars, had 
to declare bankruptcy and be bailed out by the US government (and in the case of 
GM, also by the Canadian government). The point is simple: Flawless high quality 
is now expected, is no longer rare, and thus provides no advantage.
The Internet has enabled some of the noblest human 
spirit in collaboration to shine—think of Wikipedia. 
However, the Internet has also unleashed some of the 
most nasty, disgusting, and hurtful expressions to be 
used as weapons of choice. In online communities, 
discussion boards, and social media, the lethal combi-
nation of anonymity and opinion have often resulted in 
discussions going out of control, cussing and swear-
ing increasingly dominating the air. Although such un-
civil comments represent fewer than 10% of online 
comments, they often command disproportionate 
attention, resulting in headaches, embarrassments, 
and disasters for established companies, nonprofits, 
and government agencies. Such uncivil comments 
have also presented wonderful opportunities for a 
new breed of entrepreneurs known as moderators (or 
“mods”), who can add a great deal of value.
Moderators delete uncivil comments, scold the 
people behind them (such as “We don’t call each 
other a—holes”), and in the case of repeat offenders, 
ban their accounts from airing their profanity. Working 
at home (or during vacation), moderators can make 
between $40,000 and $80,000 annually. But they 
need to be prepared for daily exposure to extreme rac-
ism and bigotry, images of pedophilia, and other un-
desirable expressions. Such clean-up is arguably the 
dirtiest job on the Internet. “Sometimes you feel like 
you need to spend two hours in the shower because 
it is so disgusting,” said Keith Bilous, founder of the 
Winnipeg, Canada-based ICUC Moderation.
Employing over 200 moderators, ICUC Modera-
tion has emerged as a global leader with $10 million 
in revenue. Its clients include Calvin Klein, Chevron, 
Intel, Molson, National Public Radio, Scotiabank, 
Starbucks, Virgin Group, and the Government of 
Canada. London-based eModeration is another 
leader, which has 160 moderators with $7 million in 
revenue. Its clients include the BBC, the Economist, 
ESPN, HSBC, Lego, MTV, Oprah, and Sony Ericsson. 
In 2010, Nestlé’s public relations (PR) department at-
tempted to address criticisms from Greenpeace on 
Nestlé’s Facebook page, which was not professionally 
moderated. It turned out to be a PR disaster. The expe-
rience, judgment, and expertise of moderators would 
have contained such a firestorm before it exploded.
Many firms, such as the New York Times, moder-
ate their own websites. But the trend is to increasingly 
outsource such work to professional online content 
and community moderation service providers, such 
as ICUC Moderation and eModeration, which typically 
charge $30 to $40 per hour. However, competition is 
rapidly becoming global, with Indian and Filipino ser-
vice providers offering deals to clients at $5 per hour.
Sources: Based on (1) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2011, The dirtiest 
job on the Internet, December 5: 95–97; (2) www.emoderation.com; 
(3) www.icucmoderation.com.
Adding Value to the Dirtiest Job Online
IN Focus 4.2
Ethical 
Dilemma
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 4   Leveraging Resources and Capabilities	
103
4-4c Imitability
Valuable and rare resources and capabilities can be a source of competitive advan-
tage only if competitors have a difficult time imitating them. While it is relatively 
easier to imitate a firm’s tangible resources (such as plants), it is a lot more challeng-
ing and often impossible to imitate intangible capabilities (such as tacit knowledge, 
superior motivation, and managerial talents).
Imitation is difficult. Why? Two words: causal ambiguity, which refers to the 
difficulty of identifying the causal determinants of successful firm performance.23 
What exactly has caused IBM to be such an enduring and continuously relevant 
company? IBM has no shortage of competitors and imitators. Rumors about IBM’s 
end erupt periodically (and almost became true at least once in the early 1990s). 
Yet, IBM has always been able to turn around by discarding businesses that it once 
dominated (think of PCs) and constructing a new portfolio of products and services 
that add value. Recently, its service businesses had 32% margins, and its software 
businesses enjoyed 88% margins.24
One natural question is: “How does IBM do it?” Usually, a number of resources 
and capabilities will be nominated, such as an innovative culture, a commitment 
to customer relationships, a willingness to change, a strong leadership team, and a 
multinational presence. While all of these resources and capabilities are plausible, 
what exactly is it? This truly is a million (or billion) dollar question, because know-
ing the answer is not only intriguing to scholars and students, it can also be hugely 
profitable for IBM’s rivals. Unfortunately, outsiders usually have a hard time un-
derstanding what a firm does inside its boundaries. We can try, as many rivals have, 
to identify IBM’s recipe for success by drawing up a long list of possible reasons, 
labeled as “resources and capabilities” in our classroom discussion. But in the final 
analysis, as outsiders we are not sure.25
What is even more fascinating for scholars and students, and more frustrating 
for rivals, is that often managers of a focal firm such as IBM do not know exactly 
what contributes to their firm’s success. When interviewed, they can usually gener-
ate a long list of their contributing factors, such as a strong organizational culture, 
a relentless drive, and many other attributes. To make matters worse, different 
managers within the same firm may have a different list. When probed as to which 
resource or capability is “it,” they often suggest that it is all of the above in com-
bination. This is probably one of the most interesting and paradoxical aspects of 
the resource-based view: If insiders have a hard time figuring out what unambigu-
ously contributes to their firm’s performance, it is not surprising that outsiders’ 
efforts in understanding and imitating these capabilities are usually flawed and 
often fail.
Overall, valuable and rare, but imitable, resources and capabilities may give 
firms some temporary competitive advantage, leading to above-average perfor-
mance for some period of time. However, such advantage is not likely to be sus-
tainable. Shown by the example of IBM, only valuable, rare, and hard-to-imitate 
resources and capabilities may potentially lead to sustained competitive advantage.
4-4d Organization
Even valuable, rare, and hard-to-imitate resources and capabilities may not give a 
firm a sustained competitive advantage if it is not properly organized. Although 
movie stars represent some of the most valuable, rare, and hard-to-imitate (as 
well as highest-paid) resources, most movies flop. More generally, the question of 
Causal ambiguity
The difficulty of identifying 
the actual cause of a firm’s 
successful performance.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

104	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
organization asks: “How can a firm (such as a 
movie studio) be organized to develop and le-
verage the full potential of its resources and  
capabilities?”
Numerous components within a firm are 
relevant to the question of organization.26 In 
a movie studio, these components include tal-
ents in “smelling” good ideas, photography 
crews, musicians, singers, makeup artists, ani-
mation specialists, and managers on the busi-
ness side. These components are often called 
complementary assets,27 because by themselves 
they cannot generate box office hits. For the fa-
vorite movie you saw most recently, do you still 
remember the names of its makeup artists? Of 
course not—you probably only remember the 
stars. However, stars alone cannot generate 
hit movies either. It is the combination of star 
resources and complementary assets that cre-
ate hit movies. “It may be that not just a few 
resources and capabilities enable a firm to gain 
a competitive advantage but that literally thousands of these organizational at-
tributes, bundled together, generate such advantage.”28
Another idea is social complexity, which refers to the socially complex ways of 
organizing that are typical of many firms. Many multinationals consist of thou-
sands of people scattered in many different countries. How they overcome cultural 
differences and are organized as one corporate entity and achieve corporate goals 
is profoundly complex. Oftentimes, it is their invisible relationships that add value. 
Such organizationally embedded capabilities are thus very difficult for rivals to 
imitate. This emphasis on social complexity refutes what is half-jokingly called the 
“Lego” view of the firm, in which a firm can be assembled (and disassembled) from 
modules of technology and people (a là Lego toy blocks). By treating employees as 
identical and replaceable blocks, the “Lego” view fails to realize that social capital 
associated with complex relationships and knowledge permeating many firms can 
be a source of competitive advantage.
Overall, only valuable, rare, and hard-to-imitate capabilities that are organi-
zationally embedded and exploited can possibly lead to sustained competitive 
advantage and persistently above-average performance. Because capabilities 
cannot be evaluated in isolation, the VRIO framework presents four intercon-
nected and increasingly difficult hurdles for them to become a source of sustain-
able competitive advantage (Table 4.2). In other words, these four aspects come 
together as one “package.”
4-5 Debates and Extensions
Like the institution-based viewed outlined in Chapters 2 and 3, the resource-based 
view has its fair share of controversies and debates. Here, we introduce two leading 
debates: (1) domestic resources versus international (cross-border) capabilities and 
(2) offshoring versus nonoffshoring.
Complementary assets
The combination of numerous 
resources and assets that en-
able a firm to gain a competitive 
advantage.
Social complexity
The socially intricate and  
interdependent ways firms  
are typically organized.
Learning Objective
Participate in two leading 
debates concerning leveraging 
resources and capabilities.
4-5
Dan MacMedan/Contributor/Getty Images
Hit movies require more than just star power—money-
making movies require complementary assets. What do 
you think some of these assets might be?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 4   Leveraging Resources and Capabilities	
105
4-5a Domestic Resources versus International  
(Cross-Border) Capabilities
Do firms that are successful domestically have what it takes to win internation-
ally? If you were to ask managers at The Limited Brands, their answer would be 
“No.” The Limited Brands is the number one US fashion retailer. It has a success-
ful retail empire of 4,000 stores throughout the country and leading brands such 
as The Limited, Victoria’s Secret, and Bath & Body Works. Yet, it has refused to 
go abroad—not even to Canada. On the other hand, the ubiquitous retail outlets 
of LVMH, Zara, and United Colors of Benetton in major cities around the world 
suggest that their answer would be “Yes!”
Some domestically successful firms continue to succeed overseas. For example, 
Swedish furniture retailer IKEA has found that its Scandinavian-style furniture, 
combined with do-it-yourself flat packaging, is popular around the globe. IKEA 
thus has become a global cult brand. The young generation in Russia is now 
known as the “IKEA Generation.” However, many other firms that are formidable 
domestically are burned badly overseas. Wal-Mart withdrew from Germany and 
South Korea. Similarly, its leading global rival, France’s Carrefour, had to exit the 
Czech Republic, Japan, Mexico, and South Korea. Starbucks has failed to turn its 
bitter brew into sweet profits overseas.
Are domestic resources and cross-border capabilities essentially the same? The 
answer can be either “Yes” or “No.” This debate is an extension of the larger debate 
on whether international business (IB) is different from domestic business. The 
argument that IB is different from domestic business is precisely the argument for 
having stand-alone IB courses in business schools. If the two are essentially the 
same, then it is possible to argue that IB fundamentally is about “business,” which is 
well covered by strategy, finance, and other courses. (Most textbooks in these areas 
have at least one chapter on “international topics.”) This question is obviously very 
important for companies and business schools. However, there is no right or wrong 
answer.
4-5b Offshoring versus Not Offshoring
As noted earlier, offshoring—or, more specifically, international (offshore) 
outsourcing—has emerged as a leading corporate movement in the 21st century. 
Outsourcing low-end manufacturing to countries such as China and Mexico is now 
widely practiced. But increased outsourcing of high-end services, particularly IT 
and other business process outsourcing (BPO) services, to countries such as India 
is controversial. Because digitization and commoditization of service work are 
enabled only by the very recent rise of the Internet and the reduction of interna-
tional communication costs, it is debatable whether such offshoring proves to be a 
long-term benefit or hindrance to Western firms and economies.
Proponents argue that offshoring creates enormous value for firms and 
economies. Western firms are able to tap into low-cost yet high-quality labor, trans-
lating into significant cost savings. Firms can also focus on their core capabilities, 
which may add more value than noncore (and often uncompetitive) activities. In 
turn, offshoring service providers, such as Infosys and Wipro, develop their core 
competencies in IT/BPO. A McKinsey study reported that for every dollar spent by 
US firms’ offshoring in India, US firms save 58 cents (see Table 4.3). Overall, $1.46 of 
new wealth is created, of which the US economy captures $1.13, through cost savings 
Business process outsourcing 
(BPO) 
Outsourcing business processes 
to third-party providers.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

106	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
and increased exports to India, which buys Made-in-USA equipment, software, and 
services. India captures the other 33 cents through profits, wages, and taxes.29 While 
acknowledging that some US employees may regrettably lose their jobs, offshoring 
proponents suggest that, on balance, offshoring is a win-win solution for both US 
and Indian firms and economies. In other words, offshoring can be conceptualized 
as the latest incarnation of international trade (in tradable services), which theoreti-
cally will bring mutual gains to all involved countries (see Chapter 5).
Critics of offshoring make three points on strategic, economic, and political 
grounds. Strategically, according to some outsourcing gurus, if “even core functions 
like engineering, R&D, manufacturing, and marketing can—and often should—
be moved outside,”30 what is left of the firm? In manufacturing, US firms have gone 
down this path before, with disastrous results. In the 1960s, Radio Corporation of 
America (RCA) invented the color TV and then outsourced its production to Japan, 
a low-cost country at that time. Fast-forward to 2010: the United States no longer 
has any US-owned color TV producers left. The nationality of RCA itself, after 
being bought and sold several times, is now Chinese (France’s Thomson sold RCA 
to China’s TCL in 2003). Critics argue that offshoring nurtures rivals.31 Why are 
Indian IT/BPO firms now emerging as strong global rivals to Western firms such 
as IBM? It is in part because they built up their capabilities doing work for IBM in 
the 1990s, particularly by working to help the IT industry prevent the “millennium 
bug” (Y2K) problem.
In manufacturing, many Asian firms, which used to be original equipment man-
ufacturers (OEMs) executing design blueprints provided by Western firms, now want 
to have a piece of the action in design by becoming original design manufactur-
ers (ODMs) (see Figure 4.5). Having mastered low-cost and high-quality manufac-
turing, Asian firms such as BenQ, Compal, Flextronics, Hon Hai/Foxconn, and 
Huawei are indeed capable of capturing some design function from Western firms 
such as Dell, HP, Kodak, and Nokia. Therefore, increasing outsourcing of design 
work by Western firms may accelerate their own long-run demise. A number of 
Asian OEMs, now quickly becoming ODMs, have openly announced that their real 
ambition is to become original brand manufacturers (OBMs). For example, HTC has 
emerged as a hot new OBM whose “HTC” branded smartphones enjoy a higher 
Original equipment 
manufacturer (OEM) 
A firm that executes design 
blueprints provided by other 
firms and manufactures such 
products.
Original design  
manufacturer (ODM)
A firm that both designs and 
manufactures products.
Original brand manufacturer 
(OBM) 
A firm that designs, manufac-
tures, and markets branded 
products.
Table 4.3
Benefit of $1 US Spending on Offshoring to India
Benefit to the United States
$
Benefit to India
$
Savings accruing to US investors/
customers
0.58
Labor
0.10
Exports of US goods/services to 
providers in India 
0.05
Profits retained in India
0.10
Profit transfer by US-owned 
operations in India back to the US
0.04
Suppliers
0.09
Net direct benefit retained in  
the United States
0.67
Central government taxes
0.03
Value from US labor reemployed
0.46
State government taxes
0.01
Net benefit to the United States
1.13
Net benefit to India
0.33
Source: Based on text in D. Farrell, 2005, Offshoring: Value creation through economic change, Journal of Management Studies, 42: 675–683. Farrell is 
director of the McKinsey Global Institute, and she refers to a McKinsey study. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 4   Leveraging Resources and Capabilities	
107
smartphone market share in Apple’s homeland, the United States (see Emerg-
ing Markets 4.1). Thus, according to critics of offshoring, isn’t the writing already 
on the wall? A new case in point is the inability of US firms to manufacture the 
Amazon Kindle (see the Closing Case).
Economically, critics contend that they are not sure whether developed 
economies, on the whole, actually gain more. While shareholders and corporate 
high-flyers embrace offshoring (see Chapter 1), offshoring increasingly results in 
job losses in high-end areas such as design, R&D, and IT/BPO. While white-collar 
individuals who lose jobs will naturally hate it, the net impact (consolidating all 
economic gains and losses including job losses) on developed economies may still 
be negative (see the Closing Case).
Finally, critics make the political argument that many large US firms claim 
that they are global companies and, consequently, that they should neither repre-
sent nor be bound by American values any more. According to this view, all that 
these firms are interested in is the cheapest and most exploitable labor. Not only 
is work commoditized, people (such as IT programmers) are degraded as trad-
able commodities that can be jettisoned. As a result, large firms that outsource 
work to emerging economies are often accused of being unethical, destroying jobs 
at home, ignoring corporate social responsibility, violating customer privacy (for 
example, by sending medical records, tax returns, and credit card numbers to be 
processed overseas), and in some cases undermining national security. Not sur-
prisingly, the debate often becomes political, emotional, and explosive when such 
accusations are made.
It is important to note that this debate takes place primarily in developed econo-
mies. There is relatively little debate in emerging economies because they clearly 
stand to gain from such offshoring to them. Taking a page from the Indian playbook, 
the Philippines, with numerous English-speaking professionals, is trying to eat some 
of India’s lunch. Northeast China, where Japanese is widely taught, is positioning 
itself as an ideal location for call centers for Japan. Central and Eastern Europe 
INPUT
Research &
development
Components
Final assembly
Marketing
OUTPUT
INPUT
Research &
development
Components
Final assembly
Marketing
OUTPUT
An example of OEM
An example of ODM
Figure 4.5
From Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) to Original Design 
Manufacturer (ODM)
Note: Dotted lines represent organizational boundaries. One further extension is to become an original brand manufac-
turer (OBM), which would incorporate brand ownership and management in the marketing area. For graphic simplicity, 
it is not shown here.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

108	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
Everyone has heard of Apple and its iPhone, which set 
the smartphone market on fire when it first appeared 
in 2007. Fast forward to 2012: Which company had 
the highest smartphone market share in the United 
States? Not Apple (20% market share), not Samsung 
(20%), and not Blackberry (9%). The winner was 
HTC, which commanded a 25% market share. “Apple 
iPhone’s market share was lower than what?” some 
of you may ask.
Founded in Taiwan in 1997, HTC was an “unlikely 
leader” in the smartphone world infested by global 
heavyweights, according to Bloomberg Business-
week. Founded as High Tech Computer, the firm fol-
lowed the well-known Taiwanese outsourcing formula 
of designing and manufacturing gadgets for other 
companies without a brand name of its own. The plain-
vanilla original name (which the firm no longer uses) 
was as low-profile as a corporate name could be. The 
firm toiled for a long time in obscurity as an original 
design manufacturer (ODM), quietly designing and 
making high-end smartphones for leading Western 
mobile operators such as Verizon and Orange. HTC’s 
first big contract came when Microsoft asked it to 
make smartphones. HTC quickly became the world’s 
top producer of Windows phones. It set up its US 
headquarters in Bellevue, Washington, a Seattle sub-
urb where Microsoft was headquartered. Like many 
contract manufacturers, HTC worried that a brandless 
firm would permanently remain a low-margin manu-
facturer of commodity products. What was worse was 
that the already razor-thin margin would be squeezed 
even further as clients shopped for lower-cost produc-
ers (read: China). The solution was usually to launch 
a firm’s own brand to command higher margins and 
more respect—in other words, to become an original 
brand manufacturer (OBM) just like Apple. However, 
Taiwanese (and Asian) firms attempting to overcome 
this hurdle usually had to face a “double whammy”: 
(1) a lack of capabilities in innovation and branding, and 
(2) the loss of clients, which did not want to do busi-
ness with an emerging rival. Such a “double whammy” 
forced many manufacturers to remain on the low-cost 
treadmill. How did HTC overcome such a challenge?
Three things stand out. First, as emphasized by 
Cher Wang, HTC’s chairwoman, in media interviews, 
HTC was never engaged in original equipment manu-
facturing (OEM). From the start, it had always been an 
ODM—emphasizing the “design” function that was 
lacking among most OEM manufacturers (such as 
Foxconn or Hon Hai, the largest Taiwanese OEM). The 
difference was nontrivial: HTC had developed world-
class design and innovation capabilities. It began de-
signing some of the world’s first touch screen and 
wireless handheld devices as early as 1998. 
Second, HTC was very skillful in collaborating with 
larger firms. Such successful collaborations—in com-
bination with its design prowess—led to a series of 
enviable first-mover accomplishments in this rapidly 
developing industry. These accomplishments included 
creating the world’s first touch screen smartphones 
as the Treo for Palm and the iPAQ for Compaq (2000); 
developing the first Microsoft-powered smartphone 
(2002) and the first Microsoft 3G smartphone (2005); 
the world’s first smartphone powered by Google’s 
Android operating system, which was promoted as 
a free, open-source system (2008); and the first 4G-
capable phone in the United States (2010).
Third, unlike many Asian firms that had a hard time 
globalizing their operations due to language barriers 
and cultural constraints, HTC was a “born global” 
firm. E-mails and documents were in English from 
day one. CEO Peter Chou, according to the Econo-
mist, sounded more like a Silicon Valley management 
guru than a typical Asian corporate patriarch. “Instead 
of telling them what to do, I want people to have the 
freedom to explore their talent,” Chou said. Such an 
open culture made HTC a more attractive employer for 
Western talents. In 2006, HTC attracted Horace Luke, 
HTC: From ODM to OBM 
E m e r g i n g  M a r k e t s  4 . 1
Danny Lehman/Corbis; Björn Meyer/sitox/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 4   Leveraging Resources and Capabilities	
109
gravitate towards serving Western Europe. Central and South American countries 
want to grab call center contracts for the large Hispanic market in the United States.
4-6 Management Savvy
How does the resource-based view answer the big question in global business: 
“What determines the success and failure of firms around the globe?” The answer 
is straightforward. Fundamentally, some firms outperform others because they 
possess some valuable, rare, hard-to-imitate, and organizationally embedded re-
sources and capabilities that competitors do not have. 
The resource-based view thus suggests four implications for action (see 
Table 4.4). First, there is nothing very novel in the proposition that firms “compete 
on resources and capabilities.” The subtlety comes when managers attempt to 
distinguish resources and capabilities that are valuable, rare, hard-to-imitate, and 
organizationally embedded from those that do not share these attributes. In oth-
er words, the VRIO framework can greatly aid the time-honored SWOT analysis, 
Learning Objective
Draw implications for action.
4-6
a rising star at Microsoft. He had been the creative 
director of Windows Mobile. At HTC, Luke created an 
innovation infrastructure of fast-moving development 
teams. Some of these teams were based in Seattle. 
In 2011, HTC also opened a research and develop-
ment (R&D) office in Durham, North Carolina. Chou 
also proudly noted in a 2010 interview that at the top 
management level, more than half of the CEO’s direct 
reports were not Taiwanese.
Sticking its neck out as a new OBM, HTC started 
to develop its own brand in 2006. By 2008, when its 
first Android phone was marketed, it was branded 
as “HTC.” As Google built an ecosystem based on 
Android to wage its battle with Apple, HTC gained tre-
mendous visibility as Google’s leading Android partner. 
Since then, HTC took off. In 2011, it displaced Acer and 
was ranked number one among Taiwan’s global brands 
by Interbrand, which listed its brand as number 98 in 
the world. In 2011, it was named “Device Manufac-
turer of the Year” by the Mobile World Congress. Also, 
its market value surpassed that of Nokia to become 
the third largest smartphone maker in the world (by 
market value), behind only Apple and Samsung. When 
asked about Apple in interviews, Chou acknowledged 
that despite HTC smartphones’ attractive features, 
they would not attract crowds eager to lay their hands 
on new gadgets during “midnight madness” sales 
outside Apple stores. “HTC is HTC,” asserted Chou. 
“I don’t care about the iPhone. I don’t even look at it.”
Apple, on the other hand, took HTC’s challenge 
very seriously. In addition to vigorously competing on 
the product dimension, Apple sued HTC for 20 counts 
of patent violations in 2010. This was part of a broader 
Apple strategy to slow the ascendance of Android 
phones made by HTC, Samsung, and Motorola. Led 
by HTC, Android phones rocketed from less than 
3% market share in 2009 to 48% in 2011. In addition 
to HTC, Apple also sued Samsung, Motorola, and 
Google itself. In response, HTC countersued Apple for 
infringing on five of HTC’s patents and sought to ban 
Apple products manufactured in Asia from being im-
ported into the United States.
As HTC’s fight with Apple spilled over from product 
markets to courts, HTC, the clear underdog, claimed 
that it had sufficient patents to deal with Apple. “Patent 
lawsuits are normal,” Wang answered the media. 
“Chinese firms have seldom used this strategic weap-
on. So we are setting an example.” Likewise, Chou said, 
“If HTC can do a good job and set an example in innova-
tion, we can inspire other companies to try the same.”
Sources: Based on (1) 21 Century Business Insights, 2011, HTC: Can being itself allow it to surpass Apple? October 1: 58–59; (2) Bloomberg Business-
week, 2010, A former no-name from Taiwan builds a global brand, November 1: 37–38; (3) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2011, Android’s dominance is 
patent pending, August 8: 36–37; (4) Economist, 2009, Upwardly mobile, July 11: 68; (5) Economist, 2011, Android alert, July 23: 64; (6) Interbrand, 2011, 
Taiwan top 20 global brands 2011, www.brandingtaiwan.com.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

110	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
Table 4.4
Implications for Action
 	 Managers need to build firm strengths based on the VRIO framework.
 	 Relentless imitation or benchmarking, while important, is not likely to be a successful 
strategy.
 	 Managers need to build up resources and capabilities for future competition.
 	 Students need to make themselves into “untouchables” whose job cannot be easily 
outsourced.
especially the S and W parts. Because managers cannot pay attention to every capa-
bility, they must have some sense of what really matters. One common mistake that 
managers often make when evaluating their firms’ capabilities is failing to assess 
them relative to rivals’, thus resulting in a mixed bag of both good and mediocre 
capabilities. The VRIO framework helps managers make decisions on what capa-
bilities to focus on in-house and what to outsource. Capabilities not meeting the 
VRIO criteria need to be jettisoned or outsourced.
Second, relentless imitation or benchmarking, while important, is not likely to 
be a successful strategy.32 By the time Elvis Presley died in 1977, there were a little 
over 100 Elvis impersonators. After his death, the number skyrocketed.33 But obvi-
ously none of these imitators achieved any fame remotely close to the star status 
attained by the King of Rock ’n’ Roll. Imitators have a tendency to mimic the most 
visible, the most obvious, and, consequently, the least important practices of win-
ning firms (and musicians). At best, follower firms that meticulously replicate every 
resource possessed by winning firms can hope to attain competitive parity. Firms so 
well endowed with resources to imitate others may be better off by developing their 
own unique and innovative capabilities (see In Focus 4.3).
Would you be surprised that Hyundai’s Genesis 
was named the North American Car of the Year for 
2009 by its auto industry peers, beating all the usual 
suspects? Would you believe an authoritative J.D. 
Power survey reported that Hyundai has better qual-
ity than Toyota and Honda? Trouble is, just like you, 
most American car buyers don’t buy it. Only 23% 
of all new-car buyers in the United States bother to 
consider buying a Hyundai. This compares with 65% 
and 50% for Toyota and Honda, respectively (before 
Toyota’s mass recalls in 2010). 
Make no mistake: Hyundai is very capable. It is 
the fastest-growing automaker in the US market in 
the 2000s. Between 2008 and 2009, it doubled its 
market share from 2% to 4%, whereas most rivals 
lost market share. Hyundai benefitted from consum-
ers’ desire to “trade down” in hard times. Elbowing 
its way into the entry-level market, Hyundai captured 
many value-conscious buyers, who appreciated the 
more tangible equipment and performance at lower 
prices. For high-end buyers, it is the intangible repu-
tation and mystique that count. Hyundai audacious-
ly compared its Genesis luxury sedan with both 
the BMW 5 series and the Lexus ES350, but does 
Hyundai have what it takes to win the hearts, minds, 
and wallets of high-end car buyers? 
Sources: Based on (1) BusinessWeek, 2007, Hyundai still gets no re-
spect, May 21: 68–70; (2) Economist, 2009, Sui Genesis, March 7: 
71; (3) PR Newswire, 2009, Hyundai leads all automotive brands in 
market share growth this year, November 3, www.prnewswire.com; 
(4) www.jdpower.com.
Hyundai’s Uphill Battle
IN Focus 4.3 
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 4   Leveraging Resources and Capabilities	
111
Third, a competitive advantage that is sustained does not imply that it will last 
forever, which is not realistic in today’s global competition. Managers’ failure to 
appreciate this insight can run an otherwise highly capable firm to the ground, 
as evidenced by Kodak’s last moment in the Opening Case. In fact, competitive 
advantage has become shorter in duration.34 All a firm can hope for is a com-
petitive advantage that can be sustained for as long as possible. Over time, all 
advantages erode.35 Each of IBM’s product-related advantages associated with 
tabulating machines, mainframes, and PCs was sustained for a period of time. 
But eventually, these advantages disappeared. The lesson for all firms, including 
current market leaders, is to develop strategic foresight—“over-the-horizon radar” 
is a good metaphor. Such strategic foresight enables firms to anticipate future 
needs and move early to identify and develop resources and capabilities for fu-
ture competition.
Finally, here is a very personal and relevant implication for action. As a stu-
dent who is probably studying this book in a developed (read: high-wage and thus 
high-cost!) country such as the United States, you may be wondering: What do 
I get out of this? How do I cope with the frightening future of global competi-
tion? There are two lessons you can draw. First, the whole debate on offshoring, 
a part of the larger debate on globalization, is very relevant and directly affects 
your future as a manager, a consumer, and a citizen. So, don’t be a coach potato! 
You should be active, get involved, and be prepared because it is not only “their” 
debate, it is yours as well. Second, be very serious about the VRIO framework of 
the resource-based view. While the resource-based view has been developed to 
advise firms, there is no reason you cannot develop that into a resource-based view 
of the individual. In other words, you can use the VRIO framework to make your-
self into an “untouchable”—a person whose job cannot be outsourced, as Thomas 
Friedman defines it in The World Is Flat (2005). An untouchable individual’s job 
cannot be outsourced because he or she possesses valuable, rare, and hard-to-
imitate capabilities indispensable to an organization. This won’t be easy. But you 
really don’t want to be mediocre. A generation ago, parents told their kids, “Eat 
your food—kids in China and India are starving.” Now, Friedman would advise 
you, “Study this book and leverage your education—students in China and India 
are starving for your job.”36
C h a p t e r  S u m m a r y
	 4.1	 Define resources and capabilities.
 	 “Resources” and “capabilities” are tangible and intangible assets a firm uses 
to choose and implement its strategies.
	 4.2	 Explain how value is created from a firm’s resources and capabilities.
 	 A value chain consists a stream of activities from upstream to downstream 
that add value.
 	 A SWOT analysis engages managers to ascertain a firm’s strengths and 
weaknesses on an activity-by-activity basis relative to rivals.
	 4.3	 Articulate the difference between keeping an activity in-house and 
outsourcing it.
 	 Outsourcing is defined as turning over all or part of an organizational 
activity to an outside supplier.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

112	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
 	 An activity with a high degree of industry commonality and a high degree 
of commoditization can be outsourced, and an industry-specific and firm-
specific (proprietary) activity is better performed in-house.
 	 On any given activity, the four choices for managers in terms of modes and 
locations are (1) offshoring, (2) onshoring, (3) captive sourcing/FDI, and 
(4) domestic in-house activity.
	 4.4	 Understand how to use a VRIO framework.
 	 A VRIO framework centers on value (V), rarity (R), imitability (I), and or-
ganizational (O) attributes of resources and capabilities.
 	 A VRIO framework suggests that only resources and capabilities that are 
valuable, rare, inimitable, and organizationally embedded will generate 
sustainable competitive advantage.
	 4.5	 Participate in two leading debates concerning leveraging resources and 
capabilities.
 	 (1) Domestic resources versus international capabilities and (2) offshoring 
versus not offshoring.
	 4.6	 Draw implications for action.
 	 Managers need to build firm strengths based on the VRIO framework.
 	 Relentless imitation or benchmarking, while important, is not likely to be a 
successful strategy.
 	 Managers need to build up resources and capabilities for future competition.
 	 Students are advised to make themselves into “untouchables” whose jobs 
cannot be outsourced.
K e y  T e r m s
Benchmarking 97
Business process  
outsourcing (BPO) 105
Capability 95
Captive sourcing 99
Causal ambiguity 103
Commoditization 98
Complementary  
assets 104
Intangible resources and  
capabilities 95
Offshoring 99
Onshoring 99
Original brand 
manufacturer  
(OBM) 106
Original design  
manufacturer  
(ODM) 106
Original equipment 
manufacturer  
(OEM) 106
Outsourcing 99
Resources 94
Resource-based  
view 94
Social complexity 104
SWOT analysis 94
Tangible resources 
and capabilities 95
Value chain 97
VRIO framework 100
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 Describe at least three types of tangible and intangible resources and 
capabilities.
	 2.	 In the text, are human resources used as an example of tangible or intan-
gible resources? Do you agree with that classification? Why or why not?
	 3.	 What is meant by “commoditization”?
	 4.	 When analyzing a value chain with a VRIO framework, what is the most 
important question to begin with and why?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 4   Leveraging Resources and Capabilities	
113
	 5.	 Show how the rarity of capabilities is an advantage for both a firm and a job 
seeker.
	 6.	 What is the difference between outsourcing and captive sourcing?
	 7.	 How can SWOT analysis be used in value chain analysis? Use an example to 
support your answer.
	 8.	 Which is more difficult: imitating a firm’s tangible resources or its intan-
gible resources?
	 9.	 How do complementary assets and social complexity influence a firm’s 
organization?
	 10.	 If a firm is successful domestically, is it likely to be successful internation-
ally? Why or why not?
	 11.	 After reviewing the arguments for and against offshoring, state your opin-
ion on this issue.
	 12.	 ON CULTURE: How can differences in values and traditions affect the 
success of offshoring?
	 13.	 Identify a developed country on PengAtlas Map 1.1, and explain why it may 
be the location of offshoring from a firm in an emerging economy.
	 14.	 What is one common mistake that managers often make when evaluating 
their firm’s capabilities?
	 15.	 What is the likely result of relentless imitation or benchmarking?
	 16.	 Why is it a good idea for the VRIO framework to focus on future competition?
	 17.	 Check Map 1.1, and imagine that your firm is headquartered in a developed 
country. Pick an emerging economy that your firm may enter. Explain what 
resources and capabilities your firm has that may enable it to succeed in this 
new market.
C r i t i c a l  D i s c u s s i o n  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 Pick any pair of rivals (such as Samsung/Sony, Nokia/Motorola, Boeing/
Airbus, and Apple/HTC) and explain why one outperforms another.
	 2.	 Rank your business school relative to the top three rival schools in terms 
of the following six dimensions. If you were the dean with a limited bud-
get, from a VRIO standpoint, where would you invest precious financial 
resources to make your school number one among rivals. Why?
Your school
Competitor 1
Competitor 2
Competitor 3
Perceived reputation
Faculty strength
Student quality
Administrative efficiency
Information systems
Building maintenance
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

114	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
	 3.	 ON ETHICS: Since firms read information posted on competitors’ websites, 
is it ethical to provide false information on resources and capabilities on 
corporate websites? Do the benefits outweigh the costs? 
G l o b a l  A c t i o n 
	 1.	 Currently, your firm has manufacturing and logistics units in the Russian 
cities of Moscow and Saint Petersburg, which provide access to Russia’s vast 
countrywide market. However, recent business regulations have discour-
aged growth in specific regions of the country. As such, you have been asked 
to reconfigure your firm’s strategy in Russia. Identify the location(s) where 
you should move operations. Provide detailed and compelling rationale to 
support your decision.
	 2.	 The technology company that you work for wants to enter a foreign market 
for the first time. The objective is for the firm to make a sustainable inter-
national investment that can create long-term competitive advantages and 
allow it to be recognized as important in the industry. Evaluate the opportu-
nities available to your company by assessing the national conditions among 
leading emerging economies.
V i d e o  C a s e
After watching the video on Dubai, discuss the following:
	 1.	 What resources, capabilities, and competencies does Dubai have?
	 2.	 What strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats exist for Dubai?
	 3.	 How is value created from Dubai’s resources and capabilities?
	 4.	 Does Dubai have the framework for sustainable competitive advantage?
	 5.	 How important is strategic sourcing to such futuristic success exhibited by 
Dubai?
Amazon’s Kindle is a revolutionary e-reader device de-
veloped by Amazon’s Lab126 unit based in California. 
Kindle 1, which retailed for $399 and could hold 
approximately 200 e-books, sold out in its first six 
hours when it debuted in November 2007. Since then, 
Amazon unleashed a series of more powerful, but 
cheaper, Kindle models. In 2011, for the first time, 
Amazon sold more Kindle copies of books than print 
copies. Yet no US-based manufacturer is able to make 
this cutting-edge, high-tech product in the United 
States. Its components are made in China, Taiwan, and 
South Korea, and its final assembly is in China.
Emerging Markets: Why Amazon’s Kindle Cannot be Made in the United States 
Ethical 
Dilemma
C l o s i n g  C a s e
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 4   Leveraging Resources and Capabilities	
115
Why Kindle cannot be made in its home country has 
become a new exhibit in the debate about the future 
of the US economy. Since no US-based manufacturer 
has the capabilities to produce Kindle at home, Amazon 
has no choice but to outsource Kindle’s production to 
Asia. Critics argue that after decades of outsourcing 
production to low-cost countries, US firms have lost 
not only millions of low-skill jobs but also the ability 
to make the next generation of high-tech, high-value 
goods. In addition to Kindle, the not-made-in-USA list 
includes electric-car batteries, light-emitting diodes, and 
carbon-fiber components of Boeing’s 787 Dreamliner.
The common belief is that as long as US firms 
control upstream R&D and design activities and 
downstream branding, marketing, and distribution 
services in a value chain, their competitiveness will 
remain unchallenged in global competition. Outsourc-
ing basic manufacturing will not be a grave problem. 
However, critics argue that when a large chunk of val-
ue-adding activities, such as manufacturing, is taken 
out of a country, employment opportunities for these 
activities shrink, experienced people change careers, 
and smart students avoid these “dead-end” fields. 
Eventually, a critical mass of capabilities is lost and 
will no longer be able to support upstream and down-
stream activities, which will be forced to migrate too.
Consider the migration of PC production. Original 
equipment manufacturers (OEMs) in Asia, for sure, 
offered compelling low-cost solutions to US firms. US 
firms initially did not feel threatened. However, prod-
uct innovation for new gadgets and process innovation 
in manufacturing are intertwined. PC designers need 
to interact with manufacturing specialists frequently  
in order to optimize the design. When the loss of US-
based manufacturing makes US design engineers less 
able to handle complex new designs, plenty of such 
opportunities to work with manufacturing specialists 
in Asia make Asian design engineers more capable. 
Thus, the erosion of PC manufacturing capabilities 
leads to the erosion of PC design skills. Ferocious 
product market competition often forces US firms to 
relinquish the design function to their Asian suppliers, 
which then become original design manufacturers 
(ODMs) (see Figure 4.5). Of course, one solution is to 
jettison a US PC brand all together, as evidenced by 
IBM’s sale of its PC division to China’s Lenovo. Lenovo 
thus becomes an original brand manufacturer (OBM). 
Today for all the remaining US-owned PC brands, with 
the exception of Apple, every laptop is not only manu-
factured but also designed in Asia. Competing with 
them are a bunch of PC brands from Taiwan, such 
as Acer, BenQ, ASUS, Advantech, HTC, and MSI—in 
addition to Lenovo from China, Samsung and LG from 
South Korea, and Sony and Toshiba from Japan.
Nevertheless, the migration of PC production 
still fits the theory of product life cycle (that is, US-
based firms manufactured and designed PCs first, 
and then gradually the production and design func-
tions migrated to Asia). However, the theory of prod-
uct life cycle no longer seems valid in the case of 
Amazon’s Kindle. US-based firms simply do not have 
a chance to manufacture it, which does not generate 
a single US manufacturing job at a time when the 
US unemployment rate is sky-high. In another high-
tech industry, the $30 billion global solar industry, the 
United States has a chance to be a contender in man-
ufacturing. However, the odds are not great because 
the United States produces just 5% of the world’s 
solar panel cells, while China is already the number-
one player, making more than 50%.
General Electric’s (GE) CEO Jeff Immelt has re-
cently admitted that GE has probably gone too far 
in outsourcing. He has labeled the notion that the 
United States could remain an economic superpower 
by relying solely on services and consumption “flat 
wrong.” Recently, Ford’s chairman Bill Ford and Dow 
Chemical’s CEO Andrew Liveris have openly called 
for “industrial policy,” an unpopular term (in the  
Laura Doss/Corbis/Jupiter Images
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

116	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
N O T E S
[Journal acronyms] AME—Academy of Management Executive; AMJ—
Academy of Management Journal; AMR—Academy of Management Review; 
BW—BusinessWeek (before 2010) or Bloomberg Businessweek (since 2010); 
HBR—Harvard Business Review; JIBS—Journal of International Busi-
ness Studies; JIM—Journal of International Management; JM—Journal 
of Management; JMS—Journal of Management Studies; JWB—Journal 
of World Business; MIR—Management International Review; OSc—
Organization Science; SMJ—Strategic Management Journal
1 J. Barney, 1991, Firm resources and sustained competitive advan-
tage, JM, 17: 99–120; M. W. Peng, 2001, The resource-based view and 
international business, JM, 27: 803–829.
2 A. Cuervo-Cazurra & L. Dau, 2009, Promarket reforms and 
firm profitability in developing countries, AMJ, 52: 1348–1368; 
G. Gao, J. Murray, M. Kotabe, & J. Lu, 2010, A “strategy tripod” 
perspective on export behaviors, JIBS, 41: 377–396; K. Meyer, 
S. Estrin, S. Bhaumik, & M. W. Peng, 2009, Institutions, resources, 
and entry strategies in emerging economies, SMJ, 30: 61–80; 
D. Sirmon, M. Hitt, J. Arregle, & J. Campbell, 2010, The dynamic in-
terplay of capability strengths and weaknesses, SMJ, 31: 1386–1409.
3 F. Acedo, C. Barroso, & J. Galan, 2006, The resource-based theory, 
SMJ, 27: 621–636; J. A. Adegbesan, 2009, On the origins of com-
petitive advantage, AMR, 34: 463–475; S. Newbert, 2007, Empirical 
research on the resource-based view of the firm, SMJ, 28: 121–146; 
D. Sirmon, M. Hitt, & R.D. Ireland, 2007, Managing firm resources in 
dynamic environments to create value, AMR, 32: 273–292; M. Sun & 
E. Tse, 2009, The resource-based view of competitive advantage in 
two-sided markets, JMS, 46: 45–64.
4 M.W. Peng & P. Heath, 1996, The growth of the firm in 
planned economies in transition, AMR, 21: 492–528. See also 
W. Egelhoff & E. Frese, 2009, Understanding managers’ prefer-
ences for internal markets versus business planning, JIM, 15: 
77–91; A. Goerzen & P. Beamish, 2007, The Penrose effect, MIR, 
47: 221–239; H. Greve, 2008, A behavioral theory of firm growth, 
AMJ, 51: 476–494; J. Steen & P. Liesch, 2007, A note on Penrosian 
growth, resource bundles, and the Upssala model of international-
ization, MIR, 47: 193–206; T. Reus, A. Ranft, B. Lamont, & G. Adams, 
2009, An interpretive systems view of knowledge investments, AMR, 
34: 382–400.
5  J. Barney, 2001, Is the resource-based view a useful perspective for 
strategic management research? (p. 54) AMR, 26: 41–56.
6 G. Lee, 2008, Relevance of organizational capabilities and its 
dynamics, SMJ, 29: 1257–1280; D. Teece, G. Pisano, & A. Shuen, 1997, 
Dynamic capabilities and strategic management, SMJ, 18: 509–533.
7 J. Barney, 2002, Gaining and Sustaining Competitive Advantage, 
2nd ed. (p. 157), Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
8 M. Porter, 1985, Competitive Advantage, New York: Free Press.
9 A. Parmigiani, 2007, Why do firms both make and buy? 
SMJ, 28: 285–311; M. W. Peng, Y. Zhou, & A. York, 2006, Behind 
make or buy decisions in export strategy, JWB, 41: 289–300.
10 S. Beugelsdijk, T. Pedersen, & B. Petersen, 2009, Is there a trend 
toward global value chain specialization? JIM, 15: 126–141; K. Coucke 
& L. Sleuwaegen, 2008, Offshoring as a survival strategy, JIBS, 39: 
1261–1277; J. Hatonen & T. Eriksson, 2009, 30+ years of research and 
practice of outsourcing, JIM, 15: 142–155; P. Jensen, 2009, A learning 
perspective on the offshoring of advanced services, JIM, 15: 181–193; 
B. Kedia & D. Mukherjee, 2009, Understanding offshoring, JWB, 44: 
250–261; K. Kumar, P. van Fenema, & M. von Glinow, 2009, Offshor-
ing and the global distribution of work, JIBS, 40: 642–667; S. Mudam-
bi & S. Tallman, 2010, Make, buy, or ally? JMS, 47: 1434–1456; G. 
Trautmann, L. Bals, & E. Hartmann, 2009, Global sourcing in inte-
grated network structures, JIM, 15: 194–208; C. Weigelt & M. Sarkar, 
2012, Performance implications of outsourcing for technological in-
novations, SMJ, 33: 189–216.
11 BW, 2006, The 787 encounters turbulence, June 19: 38–40.
12 S. Lahiri, B. Kedia, & D. Mukherjee, 2012, The impact of 
management capability on the resource-performance linkage, 
JWB, 47: 145–155; R. Mudambi & M. Venzin, 2010, The strategic 
nexus of offshoring and outsourcing decisions, JMS, 47: 1510–1533; 
H. Safizadeh, J. Field, & L. Ritzman, 2008, Sourcing practices and 
boundaries of the firm in the financial services industry, SMJ, 29: 
79–91.
United  States at least) that is otherwise known as 
government intervention by picking winners. How-
ever, by bailing out Detroit and rescuing Wall Street, 
the US government has been dragged into “industrial 
policy” without much of a clear long-term policy. At a 
time when global competition is heating up, how to 
beef up the manufacturing (and other) capabilities of 
US firms in order to enhance US competitiveness un-
doubtedly remains job number one for numerous ex-
ecutives and policymakers. But what does the future 
hold for future versions of the Amazon Kindle?
Case Discussion Questions:
	 1.	 From a resource-based view, what resources 
and capabilities do Asian firms involved in the 
production of Amazon’s Kindle have that US 
firms do not have?
	 2.	 What are the differences between the produc-
tion of PCs and the production of Amazon’s 
Kindle?
	 3.	 From an institution-based view, what should the 
US government do to foster US competitiveness?
Sources: Based on (1) BusinessWeek, 2009, Can the future be built in America? September 21: 46–51; (2) BusinessWeek, 2009, Top 20 Taiwan 
global brands 2009, November 23: 43; (3) C. Weigelt, 2009, The impact of outsourcing new technologies on integrative capabilities and performance, 
Strategic Management Journal, 30: 595–616; (4) L. Pierce, 2009, Big losses in ecosystem niches: How core firm decisions drive complementary product 
shakeouts, Strategic Management Journal, 30: 323–347; (5) G. Pisano & W. Shih, 2009, Restoring American competitiveness, Harvard Business Review, 
July-August: 114–125; (6) Y. Su, E. Tsang, & M. W. Peng, 2009, How do internal capabilities and external partnerships affect innovativeness? Asia Pacific 
Journal of Management, 26: 309–331.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 4   Leveraging Resources and Capabilities	
117
13 D. Gregorio, M. Musteen, & D. Thomas, 2009, Offshore out-
sourcing as a source of international competitiveness of SMEs, 
JIBS, 40: 969–988; D. Griffith, N. Harmancioglu, & C. Droge, 2009, 
Governance decisions for the offshore outsourcing of new product 
development in technology intensive markets, JWB, 44: 217–224; 
C. Grimpe & U. Kaiser, 2010, Balancing internal and external knowl-
edge acquisition, JMS, 47: 1483–1509; M. Kenney, S. Massini, & 
T. Murtha, 2009, Offshoring administrative and technical work, 
JIBS, 40: 887–900; A. Lewin, S. Massini, & C. Peeters, 2009, Why are 
companies offshoring innovation? JIBS, 40: 901–925; Y. Li, Z. Wei, & 
Y. Liu, 2010, Strategic orientation, knowledge acquisition and firm 
performance, JMS 47: 1457–82.
14   J. Doh, K. Bunyaratavej, & E. Hahn, 2009, Separable but not equal, 
JIBS, 40: 926–943; J. Hatonen, 2009, Making the locational choice, 
JIM, 15: 61–76; R. Liu, D. Fails, & B. Scholnick, 2011, Why are dif-
ferent services outsourced to different countries? JIBS, 42: 558–571; 
M. Demirbag & K. Glaister, 2010, Factors determining offshore 
location choice for R&D projects, JMS, 47: 1534–1560; S. Zaheer, 
A. Lamin, & M. Subramani, 2009, Cluster capabilities or ethnic ties? 
JIBS, 40: 944–968.
15 F. Contractor, V. Kuma, S. Kundu, & T. Pedersen, 2010, Reconcep-
tualizing the firm in a world of outsourcing and offshoring, JMS, 47: 
1417–1433.
16 A. Pande, 2011, How to make onshoring work, HBR, March: 30.
17 D. Levy, 2005, Offshoring in the new global political economy 
(p. 687), JMS, 42: 685–693.
18 Barney, 2002, Gaining and Sustaining Competitive Advantage 
(pp. 159–174).
19 R. Adner & R. Kapoor, 2010, Value creation innovation ecosys-
tems, SMJ, 31: 306–333; F. Bridoux, R. Coeurderoy, & R. Durand, 
2011, Heterogenous motives and the collective creation of value, 
AMR, 36: 711–730; A. Capaldo, 2007, Network structure and innova-
tion, SMJ, 28: 585–608; O. Chatain & P. Zemsky, 2011, Value creation 
and value capture with frictions, SMJ, 32: 1206–1231; J. Grahovac 
& D. Miller, 2009, Competitive advantage and performance, SMJ, 
30: 1192–1212; T. Holcomb, M. Holmes, & B. Connelly, 2009, 
Making the most of what you have, SMJ, 30: 457–485; M. Kunc & 
J. Morecroft, 2010, Managerial decision making and firm perfor-
mance under a resource-based paradigm, SMJ, 31: 1164–1182; V. La, 
P. Patterson, & C. Styles, 2009, Client-perceived performance and 
value in professional B2B services, JIBS, 40: 274–300.
20 D. Sirmon, S. Gove, & M. Hitt, 2008, Resource management in 
dyadic competitive rivalry, AMJ, 51: 919–935.
21 BW, 2011, Can this IBMer keep Big Blue’s edge? October 31: 31–32.
22 F. Aime, S. Johnson, J. Ridge, & A. Hill, 2010, The routine may 
be stable but the advantage is not, SMJ, 31: 75–87; D. Tzabbar, 2009, 
When does scientist recruitment affect technological repositioning? 
AMJ, 52: 873–896.
23 A. King, 2007, Disentangling interfirm and intrafirm casual 
ambiguity, AMR, 32: 156–178; T. Powell, D. Lovallo, & C. Caringal, 
2006, Causal ambiguity, management perception, and firm perfor-
mance, AMR, 31: 175–196.
24 BW, 2011, Can this IBMer keep Big Blue’s edge? 
25 S. Jonsson & P. Regner, 2009, Normative barriers to imitation, 
SMJ, 30: 517–536; M. Lieberman & S. Asaba, 2006, Why do firms 
imitate each other? AMR, 31: 366–385; F. Polidoro & P. Toh, 2011, 
Letting rivals come close or warding them off? AMJ, 54: 369–392.
26 M. Chari, S. Devaraj, & P. David, 2007, International diver-
sification and firm performance, JWB, 42: 184–197; S. Ethiraj, 
N. Ramasubbu, & M. Krishnan, 2012, Does complexity deter 
customer-focus? SMJ, 33: 137–161; M. Gruber, F. Heinemann, 
M. Brettel, & S. Hungeling, 2010, Configurations of resources 
and capabilities and their performance implications, SMJ, 31: 
1337–1356; M. Kotabe, R. Parente, & J. Murray, 2007, Antecedents 
and outcomes of modular production in the Brazilian automo-
bile industry, JIBS, 38: 84–106; R. Ployhart, C. Van Iddekinge, & 
W. Mackenzie, 2011, Acquiring and developing human capital in 
service contexts, AMJ, 54: 353–368; R. Sinha & C. Noble, 2008, The 
adoption of radical manufacturing technologies and firm survival, 
SMJ, 29: 943–962; K. Srikanth & P. Puranam, 2011, Integrating dis-
tributed work, SMJ, 32: 849–875.
27 T. Chi & A. Seth, 2009, A dynamic model of the choice of mode 
for exploiting complementary capabilities, JIBS, 40: 365–387; 
A. Hess & F. Rothaermel, 2011, When are assets complementary? SMJ, 
32: 895–909; N. Stieglitz & K Heine, 2007, Innovations and the role 
of complementarities in a strategic theory of the firm, SMJ, 28: 1–15.
28 J. Barney, 1997, Gaining and Sustaining Competitive Advantage 
(p. 155), Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
29 D. Farrell, 2005, Offshoring, JMS, 42: 675–683.
30 M. Gottfredson, R. Puryear, & S. Phillips, 2005, Strategic sourcing 
(p. 132), HBR, February: 132–139.
31 C. Rossetti & T. Choi, 2005, On the dark side of strategic sourcing, 
AME, 19 (1): 46–60.
32 K. Kim & W. Tsai, 2012, Social comparison among competing 
firms, SMJ, 33: 115–136.
33 D. Burrus, 2011, Flash Foresight (p. 11), New York: HarperCollins.
34 M. Chari & P. David, 2012, Sustaining superior performance in 
an emerging economy, SMJ, 33: 217–229; R. D’Aveni, G. Dagnino, & 
K. Smith, 2010, The age of temporary advantage, SMJ, 31: 1371–1385.
35 G. Pacheco-de-Almeida, 2010, Erosion, time compression, and 
self-displacement of leaders in hypercompetitive environments, 
SMJ, 31: 1498–1526.
36 The author’s paraphrase based on T. Friedman, 2005, The World 
Is Flat (p. 237), New York: Farrar, Straus, & Giroux.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

118	
 
Map 1.1
Developed Economies, Emerging Economies, and the Group of 20 (G-20)
Sources: IMF, www.imf.org; US Census Bureau, International Database; World Factbook, 2012. The IMF recognizes 182 countries and economies. It labels 
developed economies “advanced economies,” and labels emerging economies “emerging and developing economies”.
part 1
atlas
Greenland
Est
Lat
Polan
Malta
G
Portugal
Switzerland
Belgium
Luxembourg
Spain
Iceland
Norway
Austria
Denmark
United Kingdom
Ireland
Andorra
United States
U.S.
U.S.
Brazil
S
w
e
d
e
n
Netherlands
ARCTIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
Developed Economies 
BRIC Emerging Economies 
Other Emerging Economies
Member of the Group of 20 (G-20)
Mexico
Tonga 
Galapagos
Islands
(Ecuador)
Bahamas
Barbados 
Grenada 
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and
the Grenadines 
Dominica
Antigua and Barbuda 
St. Kitts and Nevis 
Costa Rica 
Panama 
Belize 
Chile
Cuba
Jamaica
Guyana
Suriname
Haiti
Dominican
Republic
Guatemala
El Salvador
Colombia
Ecuador
Peru
Trinidad and Tobago
French Guiana (FR)
Bolivia
Paraguay
Uruguay
Ar
ge
nti
na
Puerto Rico (U.S.)
Nicaragua
Honduras
Venezuela
Cape Verde
Namib
Ang
Equatorial Guinea
São Tomé and Príncipe
Central African republic
Benin
Togo
Ghana
Liberia
Sierra Leone
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Gambia
Côte d’Ivoire 
C
Libya
Tunisia
Algeria
Mali
Mauritania
Western
Sahara
(Morocco)
Senegal
Niger
Nigeria
Cameroo
Morocco
Gabon
Congo
Alba
Al
Croatia
Monaco
Liechtenstein
Burkina
Faso
Canada
France
Germany
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part 1   Atlas	
119
Part 1   Atlas	
119
Estonia
Latvia
Poland
Fiji
Samoa
Vanuatu
Papua
New guinea
Taiwan
Singapore
New Zealand
Australia
Hong Kong
Russia
South
Korea
Malta
Greece
Finland
Czech Republic
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Cyprus
Israel
S
w
e
d
e
n
Japan
INDIAN
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
Lesotho
Namibia
Zambia
Angola
Swaziland
Zimbabwe
Mauritius
Comoros
Malawi
Democratic
Republic of
Congo
Burundi
Rwanda
Uganda
Sudan
Chad
Libya
isia
Egypt
r
ameroon
Kenya
Somalia
Djibouti
Mozambique
Madagascar
Ethiopia
South
      Africa
Botswana
Cambodia
Brunei
Vietnam
Bangladesh
Laos
Mongolia
Kazakhstan
Uzbekistan
Turkmenistan
Azerbaijan
Iran
Kuwait
Qatar
United
Arab
Emirates
Sri Lanka
Pakistan
Afghanistan
Malaysia
Philippines
Indonesia
East Timor
North
Korea
Iraq
Bahrain
Jordan
Eritrea
Saudi
Arabia
Yemen
Oman
Thailand
Lithuania
San Marino 
Belarus
Hungary
Ukraine
Moldova
Romania
Serbia
Bulgaria
Macedonia
Turkey
Montenegro 
Georgia
Armenia
Lebanon
Syria
Albania 
Al
a
Bosnia and
Herzegovina 
Seychelles
Maldives
Palau
Marshall Islands 
Micronesia
Micronesia
Nauru 
Tuvalu
Solomon
   Islands
China
Myanmar (Burma)
Bhutan
Nepal
Tajikistan
Kyrgyzstan
ny
India
Tanzania
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

120	
Part 1   Atlas 
Map 1.2
Political Freedom Around the World 
Bhutan
Pakistan
Afghanistan
Montenegro 
Ukraine
Mexico
Lesotho
Togo
Guinea
Bahrain
Jordan
Mauritania
Senegal
Yemen
Maldives
Free
Partly free
Not free
Ethiopia
Thailand
Gabon
ARCTIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
INDIAN
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
Djibouti
Source: Adapted from Freedom in the World 2011, Freedom House, www.freedomhouse.org.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part 1   Atlas	
121
Map 1.3
Examples of Legal Systems Around the World 
China
Iran
United
Arab
Emirates
Sri Lanka
India
Taiwan
Singapore
Malaysia
New Zealand
Australia
Russia
Indonesia
South
Korea
Italy
Greece
Switzerland
Belgium
France
Austria
Germany
United Kingdom
Ireland
Chile
Canada
Hong Kong
United States
Mexico
U.S.
Zimbabwe
Israel
Egypt
Nigeria
Saudi
Arabia
Kenya
Brazil
Civil law countries
Common law countries
Theocratic law countries
Other countries
Ar
ge
nt
in
a
Japan
Netherlands
Sweden
South Africa
ARCTIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
INDIAN
OCEAN
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

122	
Part 1   Atlas 
Map 1.4
Religious Heritage Around the World
Source: World Factbook, 2000. Note that Confucianism, strictly speaking, is not a religion but a set of moral codes guiding interpersonal relationships.
CANADA
UNITED  STATES
BAHAMAS
CUBA
VENEZUELA
COLOMBIA
GUYANA
SURINAME
FRENCH GUIANA
ECUADOR
BRAZIL
BOLIVIA
CHILE
URUGUAY
MOROCCO
ALGERIA
LIBYA
EGYPT
TUNISIA
WESTERN
SAHARA
MAURITANIA
MALI
NIGER
CHAD
SUDAN
ETHIOPIA
DJIBOUTI
OMAN
SENEGAL
GAMBIA
GUINEA-BISSAU
GUINEA
SIERRA LEONE
LIBERIA
NIGERIA
CAMEROON
CENTRAL 
AFRICAN REP.
GABON
RWANDA
BURUNDI
UGANDA
KENYA
ANGOLA
ZAMBIA
ZIMBABWE
BOTSWANA
SWAZILAND
LESOTHO
SOUTH
AFRICA
IRAQ
KUWAIT
BAHRAIN
QATAR
UNITED
ARAB
EMIRATES
IRAN
KYRGYZSTAN
TAJIKISTAN
BHUTAN
INDIA
BANGLADESH
MYANMAR
THAILAND
LAOS
CAMBODIA
VIETNAM
BRUNEI
TAIWAN
CHINA
JAPAN
MONGOLIA
PHILIPPINES
NORTH
KOREA
SOUTH 
KOREA
AUSTRALIA
NEW
ZEALAND
RUSSIA
PAPUA
NEW GUINEA
GREENLAND
(DENMARK)
SRI
LANKA
SAUDI
ARABIA
BURKINA
FASO
TANZANIA
EQUITORIAL
GUINEA
DEM. REP.
OF THE CONGO
CYPRUS
BENIN
TOGO
ARMENIA
NICARAGUA
HONDURAS
TURKEY
ERITREA
COSTA RICA
EL SALVADOR
GUATEMALA
PANAMA
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
BELIZE
HAITI
ARGENTINA
UNITED
KINGDOM
IRELAND
SPAIN
FRANCE
ITALY
BELG.
NETH.
DEN.
GERMANY
NORWAY
SWEDEN
FINLAND
SWITZ.
AUSTRIA
GREECE
LUX.
POLAND
EST.
LATVIA
LITH.
BELARUS
UKRAINE
CZECH.
MOLDOVA
ROMANIA
HUNG.
BULG.
ALB.
PORTUGAL
SLOVAK
YUGOSLAVIA
COTE
D'IVOIRE
ˆ
JAMAICA
MALTA
MEXICO
PERU
  CONGO
NAMIBIA
 YEMEN
 PAKISTAN
AFGHANISTAN
NEPAL
 MALAYSIA
I N D O N E S I A
GHANA
ICELAND
PARAGUAY
 SOMALIA
ISRAEL
LEBANON
SAUDI
ARABIA
JORDAN
Gaza 
Strip
EGYPT
SYRIA
IRAQ
West
Bank
UNITED
KINGDOM
IRELAND
SPAIN
FRANCE
BELG.
NETH.
GERMANY
ICELAND
FINLAND
LUX.
RUSSIA
BELARUS
UKRAINE
MOLD.
PORT.
NORWAY
SWEDEN
SWITZ.
POLAND
AUST.
CZECH
REP.
SLOVAK.
ROMANIA
HUNG.
BULG.
ALB.
ITALY
DEN.
BOS.-
HERZ.
GREECE
CRO.
YUGO.
MACE.
SLOVEN.
Hindu
Indigenous
Judaism
Muslim
Orthodox, 
no major sects
Atheist
Buddhism
Confucian
Christian, other
Christian, 
Roman Catholic
Religious beliefs among 70% or more of the population
KAZAKHSTAN
MALAWI
MADAGASGAR
 MOZAMBIQUE
AZERBAIJAN
TURKMENISTAN
UZBEKISTAN
GEORGIA
LITH.
LATVIA
EST.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part 1   Atlas	
123
Map 1.5
Select World Literacy Rates Among Adults over Age 15 
Ghana
69%
Gabon
88%
Singapore
95%
Philippines
95%
ARCTIC
OCEAN
INDIAN
OCEAN
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
Argentina
98%
Guatemala
74%
Colombia
93%
Jamaica
86%
Haiti
49%
Bangladesh
56%
Nepal
59%
India
63%
Vietnam
95%
Cyprus
98%
Egypt
66%
Saudi
Arabia
86%
Yemen
62%
Hungary
99%
Portugal
95%
Botswana
84%
Malawi
74%
Chad
34%
Estonia
100%
Ukraine
100%
Source: Adapted from Adult literacy rate (2012). UN Data, http://data.un.org/Data.aspx?d=SOWC&f=inID%3A74.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

124	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
Coca-Cola in Africa1
Mike W. Peng (University of Texas at Dallas)
I n t e g r a t i v e  C a s e  1 . 1
Already in all African countries, Coca-Cola has committed 
$12 billion to invest in the continent between 2010 and 2020. 
Why does Coca-Cola show such strong commitments to Africa?
Founded in 1892, Coca-Cola first entered Africa in 1929. 
While Africa had always been viewed as a “backwater,” 
it has recently emerged as a major growth market com-
manding strategic attention. Of the $27  billion that 
Coca-Cola’s chairman and CEO Muhtar Kent prom-
ised to invest in emerging economies between 2010 and 
2020, $12 billion will be used to beef up the plants and 
distribution facilities in Africa. Why does Coca-Cola 
show such strong commitments to Africa? Both the 
push and pull effects are at work.
The Push
The push comes from the necessity to find new sources 
of growth for this mature firm, which has promised in-
vestors 7%–9% earnings growth. On July 14, 1998, its 
stock reached a high-water mark at $88. But it dropped 
to $37 in 2003. In 2011, it rallied 30% over the past 
year and reached $67 on December 1. Can Coca-Cola’s 
stock reach higher?
Its home markets are unlikely to help. Between 2006 
and 2011, US sales declined for five consecutive years. 
Further, health advocates accused Coca-Cola of con-
tributing to an epidemic of obesity in the United States 
and proposed to tax soft drinks to pay for health care. 
While Coca-Cola defeated the tax initiative, it is fair to 
say the room for growth at home is limited. In Europe 
and Japan, sales are similarly flat. Elsewhere, in China, 
strong local rivals have made it tough for Coca-Cola to 
break out. Its acquisition of a leading local fruit juice 
firm was blocked by the government, which did not 
seem to bless Coca-Cola’s further growth. In India, 
Pepsi is so popular that “Pepsi” has become the Hindi 
shorthand for all bottled soft drinks (including Coke!). 
In Latin America, sales are encouraging but growth 
may be limited. Mexicans on average are already  
1) This research was supported by the O. P. Jindal Chair at the Jindal School of 
Management, University of Texas at Dallas. All views and errors are those of 
the author. © Mike W. Peng. Reprinted with permission.
guzzling 665 servings of Coca-Cola products every year, 
the highest in the world. There is only so much sugary 
water one can drink every day.
The Pull
In contrast, Coca-Cola is pulled by Africa, where it has 
a commanding 29% market share versus Pepsi’s 15%. 
With 65,000 employees and 160 plants, Coca-Cola is 
Africa’s largest private sector employer. Yet, annual 
per capita consumption of Coca-Cola products is only 
39 servings in Kenya. For the continent as a whole, 
disposable income is growing. In 2010, 60 million 
Africans earned at least $5,000 per person, and the 
number is likely to reach 100 million by 2014. While 
Africa indeed has some of the poorest countries in 
the world, 12  African countries (with a combined 
population of 100 million) have a GDP per capita 
that is greater than China’s. Coca-Cola is hoping to 
capitalize on Africa’s improved political stability and 
physical infrastructure. Countries not fighting civil 
wars make Coke’s operations less disruptive, and new 
roads penetrating the jungle can obviously elevate 
sales. 
Coca-Cola is already in all African countries. The 
challenge now, according to CEO Kent, will be to 
deep dive into “every town, every village, every town-
ship.” This will not be easy. War, poverty, and poor 
infrastructure make it extremely difficult to distrib-
ute and market products in hard-to-access regions. 
Undaunted, Coca-Cola is in a street-by-street campaign 
to increase awareness and consumption of its products. 
The crowds and the poor roads dictate that some of the 
deliveries have to be done manually on pushcarts or 
trolleys. Throughout the continent, Coca-Cola has set 
up 3,000 Manual Distribution Centers. Taking a page 
from its playbook in Latin America, especially Mexico, 
Coca-Cola has aggressively courted small corner stores. 
Coca-Cola and its bottlers offer small corner store own-
ers delivery, credit, and direct coaching—ranging from 
how to save electricity to advice on buying a house after 
vendors make enough money.
In Africa, US-style accusations of Coca-Cola’s al-
leged contribution to the obesity problem are unlikely. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part One   Integrative Cases	
125
After all, the primary concern in many communities 
is too few available calories of any kind. However, 
this does not mean Africa is Coca-Cola’s marketing 
Shangri-la, free from any criticisms. It has to defend 
itself from critics that accuse it of depleting fresh water, 
encouraging expensive and environmentally harmful 
refrigeration, and hurting local competitors who hawk 
beverages. In response, Coca-Cola often points out the 
benefits it has brought. In addition to the 65,000 jobs it 
has directly created, one million local jobs are indirectly 
created by its vast system of distribution, which moves 
beverages from bottling plants deep into the villages 
and the bush a few crates at a time.
The Future
“Ultimately,” the Economist opined, “doing business in 
Africa is a gamble on the future.” Overall, CEO Kent 
is very optimistic about Africa. In his own words at a 
media interview: 
Africa is the untold story, and could be the big story, 
of the next decade, like India and China were this 
past decade. The presence and the significance of 
our business in Africa is far greater than India and 
China even today. The relevance is much bigger . . . 
In Africa, you’ve got an incredibly young population, 
a dynamic population. Huge disposable incomes. 
I mean, $1.6  trillion of GDP, which is bigger than 
Russia, bigger than India. It’s a big economy, and 
so rich underground. And whether the next decade 
becomes the decade of Africa or not, in my opinion, 
will depend upon one single thing—and everything 
is right there to have it happen—that is better gover-
nance. And it is improving, there is no question.
Case Discussion Questions 
	 1.	 Why is Coca-Cola so interested in Africa, which 
is typically regarded as part of the base of the 
global economic pyramid?
	 2.	 What unique resources and capabilities does 
Coca-Cola have that will help it compete well in 
Africa?
	 3.	 What are the drawbacks of making such large-
scale commitments to Africa? 
	 4.	 Do stakeholders in the United States and Africa 
who criticize Coca-Cola have a reasonable case 
against it?
Sources: Based on (1) M. Blanding, 2010, The Coke Machine, New York: 
Avery; (2) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2010, Coke’s last round, November 1: 
54–61; (3) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2010, For India’s consumers, Pepsi is 
the real thing, September 20: 26-27; (4) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2011, Can 
Coke surpass its record high of $88 a share? June 6: 49–50; (5) Economist, 
2006, Business in Africa, September 9: 60–62; (6) Economist, 2008, Index 
of happiness, July 5: 58; (7) D. Zoogah, M. W. Peng, & H. Woldu, 2012, 
Linking management research and African organizations, working paper, 
University of Texas at Dallas.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

126	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
Whose Law Is Bigger: Arbitrating Government-Firm Disputes in the EU1
Brian C. Pinkham (Texas Christian University)
I n t e g r a t i v e  C a s e  1 . 2
Formal institutional frameworks such as investment laws and 
treaties are designed to facilitate certainty and predictability. 
But what can foreign firms that have already invested in host 
countries do if these frameworks change? 
One of the key concerns as a multinational enter-
prise (MNE) making foreign direct investment (FDI) 
is how to take advantage of incentives in different 
host countries while safeguarding investor interests 
if something goes awry. This issue may arise when 
countries change regimes, like when the Central 
and Eastern European (CEE) countries joined the 
European Union (EU) in 2004–2007. Similarly, when 
a country nationalizes an industry like Argentina did 
with utilities (such as water and gas) in 2001 and with 
the Spanish oil firm Repsol in 2012, it would leave 
many foreign investors without recourse for recoup-
ing their investments. Courts in Argentina were un-
able to enforce investor contracts and the government 
refused to repay investors. However, since these con-
tracts fell under the protection of a series of bilateral 
investment treaties (BITs) between Argentina and 
other countries (typically one BIT covers one pair of 
countries), aggrieved firms can file for binding arbi-
tration proceedings through the International Center 
for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), which 
is based in Washington, DC.
Binding arbitration is a private forum for contract 
dispute resolution. Its functions are similar to those 
of an international court, but it uses experts, rather 
than judges, to decide complex disputes. While arbitra-
tion awards do not change laws (they merely interpret 
laws), binding arbitration has the benefit of enforce-
ment in multiple jurisdictions under the New York 
Convention of 1958 and the ICSID Convention. A to-
tal of 146 countries are signatories. Therefore, binding 
arbitration awards made in one country are enforce-
able in 145 other countries. This includes awards made 
against other signatory countries, such as Argentina. 
Generally, countries that lose cases pay voluntarily. 
However, even as recently as 2012 Argentina continues 
1) © Brian C. Pinkham. Reprinted with permission.
to be reluctant to pay. Many of these firms, such as 
Vivendi and Siemens, are seeking Argentine assets in 
other signatory countries.
The EU law is starting to feel the pressure of these 
government–firm investment disputes. To attract FDI 
before joining the EU, Hungary and Romania in the 
1990s and the early 2000s offered large and lucrative 
incentives in long-term contracts. However, because 
Hungary and Romania joined the EU in 2004 and 
2007, respectively, the incentives became illegal under 
the EU law. This is because the EU law forbids any dis-
crimination against any EU member countries and 
firms. Any BIT between, for example, Hungary (a non-
member until 2004) and Austria (an EU member) that 
gives Austrian firms preferential treatment and invest-
ment incentives, by definition, discriminates against 
firms from other EU countries. Therefore, such BITs 
were declared illegal by the EU and contracts signed 
under the BITs were forcibly withdrawn by Romania 
and Hungary in 2008. 
MNEs from the EU (Sweden and Belgium) and 
the US responded to the 2008 abrogation of their 
contracts in Hungary and Romania by seeking rem-
edies in arbitration instead of national courts. For ex-
ample, Micula, a firm from Sweden, is suing Romania 
for unilaterally removing tax and custom duties from 
the contracts. In Hungary, several foreign electricity 
producers are suing for breach of long-term power 
supply contracts based on unilateral change of elec-
tricity pricing. These contracts fell under the BITs 
between the contracting countries. Because the con-
tracts are unenforceable under EU law, but enforce-
able under the BITs in place at the time of contract-
ing, these cases present a larger question: Which law 
takes precedence? 
Recent arbitration suggests that the EU law is sec-
ondary to original commitments—that is, local laws 
and BITs at the time of original contracting are to be 
respected if they clash with the EU law. For example, 
in 2008, a Dutch sugar company received an award 
of €25 million against the Czech Republic based on a 
contract under a Dutch-Czech BIT from the 1990s. The 
arbitration tribunal sent a clear message by excluding 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part One   Integrative Cases	
127
the argument that the treaty ceased to have force upon 
the Czech Republic’s entry into the EU in 2004. Likely 
responding to this message, the EU Commission is 
taking an active role in the current proceedings involv-
ing Hungary and Romania, seeking to intervene in the 
arbitration decisions. 
Case Discussion Questions
	 1.	 ON ETHICS: If the EU law is bigger, the MNEs 
lose billions of euros. If the EU law is second-
ary, the governments (and ultimately the tax-
payers) in the host countries must pay. From 
a (formal) legal standpoint, which law should 
come first? From an informal (ethical) stand-
point, which law should come first?
	 2.	 From an institution-based view, explain why the 
MNEs in this case filed through arbitration and 
not in courts in the host countries.
	 3.	 As an investor, do you want to support 
BITs and arbitration or rely on local court 
systems?
Sources: Based on (1) International Center for Settlement of Investment 
Disputes, 2009, http://icsid.worldbank.org/ICSID/Index.jsp; (2) S. Pignal & 
N. Tait, 2009, EU leaves sour aftertaste, Financial Times, June 22, 2009; 
(3) B. C. Pinkham & M. W. Peng, 2012, Arbitration and cross-border transac-
tion costs, working paper, Texas Christian University and University of Texas 
at Dallas; (4) United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, 2009, 
http://www.uncitral.org; (5) L. E. Peterson, Investment Arbitration Reporter, 
2(8), 2009.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

128	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
Fighting Counterfeit Motion Pictures1
Alan Zimmerman (City University of New York, College of Staten Island)
Peggy Chaudhry (Villanova University)
I n t e g r a t i v e  C a s e  1 . 3
The scale and scope of counterfeiting, especially in motion pic-
tures, make it very challenging to combat counterfeiting. Are 
current anticounterfeiting measures effective?
Big Business
Counterfeiting is big business. It is a problem that has 
been haunting businesspeople for millennia. The first 
producer’s marks appeared on pottery in China about 
4,000 years ago. And it was not much later when coun-
terfeiters saw the advantage of copying successful prod-
ucts. In the Roman Empire, a well-known brand name 
for oil lamps was FORTIS. So many artifacts with this 
name have been found that it is evident that widespread 
product copying took place at the time.
What exactly is a counterfeit product? A common 
definition is that “any unauthorized manufacturing of 
goods whose special characteristics are protected as 
intellectual property rights (IPR) constitutes product 
counterfeiting.” IPR includes copyrights, patents, and 
trademarks. The scope of counterfeiting is widespread 
with traditional products ranging from footwear 
to computer software to watches to cigarettes. The 
pirates have also diversified their product offerings to 
non-traditional goods in health and safety areas, such 
as pharmaceuticals and aircraft parts. The total size 
of the counterfeit market is nearly impossible to accu-
rately determine, but it appears to be growing rapidly. 
In 1985, the annual worldwide product counterfeit 
market was estimated at about $25 billion. Today, a 
number of organizations claim that more than 5% of 
world trade consists of counterfeit goods and some 
estimate the total from $200 billion to $500 billion 
annually. 
A number of reasons have been given for the 
growth of counterfeits. An in-depth analysis shows 
many driving forces, including the low investment 
required to get into a market combined with easily 
available cheap technology, globalization and lower 
trade barriers, powerful worldwide brands, ongoing 
consumer willingness to buy counterfeit product, and 
1) © Alan Zimmerman and Peggy Chaudhry. Reprinted with permission.
especially weak national and international enforce-
ment of IPR. Each of these forces relate to the basic 
issues discussed in this text. Industry structures such 
as entry barriers that can be overcome by technol-
ogy and the continuing importance of worldwide 
brands are important. Firm-specific resources such 
as the ability to copy product, find distribution out-
lets, and secure financing make certain pirate firms 
successful.
But it is clear that the overriding driver of the 
growth of counterfeit products lies within institution-
al frameworks. A number of multilateral organiza-
tions exist to protect IPR, including the World Trade 
Organization’s Trade Related Aspects of Intellec-
tual Property Rights (TRIPS), the World Intellectual 
Property Organization (WIPO) that is charged with 
implementing the provisions of the Paris Convention 
dealing with patents and trademarks, and the Bern 
Convention that focuses on copyrights. In addition, 
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), such as the 
International Anticounterfeiting Coalition (IACC), 
the Business Software Alliance (BSA), and the Software 
Information Industry Association (SIIA), deal with 
chronic piracy. A critical problem lies in enforcement. 
While in the United States, convicted counterfeiters 
may be fined millions of dollars and spend years in 
prison even for a first offense, in many countries coun-
terfeiters can get away with small fines and virtually no 
danger of a prison sentence. The US Trade Representa-
tive (USTR) reports each year on the IP environment 
within each US trading partner. Countries that fail to 
enforce their IPR laws are subject to penalties from the 
US government. 
Despite the plethora of governmental and nongov-
ernmental agencies attempting to control counterfeit 
product, the failure of enforcement at national and 
international levels has allowed pirates to operate 
with impunity in many countries. For example, the 
infamous Ciudad del Este in Paraguay has been de-
scribed as the Wild West for its illicit trade. Other 
problem countries for IPR protection described in 
our 2009 book, The Economics of Counterfeit Trade: 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part One   Integrative Cases	
129
Governments, Consumers, Pirates, and Intellectual Prop-
erty Rights, are Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Egypt, 
India, Israel, Lebanon, Mexico, Russia, Thailand, 
Turkey, Ukraine, and Venezuela, which are host 
countries notorious for counterfeit shopping districts 
(such as Xiushui Market—formerly known as Silk 
Alley—in Beijing).
Counterfeit Motion Pictures
One critical worldwide problem is the illegal copy-
ing of motion pictures. The box office for films in the 
United States was estimated at $10.6 billion in 2010 
(the same as 2009) and globally at $31.8 billion (an 8% 
increase over 2009). For example, Disney’s Ratatouille 
was launched simultaneously in 33 countries in mul-
tiple languages and earned more than $300 million in 
international sales on the third weekend of its debut 
in 2007. With this type of revenue, the Motion Pic-
ture Association of America (MPAA or MPA) tries to 
improve the image of “Hollywood.” It reports several 
reasons why the industry should be nurtured, since it 
employs over 2.5 million professionals (ranging from 
costume designers to set builders), contributes almost 
$80 billion per year to the US economy, and is the only 
US industry that has a positive balance of trade in all of 
its foreign markets.
A 2009 article in The Wall Street Journal authored 
by one of us (Chaudhry), “Getting Real About Fakes,” 
reported that over 50% of 2,000 consumers surveyed 
in Brazil, Russia, India, China, and the United States 
had obtained a fake movie in either a physical or 
virtual market and that the average frequency of ac-
quisition was three times during the past year. Despite 
the well-publicized efforts of many national govern-
ments and international as well as nongovernmental 
institutions, the counterfeit product market appears 
to be growing at a rapid pace. The world of counter-
feiting seems subject mainly to informal norms and 
beliefs. The advent of easy and inexpensive commu-
nications allows all the players in this business to rely 
on relationship-based informal networks while easily 
avoiding detection. 
Many actions aimed at slowing down product 
counterfeiting have been offered by a number of re-
searchers. Studies of these recommended actions 
show that some are particularly ineffective. In particu-
lar, actions directed at consumers, whose willingness 
to buy counterfeit products including pirated mov-
ies is undaunted, seem fruitless. The MPA is target-
ing young consumers on its website and even has 
prepared material for the Weekly Reader that educates 
fifth-grade students through a story of “Lucky and 
Flo,” two dogs who sniff out fake DVDs by sensing 
the chemicals used to manufacture this product. 
Obviously, the goal is to create better cybercitizens by 
educating youth to reinforce the concept that using 
fake movies is stealing and analogous to shoplifting. 
Nevertheless, most studies report that consumers 
generally see purchasing a counterfeit good as a vic-
timless crime. In addition, the industry has followed 
in the footsteps of Apple iTunes, and there are now 
several ways to obtain movies legally through the web 
at places like MovieFlex and Netflix. Today, consum-
ers can obtain Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs at Amazon 
Video on Demand for $6.99 that gives them the flex-
ibility to watch this film through their television, a 
computer, a portable video device, or “save it for later” 
in a video library. 
The most effective anticounterfeiting action is 
straightforward—registering trademarks/patents/copy-
rights in the relevant jurisdictions. In addition, other 
effective actions focus on distributors and employees  
and local law enforcement. The MPA has developed a 
multipronged action plan ranging from publication of 
the “Top 25 University Piracy Schools” to commercials 
featuring Jackie Chan and Arnold Schwarzenegger 
riding motorcycles in their “Mission to Stop Piracy” 
advertisement. A few years ago, the MPA used the 
“You Can Click But Can’t Hide” campaign to educate 
consumers about the ease of finding someone who 
has illegally downloaded a movie from the web. This 
prompted bloggers to create their own anti-antipiracy 
campaign, “You Can Sue, But You Can’t Catch 
Everyone.” Current ads at the MPA website focus on 
illegally filming movies in the theater with the slogans, 
“Lights. Camera. Busted.” and “Leave Your Camera at 
Home. Do Not Record in This Theater.”
It may be that over time the growth and sophisti-
cation of particular markets will reduce counterfeit-
ing. Pressures from legitimate suppliers have certainly 
made product counterfeiting less widespread in the 
United States, Japan, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and South 
Korea as these markets mature. In the meantime, to 
limit the harm counterfeiters can do to their brands, 
owners of IPR must have effective ongoing antipiracy 
programs that have the attention of top management. 
Case Discussion Questions
	 1.	 Why do some entrepreneurs choose a strategy of 
product counterfeiting?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

130	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
	 2.	 What are the main drivers in the growth of prod-
uct counterfeiting?
	 3.	 Review the antipiracy advertisements on the 
MPAA website. Do you think these types of ads 
will effectively deter illegally filming movies in 
the theater and posting on the web? In your opin-
ion, what anticounterfeiting actions would the 
MPAA have to develop to realistically get con-
sumers to stop using illegal movies?
	 4.	 Why do the authors assert that “the world of 
counterfeiting seems subject mainly to informal 
norms and beliefs”?
	 5.	 What are the most effective actions firms can take 
to protect their products from being counterfeited?
Sources: Based on (1) K. Barry, 2007, Counterfeits and Counterfeiters: 
The Ancient World; (2) C. Bialik, 2006, Efforts to quantify sales of pirated 
goods lead to fuzzy figures, The Wall Street Journal, October 19: B1;  
(3) P. Chaudhry & S. Stumpf, 2009, Getting real about fakes, The Wall 
Street Journal, August  19, http://online.wsj.com; (4) P. Chaudhry & 
A. Zimmerman, 2009, The Economics of Counterfeit Trade: Govern-
ments, Consumers, Pirates and Intellectual Property Rights, Heidelberg, 
Germany: Springer-Verlag; (5) V. Cordell, N. Wongtada, & R. Kieschnick, 
1996, Counterfeit purchase intentions: Role of lawfulness attitudes and 
product traits as determinants, Journal of Business Research, 35: 41–53; 
(6) International Anti-Counterfeiting Coalition, 2007, Get Real—The Truth 
about Counterfeiting; (7) J. Kay, 2007, Ratatouille becomes 10th Disney 
film to gross $300 million overseas, http://www.screendaily.com;  
(8)  Motion Picture Association of America, 2005, The Cost of Movie 
Piracy; (9) Motion Picture Association of America, http://www.mpaa.org;  
(10) S. Ono, 1999, Overview of Japanese Trademark Law, Chapter 2; 
(11)  T.  Stern, 1985, Foreign product counterfeiting, Vital Speeches of the 
Day, Volume LI, No. 22; (12) G. Tom, B. Garibaldi, Y. Zeng, & J. Pilcher, 1998, 
Consumer demand for counterfeit goods, Psychology and Marketing, 15: 
405–421; (13) D. J. Weinterfeldt, L. Dow & P. Albertson, 2002, Historical 
Trademarks: In Use since 4000 BC, International Trademark Association; 
(14) United States Trade Representative, 2007, Special 301 Report.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part One   Integrative Cases	
131
Brazil’s Embraer: From State-Owned Enterprise to Global Leader1
Juan España (National University)
I n t e g r a t i v e  C a s e  1 . 4
How does Embraer grow to become a global leader in the highly 
competitive aircraft manufacturing industry?
In 1994, when Fernando Henrique Cardoso was elect-
ed as Brazil’s new president, the economy was unstable 
and experiencing hyperinflation of about 2,000% per 
year. As a finance minister in the previous administra-
tion, Cardoso and his team had introduced econom-
ic measures centered on the Real Plan. This plan was 
very successful and by 1997 inflation had been brought 
down to international levels. Macroeconomic reforms 
and price stability revived the economy. Brazil had 
been the world’s economic miracle of the 1970s and 
most of the 1980s. With a steady course, it could now 
look forward to a new era of growth. An important 
part of the reforms was the privatization of key state-
owned enterprises (SOEs). One of them was Embraer, 
the short form for Empresa Brasileira de Aeronautica,  
S. A. (Brazilian Aeronautics Company). Embraer’s stock 
is traded on the Sao Paulo Bovespa and has been listed 
on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE: ERJ) since 
2000.
Origins
Embraer was created in 1969 by a military govern-
ment determined to provide Brazil with the capacity 
to produce military aircraft. The company was set up 
as a mixed enterprise, with the Brazilian state retain-
ing a 51% majority of the voting shares and the rest 
held by private investors. Production started in 1970 
and the company became profitable the next year and 
remained so until 1981. Propelled by government pro-
curement and fiscal support, Embraer soon produced 
internationally successful models, such as the turbo-
prop models EMB 110 Bandeirante transport aircraft 
and its larger, 30-seat successor, the EMB 120 Brasilia, 
as well as the Tucano military trainer.
The company is located in San Jose dos Campos, 
in the state of Sao Paulo, in the corridor between the 
cities of Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro. This part of 
Brazil is called “Technology Valley,” with industrial 
clusters in the aerospace, telecommunications, auto-
mobile, and petroleum sectors. Educational centers 
have been created in the area offering aerospace-
related programs. Embraer’s distinctive competencies 
are the areas of R&D, design, product development, 
system integration, assembly, and technical assistance 
in aircraft manufacturing.
Product Range
Embraer’s product range includes commercial, mili-
tary, and corporate aircraft, with commercial sales in 
2009 accounting for 66% and the fast-growing corpo-
rate segment (also known as executive aviation) repre-
senting 14% (see Exhibits 1, 2, and 3). By comparison, 
commercial and corporate sales represented about 
80% and 6% of total sales in 2002. 
In 1989, Embraer introduced the 35-seat ERJ 135 
and the 50-seat ERJ 145 regional jets to meet increasing 
demand for jets to replace turboprop models. Regional 
jets are smaller and less costly to acquire and operate 
than larger jets such as the Boeing 737. They are a 
cost-effective alternative to serve mid-range routes 
and to feed passengers from smaller airports to major 
hubs replacing larger planes that were underutilized 
in short-haul flights. Sales of Embraer’s new family of 
regional jets took off rapidly.
By 1994, Embraer had reached world market shares 
of 31% and 42% in the regional jet and the military 
trainer markets, respectively. However, it was facing se-
vere challenges. A downturn in demand in the airline 
1) © Juan España. Reprinted with permission.
© Paul Bowen/Science Faction/Corbis
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

132	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
industry had led to a serious decline in commercial 
aircraft sales, while export financing was drying up 
due to the expiration of the Brazilian government 
Finex program. These and other factors contributed 
to a sense of disarray at Embraer at a time when major 
reforms such as privatization were transforming the 
Brazilian economy. In December 1994, Embraer was 
privatized, and acquired by a consortium of Brazilian 
institutions headed by a local investment bank. The 
Brazilian government retained a golden share that 
allowed it to veto certain strategic actions such as a 
takeover by a foreign company.
Commercial Aircraft
Turboprop
EMB 110 Bandeirante (produced until 1990)
EMB 120 Brasilia
Regional Jets
ERJ 145 family (37–50 passengers)
ERJ 170, 175, 190, 195 (80–122 passengers)
Military Aircraft
Tucano: Military trainer, produced since 1980. Used by air forces around the world.
EMB 314 Super Tucano
AMX International Fighter, in service with the Brazilian and Italian Air Forces
ERJ 145 military variants: EMB 145 AEW&C, EMB145 RS/AGS
KC 390 military tanker/transport being developed for the Brazilian military
Corporate Aircraft
Phenom 100, 300
EMB Legacy 450, 500, 600
EMB Lineage 1000
Agriculture Aircraft
Ipanema: The world’s first alcohol-powered airplane. More than 4,000 units sold.
Exhibit 3
Product Range
2009
North America
43%
Brazil
4%
Europe
18%
Others
7%
Asia Paciﬁc
18%
Latin America
10%
Exhibit 2
Revenue by Region
Source: www.embraer.com
Exhibit 1
Revenue by Segment
Source: www.embraer.com
2009
Commercial Aviation
66.7%
Executive Aviation
14.3%
Defense
6.9%
Customer Support
10.4%
Others
1.7%
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part One   Integrative Cases	
133
By 1998, buoyed by the success of its ERJ family 
of jets introduced in 1989, Embraer had become the 
world’s leader in the regional jet market, surpassing its 
main rival, Bombardier of Canada. In 1999, Embraer 
became Brazil’s leading exporter and accounted for 
about 7% of all of Brazil’s exports of manufactured 
goods.
In 1999, after a $1 billion investment in develop-
ment, Embraer introduced the E-Jet family, consist-
ing of the 80-seat ERJ 170, the 110-seat ERJ 190, and 
the 122-seat ERJ 195 airliners. They are comparable 
to Boeing 737 and DC-9 airliners. These jets proved 
to be very successful and the first one was delivered 
in 2002. Bombardier had no comparable models to 
compete against this new line of Embraer planes. 
Currently, Bombardier offers the original jet series, 
the 50-seat CRJ 100 and CRJ 200, which are identical 
except that CRJ 200 has more powerful engines. Bom-
bardier also developed the CRJ 700, CRJ 900, and CRJ 
1000, which are simply stretched versions of the CRJ 
200 and have a capacity of 70, 90, and 100 passengers, 
respectively. However, in July 2004, Bombardier an-
nounced the development of the C Series consisting of 
the CS 100 (100–125 seats) and the CS 300 (120–150 
passengers). The launch year has been set as 2013. 
The C Series jets are comparable to the Boeing 787 
and the Airbus 350.
Supply Chain
Embraer’s production structure gives the company a 
competitive edge. Its supply network consists of three 
layers. At the first level, risk (or strategic) partners 
carry most of the risk of innovation and operate on 
the basis of long-term contracts. At the second level, 
international suppliers provide equipment, systems, 
and components. At the third level are the national 
subcontractors that supply services and products fol-
lowing Embraer’s specifications. They are retained on 
the basis of purchase orders and can be easily replaced. 
Embraer trains employees of these suppliers. They re­
present a diversified local network of about 30 small 
and medium-sized firms mostly located in close prox-
imity of Embraer, and are typically founded by previ-
ous employees of the company. The number of these 
suppliers has gradually been reduced. For instance, 
while the ERJ 145 program had about 400 suppliers, 
the newer ERJ 170/190 program had around 20. Sup-
pliers must be ISO9000 certified. 
Embraer develops new products using a “co-design” 
approach that involves risk partners that carry most 
of the risk of innovation. Risk partners are also re-
sponsible for aggregating subsystems and components 
into modules (complete, recognizable subunits of the 
airplane). This modular assembly system reduces the 
number of suppliers and shifts risk and costs from 
the company to suppliers. These supply chain innova-
tions provide Embraer with a competitive edge result-
ing from reduced levels of risk, reduced R&D costs, re-
duced complexity of the production process, increased 
quality, increased innovation, and—in the case of ERJ 
170/190—a 33% shorter product development process 
(from 54 to 36 months).
The new family of regional jets, the ERJ 170/190, 
was designed through a cooperative system. Embraer’s 
design process consists of three phases: (1) the initial 
definition phase that is performed before the risk 
partners are selected, (2) the joint definition phase that 
is carried out by all risk partners and involves assigning 
the design of different parts of the aircraft to different 
partners, and (3) the detailed design and certification 
phase during which the risk partners finish all details 
and the aircraft seeks certification in different national 
markets.
Over the years, Embraer has attempted to address 
issues of strategic importance such as dependency on 
international suppliers, low local content of its prod-
ucts, a lack of government support for R&D, and a lack 
of an internal market intelligence unit. To alleviate 
these obstacles, Embraer has engaged in corporate ca-
pacity building at various levels.
The level of dependency on international contrac-
tors is illustrated by the fact that about 95% (by vol-
ume) of the equipment, materials, and components 
are purchased on international markets. The total 
national (Brazilian) content in each airplane is only 
about 40%, with risk partners accounting for an ad-
ditional 38% of the total cost of an airplane. Embraer 
is attempting to increase local sourcing, mainly by at-
tracting international suppliers to set up operations 
in Brazil. Some progress has been made in this area. 
For example, in 2003, Japan’s Kawasaki opened a wing-
production plant within Embraer’s Gaviao Peixoto 
facility, joining other international companies that 
have set up plants in Brazil, such as C&D Aerospace, 
Sonaca, Goodyear, and ELEB. In 2008, Embraer took 
full ownership of ELEB, a former joint venture (JV) 
of Embraer with Liebherr of Germany, and this sub-
sidiary now exports landing gear and hydraulic equip-
ment to aerospace firms in the United States, Asia, and 
Europe.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

134	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
Embraer faces hurdles in the creation of knowledge 
and specialized suppliers. It lacks a targeted govern-
ment program focusing on R&D and the creation of 
small high-tech suppliers to the aerospace industry. In 
addition, the company’s relationships with universities 
are rather informal and not comparable to the struc-
tured ties found between companies and university-
based R&D centers in the United States and Europe. 
In order to expedite the process of innovation and 
knowledge creation, Embraer is considering creating 
its own corporate university.
For many years, Embraer had relied on external 
consultants to produce market studies of the commer-
cial aircraft industry. In 1998, it established its own 
market intelligence unit, with the ultimate goal of pro-
ducing good estimates while at the same time internal-
izing market analysis into the company’s competitive 
strategy.
International Operations
Embraer sells civil and military aircraft around the 
world, and has established plants, sales, and mainte-
nance centers in China, France, Portugal, Singapore, 
and the Unites States. A new dimension in Embraer’s 
relations with the outside world was initiated in 1999 
when the company established a strategic alliance with 
a French consortium formed by Dassault, Aerospatiale 
Matra, Thompson-CSF, SNECMA, and EADS (the 
parent company of Airbus). These companies acquired 
about 8% of Embraer’s equity. The pact would have 
allowed Embraer access to new military and civil avia-
tion technology. Among other projects, the agreement 
envisaged the assembly of France’s Mirage fighter jets 
in Brazil. However, EADS sold its equity in 2007 and 
the Mirage project was never carried out. In 2005, a 
consortium consisting of Embraer and EADS acquired 
control of OGMA, Portugal’s formerly state-owned 
aerospace firm. OGMA would provide service and 
perform certification procedures for Embraer aircraft 
in Europe.
In 2002, Embraer established a JV with Aviation In-
dustry of China II (AVIC II), opening a plant in Harbin, 
China, to produce ERJ 145 regional jets. The first jet 
was produced in 2003, and a total of 25 would be deliv-
ered to Hainan Airlines by 2011.
Challenges for the Future
As of 2010, Embraer can look back to major achieve-
ments that have turned it into the world’s third largest 
commercial aircraft manufacturer in terms of sales, 
surpassed only by Boeing and Airbus. However, many 
significant challenges lie ahead. 
Embraer is preparing to face another difficult year 
as the world economy and commercial carriers experi-
ence the worst crisis since World War II. Many orders 
have been downsized or cancelled, and Embraer is 
expecting a 10% sales decline for 2010. The company 
is reacting to the crisis by cutting staff and adopting 
other cost-reduction measures, but there is no end in 
sight for the downturn in the world economy. To make 
matters worse, Bombardier has received several orders 
for its new C Series jets due for delivery starting in 2013, 
and Embraer, whose models go up to 122 seats, has 
nothing to offer in the 149-seat range. In addition, the 
Brazilian real appreciated by 35% against the US dol-
lar in 2009, and this will ultimately show as increased 
costs at Embraer, where about 40% of expenditures are 
denominated in the real.
There are a few bright spots in this otherwise 
bleak landscape: Sales of the expanded line of corpo-
rate jets are growing fast and making up for lost rev-
enue in other areas, and domestic sales are expected 
to reach $500 million in 2010 driven by purchases by 
the new Brazilian discount airline Azul (founded by 
Brazilian-born David Neeleman, the previous CEO of 
a US discount airline JetBlue). Azul ordered 76 of the 
118-seat ERJ 190. In addition, new lines of financing 
have been offered: China’s CDB Leasing Co., a unit 
of China Development Bank, awarded Embraer a 
$2.2 billion loan for the sale of Embraer planes, and 
the Brazilian state bank BNDES plans to step up 
financing of Embraer sales from the previous level of 
30% to as much as 60% in 2010. With an order back-
log of about $18 billion at the beginning of 2010 and 
new sources of financing lined up, Embraer is confi-
dent that it can weather the current crisis and grow 
again.
Case Discussion Questions
	 1.	 Perform a brief SWOT analysis of Embraer.
	 2.	 From a resource-based view, what are the key 
success factors behind Embraer’s success in the 
market for regional jets?
	 3.	 What changes do you foresee over the next five 
years in the market for regional jets?
	 4.	 Since September 11, 2001, demand in the air-
line industry has been unstable or deteriorating. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part One   Integrative Cases	
135
How can Embraer grow and remain profitable in 
such an environment?
	 5.	 How can Embraer’s international operations be 
upgraded to increase its competitiveness?
Sources: Based on (1) R. Bernardes, 2003, Passive Innovation System 
and Local Learning: A Case Study of Embraer in Brazil, Fundação SEADE, 
November; (2) Bloomberg, 2009, Embraer bets on Brazil market as global sales  
decline, December 23; (3) Bombardier’s website, www.bombardier.com;  
(4)  Embraer’s website, www.embraer.com; (5) J. España, 2004, Explain-
ing Embraer’s hi-tech success: Porter’s diamond, new trade theory, or the 
market at work, Journal of the American Academy of Business, 4(1), March; 
(6) P. Figueiredo, S. Gutenberg, & R. Sbragia, 2008, Risk sharing partnerships 
with suppliers: The case of Embraer, Journal of Technology Management and 
Innovation, 3(1); (7) V. Frigant & Y. Lung, 2003, Geographical proximity and 
supplying relationship in modular production, Actes du GERPISA, No. 34;  
(8)  Newsweek, 2006, Embraer: An ugly duckling finds its wings, July  31; 
(9) E. Leslie, 2002, How Brazil Beat Hyperinflation, UCLA Latin America Center.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

136	
Part One   Laying Foundations 
Microsoft in China1
Mike W. Peng (University of Texas at Dallas)
I n t e g r a t i v e  C a s e  1 . 5
How does Microsoft change its approach to China? What are 
the changed results and the remaining challenges? 
From a Disastrous Start to a Sweet Spot
Microsoft’s first decade in China was disastrous. It es-
tablished a representative office in 1992 and then set 
up a wholly owned subsidiary Microsoft (China) in 
1995. The firm quickly realized that it did not have a 
market share problem—everybody was using Windows. 
The problem was how to translate that market share 
into revenue, since everybody seemingly used pirated 
versions. Microsoft’s solution? Sue violators in Chinese 
courts. But Microsoft lost such lawsuits regularly. 
Alarmed, the Chinese government openly promoted 
the free open-source Linux operating systems. For 
security reasons, the Chinese government was afraid 
that Microsoft’s software might contain spyware for the 
US government. Internally, Microsoft’s executives often 
disagreed with this confrontational strategy. Its coun-
try managers came and went—five in a five-year period. 
Two of them later wrote books criticizing this strategy. 
These books revealed that Microsoft’s antipiracy policy 
was excessively heavy-handed, and that their authors’ 
efforts to educate their bosses in headquarters in 
Redmond, Washington (a Seattle suburb), were deeply 
frustrated. 
Fast forward to 2007. President Hu Jintao visited 
Microsoft and paid Bill Gates a visit at his house as a 
dinner guest. “You are a friend to the Chinese people, 
and I am a friend of Microsoft,” Hu told Gates. “Every 
morning I go to my office and use your software.” Starting 
in the mid 2000s, the Chinese government required all 
government agencies to use legal software and all PC 
manufacturers to load legal software before selling to 
consumers. Prior to these requirements, Lenovo, the 
leading domestic PC maker, had only shipped about 
10% of its PCs that way. Many foreign (and some US) 
PC makers in China sold numerous machines “naked,” 
1) This research was supported by the O. P. Jindal Chair at the Jindal School of 
Management, University of Texas at Dallas. All views and errors are those of 
the author. © Mike W. Peng. Reprinted with permission.
implicitly inviting their customers to use cheap illegal 
software. From a disastrous start, Microsoft today is in a 
sweet spot in China. So, what happened? 
The Changes
In a nutshell, Microsoft radically changed its approach 
to China in its second decade in the country. In China, 
it became the “un-Microsoft”: pricing at rock bottom 
instead of insisting on one very high “global price”; 
abandoning the confrontational, litigious approach 
in defense of its intellectual property rights (IPR); and 
closely partnering with the government as opposed to 
fighting it (as it was doing back home when it was sued 
by the US government). 
To be sure, the strategic changes were gradual. In 
1998, Gates sent Craig Mundie, who headed the firm’s 
public policy group, to Beijing. Mundie urged for 
strategic changes. He brought 25 of Microsoft’s 100 vice 
presidents for a week-long “China Immersion Tour.” 
Also in 1998, in part as a gesture of goodwill, Microsoft 
set up a research center in Beijing, which emerged to 
become the premier employer for top-notch software 
talents.
Within Microsoft, debates raged. Given the size 
of the country, changing the China strategy would 
inevitably lead to changing the global strategy, which 
was centered on a global, “one-size-fits-all” set of prices 
(such as $560 for the Windows and Office toolset as 
in the United States). The heart of the question was: 
“Does Microsoft need China?” As late as in 2004, its 
CFO, John Connors, argued “No” publicly. Connors was 
not alone. On the face of it, nobody needed China less 
than Microsoft, which became a dynamo without many 
China sales. However, in the long run, China’s support 
of Linux could pose dangers to Microsoft. This was 
because a public infrastructure for a software industry 
built around Linux could generate an alternative 
ecosystem with more low-cost rivals that break free 
from dependence on Windows. By the early  2000s, 
concerned about this competitive threat, Gates increas-
ingly realized that if the Chinese consumer were going 
to use pirated software, he would rather prefer it to be 
Microsoft’s. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part One   Integrative Cases	
137
In 2003, Tim Chen, a superstar China manager at 
Motorola, was hired as Corporate Vice President and 
CEO of Greater China Region for Microsoft. Led by 
Chen, Microsoft quit suing people and tolerated piracy. 
Instead, it worked with the National Development 
Reform Commission to build a software industry, with 
the Ministry of Information Industry to fund labs 
jointly, and with the Ministry of Education to finance 
computer classrooms in rural areas. Overall, it elevated 
its R&D presence, trained thousands of professionals, 
and invested close to $100 million in local firms. In 
response to Chinese government concerns about 
the alleged US government spyware embedded in 
Microsoft’s software, in 2003 the firm offered China 
(and 59 other countries) the fundamental source 
code for Windows and the right to substitute certain 
portions with local adaptation—something Microsoft 
had never done before. Only after such sustained and 
multidimensional efforts did the Chinese government 
bless Microsoft’s business by requiring that only legal 
software be used by government offices and loaded 
by PC makers. Although Microsoft never disclosed 
the depth of the discount it offered to the Chinese 
government, a legal package of Windows and Office 
could be bought for $3 (!). In Chen’s own words:
With all this work, we start changing the percep-
tion that Microsoft is the company coming just to do 
antipiracy and sue people. We changed the company’s 
image. We’re the company that has the long-term 
vision. If a foreign company’s strategy matches with 
the government’s development agenda, the govern-
ment will support you, even if they don’t like you. 
The Challenges
Microsoft now has its own five-year plan to match the 
Chinese government’s. But not all is rosy when working 
closely with the Chinese government. Problems have 
erupted on two fronts. First, Microsoft continues to 
be frustrated by the lack of sufficient progress on IPR. 
While not disclosing country-specific sales numbers, 
CEO Steve Ballmer complained in an interview in 2010 
that, thanks to IPR problems, “China is a less interest-
ing market to us than India . . . than Indonesia.” 
Second, Microsoft has been criticized by free speech 
and human rights activists for its “cozy” relationship with 
the Chinese government. While largely unscrutinized 
by the media, the Chinese version of Microsoft MSN 
has long filtered certain words such as “democracy” 
and “freedom.” In 2010 Google butted heads with the 
Chinese government and openly called for Microsoft 
(and other high-tech firms) to join its efforts. Microsoft 
refused. Instead, Microsoft took advantage of Google’s 
trouble. It set up an alliance with Google’s number-
one rival in China, Baidu, to provide English-language 
search results for Baidu from its Bing search engine. 
Such search results, of course, would be subject to po-
litical censorship. In 2011, anyone in China searching 
“jasmine,” in either Chinese (on Baidu) or English (on 
Baidu and routed through Bing), would find this term 
to be unsearchable—thanks to the Jasmine Revolution 
(otherwise known as the Arab Spring). 
Case Discussion Questions 
	 1.	 From an institution-based view, what are the 
major lessons from Microsoft’s strategic changes?
	 2.	 From a resource-based view, what valuable 
and unique resources and capabilities does 
Microsoft have in the eyes of the Chinese users 
and the government?
	 3.	 Why does Microsoft feel threatened by Linux in 
China and globally?
	 4.	 ON ETHICS: As a Microsoft spokesperson, how 
do you respond to free speech and human rights 
critics?
Sources: Based on (1) CFO, 2004, Does Microsoft need China? August 10, 
www.cfo.com; (2) Fortune, 2007, How Microsoft conquered China,  
July 23: 84–90; (3) Guardian, 2010, We’re staying in China, March 25,  
www.guardian.co.uk; (4) Guardian, 2011, Microsoft strikes deal with China’s 
biggest search engine Baidu, July 4, www.guardian.co.uk; (5) Microsoft, 
2006, Microsoft in China, www.microsoft.com; (6) South China Morning 
Post, 2010, Beijing flexes its economic muscle, July 27: B8.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

cisale/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Acquiring Tools
Chapters
	
5	 Trading Internationally
	
6	 Investing Abroad Directly
	
7	 Dealing with Foreign Exchange
	
8	 Capitalizing on Global and Regional 
Integration
p a r t
2
FPO
Digital Art/Spirit/Corbis
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
	 5-1	 use the resource-based and institution-
based views to answer why nations trade.
	 5-2	 understand classical and modern theories of 
international trade.
	 5-3	 realize the importance of political realities 
governing international trade.
	 5-4	 participate in two leading debates 
concerning international trade.
	 5-5	 draw implications for action.
Ulrich Baumgarten/vario images GmbH & Co.KG/Alamy Limited
Chapter 
5 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

* This case only deals with US merchandise (goods) exports. In service 
exports, the United States is even more competitive. It is the undisputed 
global champion every year. In 2011, US service exports were $578 billion, 
ahead of the second largest service exporter, the United Kingdom (which 
exported $274 billion), by a wide margin (see Table 5.1). While the United 
States is also the world’s largest service importer (with $391 billion im-
ports in 2011), it has always run a service trade surplus. 
Between the publication of Global Business’s sec-
ond edition (with 2008 data) and third edition (with 
2011 data), China dethroned Germany to become the 
world’s export champion. Widely reported, China’s rise 
as the world’s top export nation created both sensa-
tions and concerns. Yet, what was little reported by the 
media was that the United States also surged ahead 
of Germany and is now the world’s second largest 
exporter—never mind all that talk about the decline of 
US competitiveness. 
In 2011, the United States exported a record 
$1.48 trillion, with an enviable 16% annual increase.* 
While behind China’s $1.90 trillion exports, the US out-
sold the long-time export champion, Germany, which 
exported $1.47 trillion, and the previously (and still) for-
midable Japan, which exported $823 billion. What were 
the top US export categories? Refined petroleum prod-
ucts, civilian aircraft, semiconductors, passenger cars, 
and telecom equipment. The top five export states were 
Texas (which exported one-sixth of the nation’s total  
exports), California, Illinois, Louisiana, and New York. 
The US Department of Commerce proudly noted that 
“fueling our economic recovery, exports are a bright 
spot in the US economy.” Further, the United States is 
“on track to meet the President’s National Export Initia-
tive goals of doubling US exports by the end of 2014.”
Why are US exports so competitive? What is unique 
about US exports? What has been driving their recent 
rise in a very bleak global economic environment that 
has barely recovered from the Great Recession of 2008 
and 2009? On top of the Great Recession, one can add 
more recent catastrophes such as the Japanese earth-
quake, the Thai floods, the euro zone crisis, and the Mid-
dle East turmoil. To make a long story short, first, US 
exports have to deliver value. Consider civilian aircraft. 
One crucial reason that the new Boeing 787 Dreamliner 
became the hottest-selling airliner prior to its launch is 
its ability to reduce fuel consumption by 15%—music 
to the ears of airline executives who suffer from sky-
rocketing oil prices. Second, US exports also have to 
be rare and hard to imitate, considering that virtually all 
self-respecting governments are urging their own firms 
to export more in an effort to combat recession. There 
is no shortage of global rivals tearing apart US prod-
ucts and trying to reverse-engineer them. European, 
Russian, and Chinese aerospace firms are doing this 
Trading Internationally
O p e n i n g  C a s e
Why Are US Exports So Competitive?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

142	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
at this moment by trying to out-Boeing Boeing. While 
Airbus has been quite successful, neither the Russian 
nor the Chinese civilian aircraft makers have much pres-
ence in export markets. Finally, US exporters have to 
organize themselves in a more productive and efficient 
manner relative to their global rivals. It is hard enough to 
design and manufacture world-class airliners, but it is no 
less challenging to operate service, training, and main-
tenance networks for airlines that cannot afford any 
equipment breakdown for a long period—on a world-
wide basis and for 20 to 30 years after the initial sale.
While the products themselves have to be strong 
and competitive, Uncle Sam has also helped. At least 
ten federal agencies offer export assistance: the De-
partments of Commerce, State, Treasury, Energy, and 
Agriculture as well as the Office of US Trade Represen-
tative (USTR), the Export-Import Bank (Ex-Im Bank), 
the US Agency for International Development (USAID), 
the Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC), 
and the Small Business Administration (SBA). Since 
only approximately 1% of all US firms export and of 
them 58% export to just one country, clearly more as-
sistance will be helpful if more firms are interested in 
joining the export game.
In addition to routine export assistance, new initia-
tives focus on negotiating free trade agreements (FTAs) 
with trading partners. As of this writing, the United States 
has 12 FTAs in force with 18 countries: Australia, Bahrain, 
Chile, DR-CAFTA (Dominican Republic-Central America 
FTA, which covers Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, El 
Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua), Israel, 
Jordan, Morocco, NAFTA (which covers Canada and 
Mexico), Oman, Peru, Singapore, and South Korea. In 
addition, two FTAs with Panama and Colombia were 
negotiated, but they are still pending Congressional ap-
proval. FTAs typically reduce trade barriers to US exports 
and create a more stable and transparent trading envi-
ronment. In the first FTA with an East Asian country, the 
South Korea–US FTA (also known as KORUS), which 
was enacted at the end of 2011, both countries agreed 
to eliminate 95% of tariffs on goods within five years. 
For example, South Korea agreed to phase out a 40% 
tariff on US beef imports, and the United States agreed 
to waive a 2.5% tariff on Korean auto imports.
In addition to FTAs, the US government often nego-
tiates with other foreign governments for better market 
access and terms of trade for US exporters. The push 
to get the Chinese to let the yuan appreciate so that 
the dollar can be cheaper and US exports can be more 
competitive is a case in point. Despite an allegedly “ar-
tificially” low yuan and a government eager to promote 
China’s own exports, China rose from being the ninth 
largest US export market in 2001 to the third largest 
in 2011 (behind Canada and Mexico). During that pe-
riod, US exports to China jumped over 400%, while US 
exports to the rest of the world only grew 55%. Given 
the still huge US trade deficit (of which the US–China 
trade deficit is the largest component), clearly there is 
more room to push US exports.
In addition to formal institutions, informal norms 
and values, both at home and abroad, play a role be-
hind US exports. At home, all the talk about the virtue 
and necessity of energy conservation and going green 
evidently has slowly become a part of the American 
cultural norm. One piece of evidence is that US oil con-
sumption has declined since 2006. This helps explain 
why refined petroleum products (such as gasoline, 
diesel, and jet fuel) recently shot ahead of civilian air-
craft to become the number-one export category. This 
is partly because much of the refining capacity the 
United States added in the past decade is now geared 
toward exports. While gurus write about the decline of 
US influence, the informal norms of consuming and 
appreciating US products seem to proliferate over-
seas. In Paris metro (underground) stations, almost 
every other poster seems to be about a Hollywood 
blockbuster (in March 2012, it was Target). In Accra, 
the middle class flock into Ghana’s first KFC and lick 
their fingers greased by grown-in-USA chicken. If you 
are studying this book outside the United States, then 
you are a US export customer, too. Enjoy!
Sources: This case draws on a long line of my own research on US 
export strategy, starting with my PhD dissertation (cited as 5 below) 
and most recently with an interview with the Dallas Morning News on 
Texas export competitiveness (cited as 3 below). This case is based on 
(1) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2012, Yum’s big game of chicken, March 29: 
64–69; (2) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2011, The real way a trade deal gets 
done, October 24: 30–32; (3) Dallas Morning News, 2012, Texas exports 
spike higher on energy goods, February 23; (4) Economist, 2010, Go sell, 
March 13: 32; (5) M. W. Peng, 1998, Behind the Success and Failure of US 
Export Intermediaries, Westport, CT: Quorum; (6) US Commercial Service, 
2012, export.gov; (7) US Department of Commerce, 2012, New export 
data show 36 states experienced double digit growth of merchandise 
exports, International Trade Administration press release, February  23; 
(8) Washington Post, 2011, America’s top export in 2011 was . . . fuel? 
December 31.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 5   Trading Internationally	
143
Why are US exports so competitive in the world? Why are exports a bright spot in 
this economy? More generally, how does international trade contribute to a nation’s 
economic growth and prosperity? International trade is the oldest and still the most im-
portant building block of international business. It has never failed to generate debates. 
Debates on international trade tend to be very ferocious, because so much is at stake. 
We begin by addressing a crucial question: Why do nations trade? Then we outline how 
the two core perspectives introduced in earlier chapters—namely, resource-based and 
institution-based views—can help answer this question. The remainder of the chapter 
deals with the theories and realities of international trade. As before, debates and im-
plications for action follow.
5-1 Why Do Nations Trade?
Internationally, trade means export (sell abroad) and import (buy from abroad). 
Table 5.1 provides a snapshot of the top ten exporting and importing nations in 
the two main sectors: merchandise (goods) and services. In merchandise exports, 
China, the United States, and Germany are the top three. In merchandise imports, 
the top three are the United States, China, and Germany. In services, the United 
States is both the largest exporter and the largest importer. Britain and Germany 
are the top two and three service exporters, and Germany and China are the top 
two and three service importers (see PengAtlas Map 2.1 and 2.2).
Relative to domestic trade, international trade entails much greater complexi-
ties (see PengAtlas Map 2.1 and 2.2). So, why do nations go through these trou-
bles to trade internationally?1 Without getting into details, we can safely say that 
there must be economic gains from trade. More importantly, such gains must be 
shared by both sides—otherwise, there will be no willing exporters and importers. 
In other words, international trade is a win-win deal. Figure 5.1 shows that world 
trade growth (averaging over 5% between 1991 and 2011) routinely outpaces GDP 
growth (averaging nearly 3% during the same period). In 2009, a very difficult 
year, trade had a more severe drop than GDP. Otherwise, in every other year, trade 
growth exceeded GDP growth.
Why are there gains from trade?2 How do nations benefit from such gains? 
The remainder of the chapter will answer these questions. Before proceeding, 
it is important to clarify that “nations trade” is a misleading statement. A more 
accurate expression should be: “Firms from different nations trade.”3 Unless 
different governments directly buy and sell from each other (such as arms 
sales), the majority of trade is conducted by firms, which pay little attention 
to country-level ramifications. For example, Wal-Mart imports a lot into the 
United States and does not export much. Wal-Mart thus directly contributes to 
the US trade deficit (a nation imports more than it exports), which is something 
the US government does not like. However, in most countries, governments 
cannot tell firms, such as Wal-Mart, what to do (and not to do) unless firms 
engage in illegal activities. Therefore, we need to be aware that when we ask, 
“Why do nations trade?” we are really asking, “Why do firms from different 
nations trade?” When discussing the US–China trade whereby China runs a 
trade surplus (a nation exports more than it imports), we are really referring to 
thousands of US firms buying from and selling to China, which also has thou-
sands of firms buying from and selling to the United States. The aggregation 
of such buying (importing) and selling (exporting) by both sides leads to the 
Learning Objective
Use the resource-based and 
institution-based views to 
answer why nations trade.
5-1
Export
Selling abroad.
Import
Buying from abroad.
Merchandise
Tangible products being traded.
Services
Intangible services being traded.
Trade deficit
An economic condition in which 
a nation imports more than it 
exports.
Trade surplus
An economic condition in which 
a nation exports more than it 
imports.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

144	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
Table 5.1
Leading Trading Nations
Top 10
merchandise 
exporters
Value 
($ billion)
World 
share (%)
Annual 
change 
(%)
Top 10
merchandise 
importers
Value 
($ 
billion)
World 
share (%)
Annual 
change 
(%)
1
China
1,899
10.4%
20%
1
United States
2,265
12.3%
15%
2
United States
1,481
8.1%
16%
2
China
1,743
9.5%
25%
3
Germany
1,474
8.1%
17%
3
Germany
1,254
6.8%
19%
4
Japan
823
4.5%
7%
4
Japan
854
4.6%
23%
5
Netherlands
660
3.6%
15%
5
France
715
3.9%
17%
6
France
597
3.3%
14%
6
United Kingdom
636
3.5%
13%
7
South Korea
555
3.0%
19%
7
Netherlands
597
3.2%
16%
8
Italy
523
2.9%
17%
8
Italy
557
3.0%
14%
9
Russia
522
2.9%
30%
9
South Korea 
524
2.9%
23%
10
Belgium
476
2.6%
17%
10
Hong Kong, 
China
511
2.8%
16%
World total
18,215
100%
19%
World total
18,380
100%
19%
Top 10
service
exporters
Value 
($ billion)
World 
share (%)
Annual 
change 
(%)
Top 10
service
importers
Value 
($ billion)
World 
share (%)
Annual 
change 
(%)
1
United States
578
13.9%
11%
1
United States
391
10.1%
5%
2
United Kingdom
274
6.6%
11%
2
Germany
284
7.3%
8%
3
Germany
253
6.1%
9%
3
China
236
6.1%
23%
4
China
182
4.4%
7%
4
United Kingdom
171
4.4%
7%
5
France
181
3.9%
11%
5
Japan
155
4.3%
6%
6
India
148
3.6%
20%
6
France
141
3.6%
7%
7
Japan
143
3.4%
3%
7
India
130
3.4%
12%
8
Spain
141
3.4%
14%
8
Netherlands
118
3.1%
12%
9
Netherlands
128
3.1%
11%
9
Italy
115
3.0%
5%
10
Singapore
125
3%
12%
10
Ireland
113
2.9%
6%
World total
4,150
100%
11%
World total
3,470
100%
11%
Source: Adapted from World Trade Organization, 2012, World trade 2011, prospects for 2012, press release (Appendix Tables 3 and 5), April 12, Geneva: WTO 
(www.wto.org). All data are for 2011.
country-level balance of trade—namely, whether a country has a trade surplus 
or deficit.
Having acknowledged the limitations of the expression that “nations trade,” 
we will still use it. Why? Because it is commonly used and serves as a short-hand 
version of the more accurate but more cumbersome expression that “firms from 
different nations trade.” This clarification does enable us to use the two firm-level 
perspectives introduced earlier—namely, the resource-based and institution-based 
views—to shed light on why nations trade.
Balance of trade
The aggregation of importing and 
exporting that leads to the coun-
try-level trade surplus or deficit.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 5   Trading Internationally	
145
Recall from Chapter 4 that it is valuable, rare, inimitable, and organization-
ally derived (VRIO) products that determine the competitive advantage of a 
firm. Applying this insight, we can suggest that valuable, rare, and inimitable 
products generated by organizationally strong firms in one nation can lead to 
the competitive advantage of its exports (see the Opening Case).4 Further, re-
call from Chapters  2 and 3 that numerous politically and culturally derived 
rules of the game (known as institutions) constrain and facilitate individual 
and firm behavior. For example, although American movies are the best in the 
world, Canada, France, and South Korea limit the market share of American 
movies. Thus, various regulations create trade barriers around the world. On 
the other hand, we also see the rise of rules and organizations that facilitate 
trade, such as those advocated by the World Trade Organization (WTO) (see 
Chapter 8).
Overall, why are there economic gains from international trade? According to 
the resource-based view, this is because some firms in one nation generate exports 
that are valuable, unique, and hard-to-imitate that firms from other nations find 
it beneficial to import. How do nations benefit from such gains? According to the 
institution-based view, different rules governing trade are designed to share (or 
not to share) such gains.5 The remainder of this chapter expands on these two 
perspectives.
5-2 Theories of International Trade
Theories of international trade provide one of the oldest, richest, and most influ-
ential bodies of economics, whose founding is usually associated with the publica-
tion of British economist Adam Smith’s The Wealth of Nations in 1776. Theories of 
Learning Objective
Understand classical and 
modern theories of international 
trade.
5-2
Figure 5.1
Growth in World Trade Outpaces Growth in World GDP  
(Annual % Change)
Source: World Trade Organization, 2012, World trade 2011, prospects for 2012, press release, April 12, Geneva: 
WTO (www.wto.org). “P” in “2012P” and “2013P” refers to prediction.
15.0
10.0
5.0
0.0
25.0
210.0
215.0
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012P
2013P
Exports
GDP
Average GDP growth
1991–2011
Average export
growth 1991–2011
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

146	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
international trade predate Adam Smith. In fact, Adam Smith wrote The Wealth 
of Nations to challenge an earlier theory: mercantilism. In this section, we briefly 
review major theories of international trade: (1) mercantilism, (2) absolute ad-
vantage, (3) comparative advantage, (4) product life cycle, (5) strategic trade, and 
(6) national competitive advantage. The first three are often regarded as classical 
trade theories, and the last three are viewed as modern trade theories.
5-2a Mercantilism
Widely practiced between the 1600s and the 1700s, the theory of mercantilism viewed 
international trade as a zero-sum game. Its theorists, led by French statesman Jean-
Baptiste Colbert, believed that the wealth of the world (measured in gold and silver at 
that time) was fixed, and that a nation that exported more and imported less would 
enjoy the net inflows of gold and silver and thus become richer. On the other hand, a 
nation experiencing a trade deficit would see its gold and silver flowing out and, con-
sequently, would become poorer. The upshot? Self-sufficiency would be best.
Although mercantilism is the oldest theory in international trade, it is not an 
extinct dinosaur. Very much alive, mercantilism is the direct intellectual ancestor 
of modern-day protectionism, which is the idea that governments should actively 
protect domestic industries from imports and vigorously promote exports (see the 
Closing Case). Many modern governments may still be mercantilist at heart. Think 
about all these export assistance programs run by many governments (see the 
Opening Case). Has anyone seen an import assistance program?
5-2b Absolute Advantage
The theory of absolute advantage, advocated by Adam Smith in 1776, opened the 
floodgates of the free trade movement that is still going on today. Smith argued that 
in the aggregate, the “invisible hand” of markets, rather than governments, should 
determine the scale and scope of economic activities. This is known as laissez faire 
(see Chapter 2). By trying to be self-sufficient and (inefficiently) produce a wide 
range of goods, mercantilist policies reduce the wealth of a nation in the long run. 
Smith thus argued for free trade, which is the idea that free market forces should 
determine how much to trade with little (or no) government intervention. 
Specifically, Smith proposed a theory of absolute advantage: With free trade, 
each nation gains by specializing in economic activities in which it has absolute 
advantage. What is absolute advantage? It is the economic advantage one nation 
enjoys that is absolutely superior to other nations. For example, Smith argued that 
because of better soil, water, and weather, Portugal enjoyed an absolute advantage 
over England in the production of grapes and wines. Likewise, England had an 
absolute advantage over Portugal in the production of sheep and wool. England 
could grow grapes at a greater cost and with much lower quality—has anyone heard 
of any world-famous English wines? Smith suggested (1) that England should spe-
cialize in sheep and wool, (2) that Portugal should specialize in grapes and wines, 
and (3) that they should trade with each other. Here are two of Smith’s greatest 
insights. First, by specializing in the production of goods for which each has an 
absolute advantage, both can produce more. Second, by trading, both can benefit 
more. By specializing, England produces more wool than it can use, and Portugal 
produces more wine than it can drink. When both countries trade, England gets 
Classical trade theories
The major theories of interna-
tional trade that were advanced 
before the 20th century, which 
consist of (1) mercantilism, 
(2) absolute advantage, and 
(3) comparative advantage.
Modern trade theories
The major theories of international 
trade that were advanced in the 
20th century, which  consist of 
(1) product life  cycle, (2) strategic 
trade, and (3) national competitive 
advantage of industries.
Theory of mercantilism
A theory that suggests that the 
wealth of the world is fixed and 
that a nation that exports more 
and imports less will be richer.
Protectionism
The idea that governments 
should actively protect domestic 
industries from imports and vig-
orously promote exports.
Free trade
The idea that free market forces 
should determine how much to 
trade with little or no govern-
ment intervention.
Theory of absolute advantage
A theory that suggests that un-
der free trade, a nation gains by 
specializing in economic  activi-
ties in which it has an  absolute 
advantage.
Absolute advantage
The economic advantage one 
nation enjoys that is absolutely 
superior to other nations.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 5   Trading Internationally	
147
more (and better) wine and Portugal more (and better) wool than either country 
could produce on its own. In other words, international trade is not a zero-sum 
game as suggested by mercantilism. It is a win-win game.
How can this be? Let us use an example with hypothetical numbers (Figure 5.2 
and Table 5.2). For the sake of simplicity, assume there are only two nations in 
the world: China and the United States. They only perform two economic activi-
ties: growing wheat and making aircraft. Production of wheat or aircraft, naturally, 
requires resources such as labor, land, and technology. Assume that both are equally 
Is it necessary for a country to have an absolute advantage in some activity, 
such as the production of a particular crop, in order to participate in inter-
national trade?
Radius Images/Jupiter Images
5
10
20
30
0
10
20
30
40
B
C
Aircraft
Chinese Production 
Wheat (000 tons)
D
40
A
US Production 
Figure 5.2
Absolute Advantage
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

148	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
endowed with 800 units of resources. Between the two activities, the United States 
has an absolute advantage in the production of aircraft—it takes 20 resources to 
produce an aircraft (for which China needs 40 resources), and the total US capac-
ity is 40 aircraft if it does not produce wheat (point D in Figure 5.2). China has an 
absolute advantage in the production of wheat—it takes 20 resources to produce 
1,000 tons of wheat (for which the United States needs 80 resources) and the total 
Chinese capacity is 40,000 tons of wheat if it does not make aircraft (point A). It is 
important to note that the United States can grow wheat and that China can make 
aircraft, albeit inefficiently. But because both nations need wheat and aircraft, with-
out trade, they produce both by spending half of their resources on each—China 
at point B (20,000 tons of wheat and 10 aircraft) and the United States at point C 
(5,000 tons of wheat and 20 aircraft). Interestingly, if they stay at points A and D, 
respectively, and trade one-quarter of their output with each other (10,000 tons of 
Chinese wheat with 10 American aircraft), these two countries, and by implication 
the global economy, both produce more and consume more (Table 5.2). In other 
words, there are net gains from trade based on absolute advantage.
5-2c Comparative Advantage
According to Adam Smith, each nation should look for absolute advantage. How-
ever, what can nations do when they do not possess absolute advantage? Continuing 
our two-country example of China and the United States, what if China is absolutely 
inferior to the United States in the production of both wheat and aircraft (which 
is the real case today)? What should China do? What should the United States do? 
Obviously, the theory of absolute advantage runs into a dead end.
In response, British economist David Ricardo developed a theory of comparative 
advantage in 1817. This theory suggests that even though the United States has an 
absolute advantage over China in both wheat and aircraft, as long as China is not 
equally less efficient in the production of both goods, China can still choose to 
specialize in the production of one good (such as wheat) where it has comparative 
advantage—defined as the relative (not absolute) advantage in one economic 
activity that one nation enjoys in comparison with other nations. Figure 5.3 and 
Theory of comparative  
advantage
A theory that focuses on the 
relative (not absolute) advantage 
in one economic activity that 
one nation enjoys in comparison 
with other nations.
Comparative advantage
Relative (not absolute) advan-
tage in one economic activity 
that one nation enjoys in com-
parison with other nations.
Table 5.2
Absolute Advantage
Total units of resources 5 800 for each country
Wheat
Aircraft
(1) Resources required to produce 1,000 tons of wheat and 
1 aircraft. 
China
US
20 resources
80 resources
40 resources
20 resources
(2) Production and consumption with no specialization and without 
trade (each country devotes half of its resources to each activity).
China (point B)
US (point C)
Total production
20,000 tons
5,000 tons
25,000 tons
10 aircraft
20 aircraft
30 aircraft
(3) Production with specialization (China specializes in wheat and 
produces no aircraft, and the United States specializes in aircraft 
and produces no wheat).
China (point A)
US (point D)
Total production
40,000 tons
0
40,000 tons
0
40 aircraft
40 aircraft
(4) Consumption after each country trades one-quarter of 
its output while producing at points A and D, respectively 
(Scenario #3).
China
US
Total consumption
30,000 tons
10,000 tons
40,000 tons
10 aircraft
30 aircraft
40 aircraft
(5) Gains from trade: Increase in consumption as a result of 
specialization and trade (Scenario #4 versus #2).
China
US
110,000 tons
15,000 tons
0
110 aircraft
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 5   Trading Internationally	
149
Table 5.3 show that China’s comparative advantage lies in its relatively less ineffi-
cient production of wheat: If China devotes all resources to wheat, it can produce 
10,000 tons, which is four-fifths of the 12,500 tons the United States can produce. 
However, at a maximum, China can only produce 20 aircraft, which is merely half 
of the 40 aircraft the United States can make. By letting China specialize in the pro-
duction of wheat and importing some wheat from China, the United States is able 
to leverage its strengths by devoting its resources to aircraft. For example, if (1) the 
United States devotes four-fifths of its resources to aircraft and one-fifth to wheat 
(Point C in Figure 5.3), (2) China concentrates 100% of its resources on wheat 
(Point E), and (3) they trade with each other, both countries produce and consume 
more than what they would produce and consume if they inefficiently devote half 
of their resources to each activity (see Table 5.3).
Table 5.3
Comparative Advantage
Total units of resources 5 800 for each country
Wheat
Aircraft
(1) Resources required to produce 1,000 tons of wheat and 
1 aircraft. 
China
US
80 resources
64 resources
40 resources
20 resources
(2) Production and consumption with no specialization and 
without trade (each country devotes half of its resources to each 
activity).
China (point F)
US (point B)
Total production
5,000 tons
6,250 tons
11,250 tons
10 aircraft
20 aircraft
30 aircraft
(3) Production with specialization (China devotes all resources to 
wheat, and the United States devotes one-fifth of its resources to 
wheat and four-fifths of its resources to aircraft).
China (point E)
US (point C)
Total production
10,000 tons
2,500 tons
12,500 tons
0
32 aircraft
32 aircraft
(4) Consumption after China trades 4,000 tons of wheat for 
11 US aircraft while producing at points E and C, respectively 
(Scenario #3).
China
US
Total consumption
6,000 tons
6,500 tons
12,500 tons
11 aircraft
21 aircraft
32 aircraft
(5) Gains from trade: Increase in consumption as a result of 
specialization and trade (Scenario #4 versus #2).
China
US
11,000 tons
1250 tons
11 aircraft
11 aircraft
32
B
F
Chinese Production
US Production
C
G
E
2.5
6.25
12.5
D
A
5
10
20
30
0
10
20
30
40
Aircraft
Wheat (000 tons)
40
Figure 5.3
Comparative Advantage
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

150	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
Again, there are net gains from trade; this time from comparative advantage. 
One crucial concept here is opportunity cost—given the alternatives (other oppor-
tunities), the cost of pursuing one activity at the expense of another activity. For 
the United States, the opportunity cost of concentrating on wheat at point A in 
Figure 5.3 is tremendous relative to producing aircraft at point D, because it is only 
25% more productive in wheat than China but 100% more productive in aircraft.
Relative to absolute advantage, the theory of comparative advantage seems 
counterintuitive. However, this theory is far more realistic and useful in the real 
world. While it is easy to identify an absolute advantage in a highly simplified, two-
country world as in Figure 5.2, how can each nation decide what to specialize in 
when there are over 200 nations in the world? It is simply too challenging to ascer-
tain that one nation is absolutely better than all others in one activity. Is the United 
States absolutely better than China as well as all other 200 nations in aircraft pro-
duction? European nations that produce Airbus obviously beg to differ. The theory 
of comparative advantage suggests that even without an absolute advantage, the 
United States can still profitably specialize in aircraft as long as it is relatively more 
efficient than others. This insight has greatly lowered the threshold for specializa-
tion because absolute advantage is no longer required.
Where do absolute and comparative advantages come from? In a word, produc-
tivity. Smith looked at absolute productivity differences, and Ricardo emphasized 
relative productivity differences—in this sense, absolute advantage is really a special 
case of comparative advantage. But what leads to such productivity differences? In 
the early 20th century, Swedish economists Eli Heckscher and Bertil Ohlin argued 
that absolute and comparative advantages stem from different factor endowments, 
namely, the extent to which different countries possess various factors, such as 
labor, land, and technology. This factor endowment theory (or Heckscher-Ohlin 
theory) proposed that nations will develop comparative advantage based on their 
locally abundant factors. Numerous examples support the theories of comparative 
advantage and factor endowments. For example, Brazil is blessed by an abundant 
supply of sunshine, soil, and water, which make it a world-class player in agricul-
tural products (see the Closing Case). In another example, when Indian firms set 
up call centers to service Western clients, they use human labor, a resource that 
is very abundant in India, to replace some automation functions when answering 
the phone—telephone automation technology has been developed in the West be-
cause of a labor shortage. Western clients are happier because they can actually 
talk to a live person instead of a machine (press 1 for this, press 2 for that).
In summary, classical theories, (1) mercantilism, (2) absolute advantage, and 
(3) comparative advantage (which includes factor endowments), had evolved from 
approximately 300 to 400 years ago to the beginning of the 20th century. More 
recently, three modern theories, outlined next, emerged.
5-2d Product Life Cycle
Up to this point, classical theories all paint a static picture: If England has an abso-
lute or comparative advantage in textiles (thanks to its favorable weather and soil), 
it should keep producing textiles. However, this assumption of no change in fac-
tor endowments and trade patterns does not always hold in the real world. While 
Adam Smith’s England over 200 years ago was a major exporter of textiles, to-
day England’s textile industry is insignificant. So, what happened? While one may 
argue that in England, weather has changed and soil has become less fertile, it is 
Opportunity cost
Cost of pursuing one activity at 
the expense of another activity, 
given the alternatives (other 
opportunities).
Factor endowment
The extent to which different 
countries possess various fac-
tors of production such as labor, 
land, and technology.
Factor endowment theory 
(Heckscher-Ohlin theory)
A theory that suggests that 
nations will develop comparative 
advantages based on their 
locally abundant factors.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 5   Trading Internationally	
151
difficult to believe that weather and soil have changed so much in 200 years, which 
is a relatively short period for long-run climatic changes. In another example, since 
the 1980s, the United States turned from being a net exporter to a net importer of 
personal computers (PCs), while Malaysia transformed itself from being a net im-
porter to a net exporter of PCs—and this change has nothing to do with weather or 
soil change. Why do patterns of trade in PCs change over time? Classical theories 
would have a hard time answering this intriguing question.
In 1966, American economist Raymond Vernon developed the product life 
cycle theory, which is the first dynamic theory to account for changes in the pat-
terns of trade over time.6 Vernon divided the world into three categories: (1) lead 
innovation nation (which, according to him, is typically the United States), 
(2) other developed nations, and (3) developing nations. Further, every product 
has three life cycle stages: new, maturing, and standardized. Shown in Figure 5.4, in  
Product life cycle theory
A theory that accounts for 
changes in the patterns of trade 
over time by focusing on product 
life cycles.
A. United States
Production
Consumption
New
Product
Maturing
Product
Product Life Cycle Stages
Standardized
Product
B. Other Advanced Countries
C. Developing Countries
Trade Volume
Trade Volume
Trade Volume
Imports
Exports
Figure 5.4
Theory of Product Life Cycles 
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

152	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
the first stage, production of a new product (such as a TV) that commands a price 
premium will concentrate in the United States, which exports to other developed 
nations. In the second, maturing stage, demand and ability to produce grow in 
other developed nations (such as Australia and Italy), so it is now worthwhile to pro-
duce there. In the third stage, the previously new product is standardized (or com-
moditized). Thus, much production will now move to low-cost developing nations, 
which export to developed nations. In other words, comparative advantage may 
change over time.
While this theory was first proposed in the 1960s, some later events (such as the 
migration of PC production) have supported its prediction. However, this theory 
has been criticized on two accounts. First, it assumes that the United States will 
always be the lead innovation nation for new products. This may be increasingly 
invalid. For example, the fanciest cell (mobile) phones are now routinely pioneered 
in Asia and Europe. Second, this theory assumes a stage-by-stage migration of pro-
duction, taking at least several years (if not decades). In reality, however, an increas-
ing number of firms now simultaneously launch new products (such as iPads) around 
the globe.
5-2e Strategic Trade
Except mercantilism, none of the theories above has anything to say about the role 
of governments. Since the days of Adam Smith, government intervention has usu-
ally been regarded as undesirable. However, government intervention is extensive 
and is not going away. Can government intervention actually add value? Since the 
1970s, a new theory, strategic trade theory, has addressed this question.7
Strategic trade theory suggests that strategic intervention by governments in 
certain industries can enhance their odds for international success. What are 
these industries? They tend to be highly capital-intensive, high entry-barrier 
industries in which domestic firms may have little chance without government 
assistance. These industries also feature substantial first-mover advantages—
namely, advantages that first entrants enjoy and do not share with late entrants. 
One leading example is the commercial aircraft industry. Founded in 1915 and 
strengthened by large military orders during World War II, Boeing has long 
dominated this industry. In the jumbo jet segment, Boeing’s first-mover advan-
tages associated with its 400-seat 747, first launched in the late 1960s, are still 
significant today. Alarmed by such US dominance, in the late 1960s, British, 
French, German, and Spanish governments realized that if they had not inter-
vened in this industry, individual European aerospace firms on their own might 
have been driven out of business by US rivals. Therefore, these European govern-
ments agreed to launch and subsidize Airbus. In four decades, Airbus has risen 
from nowhere to a position where it now has a 50–50 split of the global market 
with Boeing.
How do governments help Airbus? Let us use a recent example: the very 
large, super-jumbo aircraft, which is larger than the Boeing 747. Both Airbus 
and Boeing are interested in entering this market. However, the demand in the 
next 20 years is only about 400 to 500 aircraft, and a firm needs to sell at least 300 
just to break even, which means that only one firm can be profitably supported. 
Shown in Figure 5.5 (Panel A), if both enter, the outcome will be disastrous 
Strategic trade theory
A theory that suggests that 
strategic intervention by  
governments in certain indus-
tries can enhance their odds for 
international success.
First-mover advantage
Advantage that first movers 
enjoy and do not share with late 
entrants.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 5   Trading Internationally	
153
Boeing
Airbus
Enter
Enter
Don’t Enter 
Don’t Enter
(Cell 1)
$5 billion, –$5 billion 
(Cell 2)
$30 billion, 0 
(Cell 3)
0, $20 billion 
(Cell 4)
0, 0 
Boeing
Airbus
Enter
Enter
Don’t Enter 
Don’t Enter
(Cell 1)
–$5 billion, –$5 billion
(Cell 2)
$20 billion, 0
(Cell 3)
0, $20 billion 
(Cell 4)
0, 0 
Figure 5.5
 Entering the Very Large, Super-Jumbo Market?
Panel B. With $10 Billion Subsidy from European Governments  
(Outcome 5 Airbus, Boeing)
Panel A. Without Government Subsidy (Outcome 5 Airbus, Boeing)
because each will lose $5 billion (Cell 1). If one enters and the other does not, 
the entrant will make $20 billion (Cells 2 and 3). It is possible that both will enter 
and clash. If a number of European governments promise Airbus a subsidiary 
of, say, $10 billion if it enters, then the picture changes to Panel B. Regardless of 
what Boeing does, Airbus finds it lucrative to enter. In Cell 1, if Boeing enters, 
it will lose $5 billion as before, whereas Airbus will make $5 billion ($10 billion 
subsidy with a $5 billion loss). So, Boeing has no incentive to enter. Therefore, 
the more likely outcome is Cell 2, where Airbus enters and enjoys a profit of 
$30 billion. Therefore, the subsidy has given Airbus a strategic advantage, and the 
policy to assist Airbus is known as a strategic trade policy.8 This has indeed been 
the case, as the 550-seat A380 has recently entered service.
Strategic trade theorists do not advocate a mercantilist policy to promote all in-
dustries. They only propose to help a few strategically important industries, such as 
the solar panel industry (see Emerging Markets 5.1). However, this theory has been 
criticized on two accounts. Ideologically, many scholars and policy makers are un-
comfortable. What if governments are not sophisticated and objective enough to do 
this job? Practically, a lot of industries claim that they are strategically important. 
For example, after “9/11,” American farmers successfully argued that agriculture 
is a strategic industry (guarding food supply against terrorists) and extracted more 
subsidies. Since the 2008–2009 crisis, practically every self-respecting industry in 
every country that has dished out a stimulus package can expect some handouts 
from its government. Overall, where to hold the line between strategic and non-
strategic industries is tricky.
Strategic trade policy
Government policy that provides 
companies a strategic advantage 
in international trade through 
subsidies and other supports.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

154	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
According to strategic trade theory, strategic inter-
vention by governments in certain industries can 
enhance their odds for international success. The 
rapidly growing solar panel industry has become the 
newest testing ground for this theory. Transforming 
sunlight into electricity, with no need to burn fos-
sil fuel and pollute the air, solar panels not only are 
green but can also support a lot of jobs, exports, 
and taxes. Many governments dish out subsidies to 
both solar panel producers and end-users to encour-
age more demand. European governments have 
been very aggressive. Passengers on a train ride in 
Germany passing through many villages and towns 
can see a fairly large number of roofs equipped 
with solar panels. The US solar panel industry has 
received significant funding from federal and state 
support. Despite the high-profile 2011 bankruptcy 
of Solyndra, a firm that received a $535 million fed-
eral loan guarantee, the Obama administration an-
nounced that it would not back off from its clean 
energy policy. However, given the worsening bud-
getary constraints and bad experiences such as 
Solyndra, US and EU governments have become 
more cautious. The Chinese government is by far 
the most eager practitioner of strategic trade theo-
ry. In 2010 alone, China Development Bank provided 
$30 billion in low-cost loans to the country’s top five 
solar panel producers.
The upshot? A decade ago, most of the world’s 
solar panels—in a much smaller industry—were 
made by European, American, and Japanese produc-
ers. Today, Chinese firms have captured more than 
half of the world market. Among the world’s top 
five producers, three are Chinese: Suntech (NYSE: 
STP), Yingli (NYSE: YGE), and Trina (NYSE: TSL) are, 
respectively, the top, fourth, and fifth, measured 
by megawatt shipments. While US firm First Solar 
is the world’s second largest producer, the total US 
share in manufacturing is just 5%. The price of the 
silicon-based solar panels fell from $1.80 per watt in 
2011 to 90 cents in 2012. In the process, a number 
of firms such as Solyndra have been elbowed out of 
business.
Unable to compete with Chinese firms on cost 
or financing, some US and EU firms have sued their 
Chinese rivals for dumping and for receiving “im-
proper” (or “unfair” or “predatory”—pick your choice 
of words) subsidies. In addition to pointing out the 
subsidies dished out by the US and EU governments, 
Chinese firms noted that cheap imports can generate 
a lot of local jobs because fitting panels to buildings 
will always be a local business. At $6.50 per watt for 
residential installation, Western importers that buy 
cells from China and install them can make a good 
living with a great deal of profit. Wider installation 
of solar panels can obviously reduce carbon emis-
sions. Stuck in this ethical and economic dilemma, 
the US government imposed a 4.73% import tariff 
on solar panel imports from China in March 2012. As 
far as tariffs are concerned, this amount was largely 
“symbolic,” according to an expert. In comparison, 
Chinese tire makers suffered a 35% US import tariff 
in 2009. As a result, shares of the listed Chinese solar 
panel makers shot up. Some of them are listed in 
New York (see above), so their American sharehold-
ers also loved it. In the long run, this exchange of 
trade blows will lead Chinese firms (1) to start setting 
up plants to produce in the United States, and (2) to 
sell more domestically—from a merely 5% in 2010 to 
30% in 2012. 
Applying Strategic Trade Theory to Solar Panels 
E m e r g i n g  M a r k e t s  5 . 1
Ethical 
Dilemma
Sources: Based on (1) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2012, China escapes steep tariffs, March 26: 26; (2) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2012, Firing up China’s 
solar market, March 19: 67–68; (3) D. Darling & F. Bourda, 2013, SolarWorld USA, in M. W. Peng, Global Strategy, Cincinnati: South-Western Cengage 
Learning; (4) Economist, 2012, The boomerang effect, April 21: 8–11.
Danny Lehman/Corbis; Björn Meyer/sitox/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 5   Trading Internationally	
155
5-2f  National Competitive Advantage of Industries
The most recent theory is known as the theory of national competitive advan-
tage of industries. This is popularly known as the “diamond” theory because its 
principal architect, Harvard strategy professor Michael Porter, presents it in a 
diamond shaped diagram (Figure 5.6).9 This theory focuses on why certain in-
dustries (but not other industries) within a nation are competitive internation-
ally. For example, while the Japanese automobile industry is a global winner, the 
Japanese service industry is notoriously inefficient. Porter is interested in finding 
out why.
Porter argues that the competitive advantage of certain industries in different 
nations depends on four aspects that form a “diamond.” First, he starts with factor 
endowments, which refer to the natural and human resource repertoires noted by 
the Heckscher-Ohlin theory. Some countries (such as Saudi Arabia) are rich in 
natural resources but short on population, and others (such as Singapore) have a 
well-educated population but few natural resources. Not surprisingly, Saudi Arabia 
exports oil, and Singapore exports semiconductors (which need abundant skilled 
labor). While building on these insights from previous theories, Porter argues that 
factor endowments are not enough.
Second, tough domestic demand propels firms to scale new heights. Why are 
American movies so competitive worldwide? One reason is that American movie-
goers demand the very best “sex and violence” (two themes that sell universally if 
artfully packaged). Endeavoring to satisfy such domestic demand, movie studios 
unleash Madagascar 3 after Madagascar and Madagascar 2, and Spider-Man 3 after 
Theory of national competitive 
advantage of industries 
(diamond theory)
A theory that suggests that the 
competitive advantage of certain 
industries in different nations 
depends on four aspects that 
form a “diamond.”
Country
factor
endowments  
Domestic
demand
conditions 
Firm strategy,
structure, and
rivalry 
Related and
supporting
industries 
Figure 5.6
National Competitive Advantage of Industries: The Porter Diamond
Source: M. Porter, 1990, The competitive advantage of nations (p. 77), Harvard Business Review, March–April: 
73–93. Reprinted with permission.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

156	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
Spider-Man and Spider-Man 2—each time packing more excitement. Thus, abilities 
to satisfy a tough domestic crowd may make it possible to successfully deal with less 
demanding overseas customers.
Third, domestic firm strategy, structure, and rivalry in one industry play a 
huge role behind its international success or failure. One reason that a number of 
Chinese manufacturing industries are so competitive globally—coining the term 
the “China Price”—is that their domestic rivalry is probably the most intense in the 
world. Think of appliances, cell phones, furniture, and pianos. The price wars keep 
everyone lean, and most firms struggle to make a profit. However, the few top firms 
(such as Pearl River Piano) that win the tough competition domestically may have 
a relatively easier time when venturing abroad because overseas competition is less 
demanding.
Finally, related and supporting industries provide the foundation upon 
which key industries can excel. In the absence of strong related and support-
ing industries such as engines, avionics, and materials, a key industry such as 
aerospace cannot become globally competitive. Each of these related and sup-
porting industries requires years (and often decades) of hard work. For instance, 
emboldened by the Airbus experience, Chinese, Korean, and Japanese govern-
ments poured money into their own aerospace industry. Eventually, they all re-
alized that Europe’s long history and excellence in a series of crucial related 
and supporting industries made it possible for Airbus to succeed. A lack of such 
industries made it unrealistic for the Chinese, Korean, and Japanese aerospace 
industry to take off.
Overall, Porter argues that the dynamic interaction of these four aspects ex-
plains what is behind the competitive advantage of leading industries in different 
nations. This theory is the first multilevel theory to realistically connect firms, indus-
tries, and nations, whereas previous theories only work on one or two levels. How-
ever, it has not been comprehensively tested. Some critics argue that the “diamond” 
places too much emphasis on domestic conditions.10 The recent rise of India’s IT 
industry suggests that its international success is not entirely driven by domestic 
demand, which is tiny compared with overseas demand—it is overseas demand that 
matters a lot more in this case.
5-2g Evaluating Theories of International Trade
In case you are tired after studying the six theories, you have to appreciate that 
we have just gone through over 300 years of research, debates, and policy changes 
around the world in about 12 pages (!). As a student, that is not a small accomplish-
ment. Table 5.4 enables you to see the “forest.” As you review these theories, keep 
the following four points in mind.
First, the classical pro-free trade theories seem common sense today. However, 
we need to appreciate that they were revolutionary 200 years ago, when the world was 
dominated by mercantilistic thinking. Second, all theories simplify to make their 
point. Classical theories rely on highly simplistic assumptions of a model consisting 
of only two nations and two goods. Third, the theories also assume perfect resource 
mobility—the assumption that one resource removed from wheat production can 
be moved to make aircraft. In reality, farm hands will have a hard time assembling 
modern aircraft. Finally, classical theories assume no foreign exchange complica-
tions and zero transportation costs.
Resource mobility
Assumption that a resource 
used in producing a product for 
one industry can be shifted and 
put to use in another industry.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 5   Trading Internationally	
157
So, in the real word of many countries, numerous goods, imperfect resource 
mobility, fluctuating exchange rates, high transportation costs, and product life 
cycle changes, is free trade still beneficial as Smith and Ricardo suggested? The 
answer is still “Yes!” as worldwide data support the basic arguments of free traders 
such as Smith and Ricardo.11 (See “Debates and Extensions” for disagreements.)
Table 5.4
Theories of International Trade: A Summary
Classical theories
Main points
Strengths and influences
Weaknesses and debates
Mercantilism 
(Colbert, 
1600s–1700s)
 	 International trade is a zero-sum 
game—trade deficit is dangerous.
 	 Governments should protect domestic 
industries and promote exports.
 	 Forerunner of modern-day 
protectionism.
 	 Inefficient allocation of 
resources.
 	 Reduces the wealth of the 
nation in the long run.
Absolute 
advantage 
(Smith, 1776)
 	 Nations should specialize in economic 
activities in which they have an 
absolute advantage and trade with 
others.
 	 By specializing and trading, each 
nation produces more and consumes 
more. 
 	 The wealth of all trading nations, and 
the world, increases.
 	 Birth of modern 
economics.
 	 Forerunner of the free 
trade movement.
 	 Defeats mercantilism, at 
least intellectually.
 	 When one nation is 
absolutely inferior than 
another, the theory is 
unable to provide any 
advice.
 	 When there are many 
nations, it may be difficult 
to find an absolute 
advantage. 
Comparative 
advantage 
(Ricardo, 1817; 
Heckscher, 1919; 
Ohlin, 1933)
 	 Nations should specialize in economic 
activities in which they have a compar-
ative advantage and trade with others.
 	 Even if one nation is absolutely inferior 
than another, the two nations can still 
gainfully trade.
 	 Factor endowments underpin 
comparative advantage.
 	 More realistic guidance 
to nations (and their 
firms) interested in trade 
but having no absolute 
advantage.
 	 Explains patterns of 
trade based on factor 
endowments.
 	 Relatively static, assuming 
that comparative 
advantage and factor 
endowments do not 
change over time.
Modern theories
Product life cycle 
(Vernon, 1966)
 	 Comparative advantage first resides 
in the lead innovation nation, which 
exports to other nations. 
 	 Production migrates to other advanced 
nations and then developing nations in 
different product life cycle stages.
 	 First theory to incorporate 
dynamic changes in 
patterns of trade.
 	 More realistic with trade in 
industrial products in the 
20th century. 
 	 The United States may 
not always be the lead 
innovation nation. 
 	 Many new products are 
now launched simultane-
ously around the world.
Strategic trade 
(Brander, Spencer, 
Krugman, 1980s)
 	 Strategic intervention by governments 
may help domestic firms reap first-
mover advantages in certain industries.
 	 First-mover firms, aided by 
governments, may have better odds at 
winning internationally.
 	 More realistic and 
positively incorporates the 
role of governments in 
trade.
 	 Provides direct policy 
advice.
 	 Ideological resistance 
from many “free trade” 
scholars and policy 
makers. 
 	 Invites all kinds of 
industries to claim they 
are strategic.
National 
competitive 
advantage of 
industries 
(Porter, 1990)
 	 Competitive advantage of different 
industries in different nations depends 
on the four interacting aspects of a 
“diamond.”
 	 The four aspects are (1) factor endow-
ments, (2) domestic demand, (3) firm 
strategy, structure, and rivalry, and 
(4) related and supporting industries. 
 	 Most recent, most 
complex, and most 
realistic among various 
theories.
 	 As a multilevel theory, it 
directly connects research 
on firms, industries, and 
nations.
 	 Has not been 
comprehensively tested.
 	 Overseas (not only domes-
tic) demand may stimulate 
the competitiveness of 
certain industries.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

158	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
Instead of relying on simple factor analysis, modern theories rely on more real-
istic product life cycles, first-mover advantages, and the “diamond” to explain and 
predict patterns of trade. Overall, classical and modern theories have significantly 
contributed to today’s ever deepening trade links. Yet, the victory of classic and 
modern pro-free trade theories is not complete. The political realities governing 
international trade, outlined next, indicate that mercantilism is alive and well.
5-3 Realities of International Trade
The political realities of the world suggest that as “rules of the game,” plenty of 
trade barriers exist. Although some are being dismantled, many will remain. Let 
us examine why this is the case. To do so, we will first discuss the two broad types 
of trade barriers: tariff barriers and non-tariff barriers.
5-3a Tariff Barriers
A  tariff barrier is a means of discouraging imports by placing a tariff (tax) on im-
ported goods. As a major tariff barrier, an import tariff is a tax imposed on a good 
brought in from another country. Figure 5.7 uses rice tariffs in Japan to show that 
there are unambiguously net losses—known as deadweight costs.
  	 Panel A: In the absence of international trade, the domestic price is P1 and do-
mestic rice farmers produce Q 1, determined by the intersection of domestic 
supply and demand curves.
  	 Panel B: Because Japanese rice price P1 is higher than world price P2, foreign 
farmers export to Japan. In the absence of tariffs, Japanese farmers reduce out-
put to Q 2. Japanese consumers enjoy more rice at Q 3 at a much lower price, P2.
  	 Panel C: The government imposes an import tariff, effectively raising price 
from P2 to P3. Japanese farmers increase production from Q 2 to Q 4, and con-
sumers pay more at P3 and consume less by reducing consumption from Q 3 to 
Q 5. Imports fall from Q 2Q 3 in Panel B to Q 4Q 5 in Panel C.
Classical theorists such as Smith and Ricardo would have advised Japan to enjoy 
the gains from trade in Panel B. But political realities land Japan in Panel C, which, 
by limiting trade, introduces total inefficiency represented by the area consisting of 
A, B, C, and D. However, Japanese rice farmers gain the area of A and the govern-
ment pockets tariff revenues in the area of C. Therefore:
Net losses (deadweight) 5 Total inefficiency 2 net gain
	
5 Area (A 1 B 1 C 1 D) 2 Area (A 1 C)
	
5 Area (B 1 D)
The net losses (areas B and D) represent unambiguous economic inefficiency to 
the nation as a whole.12 Japan is not alone in this regard. A Microsoft Xbox 360 con-
sole that retails for $360 in the United States costs $1,000 (!) in Brazil, after adding im-
port tariffs.13 In 2009, the United States slapped a 35% import tariff on tires made in 
China. Brazilian Xbox gamers and American tire buyers have to pay more, and some 
may be unable to afford the products. While not being able to get your arms around 
an Xbox will have no tangible damage, some economically struggling US drivers who 
should have replaced their worn-out tires may be forced to delay replacing their tires. 
Learning Objective
Realize the importance of 
political realities governing 
international trade.
5-3
Tariff barrier
Trade barrier that relies on 
tariffs to discourage imports.
Import tariff
A tax imposed on imports.
Deadweight cost
Net losses that occur in an 
economy as a result of tariffs.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 5   Trading Internationally	
159
Figure 5.7
Tariff on Rice Imports in Japan
Quantity
Domestic supply 
Domestic demand 
Price
Imports without tariff
P1
P2
Q2
Q1
Q3
Panel B. Imports with no tariff
P1
Quantity
Domestic supply 
Domestic demand 
Price
Panel A. No International trade
Q1
Quantity
Domestic supply 
Domestic demand 
Price
Panel C. Imports with tariff
Imports with tariff
Tariff
C
B
D
A
P1
P2
P3
Q2
Q1
Q5
Q4
Q3
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

160	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
According to the US Tire Industry Association, some may be killed should they be 
involved in accidents before they are able to afford the now more expensive tires.14
Given the well-known net losses, why are tariffs imposed? The answer boils 
down to the political realities. Although “everybody” in a country suffers because 
of higher prices, it is extraordinarily costly, if not impossible, to politically organize 
geographically scattered individuals and firms in order to promote free trade. On 
the other hand, special interest groups tend to be geographically concentrated and 
skillfully organized to advance their interests. In Japan, although farmers repre-
sent less than 5% of the population, they represent disproportionate votes in the 
Diet (Japanese parliament).15 Why? Diet districts were drawn up in the aftermath 
of World War II, when most Japanese lived in rural areas. Such districts were never 
re-zoned, although the majority of the population now lives in cities. Thus, when 
the powerful farm lobby speaks, the Japanese government listens.
5-3b Nontariff Barriers (NTBs)
Today, tariff barriers are often criticized around the world. Nontariff barriers (NTBs) 
are now increasingly the weapon of choice in trade wars. NTBs include (1) subsidies, 
(2) import quotas, (3) export restraints, (4) local content requirements, (5) admin-
istrative policies, and (6) antidumping duties.
Subsidies, as noted earlier, are government payments to domestic firms (see 
Emerging Markets 5.1). Similar to their colleagues in Japan, European farmers, 
who represent 2% of the EU population, are masters of extracting subsidies. The 
EU’s Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) costs European taxpayers $150 billion 
per year, eating up 40% of the EU budget. European consumers do not like CAP, 
and governments and farmers in developing countries eager to export their food-
stuffs to the EU hate it.
Import quotas are restrictions on the quantity of imports. They are worse than 
tariffs, because foreign goods can still be imported if tariffs are paid. Quotas are 
thus the most straightforward denial of absolute or comparative advantage. For ex-
ample, between 2003 and 2009, Australia annually exported 770,000 head of live 
cattle to Indonesia, to the delight of Indonesian beef lovers. However, since 2009, im-
port permits suddenly became harder to obtain. A 
quota of only 500,000 head of imported cattle was set 
for 2011.16 For Indonesia, a densely populated island 
nation, importing beef from a sparsely populated 
cattle country next door would tap into Australia’s 
comparative advantage and would be win-win for 
both countries. But with the shrinking quota, Aussie 
cattle exporters are devastated, and Indonesian beef 
lovers have to put up with skyrocketing prices—and 
some of them may have to simply quit eating beef.
Because import quotas are protectionist pure and 
simple, there are political costs that countries have 
to shoulder in today’s largely pro-free trade environ-
ment. In response, voluntary export restraints (VERs) 
have been developed to show that on the surface, 
exporting countries voluntarily agree to restrict their 
exports. VERs, in essence, are export quotas. One of  
Nontariff barrier (NTB)
Trade barrier that relies on 
nontariff means to discourage 
imports.
Subsidy
Government payment to  
domestic firms.
Import quota
Restriction on the quantity of 
imports.
Voluntary export restraint 
(VER)
An international agreement that 
shows that exporting countries 
voluntarily agree to restrict their 
exports.
How do import quotas affect businesses and 
consumers in both the importing and exporting 
countries?
Dave G. Houser/Corbis
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 5   Trading Internationally	
161
the most (in)famous examples is the VERs that the Japanese government agreed in 
the early 1980s to restrict US-bound automobile exports.17 This, of course, was a eu-
phemism because the Japanese did not volunteer to restrict their exports. Only when 
faced with concrete protectionist threats did the Japanese reluctantly agree.
 Another NTB is local content requirements, which require a certain proportion 
of the value of the goods made in one country to originate from that country. The 
Japanese automobile VERs are again a case in point here. Starting in the 1980s, 
because of VERs, Japanese automakers switched to producing cars in the United 
States through foreign direct investment (FDI—see Chapter 6 for details). However, 
such factories initially were “screw driver plants,” because a majority of components 
were imported from Japan and only the proverbial “screw drivers” were needed to 
tighten the bolts. To deal with this issue, many countries impose local content re-
quirements, mandating that a “domestically produced” product will still be treated 
as an “import” subject to tariffs and NTBs unless a certain fraction of its value 
(such as 51% specified by the Buy America Act) is produced locally.
Administrative policies refer to bureaucratic rules that make it harder to import 
foreign goods (see In Focus 5.1). Since 2008, Indonesia and Malaysia have lim-
ited imports to certain (but not all) ports. India has banned Chinese toys, citing 
safety concerns. Argentina has recently ordered importers of foreign cars to find 
export buyers of Argentine wines; otherwise, port authorities would not release 
imported cars. Foreign print publications, including time-sensitive newspapers and 
magazines, are held at the Buenos Aires airport unless subscribers go there to pay 
an additional fee.
Singapore is famous for its high standards of tidiness 
and for the stringent policies that support public clean-
liness. Beginning in 1992, policy makers banned the 
sale of chewing gum in an effort to avoid the messy 
and unsightly problem of improperly disposed used 
chewing gum. US gum manufacturers missed the op-
portunity to sell their products to four million Singapor-
eans. Wrigley, maker of several leading chewing-gum 
brands, pressured US legislators and trade represen-
tatives to do something. The ban did not discriminate 
against foreign gum because no producer existed in 
Singapore, nor did it violate any of Singapore’s other 
WTO responsibilities. So the only way for the United 
States to get Singapore to remove or loosen the anti-
gum policy was to negotiate. In 2001, the two coun-
tries began talks to reach a broad US-Singapore Free 
Trade Agreement. Wrigley made sure that the agenda 
included an unlikely item that turned out to be quite 
sticky: the chewing-gum ban.
At first, Singapore agreed to allow in only me-
dicinal-purpose gums prescribed by a doctor (for 
example, products to help stop smoking or to treat 
chronic dry mouth). Wrigley and its supporters were 
not satisfied. More negotiations followed. Finally, 
Singapore agreed to permit sales, but only of 
gums with proven health benefits, only by licensed 
dentists or pharmacists, and only if the customer 
gave his or her name to the seller. This sufficed 
to gain entry for Wrigley’s sugar-free Orbit brand 
of gum, which claims to strengthen tooth enamel. 
Singapore’s stiff penalties for gum-related littering 
remain. Fines of over $200 plus a trip to court are 
common. Some pharmacists seem a bit puzzled. 
After all, they sell more serious drugs with fewer 
restrictions.
Source: Adapted from B. V. Yarbrough & R. M. Yarbrough, 2006, Sticky 
business in Singapore, in The World Economy (7th ed.) (p. 237), Cincinnati: 
South-Western Cengage Learning.
A Sticky Business in Singapore
IN Focus 5.1 
Local content requirement
A requirement stipulating that a 
certain proportion of the value of 
the goods made in one country 
must originate from that country.
Administrative policy
Bureaucratic rules that make it 
harder to import foreign goods.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

162	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
Finally, the arsenal of trade warriors also includes antidumping duties. 
Chapter 11 will expand the discussion on dumping (selling below cost) and anti-
dumping duties in much greater detail.
Taken together, trade barriers reduce or eliminate international trade. While 
certain domestic industries and firms benefit, the entire country—or at least a ma-
jority of its consumers—tends to suffer. Given these well-known negative aspects, 
why do people make arguments against free trade? The next two sections outline 
economic and political arguments against free trade.
5-3c Economic Arguments against Free Trade
Two prominent economic arguments against free trade are: (1) the need to protect 
domestic industries and (2) the necessity to shield infant industries. The oldest and 
most frequently used economic argument against free trade is the urge to protect 
domestic industries, firms, and jobs from “unfair” foreign competition—in short, 
protectionism. The following excerpt is from an 1845 petition of the French candle 
makers to the French government:
We are subject to the intolerable competition of a foreign rival, who enjoys such 
superior capabilities for the production of light, that he is flooding the domestic 
market at an incredibly low price. From the moment he appears, our sales cease, all 
consumers turn to him, and a branch of French industry whose ramifications are in-
numerable is at once reduced to complete stagnation. This rival is nothing other than 
the sun. We ask you to be so kind as to pass a law requiring the closing of all windows, 
skylights, shutters, curtains, and blinds—in short, all openings, holes, chinks, and fis-
sures through which sunlight penetrates . . . .18
Although this was a hypothetical satire written by a French free trade advocate 
Fredric Bastiat 160 years ago, these points are often heard today (see the Closing 
Case). Such calls for protection are not limited to commodity producers like candle 
makers. Highly talented individuals, such as American mathematicians and Japa-
nese sumo wrestlers, have also called for protection. Foreign math PhDs grab 40% 
of US math jobs, and recent US math PhDs face a jobless rate of 11%. Thus, many 
American math PhDs have called for protection of their jobs. Similarly, Japanese 
sumo wrestlers insist that foreign sumo wrestlers should not be allowed to throw 
their weight around in Japan.
Another argument is the infant industry argument. If domestic firms are as 
young as “infants,” in the absence of government intervention they stand no chance 
of surviving and will be crushed by mature foreign rivals. Thus, it is imperative that 
governments level the “playing field” by assisting infant industries. While this argu-
ment is sometimes legitimate, governments and firms have a tendency to abuse it. 
Some protected infant industries may never grow up—why bother? When Airbus 
was a true “infant” in the 1960s, it no doubt deserved some subsidies. However, by 
the 2000s, Airbus had become a giant that could take on Boeing. (In some years, 
Airbus outsells Boeing.) Nevertheless, Airbus continues to ask for subsidies, which 
European governments continue to provide.
5-3d Political Arguments against Free Trade
Political arguments against free trade advance a nation’s political, social, and en-
vironmental agenda regardless of possible economic gains from trade. These 
Antidumping duty
Tariffs levied on imports that 
have been “dumped” (selling 
below costs to “unfairly” drive 
domestic firms out of business).
Infant industry argument
The argument that if domestic 
firms are as young as “infants,” 
in the absence of government 
intervention, they stand no 
chances of surviving and will be 
crushed by mature foreign rivals.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 5   Trading Internationally	
163
arguments include (1) national security, (2) consumer protection, (3) foreign policy, 
and (4) environmental and social responsibility.
First, national security concerns are often invoked to protect defense-related in-
dustries. Many nations fear that if they rely on arms imports, their national security 
may be compromised if there are political or diplomatic disagreements between 
them and the arms-producing nation. France has always insisted on maintaining 
an independent defense industry to produce nuclear weapons, aircraft carriers, 
and combat jets. While the French can purchase such weapons at much lower costs 
from the United States that is eager to sell them, the French answer has usually 
been “No, thanks!”
Second, consumer protection has frequently been used as an argument for na-
tions to erect trade barriers. In the early 2000s, a single case of mad cow disease 
in Canada led the United States to completely ban beef imports from Canada. In 
another example, American hormone-treated beef was banned by the EU between 
1989 and 1995 because of the alleged health risks. Even though the United States 
won a WTO battle on this, the EU has still refused to remove the ban.
Third, foreign policy objectives are often sought through trade intervention. 
Trade embargos are politically motivated trade sanctions against foreign countries 
to signal displeasure. Many Arab countries maintain embargoes against Israel. The 
United States has embargoed against Cuba, Iran, North Korea, Sudan, and Syria. 
In 2009, DHL paid a record fine of $9.4 million because it had violated US embar-
goes and sent shipments to Iran, Sudan, and Syria. According to a US Treasury 
Department statement, DHL “may have conferred a significant economic benefit to 
these sanctioned countries that potentially created extraordinarily adverse harm.” 
What are such dangerous shipments? Condoms, Tiffany jewelry, and radar detec-
tors for cars, according to the same Treasury Department statement.19
Finally, environmental and social responsibility can be used as political argu-
ments to initiate trade intervention against certain countries. In a “shrimp-turtle” 
case, the United States banned shrimp imports from India, Malaysia, Pakistan, and 
Thailand, because shrimp were caught in their waters using a technique that also 
accidentally trapped sea turtles, an endangered species protected by the United 
States. These nations were upset and brought the case to the WTO, alleging that 
the United States invoked an environmental law as a trade barrier. The WTO sided 
with those nations and demanded that the US ban be lifted, and the United States 
later complied.
5-4 Debates and Extensions
International trade has substantial mismatch between theories and realities. This 
section highlights two leading debates: (1) trade deficit versus surplus and (2) clas-
sical theories versus new realities.
5-4a Trade Deficit versus Trade Surplus
Smith and Ricardo would probably turn in their graves if they heard that one 
of today’s hottest trade debates still echoes the old debate between mercantilists 
and free traders 200 years ago. Nowhere is the debate more ferocious than in 
the United States, which runs the world’s largest trade deficit (combining the US 
deficit in merchandise trade with its surplus in service trade). In 2006, it reached 
a record-breaking $760 billion (6% of GDP). Thanks to reduced US (import) 
Trade embargo
Politically motivated trade sanc-
tions against foreign countries to 
signal displeasure.
Learning Objective
Participate in two leading 
debates concerning 
international trade.
5-4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

164	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
consumption due to the Great Recession and beefed-up export efforts (see the 
Opening Case), the US trade deficit was “only” $560 billion (4% of GDP) in 2011. 
Should this level of trade deficit be of concern?
Armed with classical theories, free traders argue that this is not a grave con-
cern. They argue that the United States and its trading partners mutually benefit 
by developing a deeper division of labor based on comparative advantage. Former 
Secretary of the Treasury Paul O’Neill went so far as to say that trade deficit was 
“an antiquated theoretical construct.”20 Paul Krugman, the 2008 Nobel laureate in 
economics, argued:
International trade is not about competition, it is about mutually beneficial 
exchange. . . . Imports, not exports, are the purpose of trade. That is, what a 
country gains from trade is the ability to import things it wants. Exports are 
not an objective in and of themselves: the need to export is a burden that a 
country must bear because its import suppliers are crass enough to demand 
payment.21
Critics strongly disagree. They argue that international trade is about 
competition—about markets, jobs, and incomes. In 2009, President Obama an-
nounced the goal of doubling US exports within the next five years. Highlighting 
the importance of exports, Boeing CEO Jim McNerney said: “Every time a Boeing 
777 lands in China, it lands with about 4 million parts reflecting the workman-
ship of some 11,000 small, medium, and large suppliers.”22 Trade deficit has always 
been blamed on a particular country with which the United States runs the largest 
deficit, such as Japan in the 1980s. Because the US trade deficit with China reached 
$296 billion in 2011 (over half of the total deficit), the recent trade deficit debate is 
otherwise known as the China trade debate (Table 5.5). While the United States 
runs trade deficits with all of its major trading partners—Canada, the EU, Japan, 
and Mexico—and is in trade disputes with them most of the time, the China trade 
debate is by far the most emotionally charged and politically explosive.
5-4b Classical Theories versus New Realities
While the first debate (mostly on China) is primarily about merchandise trade and 
unskilled manufacturing jobs that classical theories talk about, the second debate 
(mostly on India) is about service trade and high-skill jobs in high technology such 
as IT. Typically dealing with wheat from Australia to Britain on a slow boat, classi-
cal theorists certainly could not have dreamed about using the Internet to send this 
manuscript to India to be typeset and counted as India’s service exports. In addi-
tion to the traditional label of “trade in services,”23 a new jargon is “trade in tasks.”24 
We already discussed a part of this debate in Chapter 4 when focusing on out-
sourcing. That debate deals with firm-level capabilities; here, let us examine country-
level and individual-level ramifications. Classical theorists and their modern-day 
disciples argue that the United States and India trade by tapping into each other’s 
comparative advantage. India leverages its abundant, high-skill, and low-wage 
labor. Americans will channel their energy and resources to higher-skill, higher-
paying jobs. While regrettably certain Americans will lose jobs, the nation as a 
whole benefits, so the theory goes.
But, not so fast!—argued retired MIT economics professor Paul Samuelson. 
In an influential 2004 paper, Samuelson suggested that in a more realistic world, 
India can innovate in areas that the United States traditionally enjoys comparative 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 5   Trading Internationally	
165
advantage, such as IT.25 Indian innovation can reduce the price of US software 
exports and curtail the wage of American IT workers. Despite the availability of 
cheaper goods (which is a plus), the net effect may be that the United States is worse 
off as a whole. Samuelson is not an anti-globalization ideologue. Instead, he won a 
Nobel Prize for his penetrating research on the gains from international trade, and 
his mainstream economics textbook has trained generations of students (including 
your author). Now even Samuelson is not so sure about one of the founding pillars 
of modern economics, comparative advantage.
The reaction has been swift. Within the same year (2004), Jagdish Bhagwati, 
an Indian-born Columbia University trade expert, and his colleagues countered 
Samuelson by arguing that classical pro-free trade theories still hold.26 Bhagwati 
and colleagues wrote:
Imagine that you are exporting aircraft, and new producers of aircraft emerge 
abroad. That will lower the price of your aircraft, and your gains from trade will di-
minish. You have to be naïve to believe that this can never happen. But you have to 
be even more naïve to think that the policy response to the reduced gains from trade 
is to give up the remaining gains as well. The critical policy question we must address 
is: When external developments, such as the growth of skills in China and India, for 
Table 5.5
Debate on the US Trade Deficit with China
US trade deficit with China is a huge problem 
US trade deficit with China is not a huge problem
Naïve trader versus unfair protectionist (in China)
 	 The United States is a “naïve” trader with open markets. 
China has “unfairly” protected its markets. 
Market reformer versus unfair protectionist (in the US)
 	 China’s markets are already unusually open. Its trade volume 
(merchandise and services) is 75% of GDP, whereas the US 
volume is only 25%.
Greedy exporters
 	 Unscrupulous Chinese exporters are eager to gut US 
manufacturing jobs and drive US rivals out of business.
Eager foreign investors
 	 Two-thirds of Chinese exports are generated by foreign-
invested firms in China, and numerous US firms have invested 
in and benefited from such operations in China.
The demon who has caused deflation
 	 Cheap imports sold at “the China price” push down 
prices and cause deflation.
Thank China (and Wal-Mart) for low prices
 	 Every consumer benefits from cheap prices brought from 
China by US firms such as Wal-Mart.
Intellectual property (IP) violator
 	 China is a major violator of IP rights, and US firms lose 
$2 billion a year.
Inevitable step in development
 	 True, but (1) the US did that in the 19th century (to the British), 
and (2) IP protection will improve in China.
Currency manipulator
 	 The yuan is severely undervalued (maybe up to 40%), 
giving Chinese exports an “unfair” advantage in being 
priced at an artificially low level.
Currency issue is not relevant
 	 The yuan is somewhat undervalued, but (1) US and other 
foreign firms producing in China benefit, and (2) yuan 
appreciation will not eradicate US trade deficit.
Trade deficit will make the United States poorer 
 	 Since imports have to be paid, the United States borrows 
against its future with disastrous outcomes.
Trade deficit does not cause a fall in the US standard of living
 	 As long as the Chinese are willing to invest in the US economy 
(such as Treasury bills), what’s the worry?
Something has to be done
 	 If the Chinese don’t do it “our way,” the United States 
should introduce drastic measures (such as slapping 
20%–30% tariffs on all Chinese imports).
Remember the gains from trade argued by classic theories?
 	 Tariffs will not bring back US jobs, which will simply go to 
Mexico or Malaysia, and will lead to retaliation from China, a 
major importer of US goods and services.
Sources: Based on (1) BusinessWeek, 2004, The China price, December 6: 102–112; (2) BusinessWeek, 2009, Free trade in the slow lane, September 21: 50; 
(3) China Business Review, 2008, US exports to China hit new high, September-October: 36–39; (4) Economist, 2005, From T-shirts to T-bonds, July 30: 
61–63; (5) G. Locke, 2011, A message from the US Ambassador to China, China Business Review, October: 16; (6) O. Shenkar, 2005, The Chinese Century, 
Philadelphia: Wharton School Publishing.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

166	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
instance, do diminish the gains from trade to the US, is the harm to the US going to 
be reduced or increased if the US turns into Fortress America? The answer is: The US 
will only increase its anguish if it closes its markets.27
In any case, according to Bhagwati and colleagues, the “threat” posed by In-
dian innovation is vastly exaggerated and offshoring is too small to matter much. 
Although approximately 3.4 million US jobs may be outsourced by 2015 (see 
Chapter 4), we have to realize that in any given year, the US economy destroys 
30 million jobs and creates nearly the same, thus dwarfing the effect of offshoring. 
Further, Bhagwati argues that newer and higher-level jobs will replace those lost to 
offshoring. One huge problem in the middle of the jobless recovery from the Great 
Recession is: Will there be enough of such jobs in the United States?
5-5 Management Savvy
How does this chapter answer the big question in global business, adapted for the 
context of international trade: What determines the success and failure of firms’ ex-
ports around the globe? The two core perspectives lead to two answers. Fundamen-
tally, the various economic theories underpin the resource-based view, suggesting 
that successful exports are valuable, unique, and hard-to-imitate products gener-
ated by certain firms from a nation (see the Opening Case). However, the political 
realities stress the explanatory and predictive power of the institution-based view: As 
rules of the game, institutions such as laws and regulations promoted by various spe-
cial interest groups can protect certain domestic industries, firms, and individuals, 
erect trade barriers, and make the nation as a whole worse off (see the Closing Case).
Three implications for action emerge (Table 5.6). First, location, location, 
location! In international trade, savvy managers’ job number one is to leverage 
comparative advantage of world-class locations. For example, one crucial reason 
behind China’s rise as the world’s top exporting nation is that many non-Chinese 
managers at non-Chinese firms have discovered China’s comparative advantage as 
a low-cost production location. As a result, they set up factories and export from 
China—two-thirds of Chinese exports are generated by such foreign-invested firms.
Second, comparative advantage is not fixed (see In Focus 5.2). Managers need 
to constantly monitor and nurture the current comparative advantage of a loca-
tion and take advantage of new promising locations. Managers who fail to realize 
the departure of comparative advantage from certain locations are likely to fall 
behind. For example, numerous German managers have moved production else-
where, citing Germany’s relatively reduced comparative advantage in basic manu-
facturing. However, they still concentrate top-notch, high-end manufacturing in 
Germany, leveraging its excellence in engineering.
Third, managers need to be politically active if they appreciate the gains from 
trade. In times of economic difficulties, governments are often under pressure to 
Learning Objective
Draw implications for action.
5-5
Table 5.6
Implications for Action
 	 Discover and leverage comparative advantage of world-class locations. 
 	 Monitor and nurture the current comparative advantage of certain locations, and take 
advantage of new locations.
 	 Be politically active to demonstrate, safeguard, and advance the gains from international 
trade.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 5   Trading Internationally	
167
adopt protectionist policies (see the Closing Case). While managers at many un-
competitive firms have long mastered the game of twisting politicians’ arms for 
more protection, managers at competitive firms, who tend to be pro-free trade, 
have a tendency to shy away from “politics.” They often fail to realize that free trade 
is not free—it requires constant efforts and sacrifices to demonstrate, safeguard, 
and advance the gains from such trade. For example, the US-China Business Coun-
cil, a pro-free trade (in particular, pro-China trade) group consisting of 250 large 
US firms that are active in China (such as Coca-Cola and GE), has stood up and 
spoken out against various “China bashers.”
C h a p t e r  S u m m a r y
	 5.1	 Use the resource-based and institution-based views to answer why nations 
trade.
  	 The resource-based view suggests that nations trade because some firms 
in one nation generate valuable, unique, and hard-to-imitate exports that 
firms in other nations find it beneficial to import.
  	 The institution-based view argues that as rules of the game, different laws 
and regulations governing international trade aim to share gains from trade.
	 5.2	 Understand classical and modern theories of international trade.
  	 Classical theories include (1) mercantilism, (2) absolute advantage, and 
(3) comparative advantage.
  	 Modern theories include (1) product life cycles, (2) strategic trade, and 
(3) “diamond.” 
Making stuff has dwindled from nearly 40% of 
Britain’s GDP in the late 1950s to not much more 
than 10% now. What remains survives for a reason. 
General Motors’ Luton factory this year [2011] will 
produce 70,000 Vauxhall Vivaro vans and other ve-
hicles, more than 60% for export.
Prime Minister David Cameron has latched on to 
manufacturing as a cure for Britain’s economic hang-
over and its 7.9% jobless rate. “If you’re trying to 
make the economy grow long term on a sustainable 
basis, manufacturing is where we need to be,” says 
Vince Cable, UK Business Secretary. “One of the 
main growth sectors of the economy in recent years 
has been banking. For reasons that are blindingly obvi-
ous, that’s not going to be so important in the future.”
Starting a new Industrial Revolution will be hard. 
Government efforts to cut red tape produce plenty 
of their own. “If you were to write on a board how 
many agencies and support schemes there are, 
you would be amazed,” says Bill Parfitt, GM UK’s 
chairman.
Economists and some manufacturing executives 
also say that boosting manufacturing may be unwise. 
British manufacturing as a share of GDP is smaller 
than Germany’s 20%, yet it is similar to the US and 
France, which have big service sectors. Britain may 
have reached an equilibrium between the two sec-
tors. “I don’t think any economists believe that 
growth in the next five to 20 years will be driven by 
manufacturing,” says Jonathan Portes, director of the 
National Institute of Economic and Social Research.
Sources: Excerpted from Bloomberg Businessweek, 2011, Cameron 
tries to reindustrialize Britain, September 5: 15.
Britain’s New Industrial Revolution?
IN Focus 5.2 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

168	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
	 5.3	 Realize the importance of political realities governing international trade.
  	 The net impact of various tariffs and NTBs is that the whole nation is worse 
off while certain special interest groups (such as certain industries, firms, 
and regions) benefit.
  	 Economic arguments against free trade center on (1) protectionism and 
(2) infant industries.
  	 Political arguments against free trade focus on (1) national security, 
(2) consumer protection, (3) foreign policy, and (4) environmental and so-
cial responsibility.
	 5.4	 Participate in two leading debates concerning international trade.
  	 (1) Trade deficit versus trade surplus and (2) classical theories versus new 
realities.
	 5.5	 Draw implications for action.
  	 Be accurately aware of the comparative advantage of certain locations and 
leverage their potential. 
  	 Monitor and nurture the current comparative advantage and take advan-
tage of new locations.
  	 Be politically active to demonstrate, safeguard, and advance the gains from 
international trade.
K e y  T e r m s
Absolute advantage 146
Administrative policy 161
Antidumping duty 162
Balance of trade 144
Classical trade  
theories 146
Comparative  
advantage 148
Deadweight cost 158
Export 143
Factor endowment 150
Factor endowment  
theory (Heckscher-
Ohlin theory) 150
First-mover  
advantage 152
Free trade 146
Import 143
Import quota 160
Import tariff 158
Infant industry  
argument 162
Local content 
requirement 161
Merchandise 143
Modern trade  
theories 146
Nontariff barrier  
(NTB) 160
Opportunity cost 150
Product life cycle  
theory 151
Protectionism 146
Resource mobility 156
Services 143
Strategic trade policy 153
Strategic trade  
theory 152
Subsidy 160
Tariff barrier 158
Theory of absolute 
advantage 146
Theory of comparative 
advantage 148
Theory of  
mercantilism 146
Theory of national com-
petitive advantage of 
industries (diamond 
theory) 155
Trade deficit 143
Trade embargo 163
Trade surplus 143
Voluntary export 
restraint(VER) 160
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 Look at PengAtlas Maps 2.1 (Top Merchandise Importers and Exporters) 
and 2.2 (Top Service Importers and Exporters).  Compare the global posi-
tion of the United States in merchandise versus service imports and exports.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 5   Trading Internationally	
169
a.  Does the United States have an advantage globally in either merchandise 
or services? Does it have an advantage in both? If it has any type of ad-
vantage, is it absolute or comparative? Or does it have a disadvantage in 
both? Explain your answers.
b.  Imagine that you were asked to give reasons why you think it is good, 
from the US perspective, to have its position among the countries of the 
world as the top importer in both merchandise and services. What rea-
sons would you mention?
	 2.	 Looking at PengAtlas Maps 2.1 and 2.2, given the size of US exports, why 
does the United States import so much? Why not use resources in the US to 
produce the things the US currently imports instead of using them to pro-
duce exports?
	 3.	 ON CULTURE: Mercantilism involved a relatively significant amount of 
government control over both domestic and international activity, whereas 
Smith’s concept of absolute advantage focused on relative economic free-
dom and minimal government controls over domestic and international eco-
nomic activity. Do you think that the values prevalent in America’s culture 
today are more in line with those of the mercantilists or those of Smith? If 
there is some combination of Smith and mercantilism, which tends to be 
dominant? Defend your answer.
	 4.	 The rules of the game for international trading can be quite complex, so 
why do nations routinely engage in this activity?
	 5.	 Name and describe the two key components of a balance of trade.
	 6.	 Compare and contrast the three modern theories of international trade.
	 7.	 What are two primary economic arguments that critics use against free 
trade?
	 8.	 Summarize four political arguments against free trade.
	 9.	 Is a persistent trade deficit a matter of grave concern? Why or why not?
	 10.	 Will the service trade benefit or hurt rich countries?
	 11.	 What are some of the factors that managers need to consider when assessing 
the comparative advantage of various locations around the world?
	 12.	 Why is it necessary for business people to monitor political activity concern-
ing international trade?
C r i t i c a l  D i s c u s s i o n  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 Is the trade policy of your country’s government protectionist? Why?
	 2.	 What is the ratio of international trade (exports + imports) to GDP in your 
country? How about the ratio for Brazil, China, Egypt, the EU, India, Japan, 
Russia, Singapore, Turkey, and the US? Why are there such differences? 
	 3.	 ON ETHICS:  As a foreign policy tool, trade embargoes, such as US embargoes 
against Cuba, Iraq (until 2003), and North Korea, are meant to discourage 
foreign governments. But they also cause a great deal of misery among the 
population (such as shortages of medicine and food). Are embargoes ethical?
	 4.	 ON ETHICS:  While the nation as a whole may gain from free trade, there is 
no doubt that certain regions, industries, firms, and individuals may lose 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

170	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
their jobs and livelihood due to foreign competition. How can the rest of 
the nation help the unfortunate ones cope with the impact of international 
trade?
G l o b a l  A c t i o n
	 1.	 Cities worldwide differ considerably along many dimensions. However, one 
facet of trading internationally is to identify global cities to base a network 
of operations. Choose one dimension on which to measure different cities. 
Then, develop a report that discusses your findings in detail.
	 2.	 At times, corporate tax rates in specific locations can be considered a trade 
barrier to business development. As a result, locations that have lower tax 
rates may encourage corporations to conduct operations or relocate head-
quarters there. Find a list of tax rates for a variety of locations. If you were 
part of a company seeking to relocate its operations, which location(s) would 
you recommend and why?
V i d e o  C a s e
After watching the video on Cuba’s economy, discuss the following:
	 1.	 Can Cuba effectively become a free market economy?
	 2.	 Could the US benefit from lifting the embargo on Cuba?
	 3.	 What are Cuba’s comparative advantages relative to the US?
	 4.	 What impact does the embargo have on Cuba?
	 5.	 What do multiple trade theories have to say about Cuba?
A pine tree in a forest in Finland needs 50 years before 
it can be felled to make paper. A eucalyptus tree in 
coastal Brazil is ready in seven. Grapes in France can 
only be harvested once a year. Grapevines in north-
eastern Brazil can bear fruit twice a year. Chicken 
and hog farmers in Canada have to consume energy 
to heat the barns. Their competitors in Brazil need 
no energy to heat their animals’ dwellings. Blessed 
by an abundant supply of sunshine, soil, and water, 
Brazil is a pre-eminent player in agricultural products 
such as beef, coffee, poultry, soybeans, and sugar—
in which Brazil is either the world’s top producer, top 
exporter, or both. Brazil’s agricultural prowess may 
be the envy of many less-endowed countries, but in 
Brazil it has become a source of frustration. For much 
of the 20th century, the Brazilian government sought 
to deviate from Brazil’s dependence on agriculture-
based commodities and to industrialize, often with 
little regard for comparative advantage. Their favor-
ite policy was protectionism, which often did not 
succeed.
Brazil’s market opening since the 1990s led more 
Brazilians to realize that the country’s comparative 
advantage indeed lies in agriculture. One commodity 
EMERGING MARKETS: Brazil’s Quest for Comparative Advantage
Ethical 
Dilemma
C l o s i n g  C a s e
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 5   Trading Internationally	
171
that can potentially transform the low prestige 
associated with agricultural products is sugar cane-
based ethanol. Brazil is a world leader in the pro-
duction of ethanol, which has been mandated as an 
additive to gasoline used in cars since the 1970s. A 
system to distribute ethanol to gas stations, an odd-
ity in the eyes of the rest of the world until recently, 
now looks like a national treasure that is the envy 
of the world. At present, no light vehicle in Brazil 
is allowed to run on pure gasoline. Since 2007, the 
mandatory blend for car fuels is at least 25% ethanol. 
Brazil currently produces 18 billion liters of ethanol, 
of which it exports 4 billion—more than half of world-
wide exports. Ethanol now accounts for 40% for the 
fuel used by cars in Brazil. As the global ethanol trade 
is estimated to rise 25-fold by 2020, Brazil’s compara-
tive advantage in agricultural products is destined to 
shine.
However, the government under President Dilma 
Rousseff continues to believe that Brazil has to build 
up a world-class manufacturing base in order to 
modernize its economy. Standing in the way is the  
(in)famous “Brazil cost,” thanks to the rising costs of 
energy, raw materials, and wages. Operating costs in 
Brazil are now higher than in many developed econo-
mies. One industry association official commented:
If you were to take a factory by helicopters 
from Germany to Brazil, your costs would jump 
48% as soon as you touched down. Those 
of us producing in Brazil are doomed to be 
uncompetitive.
The government does want to help by protecting 
uncompetitive industries. In this respect, Rousseff 
has not deviated from her days as a graduate student 
studying developmental economics with some of 
Brazil’s most left-wing professors. Since taking power 
in 2011, she has imposed tariffs on shoes, textiles, 
chemicals, and even Barbie dolls. Brazil also threat-
ens to tear up an agreement with Mexico that allows 
free trade in cars, because in 2011 Mexico exported 
$2 billion worth of cars to Brazil, but Brazil only recip-
rocated with $372 million.
The “Brazil cost” has also been aggravated by 
the strength of the real, which has appreciated 38% 
against the dollar since 2009. The phenomenal export 
success of Brazil’s agricultural products and minerals 
and the lackluster condition of its manufacturing in-
dustries can force Brazil to reassess its comparative 
advantage. One expert noted: “The economy needs 
to redirect resources to where it is competitive. That 
is actually a healthy process.” The catch, of course, is 
only if there is sufficient political will.
Case Discussion Questions:
	 1.	 What is Brazil’s agriculture so competitive? 
Why do its manufacturing industries lack 
competitiveness?
	 2.	 Why have Brazil’s governments in both the 20th 
and 21st century been eager to develop world-
class manufacturing?
	 3.	 How can Brazil shift some of its resources 
from uncompetitive industries to competitive 
industries?
	 4.	 ON ETHICS: While President Rousseff’s critics 
accuse her of ignoring Brazil’s lack of compara-
tive advantage in manufacturing, her supporters 
argue that her policies force Brazil to reduce its 
dependence on foreign-made manufacturing 
goods. If you were to participate in this debate, 
which side would you be on?
Sources: Based on (1) author’s interviews; (2) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2012, Look who’s bringing up the rear, March 26: 9–10; (3) Economist, 2007, 
The economy of heat, April 14: 8–9; (4) Economist, 2012, Two ways to make a car, March 10: 48–49; (5) L. F. Monteiro, 2011, Is God Brazilian? pre-
sentation at the Strategic Management Society Conference on Latin America, Rio de Janeiro, March 11; (6) World Bank, 2008, Biofuels: The promise 
and the risks, in World Development Report 2008 (pp. 70–71), Washington: World Bank. 
Paulo Whitaker/REUTERS
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

172	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
N O T E S
[Journal acronyms] AER—American Economic Review; BW—BusinessWeek 
(prior to 2010) or Bloomberg Businessweek (since 2010); EJ—Economic 
Journal; HBR—Harvard Business Review; JEL—Journal of Economic Lit-
erature; JEP—Journal of Economic Perspectives; JIE—Journal of International 
Economics; JIBS—Journal of International Business Studies; JM—Journal of 
Management; JMS—Journal of Management Studies; QJE—Quarterly Jour-
nal of Economics; RES—Review of Economics and Statistics
1 E. Helpman, M. Melitz, & Y. Rubinstein, 2008, Estimating trade 
flows, Q JE, 123: 441–487; D. Jacks, C. Meissner, & D. Novy, 2008, 
Trade costs, 1870–2000, AER, 98: 529–534; R. Kali & J. Reyes, 2007, 
The architecture of globalization, JIBS, 38: 595–620.
2 M. Amiti & J. Konings, 2007, Trade liberalization, intermedi-
ate inputs, and productivity, AER, 97: 1611–1638; W. Antweiler, 
B. Copeland, & M. S. Taylor, 2001, Is free trade good for the envi-
ronment? AER, 91: 877–908; C. Arkolakis, S. Demidova, P. Kelnow, &  
A. Rodriguez-Clare, 2008, Endogenous variety and the gains from 
trade, AER, 98: 444–450.
3  J. Baggs & J. Brander, 2006, Trade liberalization, profitability, and 
financial leverage, JIBS, 37: 196–211.
4 M. W. Peng, 2001, The resource-based view and international 
business, JM, 27: 803–829. See also A. Bernard & J. Jensen, 1999, 
Exceptional exporters performance, JIE, 47: 1–25; D. Greenawy & 
R. Kneller, 2007, Firm heterogeneity, exporting, and foreign direct 
investment, EJ, 117: 134–161; E. Helpman, Melitz, & S. Yeaple, 2004, 
Export versus FDI, AER, 94: 300–316.
5 J. Ederington, 2002, International coordination of trade and 
domestic policies, AER, 91: 1580–1593; G. Maggi & A. Rodriguez-
Calre, 2007, A political-economy theory of trade agreements, AER, 
97: 1374–1406.
6 R. Vernon, 1966, International investments and international 
trade in product life cycle, Q JE, May: 190–207.
7 This theory is sometimes referred to as “new trade theory.” How-
ever, it is now nearly 30 years old and no longer that new. There-
fore, to avoid confusion, we label this “strategic trade theory.”  See 
J. Brander & B. Spencer, 1985, Export subsidies and international 
market share rivalry, JIE, 18: 83–100; P. Krugman (ed.), 1986, Strate-
gic Trade Policy and the New International Economics, Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
8 P. Krugman, 1994, Peddling Prosperity (p. 238), New York: Norton.
9 M. Porter, 1990, Competitive Advantage of Nations, New York: Free 
Press.
10 H. Davies & P. Ellis, 2001, Porter’s Competitive Advantage of Nations: 
Time for the final judgment? JMS, 37: 1189–1215.
11 D. Bernhofen & J. Brown, 2005, An empirical assessment of the com-
parative advantage gains from trade, AER, 95: 208–225; J. Frankel &  
D. Romer, 1999, Does trade cause growth? AER, 89: 379–399.
12  S. Bradford, 2003, Paying the price, RES, 85: 24–37; A. Panagariya, 
2002, Cost of protection, AER, 92: 175–179; S. Tokarick, 2008, 
Dispelling some misconceptions about agricultural trade liberaliza-
tion, JEP, 22: 199–216.
13 BW, 2009, Seeking the next billion gamers, July 6: 54.
14 Tire Industry Association (TIA), 2009, Tire Industry Association ex-
presses disappointment with President’s decision concerning Chinese 
tire tariff, September 14, Bowie, MD: TIA, www.tireindustry.org.
15 Economist, 2011, Electoral reform in Japan, January 29: 40–41.
16 Economist, 2011, A row over cows, February 17: www.economist.com.
17 S. Berry, J. Levinsohn, & A. Pakes, 1999, Voluntary export re-
straints on automobiles, AER, 89: 400–430.
18 F. Bastiat, 1964, Economic Sophisms, edited and translated by A. 
Goddard, New York: Van Norstrand.
19 USA Today, 2009, DHL will pay $9.4M fine to settle shipping dis-
pute, August 7: 2A.
20 BW, 2005, America’s trade deficit, October 3: 31.
21 P. Krugman, 1993, What do undergrads need to know about 
trade? (p. 24), AER, 83: 23–26.
22 Fortune, 2010, Why free trade matters to companies like Caterpil-
lar, July 26: 40.
23 J. Boddewyn, M. Halbrich, & A. Perry, 1986, Service multination-
als, JIBS, 17: 41–57; J. Francois & B. Hoekman, 2010, Services trade 
and policy, JEL, 48: 642–692.
24 G. Grossman & E. Rossi-Hansberg, 2008, Trading tasks, AER, 98: 
1978–1997.
25 P. Samuelson, 2004, Where Ricardo and Mill rebut and confirm 
arguments of mainstream economists supporting globalization, JEP, 
18(3): 135–146.
26 J. Bhagwati, A. Panagariya, & T. Sribivasan, 2004, The muddles 
over outsourcing, JEP, 18(4): 93–114.
27 J. Bhagwati & A. Panagariya, 2004, Trading opinions about free 
trade (p. 20), BW, December 27: 20.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

cisale/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
	 6-1	 use the resource-based and institution-
based views to answer why foreign direct 
investment (FDI) takes place.
	 6-2	 understand how FDI results in ownership, 
location, and internalization (OLI) advantages.
	 6-3	 identify different political views on FDI 
based on an understanding of its benefits 
and costs to host and home countries.
	 6-4	 participate in two leading debates 
concerning FDI.
	 6-5	 draw implications for action.
Bloomberg/Contributor/Getty Images
Chapter 
6 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Investing Abroad 
Directly
Until 2009, Germany was the world’s long-time 
export champion. Yet, German firms increasingly find it 
necessary to reduce production at home and to invest 
abroad. The reason? The “Made in Germany” label has 
become both a blessing and a curse. As a blessing, 
German engineering, craftsmanship, and emphasis on 
reliability and durability have won customers all over 
the world. As a curse, such a quest for perfection, 
obsession with details, and (over) engineering come 
at a price that Germany may not be able to afford. 
Expensive products built to last do not bring much 
repeat business. While BMW and Mercedes cars set 
global standards, Germany has a lot of less visible 
but equally successful champion products in their 
respective domains, which are produced by small- and 
medium-sized Mittelstand. For example, Neumann 
microphones, which have captured songs from sing-
ers ranging from Elvis Presley to Celine Dion, will 
last 22 years before they need repair. But they don’t 
come cheap: a single top-of-the-line, made-in-Germany 
Neumann microphone costs $6,450.
The little Neumann microphone is a good reflec-
tion of many German firms’ dilemma. It is often too 
expensive to produce in Germany, especially for 
labor-intensive products, which cost over $20 per 
hour. The labor market is also inflexible, often guarded 
by pro-labor government regulations and unions. In 
response, German firms have undertaken two coping 
strategies. First, many German firms, via foreign direct 
investment (FDI), perform much of the labor-intensive 
manufacturing abroad, and then bring components 
home to add a magical German finishing touch, which 
adds value. As a result, the share of imported inputs 
to German exports has increased from 30% in 1995 to 
40% currently.
A second strategy, also via FDI, is simply to pro-
duce the whole thing abroad. Even when servicing 
the domestic German market, firms find that China 
can be ideal to handle time-insensitive goods. For 
time-sensitive goods, FDI in Central European coun-
tries such as Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Hungary, 
and Poland can largely get the job done. When ser-
vicing overseas customers, producing in locations 
closer to them, especially for bulky products such 
as automobiles, can cut not only labor costs but also 
hefty transportation and insurance bills. In 1990, 
BMW was synonymous with “Made in Germany.” 
In 2012, in addition to Germany, BMW made cars 
in Austria, Brazil, Britain, China, Egypt, Indonesia, 
Malaysia, Philippines, Russia, South Africa, Thailand, 
the United States, and Vietnam. While labor costs go 
down, does quality suffer? A little, but not much. For 
example, Continental, a tire maker, makes tire sen-
sors in both China and Germany. The only difference 
O p e n i n g  C a s e
German Firms Invest Abroad Directly
Ethical 
Dilemma
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

176	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
is a slightly higher failure rate of two parts per million 
in China, compared with 0.8 parts per million in 
Germany.
FDI recipient economies are naturally happy. Central 
Europe, in particular, has benefitted from German (and 
other EU) firms’ “nearshoring.” Yet, Germany has been 
suffering from relatively high unemployment rates of 
8% (although not as high as the unemployment rates 
in Greece and Spain, which hover between 15% and 
20%). More than 50% of German job-seekers have been 
looking for more than one year, but few of them are inter-
ested in migrating to Poland or Bulgaria (let alone China 
or South Africa) to accept lower wages. Because of the 
welfare needs to support the army of unemployed, the 
tax burdens for firms and employees who have jobs end 
up becoming more crushing. Because of this vicious 
circle, out of necessity, many German firms have to shut 
down factories and move abroad. Recently, Continental 
closed a plant near Hanover, losing 320 jobs and attract-
ing political criticism. In response, its CEO argued, “My 
duty is to my 80,000 workers worldwide.” He further 
commented that if wages were set by the market (as 
opposed to being jacked up by inflexible rules), more 
German jobs would be saved.
Sources: Based on (1) www.bmwgroup.com; (2) Economist, 2006, The 
problem with solid engineering, May 20: 71–73; (3) Economist, 2009, The 
export model sputters, May 9: 53–54; (4) Economist, 2006, Waiting for a 
wunder, February 11: 1–16; (5) B. Venohr & K. Meyer, 2009, Uncommon 
common sense, Business Strategy Review, Spring: 39–43.
Why are German firms increasingly interested in outward foreign direct investment (FDI)? 
Is it because of the push of high labor costs at home? The pull of low labor costs and lucra-
tive markets abroad? Or both? Recall from Chapter 1 that FDI is defined as directly invest-
ing in activities that control and manage value creation in other countries.1 Also recall from 
Chapter 1 that firms that engage in FDI are known as multinational enterprises (MNEs). 
On a worldwide basis, FDI has been experiencing a modest recovery after the setback 
unleashed by the Great Recession of 2008–2009. While most developed economies are 
slowly recovering, emerging economies as a group for the first time attracted more than 
half of the FDI inflows in 2010. Firms from emerging economies generated nearly 30% of 
FDI outflows worldwide.2 Overall, cautious optimism is now in the air.
This chapter starts by first clarifying the terms. Then we address a crucial question: 
Why do firms engage in FDI? We outline how the two core perspectives introduced 
earlier—namely, resource-based and institution-based views—can help answer this 
question. Debates and implications for action follow.
6-1 Understanding the FDI Vocabulary
Part of FDI’s complexity is associated with the vocabulary. We will try to reduce this 
complexity by setting the terms straight in this section. 
6-1a The Key Word Is Direct
International investment can be made primarily in two ways: FDI and foreign port-
folio investment (FPI). FPI refers to investment in a portfolio of foreign securities, 
such as stocks and bonds, that do not entail the active management of foreign 
assets. Essentially, FPI is “foreign indirect investment.” In contrast, the key word in 
FDI is direct—the direct, hands-on management of foreign assets. While reading 
this book, some of you may have some FPI—that is, you own some foreign stocks 
and bonds. However, as a student taking this course, it is by definition impossible 
that you are also engaging in FDI at the same time, which requires you to be a 
manager getting your feet “wet” by actively managing foreign operations.
Learning Objective
Use the resource-based and 
institution-based views to 
answer why foreign direct 
investment (FDI) takes place.
6-1
Foreign portfolio 
investment (FPI)
Investment in a portfolio of 
foreign securities such as stocks 
and bonds.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 6   Investing Abroad Directly	
177
For statistical purposes, the United Nations defines FDI as an equity stake of 
10% or more in a foreign-based enterprise.3 Without a sufficiently large equity, it 
is difficult to exercise management control rights—namely, the rights to appoint 
key managers and establish control mechanisms. Many firms invest abroad for the 
explicit purpose of managing foreign operations, and they need a large equity, 
sometimes up to 100%, to be able to do that. 
6-1b Horizontal and Vertical FDI
FDI can be horizontal or vertical. Recall the value chain from Chapter 4, whereby 
firms perform value-adding activities stage-by-stage in a vertical fashion, from 
upstream to downstream. When a firm duplicates its home country-based activities 
at the same value-chain stage in a host country through FDI, we call this horizontal 
FDI (see Figure 6.1). For example, BMW makes cars in Germany. Through hori-
zontal FDI, it does the same thing in the United States (see the Opening Case). 
Overall, horizontal FDI refers to producing the same products or offering the same 
services in a host country as firms do at home.
If a firm moves upstream or downstream in different value-chain stages in 
a host country through FDI, we label this vertical FDI (Figure 6.2). For exam-
ple, if BMW (hypothetically) only assembles cars and does not manufacture 
components in Germany, but in Indonesia it enters into components manufac-
turing through FDI (an upstream activity), this would be upstream vertical FDI. 
Likewise, if BMW does not engage in car distribution in Germany but invests 
in car dealerships in Egypt (a downstream activity), it would be downstream 
vertical FDI.
6-1c FDI Flow and Stock
Another pair of words often used is flow and stock. FDI flow is the amount of FDI 
moving in a given period (usually a year) in a certain direction (see PengAtlas 
Map 2.3). FDI inflow usually refers to inbound FDI moving into a country in a year, 
Management control rights
The rights to appoint key 
managers and establish control 
mechanisms.
Horizontal FDI
A type of FDI in which a firm 
duplicates its home country-based 
activities at the same value chain 
stage in a host country.
Vertical FDI
A type of FDI in which a firm 
moves upstream or downstream 
at different value chain stages in 
a host country.
Upstream vertical FDI
A type of vertical FDI in which 
a firm engages in an upstream 
stage of the value chain in a host 
country.
Downstream vertical FDI
A type of vertical FDI in which a 
firm engages in a downstream 
stage of the value chain in a host 
country.
FDI flow
The amount of FDI moving in a 
given period (usually a year) in 
a certain direction.
FDI inflow
Inbound FDI moving into a 
country in a year.
INPUT
Value Chain
Research &
development
Components
Final assembly
Marketing
OUTPUT
INPUT
Value Chain
Research &
development
Components
Final assembly
Marketing
OUTPUT
Operations in home country
Operations in host country
Horizontal FDI
Figure 6.1
Horizontal FDI
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

178	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
and FDI outflow typically refers to outbound FDI moving out of a country in a year. 
Figures 6.3 and 6.4 illustrate the top 10 economies receiving inflows and generat-
ing outflows. FDI stock is the total accumulation of inbound FDI in a country or 
outbound FDI from a country. Hypothetically, between two countries A and B, if 
firms from A undertake $10 billion of FDI in B in Year 1 and another $10 billion in 
Year 2, then we can say that in each of these two years, B receives annual FDI inflows 
FDI outflow
Outbound FDI moving out of a 
country in a year.
FDI stock
Total accumulation of inbound 
FDI in a country or outbound FDI 
from a country across a given 
period (usually several years).
INPUT
Value Chain
Research &
development
Components
Final assembly
Marketing
OUTPUT
INPUT
Research &
development
Components
Final assembly
Marketing
OUTPUT
Operations in home country
Operations in host country
Upstream
vertical FDI
Downstream
vertical FDI
Value Chain
Figure 6.2
Vertical FDI
Figure 6.3
Top 10 Economies Receiving FDI Inflows (Billions of Dollars)
Source: Adapted from CIA, The World Factbook, 2011.
1. United States
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
4. United Kingdom
2. France
3. Hong Kong, China
6. Belgium
5. Germany
10. Netherlands
9. Canada
8. Spain
7. China
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 6   Investing Abroad Directly	
179
of $10 billion and, correspondingly, A generates annual FDI outflows of $10 billion. 
If we assume that firms from no other countries undertake FDI in country B, and 
prior to Year 1 no FDI was possible, then the total stock of FDI in B, by the end of 
Year 2, is $20 billion. Essentially, flow is a snapshot of a given point in time, and 
stock represents cumulating volume.
6-1d MNE versus Non-MNE
An MNE, by definition, is a firm that engages in FDI when doing business abroad. 
Note that non-MNE firms can also do business abroad by (1) exporting and 
importing, (2) licensing and franchising, (3) outsourcing, (4) engaging in FPI, 
or other means. What sets MNEs apart from non-MNEs is FDI. An exporter has 
to undertake FDI in order to become an MNE. In other words, BMW would not 
be an MNE if it made all its cars in Germany and exported them around the 
world. BMW became an MNE only when it started to invest abroad directly (see 
the Opening Case).
Although a lot of people believe that MNEs are a new organizational form that 
emerged recently, that is not true. MNEs have existed for at least 2,000 years, with 
some of the earliest traces discovered in the Assyrian, Phoenician, and Roman 
times.4 In 1903 when Ford Motor Company was founded, it exported its sixth 
car. Ford almost immediately engaged in FDI by having a factory in Canada that 
produced its first output in 1904.5 It is true that MNEs have experienced significant 
Figure 6.4
Top 10 Economies Generating FDI Outflows (Billions of Dollars)
Source: Adapted from CIA, The World Factbook, 2011.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
1. United States
2. France
4. Germany
6. Hong Kong, China
7. Switzerland
8. Japan
9. Belgium
3. United Kingdom
5. Netherlands
10. Spain
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

180	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
growth since World War II. In 1970 there were approximately 7,000 MNEs world-
wide. In 1990 there were 37,000 MNEs, with 170,000 foreign affiliates. By 2010 over 
82,000 MNEs managed approximately 810,000 foreign affiliates.6 The value added 
produced by MNEs rose from 7% of world GDP in 1990 to 25% ($16 trillion) in 
2011.7 Clearly, there has been a proliferation of MNEs lately.
6-2  Why Do Firms Become MNEs  
by Engaging in FDI?
Having set the terms straight, we need to address a fundamental question: Why 
do so many firms—ranging from those in the ancient world to today’s BMW, 
Wal-Mart, and Samsung—become MNEs by engaging in FDI? Without getting 
into details, we can safely say that there must be economic gains from FDI. More 
importantly, given the tremendous complexities, such gains must significantly 
outweigh the costs. What are the sources of such gains? The answer, as suggested 
by British scholar John Dunning and illustrated in Figure 6.5, boils down to firms’ 
quest for ownership (O) advantages, location (L) advantages, and internalization (I)  
advantages—collectively known as the OLI advantages.8 The two core perspectives 
introduced earlier, resource-based and institution-based views, enable us to probe 
the heart of this question.
In the context of FDI, ownership refers to MNEs’ possession and leveraging 
of certain valuable, rare, hard-to-imitate, and organizationally embedded (VRIO) 
assets overseas. Owning the proprietary technology and the management know-
how that go into making a BMW helps ensure that the MNE can beat rivals abroad.
Location advantages are those enjoyed by firms because they do business in 
a certain place. Features unique to a place, such as its natural or labor resources 
or its location near particular markets, provide certain advantages to firms doing 
business there. For example, Vietnam has emerged as a convenient location for 
MNEs that want to diversify away from coastal China due to rising labor costs. From 
a resource-based view, an MNE’s pursuit of ownership and location advantages 
can be regarded as flexing its muscles—its resources and capabilities—in global 
competition.
Internalization refers to the replacement of cross-border markets (such as 
exporting and importing) with one firm (the MNE) locating in two or more coun-
tries. For example, instead of selling its technology to an Indonesian firm for a 
Learning Objective
Understand how FDI results 
in ownership, location, and 
internalization (OLI) advantages.
6-2
OLI advantages
A firm‘s quest for ownership 
(O) advantages, location (L) 
advantages, and internalization (I) 
advantages via FDI.
Ownership
An MNE’s possession and 
leveraging of certain valuable, 
rare, hard-to-imitate, and 
organizationally embedded 
(VRIO) assets overseas in the 
context of FDI.
Location
Advantages enjoyed by firms 
operating in a certain location.
Internalization
The replacement of cross-border 
markets (such as exporting and 
importing) with one firm (the 
MNE) locating and operating in 
two or more countries.
Internalization
advantages 
FDI/MNE
Location
advantages  
Ownership
advantages 
Figure 6.5
Why Do Firms Become MNEs by Engaging in FDI? An OLI 
Framework
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 6   Investing Abroad Directly	
181
fee (which is a non-FDI-based market-entry mode technically called licensing), 
BMW chooses to have some FDI in Indonesia. In other words, external market 
transactions (in this case, buying and selling of technology through licensing) are 
replaced by internalization. From an institution-based view, internalization is a 
response to the imperfect rules governing international transactions—known as  
market imperfections (or market failure). Evidently, Indonesian regulations gov-
erning the protection of intellectual property, such as BMW’s proprietary tech-
nology, do not give BMW sufficient confidence that its rights will be protected. 
Therefore, internalization is a must.
Overall, firms become MNEs because FDI provides the three-pronged OLI 
advantages that they otherwise would not obtain. The next three sections outline 
why this is the case.
6-2a Ownership Advantages
All investments, including both FDI and FPI, entail ownership of assets. So, what is 
unique about FDI? This section (1) highlights the benefits of direct ownership and 
(2) compares FDI to licensing when entertaining market entries abroad.
6-2b The Benefits of Direct Ownership
Remember, the key word of FDI is direct, and it requires a significant equity 
ownership position. The benefits of ownership lie in the combination of equity 
ownership rights and management control rights. Specifically, it is significant own-
ership rights that provide much needed management control rights. In contrast, FPI 
represents essentially insignificant ownership rights but no management control 
rights. To compete successfully, firms need to deploy overwhelming resources and 
capabilities to overcome their liabilities of foreignness (see Chapters 1 and 4). FDI 
provides one of the best ways to facilitate such extension of firm-specific resources 
and capabilities abroad.
6-2c FDI versus Licensing
When entering foreign markets, basic entry choices include (1) exporting, 
(2) licensing, or (3) FDI. Successful exporting may provoke protectionist responses 
from host countries, thus forcing firms to choose between licensing and FDI (see 
Chapters 5 and 10). Between licensing and FDI, which is better? Three reasons may 
compel firms to prefer FDI to licensing (Table 6.1).
First, FDI affords a high degree of direct management control that reduces 
the risk of firm-specific resources and capabilities being opportunistically taken 
advantage of. One of the leading types of risks abroad is dissemination risks, de-
fined as the possibility of unauthorized diffusion of firm-specific know-how. If 
Dissemination risk
The risk associated with 
unauthorized diffusion of 
firm-specific know-how.
Table 6.1
Why Firms Prefer FDI to Licensing
  	 FDI reduces dissemination risks.
  	 FDI provides tight control over foreign operations.
  	 FDI facilitates the transfer of tacit knowledge through “learning by doing.”
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

182	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
a foreign company grants a license to a local firm to manufacture or market a 
product, the licensee (or an employee of the licensee) may disseminate the know-
how by using it against the wishes of the foreign company. For instance, Pizza 
Hut found out that its long-time licensee in Thailand disseminated its know-how 
and established a direct competitor, simply called The Pizza Company, which con-
trolled 70% of the market in Thailand.9 While owning and managing proprietary 
assets through FDI does not completely shield firms from dissemination risks (af-
ter all, their employees can quit and join competitors), FDI is better than licensing 
that provides no such management control. Understandably, FDI is extensively 
used in knowledge-intensive, high-tech industries, such as automobiles, electron-
ics, chemicals, and IT. 
Second, FDI provides more direct and tighter control over foreign operations. 
Even when licensees (and their employees) harbor no opportunistic intention to 
take away “secrets,” they may not follow the wishes of the foreign firm that provides 
the know-how. Without FDI, the foreign firm cannot order or control its licensee to 
move ahead. For example, Starbucks entered South Korea by licensing its format 
to ESCO. Although ESCO soon opened ten stores, Starbucks felt that ESCO was 
not aggressive enough. But there was very little Starbucks could do. Eventually, 
Starbucks switched from licensing to FDI, which allowed Starbucks to directly call 
the shots and promote the aggressive growth of the chain in South Korea.
Finally, certain knowledge (or know-how) calls for FDI rather than licensing. 
Even if there is no opportunism on the part of licensees and if they are willing to 
follow the wishes of the foreign firm, certain know-how may be simply too difficult 
to transfer to licensees without FDI. Knowledge has two basic categories: (1) explic-
it and (2) implicit. Explicit knowledge is codifiable (that is, it can be written down 
and transferred without losing much of its richness). Tacit knowledge, on the other 
hand, is noncodifiable and its acquisition and transfer requires hands-on practice. 
For instance, a driving manual represents a body of explicit knowledge. However, 
mastering this manual without any road practice does not make you a good driver. 
Tacit knowledge is evidently more important and harder to transfer and learn—it 
can only be acquired through learning by doing (in this case, driving practice 
supervised by an experienced driver). Likewise, operating a Wal-Mart store entails 
a great deal of knowledge, some explicit (often captured in an operational manual) 
and some tacit. However, simply giving foreign licensees a copy of the Wal-Mart 
operational manual will not be enough. Foreign employees will need to learn from 
Wal-Mart personnel side by side (learning by doing).
From a resource-based standpoint, it is Wal-Mart’s tacit knowledge that gives it 
competitive advantage (see Chapter 4). Wal-Mart owns such crucial tacit knowledge, 
and has no incentive to give it away to licensees without having some management 
control over how such tacit knowledge is used. Therefore, properly transferring and 
controlling tacit knowledge calls for FDI. Overall, ownership advantages enable the 
firm, now becoming an MNE, to more effectively extend, transfer, and leverage 
firm-specific capabilities abroad.10 Next, we discuss location advantages.
6-2d Location Advantages
The second key word in FDI refers to a foreign location. Given the well-known li-
ability of foreignness, foreign locations must offer compelling advantages.11 This 
section (1) highlights the sources of location advantages and (2) outlines ways to 
acquire and neutralize location advantages.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 6   Investing Abroad Directly	
183
6-2e Location, Location, Location
Certain locations possess geographical features that are difficult to match by 
others. We may regard the continuous expansion of international business, such 
as FDI, as a never-ending saga in search of location-specific advantages. For 
example, although Austria politically and culturally belongs to the West, the coun-
try is geographically located in the heart of Central and Eastern Europe (CEE). 
In fact, Austria’s capital Vienna is actually east of Prague in the Czech Republic 
and Ljubljana in Slovenia. Not surprisingly, Vienna is an attractive site as MNE 
regional headquarters for CEE. Similarly, Miami is blessed by its location close to 
Latin America and the Caribbean. It also has excellent air links with all major cities 
in North America. Miami thus advertises itself as the “Gateway of the Americas.” 
Locations such as Vienna and Miami naturally attract a lot of FDI.
Beyond natural geographical advantages, location advantages also arise 
from the clustering of economic activities in certain locations—referred to as 
agglomeration. For example, the Netherlands grows and exports two-thirds of 
the worldwide exports of cut flowers. Slovakia produces more cars per capita than 
any other country in the world, thanks to the quest for agglomeration benefits by 
global automakers. Dallas attracts all the world’s major telecom equipment makers 
and many telecom service providers, making it the Telecom Corridor. Overall, 
agglomeration advantages stem from:
  	 Knowledge spillovers—knowledge being diffused from one firm to others 
among closely located firms that attempt to hire individuals from competitors.12
  	 Industry demand that creates a skilled labor force whose members may work 
for different firms without having to move out of the region.
  	 Industry demand that facilitates a pool of specialized suppliers and buyers 
also located in the region.13
6-2f Acquiring and Neutralizing Location Advantages 
Note that from a resource-based view, location advantages do not entirely overlap 
with country-level advantages such as factor endowments discussed in Chapter 5. 
Location advantages are the advantages one firm obtains when operating in one 
location due to its firm-specific capabilities. In 1982, General Motors (GM) ran its 
Fremont, California, plant into the ground and had to 
close it. Reopening the same plant, Toyota in 1984 initi-
ated its first FDI project in the United States (in a joint 
venture (JV) with GM). Since then, Toyota (together 
with GM) has leveraged that plant’s location advan-
tages by producing award-winning cars that American 
customers particularly like—the Toyota Corolla and 
Tacoma. The point is: it is Toyota’s unique capabilities 
applied to the California location that literally saved 
this plant from its demise. The California location in 
itself does not provide location advantages per se, as 
shown by GM’s inability to make it work prior to 1982.
Firms do not operate in a vacuum. When one firm 
enters a foreign country through FDI, its rivals are likely 
to follow by undertaking additional FDI in a host coun-
try to either (1) acquire location advantages themselves  
Agglomeration
Clustering of economic activities 
in certain locations.
Knowledge spillover
Knowledge diffused from one 
firm to others among closely 
located firms. 
What advantages did Volkswagen enjoy as one of 
the first foreign entrants into China’s auto market?
philipus/Alamy.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

184	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
or (2) at least neutralize the first mover’s location advantages. These actions to 
follow competitors are especially likely in industries characterized by oligopoly—
industries populated by a small number of players (such as aerospace and semi-
conductors).14 The automobile industry is a typical oligopolistic industry. In China, 
Volkswagen was the first foreign entrant, starting production in 1985 and enjoying 
a market share of 60% in the 1990s. Now, every self-respecting global automaker 
has entered China trying to eat some of Volkswagen’s lunch. Overall, competitive 
rivalry and imitation, especially in oligopolistic industries, underscores the impor-
tance of acquiring and neutralizing location advantages around the world.
6-2g Internalization Advantages
Known as internalization, another great advantage associated with FDI is the abil-
ity to replace the external market relationship with one firm (the MNE) owning, 
controlling, and managing activities in two or more countries.15 This is important 
because of significant imperfections in international market transactions. The 
institution-based view suggests that markets are governed by rules, regulations, 
and norms that are designed to reduce uncertainties.16 Uncertainties introduce 
transaction costs—costs associated with doing business (see Chapter 2). This 
section (1) outlines the necessity of combatting market failure and (2) describes 
the benefits brought by internalization.
6-2h Market Failure
International transaction costs tend to be higher than domestic transaction costs. 
Because laws and regulations are typically enforced on a nation-state basis, if one 
party from country A behaves opportunistically, the other party from country B 
will have a hard time enforcing the contract. Suing the other party in a foreign 
country is not only costly, but also uncertain. In the worst case, such imperfec-
tions are so grave that markets fail to function, and many firms choose not to do 
business abroad to avoid being “burned.” Thus, high transaction costs can result 
in market imperfections (market failure)—the imperfections of the market mecha-
nisms that make transactions prohibitively costly and sometimes make transactions 
unable to take place. However, recall from Chapter 5 that there are gains from 
trade. In response, MNEs emerge to overcome and combat such market failure 
through FDI.
6-2i Overcoming Market Failure Through FDI
How do MNEs combat market failure through internalization? Let us use a simple 
example: An oil importer, BP in Britain, and an oil exporter, Nigerian National 
Petroleum Corporation (NNPC) in Nigeria. For the sake of our discussion, assume 
that BP does all its business in Britain and that NNPC does all its business in 
Nigeria—in other words, neither of them is an MNE. BP and NNPC negotiate a 
contract that specifies that NNPC will export from Nigeria a certain amount of 
crude oil to BP’s oil refinery facilities in Britain for a certain amount of money. 
Shown in Figure 6.6, this is both an export contract (from NNPC’s perspective) 
and an import contract (from BP’s standpoint) between two firms.
However, this international market transaction between an importer and 
an exporter may suffer from high transaction costs. What is especially costly is 
Oligopoly
Industry dominated by a small 
number of players.
Market imperfection (market 
failure)
The imperfection of the 
market mechanisms that 
make transactions prohibitively 
costly and sometimes make 
transactions unable to take place.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 6   Investing Abroad Directly	
185
the potential opportunism on both sides. For example, NNPC may demand a 
higher-than-agreed-upon price, citing a variety of reasons such as inflation, natu-
ral disasters, or simply rising oil prices after the deal is signed. BP thus has to 
either (1) pay more than the agreed-upon price or (2) refuse to pay and suffer 
from the huge costs of keeping expensive refinery facilities idle. In other words, 
NNPC’s opportunistic behavior can cause a lot of BP’s losses.
Opportunistic behavior can go both ways in a market transaction. In this 
particular example, BP can also be opportunistic. For instance, BP may refuse to 
accept a shipment after its arrival from Nigeria citing unsatisfactory quality, but the 
real reason could be BP’s inability to sell refined oil downstream because gasoline 
demand is going down. (In a recession, the jobless do not need to commute to 
work.) NNPC is thus forced to find a new buyer for a huge tankerload of crude oil 
on a last-minute, “fire sale” basis with a deep discount, losing a lot of money.
Overall, in a market (export/import) transaction, once one side behaves 
opportunistically, the other side will not be happy and will threaten or initiate law 
suits. Because the legal and regulatory frameworks governing such international 
transactions are generally not as effective as those governing domestic transac-
tions, the injured party will generally be frustrated while the opportunistic party 
can often get away. All of these are examples of transaction costs that increase 
international market inefficiencies and imperfections, ultimately resulting in 
market failure.
In response, FDI combats such market failure through internalization. The MNE 
reduces cross-border transaction costs and increases efficiencies by replacing an ex-
ternal market relationship with a single organization spanning both countries—in 
a process called internalization (transforming the external market with in-house 
links).17 In theory, there can be two possibilities: (1) BP undertakes upstream vertical 
FDI by owning oil production assets in Nigeria or (2) NNPC undertakes downstream 
vertical FDI by owning oil refinery assets in Britain (Figure 6.7). FDI essentially 
transforms the international trade between two independent firms in two countries 
to intrafirm trade between two subsidiaries in two countries controlled by the same 
MNE.18 The MNE is thus able to coordinate cross-border activities better. Such 
advantage is called internalization advantage.
Intrafirm trade
International transactions 
between two subsidiaries in two 
countries controlled by the same 
MNE.
Oil exploration
Value Chain
Value Chain
Oil production
Oil reﬁnery
Gasoline
distribution
Oil exploration
Oil production
Oil reﬁnery
Gasoline
distribution
NNPC in Nigeria
BP in Great Britain
An import/
export contract
Figure 6.6
An International Market Transaction between Two Companies  
in Two Countries
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

186	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
Overall, the motivations for FDI are complex.19 Based on the resource-based 
and institution-based views, we can see FDI as a reflection of both (1) firms’ motiva-
tion to extend firm-specific capabilities abroad and (2) their responses to overcome 
market imperfections and failures.
6-3 Realities of FDI
The realities of FDI are intertwined with politics. This section starts with three 
political views on FDI, followed by a discussion of pros and cons of FDI for home 
and host countries. 
6-3a Political Views on FDI
There are three primary political views. First, the radical view is hostile to FDI. 
Tracing its roots to Marxism, the radical view treats FDI as an instrument of impe-
rialism and as a vehicle for exploitation of domestic resources by foreign capitalists 
and firms. Governments embracing the radical view often nationalize MNE assets, 
or simply ban (or discourage) inbound MNEs. Between the 1950s and the early 
1980s, the radical view was influential throughout Africa, Asia, Eastern Europe, 
and Latin America.20 However, the popularity of this view is in decline worldwide, 
because (1) economic development in these countries was poor in the absence of 
FDI, and (2) the few developing countries (such as Singapore) that embraced FDI 
attained enviable growth (see Chapter 1).
On the other hand, the free market view suggests that FDI, unrestricted by 
government intervention, will enable countries to tap into their absolute or 
comparative advantages by specializing in the production of certain goods and 
services. Similar to the win-win logic for international trade as articulated by 
Adam Smith and David Ricardo (see Chapter 5), free market-based FDI will 
lead to a win-win situation for both home and host countries. Since the 1980s,  
Learning Objective
Identify different political 
views on FDI based on an 
understanding of its benefits 
and costs to host and home 
countries.
6-3
Radical view on FDI
A political view that is hostile  
to FDI.
Free market view on FDI
A political view that sug-
gests that FDI unrestricted by 
government intervention is 
the best.
Oil exploration
Value Chain
Value Chain
Oil production
Oil reﬁnery
Gasoline
distribution
Oil exploration
Oil production
Oil reﬁnery
Gasoline
distribution
Nigeria
Great Britain
Figure 6.7
Combating Market Failure Through FDI: One Company (MNE)  
in Two Countries1
1 In theory, there can be two possibilities: (1) BP undertakes upstream vertical FDI by owning oil production assets in 
Nigeria, or (2) NNPC undertakes downstream vertical FDI by owning oil refinery assets in Great Britain. In reality, the 
first scenario is more likely.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 6   Investing Abroad Directly	
187
a series of countries, such as Brazil, China, Hungary, 
India, Ireland, and Russia, have adopted more FDI-
friendly policies.
However, in practice, a totally free market view on 
FDI does not really exist. Most countries practice prag-
matic nationalism—viewing FDI as having both pros 
and cons and only approving FDI when its benefits 
outweigh costs. The French government, invoking 
“economic patriotism,” has torpedoed several foreign 
takeover attempts of French firms. The Chinese gov-
ernment insists that automobile FDI has to take the 
form of JVs with MNEs so that Chinese automakers 
can learn from their foreign counterparts.
More countries in recent years have changed their 
policies to be more favorable to FDI. Even hard core 
countries that practiced the radical view on FDI, such 
as Cuba and North Korea, are now experimenting with some opening to FDI, 
which is indicative of the emerging pragmatic nationalism in their new thinking. 
However, since the 2008–2009 recession, there is some creeping increase of protec-
tionism in the form of policies discouraging inbound FDI in some countries (see 
the Closing Case).
6-3b Benefits and Costs of FDI to Host Countries
Underpinning pragmatic nationalism is the need to assess the various benefits 
and costs of FDI to host (recipient) countries and home (source) countries. In a 
nutshell, Figure 6.8 outlines these considerations. This section focuses on host 
countries, and the next section deals with home countries.
Cell 1 in Figure 6.8 shows four primary benefits to host countries:21
  	 Capital inflow can help improve a host country’s balance of payments. 
(See Chapter 7 for more coverage on balance of payments.)
  	 Technology, especially more advanced technology from abroad, can create 
technology spillovers that benefit domestic firms and industries.22 Local rivals, 
Pragmatic nationalism on FDI
A political view that only 
approves FDI when its benefits 
outweigh its costs.
Technology spillover
Technology diffused from 
foreign firms to domestic firms.
Effects of FDI
Cell 1
Capital inﬂow,
technology,
management,
job creation
Cell 3
Earnings,
exports,
learning from
abroad
Cell 2
Loss of
sovereignty,
competition,
capital outﬂow
Cell 4
Capital
outﬂow,
job loss
Recipients
versus
sources
Host (recipient)
countries
Home (source)
countries
Beneﬁts
Costs
Figure 6.8
Effects of FDI on Home and Host Countries
Why have some countries welcomed FDI, like 
US-based Ford’s plan to build this manufacturing 
plant in China?
Shi Tou/REUTERS
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

188	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
after observing such technology, may recognize its feasibility and strive to 
imitate it. This is known as the demonstration effect—sometimes also called 
the contagion (or imitation) effect.23 It underscores the important role that 
MNEs play in stimulating competition in host countries.24
  	 Advanced management know-how may be highly valued. It is often difficult 
for indigenous development of management know-how to reach a world-class 
level in the absence of FDI.25 
  	 FDI creates jobs, both directly and indirectly. Direct benefits arise when 
MNEs employ individuals locally. In Ireland, more than 50% of the Irish 
manufacturing employees work for MNEs.26 In the UK, the largest private-
sector employer is an MNE: India’s Tata has 45,000 employees in the UK 
working for a variety of businesses such as Jaguar, Land-Rover, Tata Steel 
(formerly Corus), Tata Tea (formerly Tetley), and Tata Consultancy Ser-
vices.27 In the United States, foreign automakers such as BMW, Honda, 
Hyundai, Kia, Toyota, and Volkswagen will add an estimated 25,000 jobs 
by 2015.28 Indirect benefits include jobs created when local suppliers in-
crease hiring and when MNE employees spend money locally resulting in 
more jobs.
Cell 2 in Figure 6.8 outlines three primary costs of FDI to host countries: 
(1) loss of sovereignty, (2) adverse effects on competition, and (3) capital outflow. 
The first concern is the loss of some (but not all) economic sovereignty associ-
ated with FDI. Because of FDI, decisions to invest, produce, and market products 
and/or to close plants and lay off workers in a host country are being made by 
foreigners—or if locals serve as heads of MNE subsidiaries, they represent the in-
terest of foreign firms. Will foreigners and foreign firms make decisions in the best 
interest of host countries? This is truly a “billion dollar” question. According to the 
radical view, the answer is “No!” because foreigners and foreign firms are likely to 
maximize their own profits by exploiting people and resources in host countries. 
Such deep suspicion of MNEs leads to policies that discourage or even ban FDI. 
On the other hand, countries embracing free market and pragmatic nationalism 
views agree that despite some acknowledged differences between foreign and host 
country interests, there is a sufficient overlap of interests between MNEs and host 
countries. Thus, host countries are willing to live with some loss of sovereignty 
(see In Focus 6.1).
A second concern is associated with the negative effects on local competi-
tion. While we have just discussed MNEs’ positive effects on local competition, 
it is possible that MNEs may drive some domestic firms out of business. Having 
driven domestic firms out of business, MNEs, in theory, may be able to mo-
nopolize local markets. While this is a relatively minor concern in developed 
economies, this is a legitimate concern for less developed economies, where 
MNEs are of such a magnitude in size and strength and local firms tend to be 
significantly weaker. For example, as Coca-Cola and PepsiCo extend their “cola 
wars” from the United States around the world, they have almost “accidentally” 
wiped out many of the world’s indigenous beverage companies, which are—or 
were—much smaller. 
A third concern is associated with capital outflow. When MNEs make profits 
in host countries and repatriate (send back) such earnings to headquarters in 
home countries, host countries experience a net outflow in the capital account 
in their balance of payments. As a result, some countries have restricted MNEs’ 
Demonstration (contagion or 
imitation) effect
The reaction of local firms to rise 
to the challenge demonstrated 
by MNEs through learning and 
imitation.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 6   Investing Abroad Directly	
189
6-5
Britain is no stranger to FDI. Historically, the 
development of many countries such as Australia, 
Canada, India, and the United States benefited 
from FDI outflows from Britain. But now the news 
about FDI in Britain tends to focus on FDI inflows. 
Iconic brands and companies seem to slip out of 
British hands repeatedly. Cadbury was taken over 
by Kraft. The Rover Group was bought by BMW, 
but BMW failed to turn it around (except for do-
ing well with the smaller MINI division). The Land 
Rover part of the Rover Group was then sold to 
Ford, which more recently sold it to India’s Tata. 
The Rover brand itself was sold to China’s Nanjing 
Auto. Thanks to large inflows of FDI, a foreign firm 
is now Britain’s largest private-sector employer: Tata 
UK has 45,000  employees—slightly ahead of BAE 
Systems (formerly known as British Aerospace). In 
addition to these high-profile cases, the extent of 
FDI’s penetration into the British economy is indeed 
striking. The Economist noted the following example:
Consider an imaginary Englishman’s day. He 
wakes up in his cottage near Dover, ready to 
commute to London. Chomping a bowl of 
Weetabix, a British breakfast cereal resem-
bling (tasty) cardboard, he makes a cup of 
tea. His private water comes from Veolia, and 
his electricity from EDF (both French firms). 
Thumps at the gate tell him another arm of 
Veolia is emptying his bins. He takes the new 
high-speed train to London: it is part-owned by 
the French firm Keolis, while the tracks belong to 
Canadian pension funds. At St. Pancras station, 
a choice of double-decker buses awaits. In the 
last couple of years, one of the big London 
bus companies was bought by Netherlands 
Railways. A second went to Deutsche Bahn, 
the German railway company. In March 2011, a 
third was taken over by RATP, the Paris public-
transport authority (its previous owner was also 
French). . . . As for Weetabix, a French billionaire is 
interested in buying the firm. Yet, Britain still feels  
British.
For three decades, the consensus seems to be 
that Britain gains more by welcoming FDI, which 
is a vote of confidence in the country’s business 
climate. Behind only the United States and China, 
Britain typically attracts more FDI than its European 
neighbors—a well-deserved bragging right. Although 
patriotism runs deep, the specific link between 
sovereignty and corporate ownership does not seem 
very strong in Britain. But increasingly, many people 
in Britain are not so sure that the benefits of FDI 
outweigh the costs. The most basic anxiety is that 
foreign ownership may lead to factory closures and 
job losses. More strategically, as head offices close, 
Britain risks becoming a “branch factory” economy. 
When the going gets tough, foreign multinationals are 
more likely to preserve factories and jobs in their home 
countries and put British jobs on the chopping block. 
Debates on how to fend off foreigners (and foreign 
firms) to defend British ownership rage. Advocates 
of more protectionist policies point to Germany, 
whose officials complain about a swarm of (largely 
American) “locusts” devouring its Mittelstand, the 
private companies behind Germany’s export prowess. 
Such British advocates also cheer France’s decision 
to designate Danone a firm in a “strategic industry” 
that would qualify for government protection should 
foreign rivals come sniffing.
Defenders of more open policies on FDI inflows 
make four points. First, if foreigners think they can 
do a better job of managing British operations, 
“good luck to them,” according to the Economist. 
“The Spanish firm Ferrovial can hardly do a worse 
job of running London’s Heathrow airport than did 
BAA, the British firm it took over.” Second, being 
bought by foreign multinationals tends to boost 
productivity. Four out of five MINIs made in Oxford 
are now exported, and one in six BMWs sold is a 
made-in-Britain MINI. This contrasts sharply with 
the sorry state of Rover and MINI cars when under 
British ownership. Third, head offices and their jobs 
often stay. After GE bought Amersham, a British 
nuclear medicine systems firm, it moved GE Medi-
cal’s head office from Milwaukee, Wisconsin, to  
The Pros and Cons of FDI in Britain
IN Focus 6.1 
Ethical 
Dilemma
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

190	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
ability to repatriate funds. Another issue arises when MNE subsidiaries spend 
a lot of money to import components and services abroad, which also results in 
capital outflow.
6-3c Benefits and Costs of FDI to Home Countries
As exporters of capital, technology, management, and (in some cases) jobs, home 
(source) countries often reap benefits and endure costs associated with FDI that 
are opposite to those experienced by host countries. In Cell 3 of Figure 6.8, three 
benefits to home countries are: 
  	 Repatriated earnings from profits from FDI. 
  	 Increased exports of components and services to host countries. 
  	 Learning via FDI from operations abroad.
Shown in Cell 4 in Figure 6.8, costs of FDI to home countries primarily center 
on (1) capital outflow and (2) job loss. First, since host countries enjoy capital 
inflow because of FDI, home countries naturally suffer from some capital outflow. 
Less confident home country governments often impose capital controls to prevent 
or reduce FDI from flowing abroad. However, this concern is now less significant, as 
many governments realize the benefits eventually brought by FDI outflows.29
The second concern is now more prominent: job loss. Many MNEs simultane-
ously invest abroad by adding employment overseas and curtail domestic produc-
tion by laying off employees. It is not surprising that politicians, union members, 
journalists, and activists in many developed economies have been increasingly 
vocal in calling for restrictions on FDI outflows.
How MNEs and Host Governments Bargain
MNEs react to various policies by bargaining with host governments. The 
outcome of MNE-host government relationship, namely, the scale and scope 
of FDI in a host country, is a function of the relative bargaining power of both 
sides—the ability to extract favorable outcome from negotiations due to one 
party’s strengths. MNEs typically prefer to minimize the intervention from host 
governments and maximize the incentives provided by host governments. Host 
governments usually want to ensure a certain degree of control and minimize the 
incentives provided to MNEs. Sometimes host governments “must coerce or cajole 
the multinationals into undertaking roles that they would otherwise abdicate.”30 
However, host governments have to “induce, rather than command,” because 
MNEs have options elsewhere.31 Different countries, in effect, are competing with 
each other for precious FDI dollars.
Bargaining power
Ability to extract favorable 
outcome from negotiations due 
to one party’s strengths.
Buckinghamshire. Finally, considering that British 
firms actively invest abroad, protectionist policies at 
home will certainly invite retaliation abroad. While 
debates rage, it is clear that blocking FDI inflows 
would undermine Britain’s long-standing support for 
open markets, which would reduce its attractiveness 
as a place to do business.
Sources: Based on (1) Economist, 2010, Small island for sale, 
March 27: 75–77; (2) Economist, 2011, A very British paradox, June 18; 
(3) Economist, 2011, Tata for now, September 10: 61–62.
IN Focus 6.1 (continued)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 6   Investing Abroad Directly	
191
Shown in In Focus 6.2, FDI is not a zero-sum game. The negotiations are char-
acterized by the “three Cs”: common interests, conflicting interests, and compro-
mises32 (Figure 6.9). The upshot is that despite a variety of conflicts, there are 
conditions within which the interests of both sides may converge on an outcome 
that makes each side better off.33
Intel began operating in Israel in 1974 with five 
employees. By 2000, Intel had a major facility in Kiryat 
Gat in southern Israel. Intel had invested $1.5 billion in 
this facility, and had benefited from a previous law sup-
portive of FDI by receiving a grant worth 32% of the 
investment. The law subsequently had been changed, 
and the maximum level of a grant was reduced to 20% 
of new FDI projects. In 2000, Intel decided to invest 
in three new production facilities: one in the United 
States, one outside the US, and the third one to be 
either inside or outside the US. Intel approached the 
Israeli government, suggesting that it would be ready 
to build a new facility in Israel, provided that it would 
receive a reasonable amount of support.
Because of the security conflicts, Israel is usually 
regarded as a high-risk country for FDI. However, 
the security issue has two sides. In addition to the 
risk side, one positive side is the large and continu-
ous investment in security by the Israeli govern-
ment, which has generated a high-quality workforce 
capable of performing cutting-edge, high-tech work 
that is desirable for Intel. Israel, on the other hand, 
was interested in securing Intel’s further investment 
in order to attract other MNEs. Therefore, both sides 
shared some common interests.
However, the negotiations quickly revealed some 
conflicting interests. Intel, fully aware of the new law, 
asked the Israeli government to specify the level and 
nature of support. The government refused, prior to re-
ceiving a request from Intel on what Intel deemed the 
minimum level of support. In other words, both sides 
refused to be precise. Intel wanted to maximize the 
support, which the government preferred to minimize.
The Israeli government knew that Intel was 
interested but that it was also considering other 
sites such as Ireland. The government’s main 
problem was the limited budget to support FDI and 
the opportunity cost of not being able to support 
other projects should Intel be supported. The gov-
ernment team came back offering to replace the 
grant by a tax relief with the same present value. 
Intel rejected this offer, arguing that switching from 
a grant to a tax relief would have a negative effect 
on the operational profit, which was the main per-
formance measure. The Israeli team responded by 
offering a grant to be paid against tax payments 
over time. This would allow Intel to reduce the capi-
tal investment by the present value and the depre-
ciation. This would have a positive impact on op-
erational profit. Intel eventually accepted the new 
offer. It invested $2 billion on a new facility next to 
the existing one in Kiryat Gat and another $1 billion 
to upgrade the existing facility.
These negotiations were successful, because 
both sides reached a number of compromises. 
Intel not only accepted a substantially lower level 
of support (from 32% to 20% of the investment), 
but also agreed not to bargain for a cash grant up 
front. Israel agreed to maximize the level of support 
per the new law, and also shifted the cost for sup-
porting this much needed, high-profile project from 
a high opportunity cost area (a direct cash grant for 
large-scale support) to a lower opportunity cost 
area (lower tax receipts in the future). Today, the 
new Kiryat Gat manufactures processors that are 
exported around the world. Intel is Israel’s largest 
private employer with 6,600 employees in produc-
tion and R&D facilities in Kiryat Gat and five other 
locations.
Sources: Based on (1) T. Agmon, 2003, Who gets what: The MNE, the 
nation state, and the distributional effects of globalization, Journal of 
International Business Studies, 34: 416–427; (2) www.intel.com.
Israel versus Intel
IN Focus 6.2 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

192	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
Typically, FDI bargaining is not one-round only. After the initial FDI entry, both 
sides may continue to exercise bargaining power. One well-known phenomenon is 
the obsolescing bargain, referring to the deal struck by MNEs and host governments, 
which change their requirements after the initial FDI entry. It typically unfolds in 
three rounds:
  	 In Round One, the MNE and the government negotiate a deal. The MNE 
usually is not willing to enter in the absence of some government assurance 
of property rights and incentives (such as tax holidays).
  	 In Round Two, the MNE enters and, if all goes well, earns profits that may 
become visible.
  	 In Round Three, the government, often pressured by domestic political groups, 
may demand renegotiations of the deal that seems to yield “excessive” profits 
to the foreign firm (which, of course, regards these as “fair” and “normal” 
profits). The previous deal, thus, becomes obsolete. The government’s tactics 
include removing incentives, demanding a higher share of profits and taxes, 
and even expropriation (confiscating foreign assets) (see the Closing Case).
At this time, the MNE has already invested substantial sums of resources (called 
sunk costs) and often has to accommodate some new demands. Otherwise, it may face 
expropriation or exit at a huge loss (see the Closing Case). Not surprisingly, MNEs 
do not appreciate the risk associated with such obsolescing bargains. Unfortunately, 
recent actions in Argentina, Venezuela, Bolivia, and Ecuador suggest that obsolesc-
ing bargains are have necessarily become obsolete (see the next section for details).
6-4 Debates and Extensions
As an embodiment of globalization, FDI has stimulated a lot of debates. This section 
highlights two: (1) FDI versus outsourcing and (2) facilitating versus confronting 
inbound FDI.
6-4a FDI versus Outsourcing
While this chapter has focused on FDI, we need to be aware that FDI is not the only 
mode of foreign market entry. Especially when undertaking a value chain analy-
sis regarding specific activities (see Chapter 4), a decision to undertake FDI will 
Obsolescing bargain
The deal struck by MNEs and 
host governments, which 
change their requirements 
after the initial FDI entry.
Expropriation
Government’s confiscation of 
foreign assets.
Sunk cost
Cost that a firm has to endure 
even when its investment turns 
out to be unsatisfactory.
Learning Objective
Participate in two leading 
debates concerning FDI.
6-4
Common interests
Compromises
Conﬂicting interests
Figure 6.9
How MNEs Negotiate with Host Governments: The Three Cs
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 6   Investing Abroad Directly	
193
have to be assessed relative to the benefits and costs of outsourcing. Recall from 
Chapter 4 that in a foreign location, overseas outsourcing becomes “offshoring,” 
whereas FDI—that is, performing an activity in-house at an overseas location—
has been recently labeled “captive sourcing” by some authors (see Figure 4.4). One 
strategic debate is whether FDI (captive sourcing) or outsourcing will serve firms’ 
purposes better. 
The answer boils down to (1) how critical the activity being considered to 
perform abroad is to the core mission of the firm, (2) how common the activity 
is being undertaken by multiple end-user industries, and (3) how readily avail-
able the overseas talents to perform this activity are. If the activity is marginal, is 
common (or similar) across multiple end-user industries, and is able to be provided 
by proven talents overseas, then outsourcing is called for. Otherwise, FDI is often 
necessary. For instance, when Travelocity outsourced its call center operations to 
India, its rival Sabre carefully considered its options. Sabre eventually decided to 
avoid outsourcing and to initiate FDI in Uruguay. 
6-4b Facilitating versus Confronting Inbound FDI
Despite the general trend toward more friendly policies to facilitate inbound 
FDI around the world, debates continue to rage. At the heart of these debates 
is the age-old question discussed earlier and illustrated in the Closing Case and 
In Focus 6.1: Can we trust foreign firms in making decisions important to our 
economy?
In developed economies, backlash against inbound FDI from certain 
countries is not unusual. In the 1960s, Europeans were concerned about the 
massive US FDI in Europe. In the 1980s, Americans were alarmed by the signifi-
cant Japanese inroads into the United States. Over time, such concerns subsided. 
In 2006, a controversy erupted when Dubai Ports World (DP World), a United 
Arab Emirates (UAE) government-owned company, purchased US ports from an-
other foreign firm, Britain’s P&O. This entry gave DP World control over terminal 
operations at the ports of New York/New Jersey, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Miami, 
and New Orleans. Although the UAE has been a US ally for three decades, many 
politicians, journalists, and activists opposed such FDI. In this “largest political 
storm over US ports since the Boston Tea Party,”34 DP World eventually withdrew. 
Similarly, Chinese firm CNOOC’s bid for US firm’s Unocal and another Chinese 
firm Chinalco’s bid for Australia’s Rio Tinto were torpedoed by a politicized 
process. Recent media sensation often focuses on China’s rise as an active foreign 
investor, and some reporting has fostered a view of the alleged “China threat” 
brought by such FDI, which cannot be substantiated by hard evidence (Emerging 
Markets 6.1).35
In some parts of the developing world, tension over foreign ownership can heat up. 
There were numerous incidents of nationalization and expropriation against MNE 
assets throughout the developing world between the 1950s and the 1970s. Given the 
recent worldwide trend toward more FDI-friendly policies, many people thought 
that such actions were a thing of the past. During 2006, individuals holding such 
a view had a rude awakening. In March 2006, Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez 
ordered Chevron, Royal Dutch, Total, ENI, and other oil and gas MNEs to con-
vert their operations in the country into forced JVs with state-owned, Venezuelan 
firm PDVSA with PDVSA holding at least 60% of the equity. When France’s To-
tal and Italy’s ENI rejected such terms, their fields were promptly seized by the 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

194	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
The notion of the so-called “China threat” pervades 
the media in the West today. According to many 
writers, Chinese multinationals are—to paraphrase 
the Economist—intent on “buying up” the world. 
Such sensational reporting creates three lasting 
impressions: (1) China is one of the world’s biggest 
overseas investors. (2) Among the emerging econo-
mies, it is the largest foreign investor. (3) China’s out-
ward foreign direct investment (OFDI) is very global. 
Is there any hard evidence based on data to support 
these claims?
Unfortunately, none of these impressions can be 
substantiated by hard evidence. Take the notion that 
China invests abroad more than any other country 
does. According to the United Nations’ World In-
vestment Report 2011, China and Hong Kong were 
not among the top three direct foreign investors 
in 2010. They were No. 5 and No. 4, respectively 
(with Hong Kong ahead of China)—well behind the 
United States, France, and Germany (see Figure 
6.4). In 2010, when FDI outflows from China broke 
its own record (reaching $68 billion), the US/China 
difference was five times. Overall, China’s OFDI 
stock was only 6% that of the US. Therefore, if Chi-
nese companies could buy up the world with that 
tiny sum, then US companies would have done that 
16 times.
There is also a widespread perception that China 
must be the largest foreign investor among the emerg-
ing economies. Again, that is not the case, according 
to UN data. While China’s stock of OFDI, at 1.46% of 
the worldwide total, is three times India’s (0.5%) and 
ahead of Brazil’s (0.9%), Russia has far more OFDI 
stock (2.12%) than China. Yet, nobody worries about 
the “Russia threat”—at least not since 1991, when 
the Soviet Union collapsed.
Finally, Chinese OFDI is not global, because 
Chinese companies have not invested all over the 
world. Hong Kong commanded 67% of China’s OFDI 
stock, while the rest of Asia received 9%. Significant 
round tripping of Chinese capital, via Hong Kong, has 
taken place in order to take advantage of Chinese 
regulations in favor of “foreign” capital. Of the 12% of 
China’s OFDI stock that Chinese companies invested 
in Latin America and the Caribbean, tax havens like the 
Cayman Islands and the British Virgin Islands absorbed 
11%. As Beijing’s control of Hong Kong intensifies, it 
is likely that the Cayman Islands and the British Virgin 
Islands as tax havens increasingly assume the role 
that Hong Kong has traditionally played—to facilitate 
significant capital round tripping. By contrast, China’s 
OFDI in Europe (4% of its OFDI stock), North America 
(2%), and Oceania (3%) was relatively small, while 
Africa accounted for just 4% of China’s OFDI stock.
The world outside Hong Kong accounts for just 
about one-third of China’s stock of OFDI, which only 
represents 1.46% of the worldwide stock of OFDI. 
Do a little math, you can see that Chinese companies 
have invested a mere 0.03% of the worldwide stock 
of OFDI in North America (that is: 1.46% of world-
wide total × 2% invested in North America). In dol-
lar terms, that is about $6.3 billion. Note this is the 
stock of China’s OFDI—meaning the accumulation of 
all such investments over the years. In comparison, 
the revenue of the smallest US company on the For-
tune Global 500, Bristol-Myers Squibb (ranked 500th 
in 2010), was $19 billion in just one year. The upshot? 
China’s OFDI, while emerging and increasing, is insig-
nificant in North America and certainly does not de-
serve the media hoopla. 
Overall, the UN data show that because of its 
relatively small scale and limited geographic scope, 
China’s OFDI can hardly threaten any country. Em-
bracing pragmatic nationalism, policymakers the 
world over would do well to consider both the pros 
and cons, and when the economic benefits outweigh 
the costs, to approve Chinese investments—just as 
they would in the case of FDI from other countries. 
An Evidence-Based View on Why Chinese FDI Is Not a Threat 
E m e r g i n g  M a r k e t s  6 . 1
Ethical 
Dilemma
Danny Lehman/Corbis; Björn Meyer/sitox/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 6   Investing Abroad Directly	
195
government.36 On May 1 (“May Day” in the socialist world), 2006, the Bolivian 
military stormed MNEs’ oil fields and proclaimed control. President Evo Morales 
declared, “The plunder [by MNEs] has ended.”37 Soon after, in late May 2006, 
Ecuador expropriated the oil fields run by America’s Occidental Petroleum. More 
recently, in May 2012 Argentina nationalized YPF, which was owned by Spain’s Rep-
sol (see the Closing Case).
It is important to note that the anti-MNE actions in Latin America were not 
sudden, impulsive policy changes. The politicians leading these actions were all 
democratically elected. These actions were the result of lengthy political debates 
concerning FDI in the region, and such takeovers were popular with the pub-
lic. Until the 1970s, Latin American governments had often harshly confronted 
MNEs. Only in the 1990s when these countries became democratic did they open 
their oil industry to inbound FDI. Therefore, the 180-degree policy reversal is 
both surprising (considering how recently these governments welcomed MNEs 
to arrive) and not surprising (considering the history of how MNEs were dealt 
with in the region). While some argue that the recent actions were driven by 
industry-specific dynamics (oil prices skyrocketed so that governments could not 
resist the urge of their “grabbing hand”), others suggest that these actions repre-
sent the swing of a “pendulum” toward more confrontation (see Chapter 1 on the 
“pendulum” on globalization).
6-5 Management Savvy
The big question in global business, adapted to the context of FDI, is: What 
determines the success and failure of FDI around the globe? The answer boils 
down to two components. First, from a resource-based view, some firms are very 
good at FDI because they leverage OLI advantages in a way that is valuable, 
unique, and hard for rival firms to imitate (see the Opening Case). Second, from 
an institution-based view, the political realities either enable or constrain FDI 
from reaching its full economic potential (see the Closing Case). Therefore, the 
success and failure of FDI also significantly depends on institutions governing FDI 
as “rules of the game.”
As a result, three implications for action emerge (Table 6.2). First, carefully 
assess whether FDI is justified, in light of other possibilities such as outsourcing 
and licensing. This exercise needs to be conducted on an activity-by-activity basis 
as part of the value-chain analysis (see Chapter 4). If ownership and internaliza-
tion advantages are deemed not crucial, then FDI is not recommended.
Learning Objective
Draw implications for action.
6-5
When unemployment is high and jobs are hard to 
come by, turning away investments from the economy 
with the largest foreign exchange reserves in the 
world does not make much sense.
Sources: Adapted from M. W. Peng, 2012, Why China’s investments aren’t a threat, Harvard Business Review, February 13, blogs.hbr.org. 
Underlying research can be found in (1) M. W. Peng, 2011, The social responsibility of international business scholars: The case of China, AIB Insights, 
11(4): 8–10; (2) M. W. Peng, 2012, The global strategy of emerging multinationals from China, Global Strategy Journal, 2(2): 97–107; (3) M. W. Peng, 
S. Sun, & D. Blevins, 2011, The social responsibility of international business scholars, Multinational Business Review, 19(2): 106–119. Additional sources 
are (4) Economist, 2010, Buying up the world, November 13: cover story; (5) D. Lampton, 2010, Power constrained: Sources of mutual strategic suspicion 
in US-China relations, NBR Analysis, 93: 5–25, Seattle: National Bureau of Asian Research; (6) United Nations, 2011, World Investment Report 2011, 
New York and Geneva: UN.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

196	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
Second, once a decision to undertake FDI is made, pay attention to the old 
adage: “Location, location, location!” The quest for location advantages has to 
create a fit with the firm’s strategic goals. For example, if a firm is searching 
for the best “hot spots” for innovations, certain low-cost locations that do not 
generate sufficient innovations will not become very attractive (see Chapters 10 
and 13).
Finally, given the political realities around the world, be aware of the institutional 
constraints. Savvy MNE managers should not take FDI-friendly policies for grant-
ed. Setbacks are likely. The global economic slowdown has made many developed 
economies less attractive to invest in, and the credit crunch means that firms are 
less able to invest abroad. Attitudes toward certain forms of FDI are changing, 
which may lead to FDI policies to become more protectionist. In the long run, 
the interests of MNEs in host countries can be best safeguarded if MNEs accom-
modate, rather than neglect or dominate, the interests of host countries (see the 
Closing Case). In practical terms, contributions to local employment, job training, 
education, and pollution control will tangibly demonstrate MNEs’ commitment to 
host countries.
C h a p t e r  S u m m a r y
	 6.1	 Use the resource-based and institution-based views to answer why FDI takes 
place.
  	 The resource-based view suggests that the key word of FDI is direct, which 
reflects firms’ interest in directly managing, developing, and leveraging 
their firm-specific resources and capabilities abroad.
  	 The institution-based view argues that recent expansion of FDI is indicative 
of generally more friendly policies, norms, and values associated with FDI 
(despite some setbacks).
	 6.2	 Understand how FDI results in ownership, location, and internalization 
(OLI) advantages.
  	 Ownership refers to MNEs’ possession and leveraging of certain valu-
able, rare, hard-to-imitate, and organizationally embedded (VRIO) assets 
overseas.
  	 Location refers to certain places’ advantages that can help MNEs attain 
strategic goals.
  	 Internalization refers to the replacement of cross-border market relation-
ship with one firm (the MNE) locating in two or more countries. Internal-
ization helps combat market imperfections and failures.
Table 6.2
 Implications for Action
  	 Carefully assess whether FDI is justified in light of other foreign entry modes such as 
outsourcing and licensing.
  	 Pay careful attention to the location advantages in combination with the firm’s strategic 
goals.
  	 Be aware of the institutional constraints and enablers governing FDI and enhance FDI’s 
legitimacy in host countries
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 6   Investing Abroad Directly	
197
	 6.3	 Identify different political views on FDI based on an understanding of its 
benefits and costs to host and home countries.
  	 The radical view is hostile to FDI, and the free market view calls for 
minimum intervention in FDI. 
  	 Most countries practice pragmatic nationalism, weighing the benefits and 
costs of FDI.
  	 FDI brings a different (and often opposing) set of benefits and costs to host 
and home countries.
	 6.4	 Participate in two leading debates concerning FDI.
  	 (1) FDI versus outsourcing and (2) facilitating versus confronting inbound 
FDI.
	 6.5	 Draw implications for action.
  	 Carefully assess whether FDI is justified, in light of other options, such as 
outsourcing and licensing.
  	 Pay careful attention to the location advantages in combination with the 
firm’s strategic goals.
  	 Be aware of the institutional constraints governing FDI and enhance 
legitimacy in host countries. 
K e y  T e r m s
Agglomeration 183
Bargaining power 190
Contagion (imitation) 
effect 188
Demonstration effect 188
Dissemination risk 181
Downstream vertical  
FDI 177
Expropriation 192
FDI flow 177
FDI inflow 177
FDI outflow 178
FDI stock 178
Foreign portfolio 
investment (FPI) 176
Free market view 186
Horizontal FDI 177
Knowledge spillover 183
Internalization 180
Intrafirm trade 185
Location 180
Management control 
rights 177
Market imperfection 
(market failure) 184
Obsolescing bargain 192
OLI advantages 180
Oligopoly 184
Ownership 180
Pragmatic  
nationalism 187
Radical view 186
Sunk cost 192
Technology spillover 187
Upstream vertical  
FDI 177
Vertical FDI 177
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 What is the primary difference between FDI and FPI?
	 2.	 How does the resource-based view suggest that the key word of FDI is 
direct?
	 3.	 How does horizontal FDI compare to vertical FDI?
	 4.	 How does internationalization help combat market imperfections and 
failures?
	 5.	 Briefly summarize each of the three OLI advantages.
	 6.	 Discuss the pros and cons of FDI versus licensing.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

198	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
	 7.	 Devise your own example of agglomeration that demonstrates your under-
standing of the concept.
	 8.	 Compare and contrast the three political views of FDI.
	 9.	 Describe two benefits and two costs to a host country of FDI and to a home 
country of FDI.
	 10.	 Given that outsourcing is a viable alternative to FDI, what issues should be 
considered before a firm decides between the two? 
	 11.	 ON CULTURE: Many people in the United States are opposed to both 
outsourcing and FDI. Would it be easier to get such people to accept one of 
these alternatives, and if so, which one? Why or why not?
	 12.	 Why do some countries object to inbound FDI?
	 13.	 In the United States, many states and cities deliberately seek investment in 
their states and communities by firms from other parts of the country. Why 
are some of those who seek investment from elsewhere in the US worried 
about investment from overseas?
	 14.	 What issues should a savvy manager consider when evaluating a particular 
location for FDI?
	 15.	 Some Americans feel that US-based firms should not undertake FDI in 
other countries because it results in expanding business opportunities in 
those countries and does not benefit the United States. How may the data 
on PengAtlas Map 2.3 be used to refute that view?
	 16.	 Consider PengAtlas Map 2.3 showing US FDI, and then look at PengAtlas 
Maps 2.1 and 2.2. Given the possibility that some US imports are from 
operations in which US firms have made FDI, how does that affect your view 
of the trade deficit? Does it make the deficit seem like less of a problem or 
greater? Explain your answer.
	 17.	 In questions 12, 13, and 15, we have noted controversies regarding FDI in 
terms of both inflows and outflows. Regarding PengAtlas Map 2.3, public 
concern about FDI often focuses on the FDI of US-based companies, and 
some argue that investment going overseas may otherwise have occurred 
within the US. However, the map also shows that the US is a major recipi-
ent of such investment from overseas—but some who oppose FDI outflows 
also oppose FDI inflows. They fear that the United States is losing control 
over its economy as a result of such inflows. Do you think the two views are 
compatible? Why or why not?
C r i t i c a l  D i s c u s s i o n  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 Identify the top five (or ten) source countries of FDI into your country. Then 
identify the top ten (or 20) foreign MNEs that have undertaken inbound 
FDI in your country. Why do these countries and companies provide the 
bulk of FDI into your country?
	 2.	 Identify the top five (or ten) recipient countries of FDI from your country. 
Then identify the top ten (or 20) MNEs headquartered in your country that 
have made outbound FDI elsewhere. Why do these countries attract FDI 
from the top MNEs from your country?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 6   Investing Abroad Directly	
199
	 3.	 ON ETHICS: Undertaking FDI, by definition, means not investing in the 
MNE’s home country. What are the ethical dilemmas here? What are your 
recommendations, as (1) MNE executives, (2) labor union leaders of your 
domestic (home country) labor forces, or (3) host country officials? 
G l o b a l  A c t i o n 
	 1.	 Your MNE is looking to evaluate the industrial capabilities of various 
locations worldwide. Based on readily available data concerning the potential 
and performance of different countries, the information you provide will drive 
future investment by your company. Choose a country from Asia, Europe, 
North America, and South America, and summarize your findings about each. 
Of the four countries from four continents, how would you rank them? Why?
	 2.	 The main premise for development at your company in the coming years 
is to shift its offshore services to Africa. As such, you have been asked to 
develop a report that evaluates which African countries have increased the 
possibility of creating a long-term advantage for your company. Also, be sure 
to include the African countries that have decreased their capacity to create a 
long-term advantage. Can you generate a top-five list and a bottom-five list 
from Africa for this purpose?
V i d e o  C a s e
After watching the video on Thailand’s booming economy, discuss the following:
	 1.	 How do firms in Asia (in this case, in Thailand) overcome market failure?
	 2.	 What costs and benefits do US-based Ford and British companies experi-
ence as a result of FDI in Thailand?
	 3.	 What role does Thailand’s location play in its booming economy? Is agglom-
eration involved?
	 4.	 Are there confrontations with inbound FDI?
	 5.	 Should foreign-invested and domestic firms sell more to domestic consumers 
in Thailand?
Argentina’s relationship with foreign investors in its 
energy industry has historically been rocky. The govern-
ment in 1955 canceled international oil contracts 
signed by a previous president, Perón, in 1952. The 
next president signed new contracts in 1958, which 
were nullified in 1963 by a different president. Foreign 
oil companies were then invited to return in 1966, 
expelled in 1973, and again encouraged to enter after 
1976. Not surprisingly, many foreign investors shied 
away from this country.
Since the 1990s, the pro-market reform poli-
cies that were centered on trade liberalization, 
EMERGING MARKETS: Cry for Me, Argentina
Ethical 
Dilemma
C l o s i n g  C a s e
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

200	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
deregulation, and privatization have brought more sta-
bility. More foreign investors showed up. In 1993, YPF, 
the formerly state-owned oil giant, was privatized. In 
1999, Spain’s Repsol bought 57% of the shares of 
YPF and became its controlling shareholder. Although 
Argentina suffered from the government’s default on 
its $155 billion public debt (a world record at that time) 
in 2002, and the country has struggled to recover 
since then, Repsol’s operations have been relatively 
smooth—until recently.
In 2012, Argentina again was engulfed in a 
major crisis. Given the severe trade deficit, the 
government, under President Cristina Fernández 
de Kirchner, unleashed a series of radical measures 
to curb imports. Importers of foreign cars were re-
quired to find export buyers of Argentine wines; 
otherwise, port authorities would not release their 
cars. Foreign print publications, including maga-
zines and newspapers, were held at the Buenos 
Aires airport unless subscribers went there to pay 
a highly unpopular additional fee—an import tax or 
tariff of sorts. 
In addition to making the life of Argentine firms 
and citizens harder, Fernández also targeted foreign 
direct investors. Specifically, Repsol was singled 
out as a high-profile target for nationalization (or 
expropriation). Repsol’s alleged wrongdoing was 
that it failed to boost oil and natural gas production 
needed to keep up with rising local demand. In 2003, 
when Néstor Kirchner, Fernández’s late husband and 
predecessor, took office, Argentina was a net energy 
exporter. Ten years later, Argentina imported 15% 
more than its energy production, resulting in more 
than $10 billion of cash outflows. The government 
argued that the largest producer, YPF, which contrib-
uted 45% of the country’s energy production, was 
responsible for this mess. In Fernández’s own words 
in her announcement:
If YPF’s policy continues—draining fields dry, 
no exploration, and practically no investment—
the country will end up having no viable fu-
ture, not because of a lack of resources but 
because of business policies. . . . Our goal 
is for YPF to be aligned with the interests of 
the country. When corporate interests are not 
aligned with national interests, when compa-
nies are concerned only with profits, that’s 
when economies fail, which is what hap-
pened globally in 2008 and what happened to 
Argentina in 2002.
In the words of a Congressional leader, who 
participated in the debate on the YPF renationalization 
bill submitted by the president: 
All oil companies that operate in Argentina, Repsol 
and the rest, have to work in the public interest, 
which in this case means energy self sufficiency 
for Argentina. . . . Repsol invested little in Argentina. 
But it was YPF and Argentine oil that financed 
Repsol’s growth around the world.
Fernández framed the YPF renationalization as 
central to fulfill her campaign pledges to tighten 
the interventionist policies in order to rescue the 
economy. YPF was an iconic symbol of national pride, 
and the cash-strapped government would love to 
have its revenues, estimated at $1.3 billion a year. 
Fernández’s measures were popular with ordinary 
Argentines. Many of them blamed free market re-
forms such as privatization of the 1990s to be a cause 
of the economic devastation of the 2000s. Not sur-
prisingly, the YPF renationalization bill passed Con-
gress by a landslide. In May 2012, Fernández signed 
the measure into law and formally (re)nationalized—
for the time being without compensation—Repsol’s 
assets, which according to Repsol would be valued at 
more than $9.3 billion. 
Outraged, both Repsol and the Spanish govern-
ment protested, but there was little they could do. 
epa european pressphoto agency b.v./Alamy.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 6   Investing Abroad Directly	
201
Argentina had little FDI in Spain, while Spanish FDI in 
Argentina’s highly regulated banking, telecommunica-
tions, and utilities industries could suffer if tensions 
were to escalate between the two countries. In 
retaliation, Spain quickly moved to limit imports of 
biofuels from Argentina, which annually exported 
$1 billion to Spain. Spain also threatened to initiate 
complaints to the World Trade Organization, called for 
EU-wide boycotts of Argentine products, and took 
the case to the World Bank’s International Center 
for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID). In 
response, Fernández said:
This president is not going to respond to any 
threats . . . because I represent the Argentine 
people. I’m the head of the state, not a thug.
Argentina might indeed be defiant, because 
it already had a very bad record at ICSID, whereby 
one-quarter of all ICSID cases had been brought 
against Argentina (thanks to its 2002 default). While 
renationalizing YPF brought more revenues and helped 
the president gain more popularity, according to the 
Economist, “it is a disaster for Argentina.” In the short 
run, the fight over the valuation of the firm already 
began in negotiations between Argentina and Repsol. 
In the long run, such expropriation has grave ramifi-
cations far beyond the oil industry and beyond for-
eign investors from Spain (Argentina’s largest foreign 
investor). In fairness, Fernández also nationalized the 
country’s private pension funds and (re)nationalized 
the flagship airline, Aerolineas Argentinas. So, she 
did not just target foreign investors such as Repsol. 
Nevertheless, foreign investors entertaining large-
scale entries in the rapidly growing Latin American 
region are likely to be lured more strongly by Brazil, 
Chile, and Mexico, as opposed to risking their capital 
in a country known to be a global rule-breaker.
Case Discussion Questions:
	 1.	 What are the costs and benefits of FDI inflows 
for a host country such as Argentina?
	 2.	 Will foreign firms such as Repsol make decisions 
in the best interest of Argentina?
	 3.	 ON ETHICS: As a Spanish manager at YPF, 
how would you cooperate with the Argentine 
government to expropriate YPF? If you were an 
Argentine manager at YPF, would your action be 
different?
	 4.	 ON ETHICS: If you were a member of Argentina’s 
Congress, would you vote to support Fernán-
dez’s renationalization bill for YPF?
	 5.	 ON ETHICS: If you were a member of the 
arbitration panel assembled by ICSID (which 
would require you to come from a neutral 
country—neither from Argentina nor Spain), how 
much compensation would you think Argentina’s 
government should pay YPF?
Sources: Based on (1) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2012, Argentina goes rogue again, April 23: 16–17; (2) Economist, 2012, Cristina scrapes the barrel, 
April 21: 16; (3) Economist, 2012, Fill ’er up, April 21: 49–50; (4) M. Guillen, 2001, The Limits of Convergence (p. 135), Princeton, NJ: Princeton University  
Press; (5) Reuters, 2012, Argentina moves to seize control of Repsol’s YPF, April 17, www.reuters.com; (6) Reuters, 2012, Argentina nationalizes 
oil company YPF, May 4, www.reuters.com; (7) Reuters, 2012, Spain has few ways to pressure Argentina over YPF, April 18, www.reuters.com.
[Journal acronyms] AER—American Economic Review; AMJ—
Academy of Management Journal; AMR —Academy of Management 
Review; BW—BusinessWeek (before 2010) or Bloomberg Businessweek 
(since 2010); CFDIP—Columbia Foreign Direct Investment Perspectives; 
EJ—Economic Journal; FEER—Far Eastern Economic Review; GSJ—
Global Strategy Journal; IBR—International Business Review; JMS—
Journal of Management Studies; JIBS—Journal of International Business 
Studies; JWB—Journal of World Business; MBR—Multinational Busi-
ness Review; MIR—Management International Review; RES—Review of 
Economics and Statistics; SMJ—Strategic Management Journal.
1 R. Caves, 1996, Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis, 
2nd ed. (p. 1), New York: Cambridge University Press. 
2 United Nations, 2011, World Investment Report 2011 (overview, p. 2), 
New York and Geneva: United Nations.
3 United Nations, 2005, World Investment Report 2005 (p. 4), New York 
and Geneva: United Nations.
4 K. Moore & D. Lewis, 2009, The Origins of Globalization, New York: 
Routledge.
5 M. Wilkins, 2001, The history of MNE (p. 13), in A. Rugman & 
T. Brewer (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of International Business, 3–35, 
New York: Oxford University Press.
6 United Nations, 2009, World Investment Report 2009 (p. xxi), 
New York and Geneva: UN.
N O T E S
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

202	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
7 United Nations, 2011, World Investment Report 2011 (p. viii).
8 J. Dunning, 1993, Multinational Enterprises and the Global Econo-
my, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. See also C. Pitelis, 2007, Edith 
Penrose and a learning-based perspective on the MNE and OLI, 
MIR, 47: 207–219.
9 FEER, 2002, Pepperoni power, November 14: 59–60.
10 B. Elango & C. Pattnaik, 2007, Building capabilities for inter-
national operations through networks, JIBS, 38: 541–555; D. Yiu, 
C. M. Lau, & G. Bruton, 2007, International venturing by emerging 
economy firms, JIBS, 38: 519–540.
11 J. Galan, J. Gonzalez-Benito, & J. Zuniga-Vincente, 2007, Fac-
tors determining the location decisions of Spanish MNEs, JIBS, 
38: 975–997; R. Grosse & L. Trevino, 2005, New institutional eco-
nomics and FDI location in Central and Eastern Europe, MIR, 45: 
123–135.
12 N. Driffield & J. Love, 2007, Linking FDI motivation and host 
economy productivity effects, JIBS, 38: 460–473; P. Ghauri & P. Rao, 
2009, Intellectual property, pharmaceutical MNEs, and the develop-
ing world, JWB, 44: 206–215; M. Hansem, T. Pedersen, & B. Petersen, 
2009, MNC strategies and linkage effects in developing countries, 
JWB, 44: 121–130; F. Hatani, 2009, The logic of spillover inception, 
JWB, 44: 158–166; G. Santangelo, 2009. MNCs and linkages creation, 
JWB, 44: 192–205; X. Tian, 2007, Accounting for sources of FDI tech-
nology spillovers, JIBS, 38: 147–159.
13 B. McCann & T. Folta, 2009, Demand- and supply-side agglomera-
tions, JMS, 46: 362–392; J. Scott-Kennel, 2007, FDI and local linkages, 
MIR, 47: 51–77; J. Singh, 2007, Asymmetry of knowledge spillovers be-
tween MNCs and host country firms, JIBS, 38: 764–786; S. Tallman, 
M. Jenkins, N. Henry, & S. Pinch, 2004, Knowledge, clusters, and 
competitive advantage, AMR, 29: 258–271.
14 F. Knickerbocker, 1973, Oligopolistic Reaction and Multinational En-
terprise, Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
15 S. Feinberg & A. Gupta, 2009, MNC subsidiaries and country risk, 
AMJ, 52: 381–399.
16 L. Alfaro, S. Kalemli-Ozcan, & V. Volosovych, 2008, Why doesn’t 
capital flow from rich to poor countries? RES, 90: 347–368; L. Allen, 
S. Chakraborty, & W. Watanabe, 2011, FDI and regulatory remedies for 
banking crises, JIBS, 42: 875–893; C. Peinhardt & T. Allee, 2012, Dif-
ferent investment treaties, different effects, CFDIP, 61: 1–3.
17 P. Buckley & M. Casson, 1976, The Future of the Multinational Enter-
prise, London: Macmillan; S. Chen, 2010, A general TCE model of 
international business institutions, JIBS, 41: 935–959.
18 I. Filatotchev, R. Strange, J. Piesse, & Y. Lien, 2007, FDI by firms 
from new industrialized economies in emerging markets, JIBS, 38: 
556–572.
19 J. Galan & J. Gonzalez-Benito, 2006, Distinctive determinant fac-
tors of Spanish FDI in Latin America, JWB, 41: 171–189.
20 R. Vernon, 1977, Storm over the Multinationals, Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
21 P. Dimitratos, I. Liouka, & S. Young, 2009, Regional location of 
MNC subsidiaries and economic development contribution, JWB, 
44: 180–191; J. Oetzel & J. Doh, 2009, MNEs and development, JWB, 
44: 108–120; M. Yamin & R. Sinkovics, 2009, Infrastructure or FDI? 
JWB, 44: 155–157. 
22 B. Jindra, A. Giroud, & J. Scott-Kennel, 2009, Subsidiary roles, ver-
tical linkages, and economic development, JWB, 44: 167–179; X. Liu, 
C. Wang, & Y. Wei, 2009, Do local manufacturing firms benefit from 
transaction linkages with MNEs in China? JIBS, 40: 1113–1130; 
K. Meyer & E. Sinani, 2009, When and where does FDI generate posi-
tive spillovers? JIBS, 40: 1075–1094. 
23 C. Altomonte & E. Pennings, 2009, Domestic plant productivity 
and incremental spillovers from FDI, JIBS, 40: 1131–1148; B. Javorcik, 
2004, Does FDI increase the productivity of domestic firms? AER, 
94: 605–627. 
24 G. Blalock & D. Simon, 2009, Do all firms benefit equally from 
downstream FDI? JIBS, 40: 1095–1112.
25 K. Bunyaratavej, E. Hahn, & J. Doh, 2008, Multinational invest-
ment and host country development, JWB, 43: 227–242. 
26 F. Barry & C. Kearney, 2006, MNEs and industrial structure in 
host countries, JIBS, 37: 392–406.
27 Economist, 2011, Tata for now, September 10: 61–62.
28 BW, 2011, Surprise! Carmakers are a recovery bright spot, 
November 7: 19–20.
29 P. Braunerhjelm, L. Oxelheim, & P. Thulin, 2005, The relation-
ship between domestic and outward FDI, IBR, 14: 677–694.
30 P. Evans, 1979, Dependent Development (p. 44), Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.
31 C. Lindblom, 1977, Politics and Markets (p. 173), New York: Basic 
Books.
32 T. Agmon, 2003, Who gets what, JIBS, 34: 416–427.
33 M. W. Peng, 2000, Controlling the foreign agent, MIR, 40: 
141–165.
34 Economist, 2006, Trouble on the waterfront, February 25: 33–34.
35 M. W. Peng, 2011, The social responsibility of international busi-
ness scholars: The case of China, AIB Insights, 11(4): 8–10; M. W. 
Peng, 2012, The global strategy of emerging multinationals from 
China, GSJ, 2: 97–107; M. W. Peng, S. Sun, & D. Blevins, 2011, The 
social responsibility of international business scholars, MBR, 19: 
106–119.
36 BW, 2006, Venezuela: You are working for Chavez now, May 15: 
76–78.
37 Economist, 2006, Bolivia: Now it’s the people’s gas, May 6: 37–38.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

cisale/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
	 7-1	 understand the determinants of foreign 
exchange rates.
	 7-2	 track the evolution of the international 
monetary system.
	 7-3	 identify firms’ strategic responses to deal 
with foreign exchange movements.
	 7-4	 participate in three leading debates 
concerning foreign exchange movements.
	 7-5	 draw implications for action.
F.P.O.
Wendy Meder/Shutterstock
Chapter 
7 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Dealing with  
Foreign Exchange
Cellebrations, a wine shop in the inner Sydney suburb 
of Newtown, sells Moët & Chandon Brut Impérial, a 
popular French Champaign produced by LVMH Moët 
Hennesy Louis Vuitton, for A$49.99 (US$52.61) a 
bottle. Wine House, a Melbourne-based online store, 
is selling LVMH’s Chandon Green Point Cuvée 1995, a 
sparkling wine produced in Australia’s Yarra Valley, for 
A$52. Much to the dismay of Australia’s wine industry, 
its days of offering lower-priced alternatives to French 
vintages are fading.
With the Australian dollar at record levels against 
the euro, Aussie vintners are caught in a double-bind: 
Exports have been slammed as the cost of Australian 
wine has risen overseas, while oenophiles back home 
are embracing European bottles that suddenly are 
bargains. Imported wine has rarely been more afford-
able, with prices for some labels dropping 30%. “It’s 
absolutely fantastic,” says Jeremy Oliver, a Melbourne-
based wine critic. “If you have A$100 (US$105) in your 
pocket, that will get you a top bottle of Australian cab-
ernet or shiraz. Today it also buys you a pretty serious 
Bordeaux, a very good Italian from any region, or a sen-
sational Spanish red.”
Australia, the world’s largest wine exporter by 
volume outside of Europe, saw the value of its ex-
ports decline to the lowest level in a decade in 2011, 
falling 10% from a year earlier, to A$1.89 billion. At 
Melbourne-based Treasury Wine Estates, the world’s 
second-biggest publicly traded vintner and owner 
of the Lindeman’s and Penfolds brands, sales in the 
US, its largest market, fell 15%, to A$803 million in 
the year through June 2011. The currency hit is more 
pronounced in Europe, where the euro fell 8.9% over 
the last three months [in 2011] to make it the worst-
performing major currency against the Australian 
dollar, compared with a 2.2% decline for the US dollar.
That’s quite a turnabout. Driven by signature brands 
such as Yellow Tail and Jacob’s Creek and support from 
influential critics such as Robert Parker, Australia’s ex-
ports rose more than fourfold in the 10 years to 2007, 
when they peaked at 786 million liters. Australia over-
took France as Britain’s top supplier of imported wine in 
2005 and for a brief time in 2008 was the front-runner 
in the United States.
Then things turned. Competition had for years 
been increasing from other emerging wine areas such 
as Argentina, Chile, and South Africa when a domes-
tic glut in Australia put too much low-quality product 
on the market. In 2009 bush fires swept through the 
wine country of Victoria state, incinerating vineyards 
and tainting grapes with smoke. Exports have dropped 
11% in the past four years, to 703 million liters in 2011. 
The high price of labor and land and the small-scale 
nature of middle-market wineries in Australia also make 
O p e n i n g  C a s e
Australian Wine: Made from the Grapes of Currency Wrath
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

206	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
it hard to compete with imports, says Oliver. “You 
can get seriously interesting, diverse wineries from 
Europe, South America, and South Africa for A$25 a 
blow retail,” he says. “In Australia today, the small guys 
trying to do the equivalent are finding it very hard to 
get anything in the bottle for under A$45.”
Since 2005, Australia’s wine import volumes have 
risen 95%. French wine imports have risen 58%. Every 
six weeks, for instance, importer John Baker ships in a 
refrigerated container carrying about 10,800 bottles of 
French wine to his 270-square-meter (2,900-square-foot) 
refrigerated warehouse in the Sydney suburb of Artar-
mon. That’s double the import volume of five years 
before at his business, Bordeaux Shippers. The Aussie 
dollar is worth €.81 now, compared with €.54 when 
he started in 2003. “I’ve been selling a 2001 vintage 
Château tour du Haut Moulin, that’s a 10-year-old wine 
from Bordeaux, and it’s A$39 retail; that wine really 
should be A$80,” he says.
Source: Excerpted from Bloomberg Businessweek, 2012, The grapes of 
currency wrath, January 30: 22–23
Why is the value of currencies so important to the Australian wine industry? What 
determines foreign exchange rates? How do foreign exchange rates affect trade and 
investment? How can firms respond strategically? This chapter addresses these crucial 
questions. At the heart of our discussion lie the two core perspectives introduced ear-
lier: the institution-based and resource-based views. Essentially, the institution-based 
view suggests that domestic and international institutions influence foreign exchange 
rates and affect capital movements. In turn, the resource-based view sheds light 
on how firms can profit from favorable foreign exchange movements or avoid being 
crushed by unfavorable movements by developing their own firm-specific resources 
and capabilities.
We start with a basic question: What determines foreign exchange rates? Then, 
we track the evolution of the international monetary system, and continue with firms’ 
strategic responses.
7-1 What Determines Foreign Exchange Rates?
A foreign exchange rate is the price of one currency, such as the dollar, in terms 
of another, such as the euro. Table 7.1 provides some examples. An appreciation is 
an increase in the value of the currency, and a depreciation is a loss in the value 
of the currency. This section addresses a key question: What determines foreign 
exchange rates?
7-1a Basic Supply and Demand
The concept of an exchange rate as the price of a commodity—one country’s 
currency—helps us understand its determinants. Basic economic theory suggests 
that the price of a commodity is most fundamentally determined by its supply 
and demand. Strong demand will lead to price hikes, and oversupply will result 
in price drops. Of course, we are dealing with a most unusual commodity here, 
money, but the basic underlying principles still apply. When the United States sells 
products to China, US exporters often demand that they be paid in US dollars—
the Chinese yuan is useless (technically, non-convertible) in the United States. 
Chinese importers of US products will have to generate US dollars somehow in 
Learning Objective
Understand the determinants of 
foreign exchange rates.
7-1
Foreign exchange rate
The price of one currency in 
terms of another.
Appreciation
An increase in the value of the 
currency.
Depreciation
A loss in the value of the 
currency.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 7   Dealing with Foreign Exchange	
207
order to pay for US imports. The easiest way to generate US dollars is to export to 
the United States, whose buyers will pay in US dollars. In this example, the dollar 
is the common transaction currency involving both US imports and US exports. 
As a result, the demand for dollars is much stronger than the demand for yuan 
(while holding the supply constant). Worldwide, a wide variety of users outside 
the United States, such as Chinese exporters, Swiss bankers, and Russian mafia 
members, prefer to hold and transact in US dollars, thus fueling the demand 
for dollars. Such a strong demand explains why the US dollar has been the most 
sought-after currency in postwar decades (see Figure 7.1). At present, over 80% of 
Table 7.1
Examples of Key Currency Exchange Rates
US 
Dollar
(US$)
Euro
(€)
UK
Pound
(£)
Swiss
Franc
(CHF)
Mexican
Peso
Japanese
Yen
(¥)
Canadian
Dollar
(C$)
Canadian Dollar (C$)
  1.00
    1.31
    1.58
  1.09
0.08
0.012
---
Japanese Yen (¥)
81.00
105.96
128.46
88.10
6.16
---
81.14
Mexican Peso (MXN$)
13.14
  17.20
  20.85
14.30
---
0.162
13.17
Swiss Franc (CHF)
  0.92
    1.20
    1.46
---
0.07
0.011
0.92
UK Pound (£)
  0.63
    0.82
---
  0.69
0.05
0.008
0.63
Euro (€)
  0.76
---
    1.21
  0.83
0.06
0.009
0.77
US Dollar (US$)
---
    1.31
    1.59
  1.09
0.08
0.012
1.00
Source: These examples are from April 13, 2012. The rates may change. Adapted from Wall Street Journal, 2012, Key currency cross rates, April 13 (online.wsj.com). 
Reading vertically, the first column means US$1 5 C$1 5 ¥81 5 MXN$13.14 5 CHF 0.92 5 £0.63 5 €0.76. Reading horizontally, the last row means €1 5 US$1.31; 
£1 5 US$1.59; CHF 1 5 US$1.09; MXN$1 5 US$0.08; ¥1 5 US$0.012; C$1 5 US$1.
Figure 7.1
The US Dollar’s Share of World Total (%)
Source: Based on data in Economist, 2010, Beyond Bretton Woods 2 (p. 85), November 6: 85–87.
Foreign exchange
transactions
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
International
reserves
Cross-border bank
deposits
US share of
world GDP
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

208	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
the world’s foreign exchange transactions are in dollars. Approximately 65% of 
the world’s foreign exchange holdings are in US dollars, followed by 26% in euros, 
4% in pounds, and 3% in yen.1
Because foreign exchange is such a unique commodity, its markets are influ-
enced not only by economic factors, but also a lot of political and psychological 
factors. The next question is: What determines the supply and demand of foreign 
exchange? Figure 7.2 sketches the five underlying building blocks: (1) relative price 
differences, (2) interest rates and monetary supply, (3) productivity and balance of 
payments, (4) exchange rate policies, and (5) investor psychology.
7-1b Relative Price Differences and Purchasing Power Parity
Some countries (such as Switzerland) are famously expensive (see the Closing 
Case), and others (such as the Philippines) are known to have cheap prices. 
How do these price differences affect exchange rates? An answer is provided 
by the theory of purchasing power parity (PPP), which is essentially the “law 
of one price.” The theory suggests that in the absence of trade barriers (such 
as tariffs), the price for identical products sold in different countries must be 
the same. Otherwise, traders (or arbitrageurs) may “buy low” and “sell high,” 
eventually driving prices for identical products to the same level around the 
world. The PPP theory argues that in the long run, exchange rates should move 
toward levels that would equalize the prices of an identical basket of goods in 
any two countries.2 
One of the most influential, and certainly most fun-filled, applications of the 
PPP theory is the Big Mac index, popularized by the Economist magazine. The Econ-
omist’s “basket” is McDonald’s Big Mac hamburger, which is produced in about 
120 countries. According to the PPP theory, a Big Mac should cost the same any-
where around the world. In reality, it does not. In January 2012, a Big Mac cost 
$4.20 in the United States and 15.37 yuan in China, which was $2.44 according to 
the nominal exchange rate of 6.3 yuan to the dollar. If the Big Mac indeed costs the 
same, the de facto exchange rate based on the Big Mac index became 3.66 yuan to 
the dollar (that is, 15.37 yuan/$4.20). According to this calculation, the yuan was 
Figure 7.2
What Determines Foreign Exchange Rates?
Supply & demand 
of foreign exchange
Relative price differences & PPP
Productivity & balance of payments
Interest rates & money supply
Exchange rate policies
Investor psychology
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 7   Dealing with Foreign Exchange	
209
42% “undervalued” against the dollar ([6.3–3.66]/6.3)—the second most extreme 
in the Big Mac universe behind the Indian rupee, which was 60% “undervalued” 
(Figure 7.3). In other words, the Big Mac in China and the Maharaja Mac in India 
(where the beef-based Big Mac is not available) had the best “value” in the world, 
based on official exchange rates. 
Although the Big Mac index is never a serious exercise, it has been cited by 
some US politicians as “evidence” that the yuan is artificially undervalued. This 
claim has been disavowed by the Economist itself. More seriously, we can make four 
observations: 
 	 The Big Max index confirms that prices in some European countries are very 
expensive. A Big Mac in Switzerland was the most expensive in the world, cost-
ing $6.81 (see the Closing Case).
 	 A Big Mac in China and Russia and a Maharaja Mac in India are cheap in 
dollar terms. This makes sense because a Big Mac is a product with both trad-
ed and non-traded inputs. To simplify our discussion, let us assume that the 
costs for traded inputs (such as flour for the bun) are the same. It is obvious 
that non-traded inputs (such as labor and real estate) are cheaper in emerg-
ing economies.
 	 The Big Mac is not a traded product. No large number of American 
hamburger lovers would travel to China simply to get the best deal on the 
Big Mac, and then somehow take with them large quantities of the made-
in-China Big Mac (perhaps in portable freezers). If they were to do that, 
the Big Mac price in China would be driven up and the price in the United 
States would be pushed down—remember supply and demand? 
 	 After having a laugh, we shouldn’t read too much into this index. PPP signals 
where exchange rates may move in the long run. But it does not suggest that 
the yuan should appreciate by 42% or that the Swiss franc should depreciate 
Figure 7.3
 The Big Mac Index
Source: Economist, 2012, Big Mac index, January 14: 93. © The Economist Newspaper Limited. Reproduced by 
permission.
Local currency under (2) / over (1) valuation against
the dollar, %
60
Switzerland
Brazil
Australia
Canada
Euro area
nil
United States
Japan
Britain
Turkey
Russia
China
India
40
20 2 0 1 20
40
60
Big Mac price, $
6.81
5.68
4.94
4.73
4.43
4.20
4.16
3.82
3.54
2.55
2.44
1.62
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

210	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
by 62% next year. According to the Economist, anyone interested in the PPP 
theory “would be unwise to exclude the Big Mac index from their diet, but 
Super Size servings (of this index) would equally be a mistake.”3
7-1c Interest Rates and Money Supply
While the PPP theory suggests the long-run direction of exchange rate movement, 
what about the short run? In the short run, variations in interest rates have a pow-
erful effect. If one country’s interest rate is high relative to other countries, the 
country will attract foreign funds. Because inflows of foreign funds usually need to 
be converted to the home currency, a high interest rate will increase the demand 
for the home currency, thus enhancing its exchange value.
In addition, a country’s rate of inflation, relative to that prevailing abroad, 
affects its ability to attract foreign funds and hence its exchange rate. A high level 
of inflation is essentially too much money chasing too few goods in an economy—
technically, an expansion of a country’s money supply. A government, when facing 
budgetary shortfalls, may choose to print more currency, which tends to stimu-
late inflation. In turn, this would cause its currency to depreciate. This makes 
sense because, as the supply of a given currency increases while the demand stays 
the same, the per-unit value of that currency goes down. For example, the policy of 
“quantitative easing” (a euphemism for printing a large amount of money) is one 
of the reasons behind the recent decline of the value of the US dollar. In short, the 
exchange rate is very sensitive to changes in monetary policy.
7-1d Productivity and Balance of Payments
In international trade, the rise of a country’s productivity, relative to other coun-
tries, will improve its competitive position—this is the basic proposition of the the-
ories of absolute and comparative advantage discussed in Chapter 5. More foreign 
direct investment (FDI) will be attracted to the country, fueling demand for its 
home currency. One recent example is China. All of the China-bound FDI inflows 
in dollars, euros, and pounds have to be converted to local currency, boosting the 
demand for the yuan and hence its value. Other examples are not hard to find. 
The rise in relative Japanese productivity over the past four decades led to a long-
run appreciation of the yen, which rose from about ¥310 5 $1 in 1975 to ¥81 5 $1 
in 2012.
Recall from Chapter 5 that changes in productivity will change a country’s 
balance of trade. A country highly productive in manufacturing may generate 
a merchandise trade surplus, whereas a country less productive in manufactur-
ing may end up with a merchandise trade deficit. These have ramifications for 
the balance of payments—officially known as a country’s international transac-
tion statement, including merchandise (goods) trade, service trade, and capital 
movement. Table 7.2 shows that the United States had a merchandise trade deficit 
of $738 billion and a service trade surplus of $179 billion in 2011. In addition 
to merchandise and service trade, we add receipts on US assets abroad (such as 
repatriated earnings from US multinational enterprises [MNEs] in Ireland and 
dividends paid by Japanese firms to American shareholders), subtract payments on 
US-based foreign assets (such as repatriated earnings from Canadian MNEs in the 
United States to Canada and dividends paid by US firms to Dutch shareholders), 
Balance of payments
A country’s international transac-
tion statement, which includes 
merchandise trade, service 
trade, and capital movement.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 7   Dealing with Foreign Exchange	
211
and government grants and private remittances (such as US foreign aid thrown at 
Iraq and the money that Mexican farm hands in America sent home). After doing 
all of the math, we can see that the United States ran a $464 billion current ac-
count deficit. Technically, the current account balance consists of exports minus 
imports of merchandise and services, plus income on US assets abroad, minus pay-
ments on foreign assets in the United States, plus unilateral government transfers 
and private remittances.
A current account deficit has to be financed by financial account—consisting 
of purchases and sales of assets. This is because a country needs to balance its ac-
counts in much the same way that a family arranges its finances. Any deficit in a 
family budget has to be financed by spending from savings or by borrowing.4 In a 
similar fashion, the overall US deficit of $122 billion was financed by spending from 
savings and borrowing (selling US government securities such as Treasury bonds). 
To make a long story short, a country experiencing a current account surplus 
will see its currency appreciate; conversely, a country experiencing a current ac-
count deficit will see its currency depreciate. This may not happen overnight, but 
it will happen in a span of years and decades. The current movement between the 
yuan (appreciating) and the dollar (depreciating) is but one example. Going back 
to the 1950s and the 1960s, the rise of the dollar was accompanied by a sizeable US 
surplus on merchandise trade. By the 1970s and the 1980s, the surplus gradually 
turned into a deficit. By the 1990s and the 2000s, the US current account deficit be-
came ever increasing, forcing the dollar to depreciate relative to other currencies 
Table 7.2
The US Balance of Payments (Billion Dollars)
I. Current Account
  1. Exports of goods (merchandise)
1,497
  2. Imports of goods (merchandise)
22,235
     3. Balance on goods (merchandise trade—lines 1 1 2)
2738
  4. Exports of services
608
  5. Imports of services
2429
     6. Balance on services (service trade—lines 4 1 5)
179
     7. Balance on goods and services (trade deficit/surplus—lines 3 1 6)
2559
  8. Income receipts on US-owned assets abroad
733
  9. Income payments on foreign-owned assets in the US
2503
10. Government grants and private remittances
2135
    11. Balance on current account (current account deficit/surplus—lines 7 1 8 1 9 1 10)
2464
II. Financial Account
12. US-owned private assets abroad (increase/financial outflow 5 2 [negative sign])
2396
13. Foreign-owned private assets in the US
738
    14. Balance on financial account (lines 12 1 13)
342
    15. Overall balance of payments (Official reserve transactions balance—lines 11 1 14)
2122
Source: This is a simplified table adapted from US Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2012, US International Transactions: Fourth Quarter 
and Year 2011, Table 1, March 14, Washington: BEA (www.bea.gov [accessed April 10, 2012]). This table refers to 2011. Numbers may not add due to rounding.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

212	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
in developed economies such as the euro, the Canadian dollar, the Australian 
dollar (see the Opening Case), and the Swiss franc (see the Closing Case) as well 
as currencies in emerging economies such as the yuan and the real (see Emerging 
Markets 7.1). Broadly speaking, the value of a country’s currency is an embodiment 
of its economic strengths, as reflected in its productivity and balance-of-payments 
Having quickly shaken off the world recession, many 
countries in Latin America are prospering again. The 
region’s economies grew by an average of 6% in 2010, 
according to a preliminary estimate by the United Na-
tions Economic Commission for Latin America and 
the Caribbean. This strong performance, linked in large 
part to the global commodity boom, has attracted big 
inflows of foreign cash. With that has come a familiar 
problem: the region’s currencies have soared in value 
against the dollar, making life uncomfortable for Latin 
American manufacturers. They find themselves priced 
out of export markets or struggling to compete with 
cheap imports. Worried governments are launching a 
battery of measures to try to restrain the value of their 
currencies. Will they work?
In January 2011 alone, Chile announced it would buy 
$12 billion of foreign reserves in the year and Brazil began 
requiring its banks to cover 60% of their bets against the 
dollar with deposits at the Central Bank that will attract 
no interest. Peru is buying dollars, too, and similarly ex-
tended reserve requirements for banks’ sales of foreign 
exchange. Central banks in Mexico and Colombia are in-
tervening to buy dollars. Chile’s announcement prompted 
an immediate fall in the peso, and other currencies have 
temporarily stabilized, but there is no guarantee that 
these measures will be effective in the immediate term.
In part, stronger currencies reflect Latin America’s 
stronger economies. The commodity boom plays to 
the region’s comparative advantage: China and India 
are gobbling up Brazilian soybeans and iron ore, Chil-
ean copper, and Peruvian silver. Brazil and Colombia 
have both made big oil discoveries. These countries 
all have fairly sound economic policies, and their finan-
cial systems are deepening. With money cheap and 
returns too poor in the rich world, Latin America has 
become a tempting destination for investors. Guido 
Mantega, Brazil’s finance minister, has blamed the 
Brazilian real’s strength and his country’s rising import 
bill both on loose monetary policy in the United States 
and China’s refusal to allow the yuan to appreciate.
But this is becoming too much of a good thing. 
The real has appreciated by 38% against the dollar 
over the past two years (2009–2010), for example. 
Overall, Latin America posted a current-account sur-
plus of 1.6% of GDP in 2006; in 2011 it is likely to 
post a deficit of similar magnitude, according to the 
IMF. There are other signs of overheating: inflation for 
non-tradable products in Chile is 6.4%, and Brazilian 
wages are increasing at double-digit rates. 
Affected businesses are howling. Chile’s wineries 
need an exchange rate of 530 pesos to the dollar (at 
the start of January 2011 it was at 464) to be profitable, 
according to René Merino, who represents the indus-
try. In Brazil, São Paulo’s industrialists’ association 
claims that “excessive imports” of consumer goods 
have led to a “dizzying process of deindustrialization,” 
costing 46,000 manufacturing jobs and $10 billion in 
lost output in the first nine months of 2010.
Uncomfortably strong currencies and overheating 
economies pose an excruciating dilemma for policy-
makers. If central bankers raise interest rates to curb 
inflation, they risk driving up the currency further. But 
if their interventions in the foreign exchange market 
drive the currency down, they may boost inflation.
Strong Economies and Strong Currencies in Latin America
E m e r g i n g  M a r k e t s  7 . 1
Ethical 
Dilemma
Source: Excerpted from Economist, 2011, Waging the currency war, January 13, www.economist.com. © The Economist Newspaper Limited. Repro-
duced by permission.
Danny Lehman/Corbis; Björn Meyer/sitox/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 7   Dealing with Foreign Exchange	
213
positions. Overall, the recent pressure for the US dollar to depreciate is indicative 
of the relative (not absolute) decline of the US economic strengths, compared with 
its major trading partners.
7-1e Exchange Rate Policies
There are two major exchange rate policies: (1) floating rate and (2) fixed rate. 
Governments adopting the floating (or flexible) exchange rate policy tend to be 
free market believers, willing to let the demand-and-supply conditions determine 
exchange rates—usually on a daily basis via the foreign exchange market. However, 
few countries adopt a clean (or free) float, which would be a pure market solution. 
Most countries practice a dirty (or managed) float, with selective government in-
terventions. Of the major currencies, the US, Canadian, and Australian dollars, 
the yen, and the pound have been under managed float since the 1970s (after the 
collapse of the Bretton Woods system—see next section). Since the 1990s, several 
emerging economies, such as Brazil, Mexico, and South Korea, have also joined 
the managed float regime. Despite complaints from the US government, China 
currently does not fix its currency. Since 2005, China has been allowing the yuan 
to float—specifically to appreciate by 24% (from 8.3 yuan to the dollar in 2005 to 
6.3 yuan to the dollar in 2012).
The severity of intervention is a matter of degree. Heavier intervention moves 
the country closer to a fixed exchange rate policy, and less intervention enables 
a country to approach the free float ideal. One main objective for intervention is 
to prevent the emergence of erratic fluctuations that may trigger macroeconomic 
turbulence.5 Some countries do not adhere to any particular rates. Others choose 
target exchange rates—known as crawling bands or, more vividly, “snake in a tube” 
(intervention will only occur when the “snake” craws out of a tube’s upper or lower 
bounds).
Another major exchange rate policy is the fixed rate policy—countries fix the 
exchange rate of their currencies relative to other currencies. Both political and 
economic rationales may be at play. During the German reunification in 1990, the 
West German government, for political considerations, fixed the exchange rate 
between West and East German mark as 1:1. In economic terms, the East German 
mark was not worth that much. Politically, this exchange rate reduced the feel-
ing of alienation and resentment among East Germans, thus facilitating a more 
smooth unification process. Of course, West Germans ended up paying more for 
the costs of unification. Economically, many developing countries peg their cur-
rencies to a key currency (often the US dollar). There are two benefits of a peg 
policy. First, a peg stabilizes the import and export prices for developing countries. 
Second, many countries with high inflation have pegged their currencies to the 
dollar in order to restrain domestic inflation. (See Debates and Extensions for 
more discussion.)
7-1f Investor Psychology
While theories on price differences (PPP), interest rates and money supply, balance 
of payments, and exchange rate policies predict long-run movements of exchange 
rates, they often fall short of predicting short-run movements. It is investor psychol-
ogy, some of which is fickle and thus very hard to predict, that largely determines 
short-run movements. Professor Richard Lyons at the University of California, 
Floating (flexible) exchange 
rate policy
A government policy to let  
supply-and-demand conditions 
determine exchange rates.
Clean (free) float
A pure market solution to  
determine exchange rates.
Dirty (managed) float
Using selective government 
intervention to determine  
exchange rates.
Target exchange rate  
(crawling band)
Specified upper or lower bounds 
within which an exchange rate is 
allowed to fluctuate.
Fixed exchange rate policy
A government policy to set the 
exchange rate of a currency  
relative to other currencies.
Peg
A stabilizing policy of linking a 
developing country’s currency to 
a key currency.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

214	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
Berkeley, is an expert on exchange rate theories. However, he was baffled when he 
was invited by a friend, a currency trader, to observe currency trading firsthand:
As I sat there, my friend traded furiously all day long, racking up over $1 billion in 
trades each day. This was a world where the standard trade was $10 million, and a 
$1 million trade was a “skinny one.” Despite my belief that exchange rates depend on 
macroeconomics, only rarely was news of this type his primary concern. Most of the 
time he was reading tea leaves that were, at least to me, not so clear. . . . It was clear 
my understanding was incomplete when he looked over, in the midst of his fury, and 
asked me: “What should I do?” I laughed. Nervously.6
Investors—currency traders (such as the one Lyons observed), foreign portfolio 
investors, and average citizens—may move as a “herd” at the same time in the same 
direction, resulting in a bandwagon effect. The bandwagon effect seemed to be at 
play in 2008, when the Icelandic krona lost more than half of its value against key cur-
rencies such as the US dollar, the euro, and the pound sterling.7 Essentially, a large 
number of individuals and firms exchanged the krona for the key foreign currencies 
in order to minimize their exposure to Iceland’s financial crisis—a phenomenon 
known as capital flight. This would push down the demand for, and thus the value 
of, the domestic currency. Then, more individuals and companies joined the “herd,” 
further depressing the exchange rate and worsening a major economic crisis. 
Overall, economics, politics, and psychology are all at play. The stakes are high, 
yet consensus is rare regarding the determinants of foreign exchange rates. As a 
result, predicting the direction of currency movements remains an art or, at best, a 
highly imprecise science.
7-2 Evolution of the International Monetary System
Having outlined the basic determinants of exchange rates, let us undertake a his-
toric excursion to trace the three eras of the evolution of the international mon-
etary system: (1) the gold standard, (2) the Bretton Woods system, and (3) the 
post-Bretton Woods system.
7-2a The Gold Standard (1870–1914)
The gold standard was a system in place between 1870 and 1914, when the value 
of most major currencies was maintained by fixing their prices in terms of gold. 
Gold was used as the common denominator for all currencies. This was essentially 
a global peg system, with little volatility and every bit of predictability and stabil-
ity. To be able to redeem its currency in gold at a fixed price, every central bank 
needed to maintain gold reserves. The system provided powerful incentives for 
countries to run current account surpluses, resulting in net inflows of gold.
7-2b The Bretton Woods System (1944–1973)
The gold standard was abandoned first in 1914 when World War I broke out. Sev-
eral combatant countries printed excessive amounts of currency to finance their 
war efforts. After the war, especially during the Great Depression (1929–1933), 
countries engaged in competitive devaluations in an effort to boost exports at the 
expense of trading partners. But no country could win such a “race to the bottom,” 
and the gold standard had to be jettisoned.
Bandwagon effect
The effect of investors moving in 
the same direction at the same 
time, like a herd.
Capital flight
A phenomenon in which a large 
number of individuals and com-
panies exchange domestic cur-
rency for a foreign currency.
Gold standard
A system in which the value 
of most major currencies was 
maintained by fixing their prices 
in terms of gold.
Common denominator
A currency or commodity to 
which the value of all currencies 
are pegged.
Learning Objective
Track the evolution of the 
international monetary system.
7-2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 7   Dealing with Foreign Exchange	
215
Toward the end of World War II, at an allied conference in Bretton Woods, 
New Hampshire, a new system—known simply as the Bretton Woods system—was 
agreed upon by 44 countries. The Bretton Woods system was centered on the US 
dollar as the new common denominator. All currencies were pegged at a fixed rate 
to the dollar. Only the dollar, as the official reserve currency, was convertible into 
gold at $35 per ounce. Other currencies were not required to be gold convertible. 
It was the Bretton Woods system that propelled the dollar to the commanding 
heights of the global economy (see Figure 7.1). This was also a reflection of the 
higher US productivity level and the large US trade surplus with the rest of the 
world in the first two postwar decades. This was not surprising, because the US 
economy contributed to approximately 70% of the global GDP at the end of World 
War II and was the export engine of the world.
7-2c The Post–Bretton Woods System (1973–present)
By the late 1960s and early 1970s, a combination of rising productivity elsewhere and 
US inflationary policies led to the demise of Bretton Woods. First, (West) Germany 
and other countries caught up in productivity and exported more, and the United 
States ran its first post-1945 trade deficit in 1971. This pushed the (West) German 
mark to appreciate and the dollar to depreciate—a situation very similar to the 
yen-dollar relationship in the 1980s and the yuan-dollar relationship in the 2000s. 
Second, in the 1960s, in order to finance both the Vietnam War and Great Society 
welfare programs, President Lyndon Johnson increased government spending not 
by additional taxation but by increasing money supply. These actions led to rising 
inflation levels and strong pressures for the dollar to depreciate.
As currency traders bought more German marks, Germany’s central bank, the 
Bundesbank, had to buy billions of dollars in order to maintain the dollar/mark 
exchange rate fixed by Bretton Woods. Being stuck with massive amounts of the 
dollar that was worth less now, Germany unilaterally allowed its currency to float 
in May 1971.
The Bretton Woods system also became a pain in the neck for the United States, 
because the exchange rate of the dollar was not allowed to change unilaterally. Per 
Bretton Woods agreements, the US Treasury was obligated to dispense one ounce 
of gold for every $35 brought by a foreign central bank such as the Bundesbank. 
Consequently, there was a hemorrhage of US gold flowing into the coffers of for-
eign central banks. In August 1971, in order to stop such hemorrhaging, President 
Richard Nixon unilaterally announced that the dollar was no longer convertible 
into gold. After tense negotiations, major countries collectively agreed to hammer 
the coffin nails of the Bretton Woods system by allowing their currencies to float 
in 1973. In retrospect, the Bretton Woods system had been built on two condi-
tions: (1) the US inflation rate had to be low and (2) the US could not run a trade 
deficit. When both of these conditions were violated, the demise of the system was 
inevitable.
As a result, today we live in the post–Bretton Woods system. The strengths lie in 
its flexibility and diversity of exchange rate regimes (ranging from various schemes 
of floating systems to various ways of fixed rates). Its drawback is turbulence and un-
certainty (see the Opening and Closing Cases and Emerging Markets 7.1 and 7.2). 
Since the 1970s, the US dollar is no longer the official reserve currency. However, it 
has retained a significant amount of “soft power” as a key currency (see Figure 7.1).
Bretton Woods system
A system in which all currencies 
were pegged at a fixed rate to 
the US dollar.
Post–Bretton Woods system
A system of flexible exchange 
rate regimes with no official 
common denominator.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

216	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
7-2d The International Monetary 
Fund (IMF)
Although the Bretton Woods system is no longer 
with us, one of its most enduring legacies is the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), founded in 1944 
as a “Bretton Woods institution.” (The World Bank 
is the other Bretton Woods institution.) The IMF’s 
mandate is to promote international monetary co-
operation, exchange stability, and orderly exchange 
arrangements.
Lending is a core responsibility of the IMF, which 
provides loans to countries suffering from balance-
of-payments problems. The IMF can be viewed as a 
lender of last resort to help member countries out of 
financial difficulty. Where does the IMF get its funds? 
The answer boils down to the same principle on where insurance companies get 
their funds to pay for insurance coverage. For the same reason that insurance com-
panies obtain their funds from insurance subscribers who pay a premium, the IMF 
collects funds from member countries. Each member country is assigned a quota, 
which determines its financial contribution to the IMF, its capacity to borrow from 
the IMF, and its voting power.
By definition, the IMF’s lending refers to loans, not free grants. IMF loans 
have to be repaid in one to five years. Although payments have been extended in 
some cases, no member country has defaulted. An ideal IMF loan scenario would 
be a balance-of-payments crisis that threatens to severely disrupt a country’s fi-
nancial stability, such as when it imports more than it exports and cannot pay for 
imports. 
While an IMF loan provides short-term financial resources, it also comes with 
strings attached. These strings are long-term policy reforms that recipient coun-
tries must undertake as conditions of receiving the loan. These conditions usually 
entail belt-tightening, pushing governments to embark on reforms that they other-
wise probably would not have undertaken (Table 7.3). For example, when the IMF 
(together with the EU) provided a loan to Greece in 2010, the Greek government 
agreed to cut wages and pensions by 15% to 20% in order to pay for government 
debt. Since the 1990s, the IMF has helped Mexico (1994), Russia (1996 and 1998), 
Asia (Indonesia, South Korea, and Thailand, 1997), Turkey (2001), Brazil (2002), 
Iceland (2008), Ukraine (2008), Hungary (2008), Greece (2010), and several 
others. While the IMF has noble goals, its actions are not without criticisms (see 
In Focus 7.1).8
International Monetary 
Fund (IMF)
An international organization 
that was established to promote 
international monetary coopera-
tion, exchange stability, and or-
derly exchange arrangements.
Quota
The weight a member country 
carries within the IMF, which 
determines the amount of its 
financial contribution (technically 
known as its “subscription”), its 
capacity to borrow from the IMF, 
and its voting power.
Table 7.3
Typical IMF Conditions on Loan Recipient Countries: From IMF 1.0  
to IMF 2.0
IMF 1.0
IMF 2.0
  	 Balance budget by slashing government 
spending (often cutting social welfare)
  	 Expand fiscal spending by stimulating 
more economic activity
  	 Raise interest rates to slow monetary 
growth and inflation
  	 Ease money supply, and reduce 
interest rates to combat deflation and 
recession
Can you think of any reason why some people 
object to the IMF’s actions in various countries?
NUNES PEDRO/SIPA/Newscom
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 7   Dealing with Foreign Exchange	
217
The complexity of the IMF’s actions means that it 
cannot please everyone. First, the IMF’s critics ar-
gue that the IMF’s lending may facilitate more prob-
lems because of moral hazard. Moral hazard refers to 
recklessness when people and organizations (includ-
ing governments) do not have to face the full conse-
quences of their actions. Moral hazard is inherent in 
all insurance arrangements, including the IMF. Basi-
cally, knowing that the IMF would come to the rescue, 
certain governments may behave more recklessly. For 
example, between 1958 and 2001, Turkey was res-
cued by 18 (!) IMF loans.
A second criticism centers on the IMF’s lack of 
accountability. Although the IMF can dictate terms 
over a host country that is being rescued and receiv-
ing loans, none of the IMF officials is democratically 
elected, and most of them do not have any deep 
knowledge of the host country. Consequently, they 
sometimes make disastrous decisions. For example, 
in 1997–1998, the IMF forced the Indonesian gov-
ernment to cut back drastically on food subsidies for 
the poor. Riots soon exploded. Hundreds of people 
were killed, and property was damaged. Then, the 
IMF reversed its position by restoring food subsidies. 
However, in some quarters, the bitterness was all the 
greater. A lot of protesters argued: If food subsidies 
could have been continued, why were they taken 
away in the first place?
A third and perhaps most challenging criticism 
is that the IMF’s “one-size-fits-all” strategy may be 
inappropriate. Since the 1930s, in order to maintain 
more employment, most Western governments have 
abandoned the idea to balance the budget. Deficit 
spending has been used as a major policy weapon 
to pull a country out of an economic crisis. Yet, the 
IMF often demands governments in more vulner-
able developing countries, in the midst of a major 
crisis, to balance their budgets by slashing spending 
(such as cutting food subsidies). These actions often 
make the crisis far worse than it needs to be. After 
the IMF came to “rescue” countries affected by the 
1997 Asian financial crisis, unemployment rate was 
up threefold in Thailand, fourfold in South Korea, and 
tenfold in Indonesia. Many scholars are surprised that 
the IMF would pursue its agenda in the absence of 
conclusive research and with the knowledge of re-
peated failures.
After a period of relative inactivity in the early 
2000s, the IMF went back to action again, starting in 
late 2008, rescuing ten countries, mostly in emerg-
ing Europe (Georgia, Hungary, Ukraine, Latvia, Serbia, 
Belarus, Armenia, and Romania), in five months. 
Shown in Table 7.3, balancing budgets and raising 
interest rates were the IMF’s standard weapons of 
choice that it would impose on loan-recipient coun-
tries. In most emerging European countries, the IMF 
has still prescribed such bitter “medicines.” 
However, the momentum of the criticisms, the 
severity of the global crisis, and the desire to better 
serve the international community have facilitated a 
series of IMF reforms since 2009. Some of these re-
forms represent a total, 180-degree change from its 
previous direction, resulting in what Time dubbed an 
“IMF 2.0.” For example, the IMF now starts to pro-
mote more fiscal spending in order to stimulate the 
economy and to ease money supply and reduce in-
terest rates, given the primary concern for the global 
economy now is deflation and recession, but not infla-
tion. Obviously, the IMF’s change of heart is affected 
by the tremendous stimulus packages unleashed by 
developed economies since 2008, which result in 
skyrocketing budget deficits. If the developed econo-
mies can (hopefully) use greater fiscal spending and 
budget deficits to pull themselves out of the crisis, 
the IMF simply cannot lecture developing economies 
that receive its loans to balance their budgets in the 
middle of a crisis. Further, given the stigma of receiv-
ing IMF loans and listening to and then implementing 
IMF lectures, many countries avoid the IMF until they 
run out of options. In response, in April 2009, the IMF 
unleashed a new Flexible Credit Line (FCL), which is 
particularly useful for crisis prevention by providing 
the flexibility to draw on it at any time, with no strings 
attached—a radical contrast to the requirement to be 
IMF 2.0?
IN Focus 7.1
Ethical 
Dilemma
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

218	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
7-3 Strategic Responses  
to Foreign Exchange Movements
From an institution-based view, knowledge about foreign exchange rates and the 
international monetary system (including the role of the IMF) helps paint a broad 
picture of the “rules of the game” that govern financial transactions around the 
world.9 Armed with this knowledge, savvy managers need to develop firm-specific 
resources and capabilities to rise to the challenge—or at least to prevent their 
firms from being crushed by unfavorable currency movements. This section out-
lines the strategic responses of two types of firms: financial and non-financial 
companies.
7-3a Strategies for Financial Companies
One of the leading strategic goals for financial companies is to profit from the for-
eign exchange market. The foreign exchange market is a market where individuals, 
firms, governments, and banks buy and sell foreign currencies. Unlike a stock ex-
change, the foreign exchange market has no central, physical location. This market 
is truly global and transparent. Buyers and sellers are geographically dispersed but 
constantly linked (quoted prices change as often as 20 times a minute).10 The market 
opens on Monday first in Tokyo and then Hong Kong and Singapore, when it is 
still Sunday evening in New York. Gradually, Frankfurt, Zurich, London, New York, 
Chicago, and San Francisco wake up and come online.
Operating on a 24/7 basis, the foreign exchange market is the largest and most 
active market in the world. On average, the worldwide volume exceeds $2 trillion 
per day. To put this mind-boggling number in perspective, the amount of one 
single day of foreign exchange transactions roughly doubles the amount of entire 
worldwide FDI outflows in one year and roughly equals close to one-eighth of 
Learning Objective
Identify firms’ strategic 
responses to deal with foreign 
exchange movements.
7-3
Foreign exchange market
The market where individuals, 
firms, governments, and banks 
buy and sell foreign currencies.
in compliance with IMF-imposed targets as in tradi-
tional IMF loans. Mexico, Colombia, and Poland have 
used the FCL so far.
Further, the IMF 2.0 has become three times 
bigger—leaders in the G20 Summit in London in 2009 
agreed to enhance the IMF’s funding from $250 billion 
to $750 billion. Of the $500 billion in new funding (tech-
nically Special Drawing Rights [SDRs]), the US, the EU, 
and Japan are each expected to contribute $100 billion. 
China has signed up for $40 billion. Further, injection 
of substantial funding from emerging economies has 
led the finance ministers of Brazil, Russia, India, and 
China (BRIC), who met in 2009, to call for better rep-
resentation of these countries. However, enhancing 
voting rights for emerging economies would result in 
reduced shares for developed economies. Even with 
the IMF’s new proposed change to vote shares, Brazil, 
with 1.72% of the votes (up from the current 1.38%), 
will still carry less weight than Belgium (with 1.86%, 
down from the current 2.09%). Such points of con-
tention continue to rage throughout IMF discussions. 
Therefore, IMF reforms will be a long-term undertak-
ing that will not stop any time soon.
Sources: Based on (1) Economist, 2009, A good war, September 19:  
83–84; (2) Economist, 2009, Mission possible, April 11: 69–71; (3) Econ-
omist, 2009, New fund, old fundamentals, May 2: 78; (4) Economist, 
2010, Beyond Bretton Woods 2, November 6: 85–87; (5) A. Ghosh, 
M. Chamon, C. Crowe, J. Kim, & J. Ostry, 2009, Coping with the crisis: 
Policy options for emerging market countries, IMF staff position paper, 
Washington: IMF; (6) R. Rajan, 2008, The future of the IMF and the 
World Bank, American Economic Review, 98: 110–115; (7) J. Stiglitz, 
2002, Globalization and Its Discontents, New York: Norton; (8) Time, 
2009, International Monetary Fund 2.0, April 20.
IN Focus 7.1 (continued)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 7   Dealing with Foreign Exchange	
219
worldwide merchandise exports in one year. Specifically, the foreign exchange 
market has two functions: (1) to service the needs of trade and FDI and (2) to trade 
in its own commodity—namely, foreign exchange.
There are three primary types of foreign exchange transactions: (1) spot trans-
actions, (2) forward transactions, and (3) swaps. Spot transactions are the classic 
single-shot exchange of one currency for another. For example, Canadian tourists 
buying several thousand euros in Italy with Canadian dollars will get their euros 
from a bank right away.
Forward transactions allow participants to buy and sell currencies now for 
future delivery, typically in 30, 90, or 180 days, after the date of the transaction. 
The primary benefit of forward transactions is to protect traders and investors 
from being exposed to the fluctuations of the spot rate, an act known as currency 
hedging. Currency hedging is essentially a way to minimize the foreign exchange 
risk inherent in all non-spot transactions, which characterize most trade and 
FDI deals.11 Traders and investors expecting to make or receive payments in a 
foreign currency in the future are concerned whether they will have to make a 
greater payment or receive less in terms of the domestic currency, should the 
spot rate change. For example, if the forward rate of the euro (€/US$) is exactly 
the same as the spot rate, the euro is “flat.” If the forward rate of the euro per 
dollar is higher than the spot rate, the euro has a forward discount. If the forward 
rate of the euro per dollar is lower than the spot rate, the euro then has a forward 
premium.
Hypothetically, assume that (1) today’s exchange rate of €/US$ is 1, (2) a US 
firm expects to be paid €1 million six months later, and (3) the euro is at a 180-day 
forward discount of 1.1. The US firm may take out a forward contract now and 
convert euro earnings into a dollar revenue of $909,091 (€1 million/1.1) after six 
months. Does such a move make sense? There can be two answers. “Yes,” if the firm 
knew in advance that the future spot rate would be 1.25. With the forward contract, 
the US firm would make $909,091 instead of $800,000 (€1 million/1.25)—the dif-
ference is $109,091 (14% of $800,000). However, the answer would be “No” if the 
spot rate after six months were actually below 1.1. If the spot rate had remained 
at 1, the firm could have earned $1 million, without the forward contract, instead 
of only $909,091. This simple example suggests a powerful observation: Currency 
hedging requires firms to have expectations or forecasts of future spot rates relative 
to forward rates. 
A third major type of foreign exchange transactions is swap. A currency swap is 
the conversion of one currency into another in Time 1, with an agreement to revert 
it back to the original currency at a specific Time 2 in the future. Deutsche Bank 
may have an excess balance of pounds but needs dollars. At the same time, Union 
Bank of Switzerland (UBS) may have more dollars than it needs at the moment, 
but it is looking for more pounds. They can negotiate a swap agreement in which 
Deutsche Bank agrees to exchange with UBS pounds for dollars today and dollars 
for pounds at a specific point in the future. 
The primary participants of the foreign exchange market are large inter­
national banks such as Citigroup, Deutsche Bank, and UBS that trade among them-
selves. How do these banks make money by trading money? They make money 
by capturing the difference between their offer rate (the price to sell) and bid 
rate (the price to buy)—the bid rate is always lower than the offer rate. The dif-
ference of this “buy low, sell high” strategy is technically called the spread. For 
example, Citigroup may quote offer and bid rates for the Swiss franc at $1.0877 
Spot transaction
The classic single-shot exchange 
of one currency for another.
Forward transaction
A foreign exchange transaction 
in which participants buy and 
sell currencies now for future 
delivery.
Currency hedging
A transaction that protects 
traders and investors from 
exposure to the fluctuations of 
the spot rate.
Forward discount
A condition under which the 
forward rate of one currency 
relative to another currency is 
higher than the spot rate.
Forward premium
A condition under which the 
forward rate of one currency 
relative to another currency is 
lower than the spot rate.
Currency swap
A foreign exchange transaction 
between two firms in which one 
currency is converted into anoth-
er at Time 1, with an agreement 
to revert it back to the original 
currency at a specified Time 2 in 
the future.
Offer rate
The price to sell a currency.
Bid rate
The price to buy a currency.
Spread
The difference between the 
offer price and the bid price.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

220	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
and $1.0874, respectively, and the spread is $0.0003. That is, Citigroup is willing 
to sell 1 million francs for $1,087,700 and to buy 1 million francs for $1,087,400. 
If Citigroup can simultaneously buy and sell 1 million francs, it can make $300 
(the spread of $0.0003 3 1 million francs). Given the instantaneous and trans-
parent nature of the electronically linked foreign exchange market around the 
globe (one new quote in London can reach New York before you finish reading 
this sentence), the opportunities for trading, or arbitrage, can come and go very 
quickly. The globally integrated nature of this market leads to three outcomes: 
 	 Razor-thin spread.
 	 Quick (often literally split-second) decisions on buying and selling (remem-
ber Lyon’s observation earlier).
 	 Ever-increasing volume in order to make more profits (recall the daily volume 
of $2 trillion). In the example above, $300 is obviously just a few “peanuts” for 
Citigroup. Do a little math: How much trading in Swiss francs does Citigroup 
have to do in order to make $1 million profits for itself? 
7-3b Strategies for Non-Financial Companies
How do non-financial companies cope with the fluctuations of the foreign ex-
change market—broadly known as currency risks? There are two primary strat-
egies: (1) currency hedging (as discussed earlier) and (2) strategic hedging.12 
Currency hedging is risky in case of wrong bets of currency movements. For ex-
ample, most airlines in the world engage in currency hedging to manage fuel 
cost fluctuations, and most suffered losses in 2008. In July 2008, oil price was at 
a record high, $147 per barrel. Some airlines entered 180-day forward transac-
tions with foreign exchange traders at, say, $100 per barrel. This looked like a 
fantastic deal, representing 32% savings. However, by early 2009, oil was trading 
at only $41 per barrel. But some airlines were bound by the contract to purchase 
oil at $100 per barrel; they were thus paying 144% (!) more than they needed to 
for their fuel. 
Strategic hedging means spreading out activities in different currency zones 
in order to offset the currency losses in certain regions through gains in other 
regions.13 Therefore, strategic hedging can be considered as currency diversifica-
tion. It reduces exposure to unfavorable foreign exchange movements. Strategic 
hedging is conceptually different from currency hedging. Currency hedging fo-
cuses on using forward contracts and swaps to contain currency risks, a financial 
management activity that can be performed by in-house financial specialists or out-
side experts (such as currency traders). Strategic hedging refers to geographically 
dispersing operations—through sourcing or FDI—in multiple currency zones. By 
definition, this is more strategic, involving managers from many functional areas 
(such as production, marketing, and sourcing) in addition to those from finance.
Overall, the importance of foreign exchange management cannot be overem-
phasized for firms of all stripes interested in doing business abroad. Firms whose 
performance is otherwise stellar can be devastated by unfavorable currency move-
ments. For example, the Brazilian real appreciated by 38% against the dollar be-
tween 2009 and 2010. Brazilian manufacturers thus had a hard time competing 
with cheap imports (see Emerging Markets 7.1). On the other hand, thanks to 
crises in countries such as Greece, Ireland, and Portugal, the euro depreciated 
Currency risk
The potential for loss associated 
with fluctuations in the foreign 
exchange market.
Strategic hedging
Spreading out activities in a 
number of countries in different 
currency zones to offset any 
currency losses in one region 
through gains in other regions.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 7   Dealing with Foreign Exchange	
221
sharply against the dollar and the Swiss franc during the same period. While euro 
zone exporters such as Daimler-Benz (maker of Mercedes cars) and EADS (manu-
facturer of Airbus jets) could not be happier, Swiss exporters struggled (see the 
Closing Case). 
From a resource-based view, it seems imperative that firms develop resources 
and capabilities that can combat currency risks, in addition to striving for excel-
lence in, for example, operations and marketing.14 Developing such expertise is 
no small accomplishment, because, as noted earlier, prediction of currency move-
ments remains an art or a highly imprecise science. Precisely because of such chal-
lenges, firms able to profit from (or at least avoid being crushed by) unfavorable 
currency movements will possess some valuable, rare, and hard-to-imitate capabili-
ties that are the envy of rivals.
7-4 Debates and Extensions
In the highly uncertain world of foreign exchange movements, stakes are high, yet 
consensus is rare, and debates are numerous. We review three major debates here: 
(1) fixed versus floating exchange rates, (2) a strong dollar versus a weak dollar, 
and (3) hedging versus not hedging. 
7-4a Fixed versus Floating Exchange Rates15 
Since the collapse of the Bretton Woods system in the early 1970s, debate has never 
ended on whether fixed or floating exchange rates are better.16 Proponents of fixed 
exchange rates argue that fixed exchange rates impose monetary discipline by pre-
venting governments from engaging in inflationary monetary policies (essentially, 
printing more money). Proponents also suggest that fixed exchange rates reduce 
uncertainty and thus encourage trade and FDI, not only benefiting the particular 
economy but also helping the global economy.
Proponents of floating exchange rates believe that market forces should take 
care of supply, demand, and, thus, price of any currency. Floating exchange rates 
may avoid large balance-of-payments deficits, surprises, and even crises. In other 
words, flexible exchange rates may help avoid the crises that occur under fixed ex-
change rates when expectations of an impending devaluation arise. For example, 
Thailand probably would not have been devastated so suddenly in July 1997 (gener-
ally regarded as the triggering event for the 1997 Asian financial crisis) had it op-
erated a floating exchange rate system. In addition, floating exchange rates allow 
each country to make its own monetary policy. One major problem associated with 
the Bretton Woods system was that other countries were not happy about pegging 
their currencies to that of the United States, which practiced inflationary monetary 
policies in the late 1960s.
There is no doubt that floating exchange rates are more volatile than fixed 
rates. Many countries have no stomach for such volatility. The most extreme fixed 
rate policy is through a currency board, which is a monetary authority that issues 
notes and coins convertible into a key foreign currency at a fixed exchange rate. 
Usually, the fixed exchange rate is set by law, making changes to the exchange 
rate politically very costly for governments. To honor its commitment, a currency 
board must back the domestic currency with 100% of equivalent foreign exchange.  
Learning Objective
Participate in three leading 
debates concerning foreign 
exchange movements.
7-4
Currency board
A monetary authority that issues 
notes and coins convertible into 
a key foreign currency at a fixed 
exchange rate.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

222	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
In the case of Hong Kong’s currency board, every 
HK$7.8 in circulation is backed by US$1. By design, a 
currency board is passive. When more US dollars flow 
in, the board issues more Hong Kong dollars and in-
terest rates fall. When more US dollars flow out, the 
board reduces money supply and interest rates rise. 
The Hong Kong currency board has been jokingly de-
scribed as an Asian outpost of the US Federal Reserve. 
This is technically accurate, because interest rates in 
Hong Kong are essentially determined by the US Fed-
eral Reserve. While the Hong Kong currency board 
was a successful bulwark against speculative attacks on 
the Hong Kong dollar in 1997 and 1998, it has been 
dragged down by the weakening US dollar recently.17 
7-4b A Strong Dollar versus a Weak Dollar
In recent years, the debate on the value of the dollar is closely related to the debate 
on the value of the yuan.18 The value of the US dollar is a trillion-dollar question. 
At present, 65% of the world’s foreign exchange holdings are in dollars, while the 
US share of global GDP is only 24% (see Figure 7.1). The recent economic turmoil 
has intensified the global debate on the proper value of the dollar (see Table 7.4). 
In terms of international trade competitiveness, a strong dollar may make it harder 
for US firms to export and to compete on price when combating imports. Con-
versely, a weak dollar may facilitate more US exports and stem import growth. 
Since the Plaza Accord of 1985, after which the dollar declined sharply against the 
Japanese yen, the United States has been pursuing a “cheap dollar” policy in order 
Table 7.4
A Strong Dollar versus a Weak Dollar
Panel A. A Strong (Appreciating) Dollar
Advantages
Disadvantages
  	 US consumers benefit from low prices on imports.
  	 Lower prices on foreign goods help keep US price level and 
inflation level low.
  	 US tourists enjoy lower prices abroad.
  	 US firms find it easier to acquire foreign targets.
  	 US exporters have a hard time to compete on price abroad.
  	 US firms in import-competing industries have a hard time 
competing with low-cost imports.
  	 Foreign tourists find it more expensive when visiting 
the US.
Panel B. A Weak (Depreciating) Dollar
Advantages
Disadvantages
  	 US exporters find it easier to compete on price abroad.
  	 US firms face less competitive pressure to keep prices low.
  	 Foreign tourists enjoy lower prices in the US.
  	 Foreign firms find it easier to acquire US targets.
  	 The US can print more dollars to export its problems to the 
rest of the world.
  	 US consumers face higher prices on imports.
  	 Higher prices on imports contribute to higher price level 
and inflation level in the US.
  	 US tourists find it more expensive when traveling abroad.
  	 Governments, firms, and individuals outside the US 
holding dollar-denominated assets suffer from value loss 
of their assets.
How are you personally affected by fluctuations 
in currency exchange rates?
© Image/Alamy
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 7   Dealing with Foreign Exchange	
223
to facilitate more exports and reduce trade deficits. Unfortunately, the policy has 
backfired. While US exports did rise (in 2011 US merchandise exports grew 16% 
compared with 2010), US trade deficits remained consistently high. In part, this 
was due to China’s (pre-2005) policy to peg its yuan to the dollar, which made the 
yuan cheap. Since 2005, the United States has been complaining that China has 
not let its currency appreciate enough.
After being burned by the most horrific economic recession that the world had 
seen since the Great Depression, a number of governments, firms, and experts 
around the world are arguing for the proper valuation of the dollar. In addition to 
debating what the “fair” value of the dollar is, a new voice is now calling for aban-
doning the dollar as a de facto reserve currency. (Since the demise of the Bretton 
Woods system in the 1970s, the US dollar is no longer the official reserve cur-
rency, but it has retained some characteristics of a reserve currency due to its “soft 
power.”) Leading this new global movement is China. China is America’s number-
one creditor country and holds about $2.2 trillion in foreign exchange reserves, 
two-thirds of which are denominated in dollars. Since the yuan is not internation-
ally accepted (technically non-convertible), China does not suggest that the yuan 
be used to replace the dollar. Instead, China has proposed to use Special Drawing 
Rights (SDRs), already created by the IMF, to replace the dollar as a global reserve 
currency. While this proposal is made in the name of promoting global stability, 
China is not totally altruistic. Since the US budget deficit has exploded and the US 
Federal Reserve has been printing a ton of new money to fund stimulus packages, 
China is deeply worried that a cheapening dollar will be a nasty hit to Chinese 
holdings of US Treasury bonds. There is some fundamental soul-searching among 
Beijing’s economic mandarins. Their policy of keeping the yuan low versus the 
dollar to promote exports and then to recycle export earnings to buy US Trea-
sury bonds has backfired. Even the typically timid, state-controlled media in China 
are now full of criticisms of the Chinese government’s “irresponsible” investment 
policy, which ends up investing hard-earned dollars from a developing economy to 
subsidize a very rich economy. China’s proposal to dethrone the dollar as a domi-
nant currency, although clearly a long shot, quickly garnered support from Russia 
and Brazil. In 2009, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 
issued a supportive opinion:
An economy whose currency is used as a reserve currency is not under the same obli-
gation as others to make the necessary macroeconomic or exchange-rate adjustments 
for avoiding continuing current account deficits. Thus, the dominance of the dollar 
as the main means of international payments also played an important role in the 
build-up of the global imbalances in the run up to the financial crisis.
The United States, on the other hand, has every interest in keeping the dollar’s 
status quo as a (de facto) reserve currency around the world so that China and 
other surplus countries will keep buying Treasury bonds—for lack of a better al-
ternative. While China has continued to buy new Treasury bonds, it has taken two 
concrete steps. First, in 2009 China arranged more than $120 billion in currency 
swaps with its trading partners such as Argentina, Belarus, Indonesia, Malaysia, 
and South Korea. The People’s Bank of China, the central bank, made yuan avail-
able to pay for imports from these countries if they are short on dollars. Second, 
some Chinese exporters started to settle certain transactions in Hong Kong and in 
Africa with yuan (see Emerging Markets 7.2)—the first step for the yuan’s eventual 
international convertibility.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

224	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
7-4c Currency Hedging versus Not Hedging
Given the unpredictable nature of foreign exchange rates, it seems natural that 
firms that deal with foreign transactions—both financial and non-financial types, 
both large and small firms—may want to engage in currency hedging. Firms that 
fail to hedge are at the mercy of the spot market.
Yet, surprisingly, many firms do not bother to engage in currency hedging. 
Some euro zone exporters simply insist on payment in euros, and some Chinese 
exporters have started to insist on payment in yuan (see Emerging Markets 7.2). 
Among the largest US firms, only approximately one-third hedge. The standard 
argument for currency hedging is increased stability of cash flows and earnings. 
In essence, currency hedging may be regarded as a form of insurance, whose cost 
may be outweighed by the protection it provides. However, many large firms, such 
as 3M, John Deere, and ExxonMobil, do not care about such insurance. Managers 
argue that currency hedging eats into profits. A simple forward contract may cost 
In 2000, trade between China and Africa was only 
$10 billion. In 2010, the volume rocketed ahead to reach 
$127 billion. While China has become Africa’s number-
one trading partner, the downside of such intense 
trading is the complication of having to deal with cur-
rency fluctuation. The vast majority of the trade deals 
between China and Africa are conducted in US dollars, 
which have fluctuated substantially. Since the dollar is 
likely to depreciate and the yuan is likely to correspond-
ingly appreciate further, Chinese exporters with costs 
in yuan and payments in dollars stand to lose. While 
currency hedging using forward contracts is an obvious 
coping strategy, many small exporters cannot afford 
the expenses. In addition, currency hedging is not risk-
free. Wrong bets may end up burning firms big time.
To better cope with currency fluctuation, one 
straightforward mechanism for Chinese export-
ers is to insist on payment in yuan. The question is: 
Why would African importers agree to pay in yuan? 
Two compelling reasons stand out. First, Chinese 
exporters can save approximately 7% to 10% of their 
costs if they are paid in yuan. If they can share some 
of these gains with their African trading partners with 
lower prices, the new deal to use yuan as the common 
transaction currency becomes a win-win solution for 
both sides. Second, an increasing number of Chinese 
firms have engaged in foreign direct investment (FDI) 
in Africa. Their subsidiaries in Africa would be comfort-
able to use yuan to buy supplies, components, and 
manufactured products from home. Johannesburg, 
South Africa-based Standard Bank, which is the larg-
est bank in Africa, estimated that by 2015, 40% of the 
China-Africa trade (worth $100 billion) may be settled 
in yuan. This would significantly eliminate the head-
ache of currency fluctuation for Chinese exporters. 
While this amount will represent less than 10% of 
China’s total exports and less than 1% of worldwide 
exports, it represents a small step of the yuan’s rising 
popularity as a major currency for international trade 
around the world.
Chinese Exporters Cope with Currency Fluctuation in Africa 
E m e r g i n g  M a r k e t s  7 . 2
Sources: Based on (1) 21st Century Business Insights, 2011, Renminbi is popular in Africa, September 16: 26; (2) G. Allard, 2012, Chinese OFDI in Africa, 
in I. Alon, M. Fetscherin, & P. Gugler (eds.), Chinese International Investments (pp. 279–299), New York: Palgrave; (3) www.standardbank.com.
Danny Lehman/Corbis; Björn Meyer/sitox/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 7   Dealing with Foreign Exchange	
225
up to half a percentage point per year of the revenue being hedged. More compli-
cated transactions may cost more. As a result, many firms believe that the ups and 
downs of various currencies even out in the long run. Some, such as IBM, focus 
on strategic hedging (geographically dispersing activities) while refraining from 
currency hedging. Whether such a “no currency hedging” strategy outperforms a 
currency hedging strategy remains to be seen.
7-5 Management Savvy
The big question in global business, adapted to the context of foreign exchange 
movements, is: What determines the success and failure of currency manage-
ment around the globe? The answer boils down to two components. First, from 
an institution-based standpoint, the “rules of the game”—economic, political, and 
psychological—enable or constrain firms. Shown in the Closing Case, Swiss export-
ers’ frustration with the appreciation of the Swiss franc relative to the euro stems 
from the centuries-old policy of Switzerland to maintain its political and economic 
independence. While all of Switzerland’s neighboring countries have joined the 
EU and adopted the euro, Switzerland will not. Second, from a resource-based 
perspective, how firms develop valuable, unique, and hard-to-imitate capabilities in 
currency management may make or break them. While Swiss multinationals such 
as ABB and Nestlé can reduce their exposure to the Swiss franc by engaging in 
strategic hedging to produce outside of Switzerland (and often outside of the euro 
zone), many smaller Swiss firms do not have such capabilities.
As a result, three implications for action emerge (Table 7.5). First, foreign ex-
change literacy must be fostered. Savvy managers need to not only pay attention 
to the broad long-run movements informed by PPP, productivity changes, and bal-
ance of payments, but also to the fickle short-run fluctuations triggered by interest 
rate changes and investor mood swings.
Second, risk analysis of any country must include its currency risks. Previ-
ous chapters have advised managers to pay attention to political, regulatory, and 
cultural risks of various countries. Here, a crucial currency risk dimension is 
added. An otherwise attractive country may suffer from high inflation, resulting 
in devaluation of its currency on the horizon. For example, prior to 2008, foreign 
and domestic banks in emerging European countries such as Hungary, Latvia, 
and Poland let numerous home buyers take out mortgage loans denominated 
in the euro, while a majority of these customers’ assets and incomes were in lo-
cal currencies. Unfortunately, local currencies in these countries were severely 
devaluated in the 2008–2009 crisis, making many home buyers unable to come 
up with the higher mortgage payments. Banks in the region also suffered from 
severe losses.19
Learning Objective
Draw implications for action.
7-5
Table 7.5
Implications for Action
  	 Fostering foreign exchange literacy is a must.
  	 Risk analysis of any country must include an analysis of its currency risks.
  	 A currency risk management strategy is necessary—via currency hedging, strategic 
hedging, or both. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

226	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
Finally, a country’s high currency risks do not necessarily suggest that this 
country needs to be totally avoided. Instead, they call for a prudent currency risk 
management strategy—via currency hedging, strategic hedging, or both. Not every 
firm has the stomach or capabilities to do both. Smaller, internationally inexperi-
enced firms may outsource currency hedging to specialists such as currency trad-
ers. Strategic hedging may be unrealistic for such smaller, inexperienced firms. 
On the other hand, many larger, internationally experienced firms (such as 3M) 
choose not to touch currency hedging, citing its unpredictability. Instead, they fo-
cus on strategic hedging. Although there is no fixed formula, firms that do not 
have a well-thought-out currency management strategy will be caught off guard 
when currency movements take a nasty turn.
C h a p t e r  S u m m a r y
	 7.1	 Understand the determinants of foreign exchange rates.
 	 A foreign exchange rate is the price of one currency expressed in another.
 	 Basic determinants of foreign exchange rates include (1) relative price dif-
ferences and PPP, (2) interest rates, (3) productivity and balance of pay-
ments, (4) exchange rate policies, and (5) investor psychology.
	 7.2	 Track the evolution of the international monetary system.
 	 The international monetary system evolved from the gold standard (1870–
1914), to the Bretton Woods system (1944–1973), and eventually to the cur-
rent post-Bretton Woods system (1973–present).
 	 The IMF serves as a lender of last resort to help member countries fight 
balance-of-payments problems.
 	 In response to the criticisms, the IMF has initiated major reforms recently.
	 7.3	 Identify firms’ strategic responses to deal with foreign exchange movements.
 	 Three foreign exchange transactions are: (1) spot transactions, (2) forward 
transactions, and (3) swaps.
 	 Firms’ strategic responses include (1) currency hedging, (2) strategic hedg-
ing, or (3) both.
	 7.4	 Participate in three leading debates concerning foreign exchange movements.
 	 (1) Fixed versus floating exchange rates, (2) a strong dollar versus a weak 
dollar, and (3) hedging versus not hedging.
	 7.5	 Draw implications for action.
 	 Fostering foreign exchange literacy is a must.
 	 Risk analysis of any country must include an analysis of its currency risks.
 	 A currency risk management strategy is necessary—via currency hedging, 
strategic hedging, or both.
Appreciation 206
Balance of payments 210
Bandwagon effect 214
Bid rate 219
Bretton Woods system 215
Capital flight 214
Clean (free) float 213
Common  
denominator 214
Currency board 221
Currency hedging 219
Currency risk 220
Currency swap 219
Depreciation 206
Dirty (managed)  
float 213
Fixed exchange rate 
policy 213
Floating (flexible)  
exchange rate  
policy 213
K e y  T e r m s
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 7   Dealing with Foreign Exchange	
227
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 ON CULTURE: Suppose that in country X, the culture is one that avoids risk 
and frowns on gambling. Suppose the country uses the dollar in its interna-
tional transactions, and a firm in X buys a product from Europe of which it 
will take delivery in 60 days and for which it will have to pay 100,000 euros 
at that time. The firm does not know how many dollars will be needed in 
order to obtain those 100,000 euros 60 days from now. One way to know that 
would be to enter into a contract for the future delivery of that currency 
with a speculator who would guarantee the firm that it will be able to obtain 
those euros for a specific dollar value. The firm would thus avoid the risk 
of having to pay too much for those euros 60 days from now by transferring 
the risk at the present time to a speculator. The speculator takes the risk, 
because he or she is expecting that the actual costs of those euros (in terms 
of dollars) will be less 60 days from now than speculator promised to the 
firm. As a result, the speculator profits from the price differential. Some in 
country X view contracts for the future delivery of a currency (forward con-
tracts) as risk avoidance, but others view it as gambling. What do you think?
	 2.	 Do an online search regarding current challenges to the dollar, euro, and 
yen, and then refer to PengAtlas Maps 2.1 (Top Merchandise Importers and 
Exporters) and 2.2 (Top Service Importers and Exporters). To what extent 
do the users of these three currencies tend to dominate world trade?
	 3.	 Refer to PengAtlas Map 2.3 (FDI Inflows and Outflows), and compare to 
what you learned from Question 2 above. To what extent do the users of 
the three currencies dominate? In your opinion, will the rise of the BRIC 
(Brazil, Russia, India, and China) countries ultimately reduce the domi-
nance of those currencies?
	 4.	 What are foreign exchange rates?
	 5.	 How are foreign exchange rates affected by differences in the interest rates 
prevailing in various countries?
	 6.	 What happened toward the end of World War II that lifted the dollar to the 
commanding heights of the global economy?
	 7.	 What is the IMF, and how does it help countries?
	 8.	 In foreign exchange, what are spot and forward transactions? How do they 
differ?
	 9.	 What is the difference between currency hedging and strategic hedging?
	 10.	 What is the role of currency boards regarding fixed exchange rates? Dis-
cuss at least one problem that such boards may have in maintaining fixed 
rates.
Foreign exchange  
market 218
Foreign exchange  
rate 206
Forward discount 219
Forward premium 219
Forward transaction 219
Gold standard 214
International Monetary 
Fund (IMF) 216
Offer rate 219
Peg 213
Post–Bretton Woods 
system 215
Quota 216
Spot transaction 219
Spread 219
Strategic hedging 220
Target exchange rates 
(crawling bands) 213
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

228	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
	 11.	 Why a strong dollar is not always desirable to the United States, while it may 
be to other countries?
	 12.	 Why should a savvy manager become literate about foreign exchange?
	 13.	 What is one example that illustrates why risk analysis of a country should 
include its currency risks?
C r i t i c a l  D i s c u s s i o n  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 Suppose US$1 5 €0.75 in New York and US$1 5 €0.77 in Paris. How can foreign 
exchange traders profit from these exchange rates? What actions they take  
may result in the same dollar/euro exchange rate in both New York and Paris? 
	 2.	 Identify the currencies of the top-three trading partners of your country in 
the last ten years. Find the exchange rates of these currencies, relative to 
your country’s currency, ten years ago and now. Explain the changes. Then 
predict the movement of these exchange rates ten years from now.
	 3.	 As a manager, you are choosing to do business in two countries: one has a 
fixed exchange rate and another a floating rate. Which country would you 
prefer? Why?
	 4.	 ON ETHICS: You are an IMF official going to a country whose export earn-
ings are not able to pay for imports. The government has requested a loan 
from the IMF. Which areas would you recommend the government to cut: 
(1) education, (2) salaries for officials, (3) food subsidies, and/or (4) tax 
rebates for exporters?
G l o b a l  A c t i o n
	 1.	 Based in the United States, your firm trades extensively in European coun-
tries that have adopted the euro. You have been asked to evaluate the impact 
of currency fluctuations on sales in this region over the past month. The 
first step in this process is to develop an exchange rate table for daily ex-
change rates over the past month between the US dollar and the euro. Once 
this has been accomplished, what general trends do you notice? How could 
these trends impact your firm’s sales in countries that use the euro?
	 2.	 Your company is examining possible market opportunities in the Asia 
Pacific region. As a part of this possible strategic shift, the benchmark cur-
rencies of the region must be identified to diversify currency risk for future 
operations. Using a resource that examines foreign exchange, determine 
which predominant currencies are likely candidates for your analysis.
V i d e o  C a s e
After watching the video on interest rates at the European Central Bank, discuss 
the following:
	 1.	 How will the rise in interest rates affect FDI for these euro zone countries?
	 2.	 What reasons can you suggest for the lack of growth in Portugal, Ireland, 
Greece, and Spain?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 7   Dealing with Foreign Exchange	
229
	 3.	 What role may strategic hedging play in the success of firms in euro zone 
countries?
	 4.	 Are fixed or floating exchange rates better for the euro zone countries?
	 5.	 Will the value of the dollar continue to be a debate with regard to foreign 
exchange?
Situated in the middle of Europe, Switzerland enjoys 
splendid isolation politically. Unlike many non-EU mem-
ber countries eager to join the EU, Switzerland does not 
bother to apply. Economically, the Swiss economy is 
closely integrated with its European neighbors—60% 
of its exports go to EU member countries. While 
the hoopla associated with the successful launch 
of the euro a decade ago has been replaced by the 
recent pessimism associated with the euro mess, 
Switzerland can proudly point to its Swiss franc as a 
rock-solid currency.
Known as a “haven currency,” the Swiss franc 
strengthens when US stock prices crash; when bond 
prices in Greece, Italy, and Spain rise; and when the 
euro takes a beating. On one of the most stressful 
days in recent history, September 11, 2001, the Swiss 
franc rose by a remarkable 3% within two hours of 
the first plane crashing into World Trade Center.
But here is a catch: To Swiss exporters, service 
providers catering to international tourists, and em-
ployees whose pay is cut or whose jobs are lost, 
the Swiss franc is actually a “currency from hell.” 
Between 2010 and 2012, the Swiss franc appreci-
ated 25% against the euro. “If you have loads of 
euro sales and lots of Swiss franc costs, you’re 
getting killed,” noted an expert. “It is a nightmare 
for everybody,” noted another expert, “We have to 
adapt.” Mopac, a maker of food packaging materials, 
cut wages by 10% for its 260 employees in 2011, 
thanks to unfavorable foreign exchange movements. 
The firm adjusted wages every three months, de-
pending on the exchange rate. The union protested, 
by arguing that “exchange rate fluctuations are a risk 
that should be taken on by the company’s owner.” 
The owner responded, “If we hadn’t cut wages, 
we would have had to move our production to the 
euro zone”—and most jobs at Mopac in Switzerland 
would be lost.
Prior to the recent spike, Swiss prices had already 
been hair-raisingly expensive. Now they became 
worse. A Big Mac in 2012 cost $6.81—the most ex-
pensive in the world (see Figure 7.3). The Swiss eco-
nomics ministry commissioned a study that compared 
a standard Alpine skiing holiday in a medium-class 
hotel in the Swiss Alps versus in the Austrian 
Alps—Austria turned out to be one-third more price-
competitive than Switzerland. For example, a regular 
room in a three-star hotel in Zermatt, where guests 
can view the spectacular, 4,478-meter (14,692-feet) 
Matterhorn peak from their balconies, costs $350 a 
night. While Switzerland still attracts a large number 
of visitors, an untold number have opted for vaca-
tions in Austria, France, and Italy, which also offer 
beautiful Alpine mountain scenery, excellent skiing, 
and other enticing tourist attractions.
When visitors do come, they spend less in 
Switzerland. A saleswoman at the famous Zett 
Meyer watch store on Zurich’s Bahnhofstrasse 
sensed this when shoppers from abroad pulled out 
their phones. “Some customers come in with prices 
saved on their cell phones to compare them with 
ours,” she said. For a TAG Heuer watch that cost 
$12,930, “even when we give them 10% off, it’s still 
cheaper in their home country.” In another example, 
Chinese tourists often look for Chinese restaurants, 
both for the more reasonable prices and for the more 
The Swiss Franc: A Currency from Where?
Ethical 
Dilemma
C l o s i n g  C a s e
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

230	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools
[Journal acronyms] AER—American Economic Review; BW—BusinessWeek 
(before 2010) or Bloomberg Businessweek (since 2010); JEL—Journal 
of Economic Literature; JEP—Journal of Economic Perspectives; JIBS—
Journal of International Business Studies; SMJ—Strategic Management 
Journal; WSJ—Wall Street Journal
1 Economist, 2009, Yuan small step, July 11: 71–72.
2 A. Taylor & M. Taylor, 2004, The purchasing power parity debate, 
JEP, 18: 135–158.
3 Economist, 2006, McCurrencies, May 27: 74.
4 M. Kreinin, 2006, International Economics (p. 183), Cincinnati: 
South–Western Cengage Learning.
5 L. Sarno & M. Taylor, 2001, Official intervention in the foreign 
exchange market, JEL, 39: 839–868.
6 R. Lyons, 2001, The Microstructure Approach to Exchange Rates (p. 1), 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
7 E. Olsen, 2011, Iceland’s financial crisis (pp. 276–279), in 
M. W. Peng, Global Business, 2nd ed., Cincinnati: South–Western 
Cengage Learning.
8 R. Rajan, 2008, The future of the IMF and the World Bank, AER, 
98: 110–115;
9 P. Lane & G. Milesi–Ferretti, 2008, The drivers of financial global-
ization, AER, 98: 327–332.
10 R. Carbaugh, 2007, International Economics, 11th ed. (p. 360), 
Cincinnati: South–Western Cengage Learning.
11 E. Hutson & S. Stevenson, 2010, Openness, hedging incentives, 
and foreign exchange exposure, JIBS, 41: 105–122.
N O T E S
familiar dishes rather than the more “exotic” Swiss 
diet heavy with cheese and cream—two ingredients 
that the Chinese never use in their cuisine. Step-
ping out of Geneva’s train station, a group of them 
found a Chinese restaurant, Le Mandarin. However, 
they were shocked to find that the cheapest dish—
a bowl of Beijing street noodles (not even fancy 
Singapore or Shanghai noodles)—cost $32 (!). But 
Beijing street noodles nevertheless became the 
most popular dish served by Le Mandarin, accord-
ing to the staff. It is not uncommon to see a table 
of very rich Chinese tourists (anyone from China 
who can afford a holiday in Switzerland has to be 
very rich) devouring Beijing street noodles, which is 
something they probably do not do either in China 
or elsewhere around the world. They would only do 
that in Switzerland.
For a country of its size (a population of seven 
million), Switzerland has an unusual number of large 
multinational manufacturers, such as ABB, Nestlé, 
Novartis, Roche, and Swatch. These firms all en-
gage in strategic hedging by producing and sourc-
ing in different currency zones around the world, so 
they are better able to cope with the Swiss franc 
spike. But 60% of Switzerland’s employment is in 
small- and medium-sized manufacturers, retailers, 
hotels, restaurants, and tour operators. To them, 
strategic hedging is not realistic, and most of them 
also do not bother to engage in currency hedging 
or simple currency diversification—most of them 
refuse to accept euros. With Swiss francs in hand, 
they are stuck between a rock and a hard currency.
Case Discussion Questions: 
	 1.	 Why is the Swiss franc a “haven currency” ac-
cording to many international investors?
	 2.	 Why have the unfavorable foreign exchange 
movements made the Swiss franc a “currency 
from hell,” according to a lot of Swiss firms, 
managers, and employees?
	 3.	 If you were CEO of a medium-sized manufacturer 
in Switzerland, what are the options you may con-
sider in response to the spike of the Swiss franc? 
	 4.	 As a tourist looking to have a vacation in Europe, 
you are very interested in Switzerland, but you 
are concerned about the high prices. What other 
European countries would you consider? 
Sources: Based on (1) the author’s interviews, (2) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2011, The Swiss can barely afford their currency, June 6: 20–21; (3) Economist, 
2004, A special case: A survey of Switzerland, February 14; (4) Economist, 2011, Too strong for comfort, September 3: 76.
MARTIN RUETSCHI/Keystone/Corbis
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 7   Dealing with Foreign Exchange	
231
12 F. Carrieri & B. Majerbi, 2006, The pricing of exchange risk in 
emerging stock markets, JIBS, 37: 372–391; L. Jacque & P. Vaaler, 
2001, The international control conundrum with exchange risk, 
JIBS, 32: 813–832.
13 S. Lee & M. Makhija, 2009, Flexibility in internationalization, 
SMJ, 30: 537–555; C. Pantzalis, B. Simkins, & P. Laux, 2001, Opera-
tional hedges and the foreign exchange exposure of US multina-
tional corporations, JIBS, 32: 793–812.
14 R. Faff & A. Marshall, 2005, International evidence on the de-
terminants of foreign exchange rate exposure of multinational 
corporations, JIBS, 36: 539–558; R. Weiner, 2005, Speculation in 
international crises, JIBS, 36: 576–587.
15 This section draws heavily from B. Yarbrough & R. Yarbrough, 
2006, The World Economy, 7th ed. (p. 683), Cincinnati: South–Western 
Cengage Learning.
16 P. Henry, 2007, Capital account liberalization, JEL, 45: 887–935.
17 BW, 2011, Hong Kong’s currency inflicts plenty of pain, October 3: 
21–22.
18 BW, 2009, China’s doubts about the dollar, June 8: 20; Economist, 
2009, Time for a Beijing bargain, May 30: 15–16; Economist, 2009, 
Yuan small step, July 11: 71–72; WSJ, 2009, Geithner is exactly wrong 
on China trade, January 26; WSJ, 2009, UN panel calls for dollar 
reserve role to be eliminated, September 8.
19 M. W. Peng & K. E. Meyer, 2011, International Business (pp. 200–202), 
London: Cengage Learning EMEA.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Axel Schmies/imagebroker/Alamy
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
	 8-1	 make the case for global economic 
integration.
	 8-2	 understand the evolution of the GATT and 
the WTO, including current challenges.
	 8-3	 make the case for regional economic 
integration.
	 8-4	 understand regional economic integration 
efforts in Europe, the Americas, the Asia 
Pacific, and Africa.
	 8-5	 participate in two leading debates concerning 
global and regional economic integration.
	 8-6	 draw implications for action.
Chapter 
8 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Capitalizing on Global 
and Regional Integration
It is Tuesday morning at 5 o’clock, and a nearly empty 
freeway lies ahead of Marcus as he heads for the air-
port in Munich, Germany. Traveling and engaging with 
other cultures is part of Marcus’ daily job as a manager 
with European responsibilities.
Marcus is Vice President Northern Europe of an en-
trepreneurial software company that provides comput-
er aided design (CAD) software for use in businesses 
such as large architectural firms, automotive suppliers, 
aerospace manufacturers, and media and entertain-
ment designers. His responsibilities include the defini-
tion of strategies for the region, budgeting for several 
European countries, negotiations with new potential 
business partners, and conducting business reviews 
with his own local teams, suppliers, and partners. 
After parking the car and writing down the exact 
location (important!), Marcus heads for International 
Departures. In the early morning, departure times are 
quite reliable. His flight departs on time: two hours to 
read the morning news, to get an update on worldwide 
financials, and to enjoy a cup of tea or two and an un-
spectacular sandwich.
When Marcus arrives at the Warsaw airport, he 
finds there is less border security than in the past. 
Since Poland became a member of the European Union 
(EU) and the Schengen Agreement, there are no longer 
any passport controls. Business travelers try to avoid 
checking luggage to save time, and ten minutes later 
Marcus is greeted by his local country manager. Un-
fortunately, Marcus cannot take advantage of the EU’s 
monetary union and still has to use five different wal-
lets. In addition to his “euro wallet” for Germany and 
other countries that use the euro, he needs one for 
Swedish krones, one for Romanian leu, one for British 
pounds, and finally one for Polish zloty, which is what 
he is carrying today. It is quite a challenge to grab the 
right one when leaving home at 4:30 in the morning.
While an experienced driver takes Marcus and his 
Country Manager through Warsaw’s rush-hour traffic, 
they discuss the latest development at the Polish of-
fice. Since joining the EU, the level of professionalism 
has significantly increased at all levels of management 
in Poland, and English has become the norm for con-
versations with local staff. This was not the case when 
Marcus started doing business in Poland in 2001. Initially, 
he would only communicate with the country manager 
directly in English. For the first year, all employees were 
enrolled in English-language training every Friday after-
noon. Now this training has paid off, and Marcus can 
easily talk to everyone in the office directly.
This time, Marcus’s first appointment is with a 
major supplier in the center of Warsaw to discuss op-
portunities for the coming months. After three hours 
of PowerPoint presentations, financial reports, and 
O p e n i n g  C a s e
A Day in European Business
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

234	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools 
marketing reviews, he is invited for a quick business 
lunch. Another two hours in the car on the way to his 
company’s Polish office in Łodz are followed by an in-
ternal staff meeting with updates by all business unit 
managers. 
Marcus’ visit to a country office typically takes 
three days packed with meetings and events to jus-
tify the expenses of the journey. Modern technology 
allows video conferencing at high quality, yet it can-
not replace the extremely important human factor in 
business negotiations. Marcus prefers face-to-face dis-
cussions where recognizing subtle expressions on the 
other’s face can make a difference between closing a 
deal and walking away empty-handed.
When doing business in different European coun-
tries, Marcus faces differences in bureaucracy at 
almost every step. In Poland, for example, it seems 
that everything needs to be filed in several copies, 
stamped, and signed. Notaries hold the “license to 
print money,” because more or less everything related 
to the administration of a company needs to be signed 
in the presence of a notary. One of the easiest (and 
most depressing) ways to discover this is by having 
a dinner and requesting a receipt. If you ask a waiter 
for receipt, after ten minutes he may come back with 
a huge document (three pages) that needs to be filled 
with the company’s long tax-ID number, signed several 
times, and finally stamped by the restaurant before it 
is accepted. Back home in Germany, Marcus would 
just take his credit card receipt—that’s it.
After a long day, it is time to check in at one of the busi-
ness hotels. Besides the construction of highways and 
roads, this is an area where the progress of economic 
transition and development of Poland is most visible. In 
2001, business travelers in Łodz had the choice of one 
hotel. Today, international hotel chains such as Ibis and 
Radisson provide facilities at very good standards. It is 
past 10 o’clock in the evening when he returns from his 
business dinner to the hotel, and he will have to prepare 
for another busy day in European business.
Source: This case is fictitious. It was adapted from M. W. Peng and 
K. E. Meyer, 2011, International Business (pp. 228–229), London: Cengage 
Learning EMEA. 
Why is Marcus so busy traveling around Europe? Why is there no passport control 
when his international flight from Munich, Germany, arrives in Warsaw, Poland? Why, 
despite the widespread use of the euro, does Marcus have to maintain five wallets 
stuffed with different European currencies? In two words, the answer is: economic 
integration—both regionally and globally. Regional economic integration refers to 
efforts to reduce trade and investment barriers within one region, such as the European 
Union (EU). Global economic integration, in turn, refers to efforts to reduce trade and 
investment barriers around the globe.
Most fundamentally, this chapter is about how the two core perspectives in global 
business interact. Specifically, how do changes in the “rules of the game” via global 
and regional economic integration (as emphasized by the institution-based view) lead 
firms to better develop and leverage their capabilities (as highlighted by the resource-
based view)? In other words, how do firms around the world capitalize on global and 
regional economic integration? We start with a description of global economic integra-
tion. Next, we introduce regional economic integration. Debates and extensions follow. 
8-1 Global Economic Integration
Current frameworks of regional and global economic integration date back to 
the end of World War II. The world community was mindful of the mercantilist 
trade wars in the 1930s, which worsened the Great Depression and eventually led 
Regional economic integration
Efforts to reduce trade and 
investment barriers within one 
region.
European Union (EU)
The official title of European 
economic integration 
since 1993.
Global economic integration
Efforts to reduce trade and 
investment barriers around 
the globe.
Learning Objective
Make the case for global 
economic integration.
8-1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 8   Capitalizing on Global and Regional Integration	
235
to World War II. Two new developments after the war were initiated to prevent a 
repeat of these circumstances. Globally, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 
(GATT) was created in 1948. In Europe, regional integration started in 1951. Both 
developments proved so successful that they are now considerably expanded: one 
became the World Trade Organization (WTO), and the other the EU. 
8-1a Political Benefits for Global Economic Integration
Recall from Chapters 5 and 6 that theoretically, there are economic gains when 
firms from different countries can freely trade and engage in foreign direct in-
vestment (FDI). However, until the end of World War II, most governments had 
not accepted these insights. In the late 1920s and the early 1930s, virtually all 
governments tried to protect domestic industries by imposing protectionist policies 
through tariffs and quotas. Collectively, these beggar-thy-neighbor policies trig-
gered retaliation that further restricted trade (Figure 8.1). Eventually, trade wars 
turned into World War II.
The postwar urge for global economic integration grew out of the pain-
ful lessons of the 1920s and the 1930s. While emphasizing economic benefits, 
global economic integration is political in nature. Its most fundamental goal is 
to promote peace (Table 8.1). Simply put, buyers and sellers are usually reluc-
tant to fight or kill each other. On the other hand, in 1941, when the United 
States cut off oil sales to Japan (in protest of its aggression in China), Japan 
attacked Pearl Harbor. Global economic integration seeks to build confidence. 
General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade (GATT)
A multilateral agreement 
governing the international 
trade of goods (merchandise).
World Trade Organization 
(WTO)
The official title of the multi-
lateral trading system and the 
organization underpinning this 
system since 2005.
Figure 8.1
Down the Tube: Contraction of World Trade during the Great 
Depression (1929–1933, millions $)
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
January
February
March
1929
2,998
2,739
1,839
1,206
992
1930
1931
1932
1933
Source: C. Kindleberger, 1973, The World in Depression (p. 170), Berkeley: University of California Press.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

236	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools 
The trade wars in the 1930s were triggered by a lack of confidence. Confidence 
building is key to avoiding the tragedies of the 1930s. Governments, if they are 
confident that other countries will not raise trade barriers, will not be tempted 
to raise trade barriers.
Recently, as the global economy endeavors to recover from the worst economic 
crisis since the Great Depression, there is a grave danger of rising protectionism 
around the globe. Hopefully, leaders of the 21st century will be smarter and wiser 
than the leaders of the 1920s and the 1930s. While protectionism may lead to short-
term gains at the expense of trading partners, the world as a whole has “been there, 
done that”—with disastrous outcomes and tremendous wartime losses.
8-1b Economic Benefits for Global Economic Integration
There are at least three other compelling economic reasons for global economic in-
tegration. One is to handle disputes constructively. This is especially evident in the 
WTO’s dispute resolution mechanisms (discussed later in this chapter). Although 
there is an escalation in the number of disputes brought to the WTO, such an in-
crease, according to the WTO, “does not reflect increasing tension in the world. 
Rather, it reflects the closer economic ties throughout the world, the WTO’s ex-
panding membership, and the fact that countries have faith in the system to solve 
their differences.”1 In other words, bringing disputes to the WTO is so much better 
than declaring war on each other.
Another benefit is that global economic integration makes life easier for 
all participants. Officially, the GATT/WTO system is called the multilateral 
trading system—the key word being multilateral (involving all participating coun-
tries) as opposed to bilateral (between two countries). One crucial principle is  
non-discrimination. Specifically, a country cannot discriminate among its trading 
partners. Every time a country lowers a trade barrier, it has to do the same for all 
WTO member countries (except when giving preference to regional partners—
discussed later). Such non-discrimination makes life easier for all members.
Finally, global economic integration raises incomes, generates jobs, and stimu-
lates economic growth. The WTO estimates that cutting global trade barriers by a 
third may raise worldwide income by approximately $600 billion—equivalent to con-
tributing an economy the size of Canada to the world.2 While countries benefit, indi-
viduals also benefit because more and better jobs are created. In the United States, 
Multilateral trading system
The global system that governs 
international trade among 
countries—otherwise known 
as the GATT/WTO system.
Non-discrimination
A principle that a country cannot 
discriminate among its trading 
partners.
Table 8.1
Benefits of Global Economic Integration
Political benefits
 	 Promote peace by promoting trade and investment.
 	 Build confidence in a multilateral trading system.
Economic benefits
 	 Disputes are handled constructively.
 	 Rules make life easier, and discrimination impossible, for all participating countries. 
 	 Free trade and investment raise incomes and stimulate economic growth.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 8   Capitalizing on Global and Regional Integration	
237
12 million people owe their jobs to exports. In China, 18 million people work for 
foreign-invested firms, which have the highest level of profits and pay among all 
China-based firms.3
Of course, global economic integration has its share of problems. Critics may 
be unhappy with the environmental impact and distribution of the fruits from 
more trade and investment among the haves and have-nots in the world. However, 
when weighing all the pros and cons, most governments and people agree that 
global economic integration generates enormous benefits, ranging from preserv-
ing peace to generating jobs. Next, let us examine its two principal mechanisms: 
the GATT and WTO.
8-2 Organizing World Trade
8-2a General Agreement on Tariffs  
and Trade (GATT): 1948–1994
The GATT was created in 1948. Unlike the WTO, the GATT was technically an 
agreement but not an organization. Its major contribution was to reduce the level 
of tariffs by sponsoring rounds of multilateral negotiations. As a result, the average 
tariff in developed economies dropped from 40% in 1948 to 3% in 2005. Between 
1950 and 1995 (when the GATT was phased out to become the WTO), while world 
GDP grew about fivefold, world merchandise exports grew about 100 times (!). 
During the GATT era, trade growth consistently outpaced GDP growth.
Despite the GATT’s phenomenal success in bringing down tariff barriers, it 
was clear by the mid-1980s, when the Uruguay Round was launched, that reforms 
would be necessary. Such reforms were triggered by three concerns. First, because 
of the GATT’s declared focus on merchandise trade, neither trade in services 
nor intellectual property (IP) protection was covered. Both of these areas were 
becoming increasingly important. Second, in merchandise trade, there were a 
lot of loopholes that called for reforms. The most (in)famous loophole was the 
Multifibre Arrangement (MFA) designed to limit free trade in textiles, which was 
a direct violation of the letter and spirit of the GATT. Finally, the GATT’s suc-
cess in reducing tariffs, combined with the global recessions in the 1970s and the 
1980s, led many governments to invoke nontariff barriers (NTBs), such as subsi-
dies and local content requirements (see Chapter 5). Unlike tariff barriers that 
were relatively easy to verify and challenge, NTBs were more subtle but more per-
vasive, thus triggering a growing number of trade disputes. The GATT, however, 
lacked effective dispute resolution mechanisms. Thus, at the end of the Uruguay 
Round, participating countries agreed in 1994 to upgrade the GATT and launch 
the WTO.
8-2b World Trade Organization (WTO): 1995–Present
Established on January 1, 1995, the WTO is the GATT’s successor. This transforma-
tion turned the GATT from a provisional treaty serviced by an ad hoc secretariat 
to a full-fledged international organization, headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland. 
Although the WTO is technically one of the youngest major international organi-
zations, it actually is not so young, considering its history since 1948 as the GATT. 
Learning Objective
Understand the evolution of the 
GATT and the WTO, including 
current challenges.
8-2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

238	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools 
One interesting question is: What happened to the GATT? Did it “die”? Not really, 
because the GATT is still in existence as part of the WTO. But this is confusing. 
One straightforward way to distinguish the “new” GATT (as part of the WTO) from 
the original GATT is to identify the new one as “GATT 1994” and the old one as 
“GATT 1947.” Significantly broader than the GATT, the WTO has six main areas 
(Figure 8.2):
 	 An umbrella agreement, simply called the Agreement Establishing the WTO.
 	 An agreement governing the international trade of goods, still using the old 
title as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)—technically, as 
noted earlier, it is “GATT 1994.”
 	 An agreement governing the international trade of services, the General 
Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS).
 	 An agreement governing intellectual property rights, the Trade-Related 
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS)—see Chapter 2.
 	 Trade dispute settlement mechanisms, which enable the WTO to adjudicate 
trade disputes among countries in a more effective and less time-consuming 
way (discussed next).
 	 Trade policy reviews, which enable other members to “peer review” a coun-
try’s trade policy.
Overall, the WTO has a far wider scope, bringing into the multilateral trading 
system—for the first time—trade in services, intellectual property, dispute settle-
ment, and peer review of policy. The next two sections outline two of its major 
initiatives: dispute settlement and the Doha Round.
8-2c Trade Dispute Settlement
One of the main objectives for establishing the WTO was to strengthen the 
trade dispute settlement mechanisms. The old GATT mechanisms experienced 
(1) long delays, (2) blocking by accused countries, and (3) inadequate enforce-
ment. The WTO addresses all three of these problems. First, it sets time limits 
for a panel, consisting of three neutral countries, to reach a judgment. Second, 
it removes the power of the accused countries to block any unfavorable decision. 
WTO decisions will be final. Third, in terms of enforcement, although the WTO 
has earned the nickname of “the world’s supreme court in trade,” it does not have 
real enforcement capability. The WTO simply recommends the losing countries 
to change their laws or practices, and authorizes the winning countries to use 
tariff retaliation to compel the offending countries to comply with the WTO 
ruling. 
General Agreement on Trade 
in Services (GATS)
A WTO agreement governing 
the international trade of 
services.
Trade-Related Aspects of 
Intellectual Property Rights 
(TRIPS)
A WTO agreement governing 
intellectual property rights.
Figure 8.2
Six Main Areas of the WTO
Source: Adapted from World Trade Organization, 2003, Understanding the WTO (p. 22), Geneva: WTO.
Umbrella
 Agreement Establishing the WTO
Three main areas
Goods  
(GATT)
Services  
(GATS)
Intellectual  
Property (TRIPS)
Dispute settlement
Dispute Settlement Mechanisms
Transparency
Trade Policy Reviews
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 8   Capitalizing on Global and Regional Integration	
239
Understandably, enforcement of the WTO ruling is controversial because a 
losing country experiences some loss of sovereignty. It is important to note that 
fundamentally, the WTO ruling is a recommendation but not an order—no higher-
level entity can order a sovereign government to do anything against its wishes. In 
other words, the offending country retains full sovereignty on whether or not to 
implement a WTO recommendation.
Because the WTO has no real enforcement “teeth,” a country that has lost a 
dispute case can choose one of two options: (1) change its laws or practices to be in 
compliance, or (2) defy the ruling by doing nothing and suffer trade retaliation by 
the winning country, known as “punitive duties.” Most of the WTO’s trade dispute 
rulings, however, are resolved without resorting to trade retaliation. This supports 
the first proposition in the institution-based view (see Chapter 2): most offending 
countries have made a rational decision to respect the “rules of the game,” believ-
ing that the benefits of being in compliance with the rulings unfavorable to them 
outweigh the costs of “rocking the boat.”
8-2d The Doha Round—“The Doha Development Agenda”
The Doha Round was the only round of trade negotiations sponsored by the WTO. 
In 1999, a WTO meeting in Seattle intended to start a new round of trade talks was 
not only devastated by the appearance of 30,000 protesters, but also was derailed by 
significant differences between developed and developing countries. The meeting, 
thus, became known as the “Battle of Seattle” (see Chapter 1). Undeterred by the 
backlash, WTO member countries went ahead to launch a new round of negotia-
tions in Doha, Qatar, in November 2001.
The Doha Round was significant for two reasons. First, it was launched in the 
aftermath of the “9/11” attacks. Members had a strong resolve to make free trade 
work around the globe in order to defeat the terrorist agenda to divide and ter-
rorize the world. Second, this was the first round in the history of GATT/WTO 
to specifically aim at promoting economic development in developing countries. 
Consequently, the official title of the Doha Round was the “Doha Development 
Agenda.” The agenda was ambitious: Doha would (1) reduce agricultural subsidies 
in developed countries to facilitate exports from developing countries; (2) slash 
tariffs, especially in industries that developing countries might benefit (especially 
textiles); (3) free up trade in services; and (4) strengthen IP protection. Note that 
in the Doha Round, not all meetings were held in Doha. Subsequent meetings 
took place in Cancun, Mexico (2003), Hong Kong (2005), and Geneva (2006 and 
2008).
 Unfortunately, numerous countries failed to deliver on promises made in 
Doha. The “hot potato” turned out to be agriculture. Australia, Argentina, and 
most developing countries demanded that Japan, the EU, and the US reduce farm 
subsidies. Japan rejected any proposal to cut rice tariffs. The EU refused to signifi-
cantly reduce farm subsidies, which consumed 40% of its budget. The US actually 
increased farm subsidies. On the other hand, many developing countries, led by 
India, refused to tighten IP protection, citing their needs for cheap generic drugs 
to combat diseases such as HIV/AIDS. Overall, developing countries refused to 
offer concessions in IP and service trade in part because of the failure of Japan, the 
EU, and the US to reduce farm subsidies.
Eventually, at the Geneva meeting in 2006, it was evident that member coun-
tries could not talk any more, because they were still miles apart. The Doha 
Doha Round
A round of WTO negotiations 
to reduce agricultural subsidies, 
slash tariffs, and strengthen 
intellectual property protection 
that started in Doha, Qatar, in 
2001. Officially known as the 
“Doha Development Agenda,” it 
was suspended in 2006 due to 
disagreements.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

240	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools 
Round was thus officially suspended, and hopes of lifting millions out of pov-
erty through free trade derailed. Labeled “the biggest threat to the postwar 
[multilateral] trading system” by the Economist,4 the fiasco disappointed almost 
every country involved. Naturally, finger pointing started immediately. To be 
fair, no country was totally responsible for the collapse of the Doha Round, and 
all members collectively were culpable. The sheer complexity of reaching an 
agreement on “everything” among 153 member countries was simply mind bog-
gling. (More recently, another round of multilateral negotiations, the Copen-
hagen Climate Summit in 2009, also failed to reach any meaningful, binding 
agreements.)
What happens next? Officially, Doha was “suspended” but not “terminated” or 
“dead.” In 2008, members tried but failed again in another meeting in Geneva. 
Efforts again emerged in 2011.5 But with high levels of unemployment and strong 
protectionist moods in many parts of the world, chances of getting a Doha deal 
done are not great. Multilateral trade negotiations are notoriously challenging. In 
1990, the Uruguay Round was similarly suspended, only to rise again in 1994 with a 
far-reaching agreement that launched the WTO. Whether history will repeat itself 
remains to be seen. On the other hand, although global deals may be hard to do, 
regional deals are moving “at twice the speed and with half the fuss.”6 The upshot 
is stagnation of multilateralism and acceleration of regionalism—a topic we turn 
to next.
8-3 Regional Economic Integration
There is now a proliferation of regional trade deals. All but one WTO member, 
Mongolia, are now involved in some regional trade arrangement. This section first 
introduces the benefits for regional economic integration, followed by a discussion 
of its major types.
8-3a The Pros and Cons for Regional Economic Integration
Similar to global economic integration, the benefits for regional economic integra-
tion center on both political and economic dimensions (see Table 8.1). Politically, 
regional economic integration promotes peace by fostering closer economic ties 
and building confidence. Only in the last six decades did the Europeans break 
away from their deadly habit of war and violence against one another dating back 
hundreds of years. One leading cause of this dramatic behavioral change is eco-
nomic integration. In addition, regional integration enhances the collective po-
litical weight of a region. Postwar European integration has been fueled by such a 
desire when dealing with superpowers such as the United States.
Economically, the three benefits associated with regional economic integration 
are similar to those associated with global economic integration. (1) Disputes are 
handled constructively. (2) Consistent rules make life easier and discrimination 
impossible for participating countries within one region. (3) Free trade and invest-
ment raise incomes and stimulate economic growth (see Table 8.1). Moreover, re-
gional economic integration may bring additional benefits, such as a larger market, 
simpler standards, and economies of scale for firms based in that region.
However, not everything is rosy in regional integration. A case can be made 
against it. Politically, regional integration, centered on preferential treatments for 
Learning Objective
Make the case for regional 
economic integration.
8-3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 8   Capitalizing on Global and Regional Integration	
241
firms within a region, discriminates against firms outside a region, thus under-
mining global integration. Of course, in practice, global deals (such as the Doha 
Round) are so challenging to accomplish, and regional deals emerge as realistic 
alternatives. Economically, regional integration may result in some loss of sover-
eignty. The 17 EU members adopting the euro can no longer implement indepen-
dent monetary policies.
The simultaneous existence of both pros and cons means that countries are 
often cautious in joining regional economic integration. Norway and Switzerland 
chose not to join the EU. Even when countries are part of a regional deal, they 
sometimes choose to stay out of certain areas. For example, Britain, Denmark, and 
Sweden refused to adopt the euro. Overall, different levels of enthusiasm call for 
different types of regional economic integration, which are outlined next.
8-3b Types of Regional Economic Integration
Figure 8.3 shows five main types of regional economic integration.
 	 A free trade area (FTA) is a group of countries that remove trade barriers 
among themselves. Each still maintains different external policies regarding 
non-members. An example is NAFTA.
 	 A customs union is one step beyond an FTA. In addition to all the arrange-
ments of an FTA, a customs union imposes common external policies on non-
participants in order to combat trade diversion. One example is the Andean 
Community in South America (see the “Regional Economic Integration in 
the Americas” section later in this chapter).
 	 A common market combines everything a customs union has. In addition, a 
common market permits the free movement of goods and people. Today’s EU 
used to be a common market.
 	 An economic union combines all the features of a common market. Members 
also coordinate and harmonize economic policies (for example, monetary, 
fiscal, and taxation) in order to blend their economies into a single eco-
nomic entity. Today’s EU is an economic union. One possible dimension 
Free trade area (FTA)
A group of countries that 
remove trade barriers among 
themselves.
Customs union
One step beyond a free trade 
area (FTA), a customs union im-
poses common external policies 
on nonparticipating countries.
Common market
Combining everything a customs 
union has, a common market, 
in addition, permits the free 
movement of goods and people.
Economic union
Having all the features of a com-
mon market, members also 
coordinate and harmonize eco-
nomic policies (in areas such as 
monetary, fiscal, and taxation) 
to blend their economies into a 
single economic entity.
Figure 8.3
Types of Regional Economic Integration
Removal of intragroup
tariffs
Common external
tariffs
Free movement of goods,
people, and capital
Common economic
policies
Integration of political
and economic affairs
Free Trade
Area
Customs
Union
Common
Market
Economic
Union
Political
Union
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

242	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools 
of an economic union is to establish a monetary union, which has been ac-
complished by 17 EU members through the adoption of the euro (see next 
section).
 	 A political union is the integration of political and economic affairs of a 
region. The United States and the former Soviet Union are two examples. 
Whether the EU will eventually turn into a political union is subject to debate. 
At present, the EU is not a political union.
Overall, these five major types feature an intensification of the level of regional 
economic integration. Next, we tour the world to visit concrete examples of these 
arrangements.
8-4 Regional Economic Integration in Europe
At present, the most ambitious economic integration takes place in Europe. This 
section (1) outlines its origin and evolution, (2) introduces its current structure, 
and (3) discusses its challenges.
8-4a Origin and Evolution
Although European economic integration is now often noted for its economic 
benefits, its origin was political in nature. More specifically, it was an effort by 
European statesmen to stop the vicious cycle of hatred and violence. In 1951, 
Belgium, France, Germany (then known as West Germany), Italy, Luxembourg, 
and the Netherlands signed the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) 
Treaty, which was the first step toward what is now the EU. There was a good reason 
for the six founding members and the two industries to be involved. France and 
Germany were the main combatants in both World Wars I and II (and major previ-
ous European wars), each having lost millions of soldiers and civilians. Reflecting 
the public mood, statesmen in both countries realized that such killing needed to 
stop. Italy had the misfortune of being dragged along and devastated whenever 
France and Germany went to war. The three small countries known as Benelux 
(Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg) had the 
unfortunate geographic location of being sandwiched 
between France and Germany, and were usually wiped 
out when France and Germany slugged it out. Natural-
ly, Italy and Benelux would be happy to do anything 
to stop France and Germany from fighting again. Also, 
the industry focus on coal and steel was not an accident. 
These two industries traditionally supplied the raw ma-
terials for war. Integrating them among six members 
might help prevent future hostilities from breaking out.
In 1957, six member countries of ECSC signed the 
Treaty of Rome, which launched the European Economic 
Community (EEC)—later known as the European Com-
munity (EC). Starting as an FTA, the EEC/EC progressed 
to become a customs union and eventually a common 
market. In 1991, 12 member countries signed the Treaty 
on European Union in Maastricht, the Netherlands (in 
short, the “Maastricht Treaty”) to complete the single 
Monetary union
A group of countries that use a 
common currency.
Political union
The integration of political and 
economic affairs of a region.
Learning Objective
Understand regional economic 
integration efforts in Europe, 
the Americas, the Asia Pacific, 
and Africa.
8-4
Why was it important for the EU to create new 
positions such as the President of the European 
Council, currently held by Herman Van Rompuy, 
and the High Representative of the Union for 
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, currently 
held by Catherine Ashton?
CHESNOT/SIPA/Newscom
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 8   Capitalizing on Global and Regional Integration	
243
market and establish an economic union. The title the “European Union” (EU) was 
officially adopted in 1993 when the Maastricht Treaty went into effect. Most recently, 
the Lisbon Treaty, signed in 2007 and enacted in 2009, amended the Maastricht 
Treaty that served as a constitutional basis for the EU. Two major changes intro-
duced by the Lisbon Treaty were the appointments of (1) a long-term President 
of the European Council and (2) a High Representative of the Union for Foreign 
Affairs and Security Policy.
8-4b The EU Today
Headquartered in Brussels, Belgium, today’s EU (see PengAtlas Map 2.4) has 
27  member countries, 500  million citizens, and $16 trillion GDP. Contributing 
about 26% of the world’s GDP, the EU is the world’s largest economy, the largest 
exporter and importer of goods and services, and the largest trading partner with 
large economies such as the United States, China, and India. Here is how the EU 
describes itself in an official publication:
The European Union is not a federation like the United States. Nor is it simply an or-
ganization for cooperation between governments, like the United Nations. Neither is it 
a state intended to replace existing states, but it is much more than any other organi-
zation. The EU is, in fact, unique. Never before have countries voluntarily agreed to set 
up common institutions to which they delegate some of their sovereignty so that deci-
sions on specific matters of joint interest can be made democratically at a higher, in this 
case European, level. This pooling of sovereignty is called “European integration.”7
The EU today is an economic union. Internal trade barriers have been mostly 
removed. In aviation, the EU now has a single market, which means all European 
carriers compete on equal terms across the EU (including domestic routes in a 
foreign country). US airlines are not allowed to fly between pairs of cities within 
Germany. However, non-German, EU airlines (such as Ireland’s Ryanair) can fly 
between any pair of cities within Germany. On the ground, it used to take French 
truck drivers 24 hours to cross the border into Spain due to paperwork require-
ments and checks. Since 1992, passport and customs control within most (but not 
all) member countries of the EU has been disbanded, and checkpoints at border 
crossings are no longer manned (see the Opening Case). The area covered by EU 
countries became known as the Schengen passport-free travel zone, named after 
Schengen, Luxembourg, where the agreement was signed in 1985. Now, French 
trucks can move from France to Spain non-stop, similar to how American trucks go 
from Texas to Oklahoma. At present, 22 of the 27 EU member countries are in the 
Schengen zone. Five other members are not yet in: Britain and Ireland chose to opt 
out, and three new members—Bulgaria, Cyprus, and Romania—have yet to meet 
requirements. (Interestingly, three non-EU member countries—Iceland, Norway, 
and Switzerland—are also in the Schengen area.)
As an economic union, one of the EU’s proudest accomplishments—but also 
one of its most significant headaches—is the introduction of a common currency, 
the euro, initially in 12 of the EU 15 countries. Since then, five more countries 
have joined the euro zone, resulting in a total of 17 countries currently using the 
euro. Today’s euro zone accounts for approximately 330 million people and 21% 
of world GDP (relative to 24% for the United States). The euro was introduced 
in two phases. First, it became available in 1999 as “virtual money” only used for 
financial transactions but not in circulation. Exchange rates with various national 
currencies were also fixed at that point. Second, in 2002, the euro was introduced 
Schengen
A passport-free travel zone 
within the EU.
Euro
The currency currently used 
in 17 EU countries.
Euro zone
The 17 EU countries that 
currently use the euro as the 
official currency.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

244	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools 
as banknotes and coins. To meet the cash needs of over 300 million people, the EU 
printed 14.25 billion banknotes and minted 56 billion coins—with a total value of 
660 billion euros ($558 billion). The new banknotes would cover the distance be-
tween the earth and the moon five times (!).8 Overall, the introduction of the euro 
was a great success.9
Adopting the euro has three great benefits (Table 8.2). First, it reduces currency 
conversion costs. Travelers and businesses no longer need to pay processing fees 
to convert currencies for tourist activities or hedging purposes (see Chapter 7). 
Remember the five wallets stuffed with different currencies that Marcus had to 
carry in the Opening Case? Second, direct and transparent price comparison is 
now possible, thus channeling more resources toward more competitive firms. 
Third, adopting the euro imposes strong macroeconomic discipline on participat-
ing governments. Prior to adopting the euro, different governments independently 
determined exchange rates. Italy, for example, sharply devalued its lira in 1992 and 
1995. While Italian exports became cheaper and more competitive overseas, other 
EU members (especially France) were furious. Also, when confronting recessions, 
governments often printed more currency and increased government spending. 
Such actions cause inflation, which may spill over to neighboring countries. By 
adopting the euro, euro zone countries agreed to abolish monetary policy (such as 
manipulating exchange rates and printing more currency) as a tool to solve macro-
economic problems. These efforts provide much-needed macroeconomic stability. 
Overall, the euro has boosted intra-EU trade by approximately 10%. Commanding 
a quarter of global foreign currency reserves, the euro has quickly established itself 
as the only credible rival to the dollar.10
There are also significant costs involved, however. The first, noted above, is the 
loss of ability to implement independent monetary policy. Especially since 2008, 
economic life for many EU countries without the option of devaluation is tough 
(see the Closing Case). The possibility of leaving the euro zone has surfaced in 
public discussion in some countries.11 The second cost is the lack of flexibility in 
implementing fiscal policy in areas such as deficit spending. When a country runs 
into fiscal difficulties, it may be faced with inflation, high interest rates, and a run 
on its currency. When a number of countries share a common currency, the risks 
are spread. But some countries can become “free riders,” because they may not 
need to fix their own fiscal problems—other, more responsible members will have 
to shoulder the burden (see the Closing Case).
8-4c The EU’s Challenges
Politically, the EU and its predecessors—the ECSC, the EEC, and the EC—have 
delivered more than half a century of peace and prosperity and have turned some 
Table 8.2
Benefits and Costs of Adopting the Euro
Benefits
Costs
 	 Reduce currency conversion costs.
 	 Facilitate direct price comparison.
 	 Impose monetary discipline on 
governments.
 	 Unable to implement independent 
monetary policy.
 	 Limit the flexibility in fiscal policy (in areas 
such as deficit spending).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 8   Capitalizing on Global and Regional Integration	
245
Cold War enemies into members. Although some people complain about the EU’s 
huge expenses and bureaucratic meetings, they need to be reminded that one 
day spent on such meetings is one day when member countries not shooting at 
one another in a war—clearly a more prohibitively costly outcome. Considering 
that most European countries, until the mid-20th century, were involved in wars as 
their primary conflict resolution mechanism, negotiating to resolve differences via 
EU platforms is not only cheaper but also far better in the long run. Economically, 
the EU has launched a single currency and has built a single market in which 
people, goods, services, and capital can move freely—known as the “four free-
doms of movement”—within the core Schengen area (although not throughout 
the entire EU). While the accomplishments are enviable in the eyes of other re-
gional organizations, the EU seems to be engulfed in a midlife crisis.12 Significant 
challenges lie ahead, especially in terms of (1) internal divisions and (2) enlarge-
ment concerns.
Internally, there is a significant debate on whether the EU should be an eco-
nomic and political union, or just an economic union. One school of thought, led 
by France, argues that an economic union should inevitably evolve toward a politi-
cal union, through which Europe speaks as “one voice.” Proponents of this view 
frequently invoke the famous term enshrined in the 1957 Treaty of Rome, “ever 
closer union.” Another school of thought, led by Britain, views the EU as primarily 
an economic union, which should focus on free trade, pure and simple.
The 2010–2012 bailouts to rescue Greece (and Ireland and Portugal) have 
intensified this debate. While Germany reluctantly agreed to lead the efforts 
to bail out these financially troubled countries, Germany demanded that the 
EU-wide “economic governance” be strengthened, and that insolvent coun-
tries have to lose some of their economic sovereignty by having their budgets 
approved (or vetoed) by the EU. While this is viewed as a step toward closer 
political union, Germany does not share France’s political motivation for an 
“ever closer union,” and in fact some German media have called for Germany to 
withdraw from the euro zone in order to avoid the burden of paying for other 
countries’ problems. However, abandoning the euro is not realistic for Germany. 
Thus, Germany’s call for tightening the “leash” is motivated by its interest in 
protecting its own investment in the bailout funds and by its determination to 
punish the insolvent countries so that future governments in these countries 
will have to think twice before running their economies into the ground (see 
the Closing Case). Britain, on the other hand, has been resisting such efforts of 
heavy-handed EU intervention. In December 2011, Britain vetoed a new treaty 
supported by 26 EU members to enhance the “economic governance” for the 
euro zone. Since the EU takes pride in its consensus building, all EU treaties 
had to be signed off by all members—in this case, even for a treaty on the euro 
zone governance, EU members that did not use the euro (such as Britain) had 
to sign off. Therefore, Britain’s single veto torpedoed the whole new treaty, caus-
ing an uproar throughout the EU. The rest of the EU countries were forced to 
seek a separate pact to enforce greater fiscal discipline, which could still be done 
despite the British veto. While British prime minister David Cameron’s “bulldog 
spirit” won praise from the British Eurosceptics crowd, the French president 
Nicolas Sarkozy seemed to emerge as a real winner. This is because Sarkozy 
was able to secure “a long-cherished French ambition: an agreement on hold-
ing frequent summits of EU leaders from an inner core of countries, excluding 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

246	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools 
Britain.”13 A frustrated Britain then found it might have (close to) zero influence 
or leverage in further deliberations.14
There are also significant concerns associated with enlargement. The EU’s 
largest expansion took place in 2004, with ten new members. Eight of them—
the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia, and 
Slovenia—were former eastern bloc Central and Eastern Europe (CEE) countries. 
Three of these—Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania—were Baltic states that had pre-
viously been part of the Soviet Union. While taking on ten new members was a 
political triumph, it was also an economic burden. The ten new members consti-
tuted 20% of the overall population, but contributed only 9% to GDP and had 
an average GDP per capita that was 46% of the average for the EU 15.15 In 2007, 
Bulgaria and Romania joined the EU and brought the average down further. 
With low economic growth and high unemployment throughout the EU and se-
vere economic crisis in the so-called PIGS (Portugal, Ireland, Greece, and Spain) 
countries, many EU citizens are sick and tired of taking on additional burdens to 
absorb new members. Many EU 15 countries have restricted immigration from 
these new members.
Another major debate regarding enlargement is Turkey, whose average income 
is even lower. In addition, its large Muslim population is also a concern for a pre-
dominantly Christian EU. If Turkey were to join, its population of 73 million would 
make it the second most populous EU country behind only Germany, whose popu-
lation is 83 million now (but is declining). The weight of EU countries in voting is 
based (mostly) on population. Given the current demographic trends (high birth 
rates in Turkey and low birth rates in Germany and other EU countries), by 2020, 
Turkey, if it were to join the EU, would become the most populous and thus the 
most powerful member by commanding the most significant voting power. Turkey’s 
combination of low incomes, high birthrates relative to current EU members, and 
a Muslim majority visibly concern current member countries, especially given the 
history of Christian–Muslim tension in Europe.
During the 2008–2009 crisis, the EU’s challenges were magnified. While the 
EU’s banks avoided the subprime mortgages, they had something worse: subprime 
countries.16 Consumers in many new EU member countries in CEE felt they could 
afford to enjoy rich Europe’s living standards by borrowing excessively. Even for 
countries that had not yet adopted the euro, such loans were often denominated 
in the euro and financed by banks headquartered in the EU 15, resulting in a 
housing bubble and a consumption binge. When the bubble collapsed, the sub-
prime countries did not suffer from financial meltdown, because, according to the 
Economist, “they lack much to melt.”17 Instead, they require massive bailouts from 
the International Monetary Fund (IMF, see Chapter 7) and from the EU 15 gov-
ernments, which felt compelled to support their own banks that were dangerously 
exposed to CEE. At the same time, thanks to the global recession, EU 15 econo-
mies also suffered a tremendous recession. For example, Spain’s unemployment 
rose from 11% in 2007 to 18% in 2009. In 2009, the world’s export champion, 
Germany, endured a 20% export decline and lost its champion status (to China). 
Not surprisingly, Germany, France, and other relatively well-off EU countries, in 
the middle of their own crisis, were reluctant to foot the bill to bail out other 
countries. After the CEE fire was put out, the Greek volcano erupted (see the 
Closing Case). There is a proliferation of opinions on how to solve the problem. In 
Focus 8.1 outlines the views suggested by the IMF’s managing director, Christine 
Lagarde.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 8   Capitalizing on Global and Regional Integration	
247
Overall, we can view the EU enlargement as a miniature version of globaliza-
tion, and the “enlargement fatigue” as part of the recent backlash against globaliza-
tion.18 Given the accomplishments and challenges, what does the future of the EU 
hold? Since the 2010 crisis in Greece, the media are full of speculative calls for split-
ting the euro zone into a northern group led by Germany and a southern group 
led by France, or for certain countries (such as Greece or Germany) to individually 
abandon the euro. Assuming none of the above actually happens and both the EU 
On September 22, 2011, Christine Lagarde, manag-
ing director of the IMF, published the following piece 
in Bloomberg Businessweek. Prior to her appoint-
ment at the IMF, Lagarde was the French minister of 
finance.
Policymakers in the euro zone face two major 
challenges to the recovery: sovereign risks and 
banking risks. Because these two challenges 
are deeply intertwined, both must be solved to 
clear the way to a recovery. There are three key 
steps that Europe should take to address them.
First, sovereign finances need to be sustain-
able, which means more fiscal action and more 
financing. It does not necessarily mean drastic 
upfront belt-tightening—if countries address 
long-term fiscal risks like rising health-care or 
pension costs, they will have more space in 
the short run to support growth and jobs. But 
without a credible financing path, fiscal adjust-
ment will be doomed to fail. After all, deciding 
on a deficit path is one thing, getting the money 
to finance it is another. Sufficient financing 
can come from the private or official sector—
including continued support from the European 
Central Bank, with full backup of the euro area 
members.
Second, banks need urgent recapitalization. 
This is key to cutting the chains of contagion. If it 
is not addressed, we could easily see the further 
spread of economic weakness to core countries 
or even a debilitating liquidity crisis. The most ef-
ficient solution would be mandatory substantial 
recapitalization—seeking private resources first, 
but using public funds if necessary. One option 
would be to mobilize the European Financial 
Stability Facility, or other European-wide fund-
ing, to recapitalize banks directly.
Third, Europe needs a common vision for its 
future. The current turmoil has exposed some 
serious flaws in the architecture of the euro zone, 
flaws that threaten the entire project. Europe 
must recommit credibly to a common vision, 
and it needs to be built on solid foundations—
including, for example, fiscal rules that actually 
work.
Risks to the global economy are rising, but 
there remains a path to recovery. The policy op-
tions are narrower than before, but there is a 
way through. There are lingering uncertainties, 
but resolute action will help to dispel doubts. 
There is a clear implication: We must act now, 
act boldly, and act together.
Source: C. Lagarde, 2011, Save Europe, Bloomberg Businessweek, 
September 22: 90.
How to Save Europe: A Message from the IMF’s Managing Director
IN Focus 8.1 
Ethical 
Dilemma
Saurabh Das/AP Images
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

248	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools 
and the euro survive, one possible scenario is that there will be an “EU à la carte,” 
where different members pick and choose certain mechanisms to join and other 
mechanisms to opt out of. Seeking consensus among 27 members during negotia-
tions may be simply impractical. If every country’s representative were to spend 
10 minutes on opening remarks, 4.5 hours would be gone before discussions even 
began. The translation and interpretation among the 23 official languages now 
cost the EU €1.1 billion ($1.4 billion) per year.19 Since not every country needs to 
take part in everything, ad hoc groupings of member countries with similar inter-
ests are increasingly common, and discussions are more efficient. To some extent, 
“EU à la carte” has already taken place, as evidenced by three countries’ refusal to 
adopt the euro a decade ago and Britain’s refusal to participate in the euro zone 
defense fund in 2010 and its veto on the new treaty to tighten the euro zone eco-
nomic governance in 2011.
Regional Economic Integration in the Americas
Two sets of regional economic integration efforts in the Americas have taken place 
along geographic lines, one in North America and the other in South America.
8-4d North America: North American  
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
The North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) is a free trade agreement 
among Canada, Mexico, and the United States. Because of the very different lev-
els of economic development, NAFTA, launched in 1994, was labeled “one of the 
most radical free trade experiments in history.”20 Politically, the Mexican govern-
ment was interested in cementing market liberalization reforms by demonstrat-
ing its commitment to free trade. Economically, Mexico was interested in securing 
preferential treatment for 80% of its exports. Consequently, by the stroke of a pen, 
Mexico declared itself a North American country. Many Americans, on the other 
hand, thought it was not the best time to open the borders, as the US unemploy-
ment rate was 7% at that time. Texas billionaire H. Ross Perot, a presidential can-
didate in 1992, described NAFTA’s potential destruction of thousands of US jobs 
as a “giant sucking sound.”
As NAFTA went into effect in 1994, tariffs on half of exports and imports 
among members were removed immediately. These changes in the “rules of the 
game” significantly shaped the strategies of NAFTA and non-NAFTA firms.21 In 
NAFTA’s first decade, trade between Canada and the United States grew twice as 
quickly as it had before NAFTA. Expanding even faster, US exports to Mexico grew 
threefold, from $52 billion to $161 billion. US FDI in Mexico averaged $12 billion 
per year, three times what India took in. Mexico’s US-bound exports grew three-
fold, and its GDP rose to become the 9th in the world, up from the 15th in 1992. 
In ten years, Mexico’s GDP per capita rose 24% to over $4,000 (by 2004), several 
times that of China.22
What about jobs? Maquiladora (export assembly) factories blossomed under 
NAFTA, with jobs peaking at 1.3 million in 2000. Yet, no “giant sucking sound” 
was heard. Approximately 300,000 US jobs were lost due to NAFTA, but about 
100,000 jobs were added. The net loss was small, since the US economy generated 
20 million new jobs during the first decade of NAFTA. NAFTA’s impact on job 
North American Free Trade 
Agreement (NAFTA)
A free trade agreement among 
Canada, Mexico, and the United 
States.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 8   Capitalizing on Global and Regional Integration	
249
destruction versus creation in the United States was essentially a wash.23  But a hard 
count on jobs misses another important but subtle, benefit. NAFTA has allowed US 
firms to preserve more US jobs, because 82% of the components used in Mexican 
assembly plants are made in the United States, whereas factories in Asia use far fewer 
US parts. Without NAFTA, entire industries might be lost rather than just the labor-
intensive portions.
As NAFTA celebrated its 15th anniversary in 2009, not all was rosy (see In 
Focus 8.2). Opponents of globalization in both Canada and the United States no 
longer focus on the negative impact of competition from Mexico but rather on 
China and India. Despite the impressive gains in their country, many Mexicans 
feel betrayed by NAFTA. Thanks to Chinese competition, Mexican real wages 
in manufacturing have stagnated. Many US, Canadian, European, and Japanese 
multinationals are shifting some of their factory work to China, which has now re-
placed Mexico as the second largest exporter to the United States (after Canada).24 
About 1,000 maquiladora factories have closed down since 2000. NAFTA might 
have been oversold by its sponsors as a cure-all for Mexico to become the next 
South Korea, but it can be argued that the Mexican government has not capital-
ized on the tremendous opportunities it has been offered. There is only so much 
that free trade can do; other reforms in infrastructure and education need to 
keep up.
8-4e South America: Andean Community,  
Mercosur, FTAA, USAN/UNASUR, and CAFTA
Whatever NAFTA’s imperfections, it is much more effective than the two customs 
unions in South America: Andean Community and Mercusor. Members of the 
Andean Community (launched in 1969) and Mercusor (launched in 1991) are mostly 
Andean Community
A customs union in South 
America that was launched 
in 1969.
Mercosur
A customs union in South 
America that was launched 
in 1991.
In 1993, when NAFTA was signed, the United States 
and Mexico agreed to let their trucks freely cross 
each other’s border. The current system, with cargo 
unloaded on one side of the border and reloaded onto 
different trucks on the other side, is costly and time-
consuming. However, in the mid-1990s, the Clinton 
administration went along with the demands made by 
unions and environmentalists to keep Mexican trucks 
out, allegedly for safety and environmental reasons. 
But experts suspected this was really due to protec-
tionist reasons, since US drivers were in fear of losing 
their jobs. In contrast, the more unionized Canadian 
truck drivers were allowed to enter.
In 2007, the Bush administration started to run a 
pilot program to let up to 100 Mexican trucking com-
panies come through. However, in 2009, the program 
was cancelled after the Obama administration came 
into office. In retaliation, Mexico announced addition-
al tariffs on 89 US exports of various sorts, such as 
20% on Christmas trees and 45% on grapes. Overall, 
these tariffs hit $2 billion Mexico-bound exports from 
the United States. After intense negotiations, the 
Obama administration in 2011 decided that the United 
States should honor its international obligations and 
not give in to protectionist impulses. Therefore, one 
of the last remaining bones of contention in NAFTA, 
trucking, can finally be resolved satisfactorily.
Sources: Based on (1) Economist, 2010, Signs of life, June 26: 36; 
(2) Sign on San Diego, 2011, US honors key NAFTA provision—finally, 
March 16, www.signonsandiego.com.
A NAFTA Provision that Took 18 Years to Implement
IN Focus 8.2 
Ethical 
Dilemma
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

250	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools 
countries on the western and eastern sides of the Andean mountains, respectively (see 
PengAtlas Map 2.5). There is much mutual suspicion and rivalry between both orga-
nizations as well as within each of them. Mercusor is relatively more protectionist and 
suspicious of the United States, whereas the Andean Community is more pro-free 
trade. When Colombia and Peru, both Andean Community members, signed trade 
deals with the United States, Venezuela, led by the anti-American President Hugo 
Chavez, pulled out of the Andean Community in protest and joined Mercosur in 
2006. At the same time, Uruguay, a Mercosur member, demanded permission from 
the group to sign a separate trade deal with the United States—otherwise, it threat-
ened to quit Mercosur.25
Neither regional initiative has been effective, in part because only about 5% 
and 20% of members’ trade is within the Andean Community and Mercosur, re-
spectively. Their largest trading partner, the United States, lies outside the region. 
It is a free trade deal with the United States, not among themselves, that would 
generate the most significant benefits. (For this reason, Chile, Colombia, Panama, 
and Peru signed bilateral free trade agreements with the United States.)
Emboldened by NAFTA, in 1998, all Latin American countries (except Cuba) 
launched negotiations with Canada and the United States for a possible Free 
Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA). However, by 2005, Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, 
Uruguay, and Venezuela changed their mind and announced that they opposed 
FTAA, which seems unlikely to be set up.
Instead of pursuing FTAA, Andean Community and Mercosur countries in 
2008 agreed to form the Union of South American Nations (USAN, more commonly 
known by its Spanish acronym, UNASUR, which refers to Unión de Naciones Surameri-
canas). Inspired by the EU, USAN/UNASUR announced its intention to eventually 
adopt a common currency, parliament, and passport. A functioning union similar 
to that of the EU may be possible in 2019.
In the absence of the FTAA, one recent accomplishment is the United States–
Dominican Republic–Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA), which took 
effect in 2005. Modeled after NAFTA, CAFTA is an agreement “between a whale 
and six minnows” (five Central American countries—Costa Rica, El Salvador, 
Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua—plus the Dominican Republic).26 Although 
small, the six CAFTA countries collectively represent the second largest US export 
market in Latin America (behind only Mexico). Globally, CAFTA is the tenth largest 
US export market, importing more than Russia, India, and Indonesia combined.27
Regional Economic Integration in the Asia Pacific
This section introduces regional integration efforts (1) between Australia and 
New Zealand, (2) in Southeast Asia, and (3) throughout the Asia Pacific. Their 
scale and scope differ.
8-4f Australia–New Zealand Closer Economic Relations  
Trade Agreement (ANZCERTA or CER)
The CER, launched in 1983, turned the historical rivalry between Australia and 
New Zealand into a partnership. As an FTA, the CER removed tariffs and NTBs over 
time. For example, both countries agreed not to charge exporters from another 
country for “dumping.” Citizens from both countries can also freely work and reside 
Free Trade Area of the 
Americas (FTAA)
A proposed free trade area for 
the entire Western Hemisphere.
Union of South American 
Nations (USAN/UNASUR)
A regional integration mecha-
nism integrating two existing 
customs unions (Andean Com-
munity and Mercosur) in South 
America.
United States–Dominican 
Republic–Central America Free 
Trade Agreement (CAFTA)
A free trade agreement between 
the United States and five Cen-
tral American countries and the 
Dominican Republic.
Australia–New Zealand Closer 
Economic Relations Trade 
Agreement (ANZCERTA or CER)
A free trade agreement between 
Australia and New Zealand that 
was launched in 1983.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 8   Capitalizing on Global and Regional Integration	
251
in the other country. Mostly due to the relatively high level of geographic proximity 
and cultural homogeneity, CER has been regarded as a very successful FTA.
8-4g Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
Founded in 1967, ASEAN was inspired by the EU’s success and set up the ASEAN 
Free Trade Area (AFTA) in 1992. ASEAN suffers from a similar problem that 
Latin American countries face: ASEAN’s main trading partners—the US, the EU, 
Japan, and China—are outside the region. Intra-ASEAN trade usually accounts 
for less than a quarter of total trade. The benefits of AFTA, thus, may be limited. 
In response, ASEAN in 2002 signed an ASEAN–China Free Trade Agreement 
(ACFTA), which was launched in 2010. Given the increasingly strong competition 
in terms of Chinese exports and China-bound FDI that could have come to ASE-
AN, ACFTA hopes to turn such rivalry into a partnership. ACFTA is estimated to 
boost ASEAN’s exports to China by 48% and China’s exports to ASEAN by 55%, 
thus raising ASEAN’s GDP by 0.9% and China’s by 0.3%.28 ACFTA is currently the 
largest FTA in terms of population (1.9 billion) and the third largest in terms of 
GDP and trade volume (behind the EU and NAFTA). Similar FTAs are being nego-
tiated with India, Japan, and South Korea.
8-4h Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)  
and Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP)
While ASEAN was deepening its integration, Australia was afraid that it might be 
left out and suggested in 1989 that ASEAN and CER countries form APEC. Given 
the lack of a global heavyweight in both ASEAN and CER, Japan was invited. While 
the Japanese happily agreed to join, ASEAN and CER countries also feared that 
Japan might dominate the group and create a de facto “yen bloc.” Japan invaded 
most countries in the region during World War II, and bitter memories of Japanese 
wartime atrocities seemed to die hard. At that time, China was far less significant 
economically than it is now, and thus could hardly counterbalance Japan. Then the 
United States requested to join APEC, citing its long West Coast that would qualify 
it as a Pacific country. Economically, the United States did not want to be left out of 
the most dynamically growing region in the world. Politically, the United States was 
interested in containing Japanese influence in any Asian regional deals. While the 
United States could certainly serve as a counterweight for Japan, the US member-
ship would also change the character of APEC, which had been centered on ASEAN 
and CER. To make its APEC membership less odd, the United States brought on 
board two of its NAFTA partners, Canada and Mexico. Canada and Mexico were 
equally interested in the economic benefits but probably cared less about the US 
political motives. Once the floodgates for membership were open, Chile, Peru, and 
Russia all eventually got in, each citing their long Pacific coastlines (!).
Today, APEC’s 21 member economies (shown in PengAtlas Map 2.6) span four 
continents, are home to 2.6 billion people, contribute 46% of world trade, and 
command 57% of world GDP, making it the largest regional integration grouping 
by geographic area and by GDP.29 While it is nice to include “everyone,” APEC may 
be too big. The goal of free trade by 2020 is not binding. Essentially as a talking 
shop, APEC (nicknamed “a perfect excuse to chat”) provides a forum for members 
to make commitments that are largely rhetorical.
Association of Southeast 
Asian Nations (ASEAN)
The organization underpinning 
regional economic integration in 
Southeast Asia.
Asia-Pacific Economic 
Cooperation (APEC)
The official title for regional 
economic integration involving 
21 member economies around 
the Pacific.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

252	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools 
In part because APEC is too big and too difficult to get anything meaning-
ful done, a new and smaller Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) has been developing. 
The original agreement among Brunei, Chile, New Zealand, and Singapore was 
signed in 2005 and entered into force in 2006. TPP is a multilateral free trade 
agreement that aims to further liberalize the economies of the Asia-Pacific region. 
Six additional countries—Australia, Malaysia, Peru, Japan, the United States, and 
Vietnam—are negotiating to join the group. Although all original and negotiating 
parties are APEC members, how the relationship between the APEC and the TPP 
will play out remains to be seen.
Regional Economic Integration in Africa
Regional integration initiatives in Africa are both numerous and ineffective. One 
case in point is the fact that because one country often has memberships in mul-
tiple regional deals, a map using one color to indicate one country’s membership 
in one regional deal will be difficult to draw. Consequently, Figure 8.4 draws a “spa-
ghetti bowl” to (hopefully) more clearly capture the various African regional deal. 
This (hopelessly) complicated diagram also suggests that no sane professor will 
want to quiz students on the membership of these different deals on your exam (!). 
While various African countries are interested in reaping the benefits from region-
al economic integration, there is relatively little trade within Africa (amounting to 
less than 10% of the continent’s total trade) whereby protectionism often prevails.30 
Frustration with a current regional deal often leads to a new deal, often with a dif-
ferent set of countries, eventually leading to a messy “spaghetti bowl” in Figure 8.4.
Figure 8.4
Regional Economic Integration in Africa
Source: J. Bhagwati, 2002, Free Trade Today (p. 115), Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. CBI—Cross Border Ini-
tiative; COMESA—Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa; EAC—Commission for East Africa Co-operation; 
SADC—Southern African Development Community; SACU—Southern African Customs Union.
COMESA
SADC
EAC
SACU
CBI
Djibouti
Egypt    
Eritrea        
Ethiopia            
Sudan                
Burundi
Rwanda
Comoros
Madagascar
Kenya
Uganda
Tanzania
Angola
Congo, DR
Malawi
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Mauritius
Seychelles
Nambia
Swaziland
Botswana
Lesotho
South Africa
Mozambique
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 8   Capitalizing on Global and Regional Integration	
253
8-5 Debates and Extensions
As discussed earlier, global and regional economic integration is characterized by 
numerous debates. (What caused Doha to collapse? How can Greece be rescued?) 
This section outlines two additional major debates: (1) building blocks versus stum-
bling blocks and (2) impact of the WTO.
8-5a Building Blocks or Stumbling Blocks
In the absence of global economic integration, regional economic integration 
is often regarded as the next best thing to facilitate free trade—at least within a 
region. Some may even argue that regional integration represents building blocks 
for eventual global integration. For example, the EU now participates in WTO ne-
gotiations as one entity, which seems like a “building block.” Individual EU member 
countries no longer enter such talks.
However, another school of thought argues that regional integration has be-
come a stumbling block for global integration. By design, regional integration 
provides preferential treatments to members and, at the same time, discriminates 
against non-members (which is allowed by WTO rules). It is still a form of protec-
tionism centered on “us versus them,” except “us” is now an expanded group of 
countries. The proliferation of regional trade deals thus may be alarming. In the 
first few decades after World War II, the United States avoided regional deals. In 
part alarmed by the EU, the United States, with Canada and Mexico, launched 
NAFTA. Likewise, China signed its first FTA agreement (ACFTA) in 2002 with 
ASEAN. Clearly, the trend is accelerating.
Of course, all countries that are party to some regional deals participate in 
WTO talks, arguing that they are walking on two legs: regional and global. Yet, “in-
stead of walking on two legs,” critics such as Columbia professor Jagdish Bhagwati 
have argued, “we have wound up on all fours”—crawling with slow progress.31 This 
sorry state is triggered by the pursuit of individual countries’ interest in a globally 
uncoordinated fashion. As regional deals proliferate, non-members feel that they 
are squeezed out, and begin plotting their own regional deals. Very soon, we end 
up having a global “spaghetti bowl.”
8-5b Does the WTO Really Matter?
China’s experience since it acceded to WTO membership offers a resounding “Yes” 
to this question. After 15 years of long and arduous negotiations, China joined the 
WTO in 2001. Since then, it joined the “ranks of the world’s trading superheavy-
weights,” in the words of the US Ambassador to China (see Emerging Markets 8.1). 
Between 2001 and 2010, China dethroned Germany to become the world’s cham-
pion merchandise exporter and became the world’s second largest merchandise 
importer (behind the United States) (see Figures 8.5 and 8.6). In the crucial 
US–China trade, between 2001 and 2010, China’s exports to the US (which the 
US counted as US imports) grew by 260%, and China became the second largest 
exporter to the US (behind Canada). China’s imports from the US (which the US 
counted as US exports) jumped over 400%—in the same period, US exports to the 
rest of the world only grew 55%. In 2001, China was the ninth largest US export 
market. In 2010, China became the third largest US export market (behind Canada 
and Mexico). As China celebrated the tenth anniversary of its WTO membership, 
Learning Objective
Participate in two leading 
debates concerning global and 
regional economic integration.
8-5
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

254	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools 
China joined the WTO in 2001 and celebrated the 10th 
anniversary of its membership in 2011. The follow-
ing is a reprint of an article in China Business Review 
published by the US Ambassador to China, Gary Locke: 
In the 10 years since it acceded to the World 
Trade Organization (WTO), China has joined the 
ranks of the world’s trading superheavyweights, 
and its own market has become a major driver 
of global growth. It has evolved from merely a 
hot investment destination for multinationals to 
become a major investor in markets worldwide 
and home to its own leading global companies. 
It has learned that the legal tools for settling 
trade disputes and addressing unfair trade prac-
tices can be used to protect China’s own inter-
ests. Never in its history has China’s stake in the 
global economy or the world’s stake in China’s 
economy been so great. And the cornerstone of 
this healthy interdependence is the rules-based 
international trading system organized under 
the WTO.
Skeptics in the United States and China at 
the time of accession would find it hard to argue 
now that the past decade’s explosion of bilat-
eral trade and investment has not contributed to 
both countries’ prosperity. America’s exports to 
China have risen faster than to any other major 
market during this period, and China has shot up 
from our ninth largest export destination to our 
third largest, behind only our neighbors Canada 
and Mexico. During the deep recession of 2009, 
our goods exports to the world sank 18%, but 
our exports to China held steady. US investors 
in China now produce overwhelmingly for the 
Chinese market, not for export back to America.
Our overall goods trade deficit with China, 
$273 billion in 2010, is huge and must be 
addressed. But it must also be put into perspec-
tive: Recent studies suggests that US business-
es have more to gain than Chinese businesses 
from the sale of certain popular “made in China” 
electronic products, such as the iPad, and that 
only a fraction of US consumer spending goes 
to imports from China, with most goods and ser-
vices purchased coming from our own country.
China has benefitted no less. Its own exports 
to the world have surged since accession, from 
$266 billion in 2001 to nearly $1.6 trillion in 2010 
by China’s own data. Joining the WTO provided 
a roadmap for China’s reformers to rework the 
economy and strengthen the competitiveness 
of Chinese firms through lower tariffs, a reduc-
tion in non-trade barriers, and fewer investment 
barriers. Some in China feared that sectors 
such as the auto industry would wilt under 
foreign competition, but even as foreign brands 
increased sales (in 2010, General Motors sold 
more cars in China than in the United States), 
Chinese brands gained market share in China 
and are starting to become players overseas. 
It seems competition only made them stronger 
and thus should not be feared.
As China’s leaders confront their self-
assigned task of turning the economy from 
reliance on investment and exports to domes-
tic consumption, renewed openness is the 
answer, especially in emerging industries and 
the services sector that will create jobs and 
spur consumption. This would help temper 
the trade frictions that have grown in recent 
years as a result of China’s industrial policies 
and resurgent protectionism. It would assure 
China’s trading partners that China is assuming 
responsibility commensurate with its weight 
China’s Ten Years in the WTO: A Message  
from the US Ambassador to China
E m e r g i n g  M a r k e t s  8 . 1
Ethical 
Dilemma
Danny Lehman/Corbis; Björn Meyer/sitox/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 8   Capitalizing on Global and Regional Integration	
255
Pascal-Lamy, WTO’s Director-General, offered his thoughts in an interview:
Surely, the market success that China received as a result of its accession to the WTO 
contributed to its trade performance. Lower tariffs on imports would have stimulated 
purchases of foreign goods as well. But other factors have helped. The reforms that 
China undertook as part of its accession process have improved economic efficiency 
Figure 8.5
China’s Exports After Its WTO Entry ($ Billion)
Source: Based on data from China Business Review, 2011, Since its WTO entry, China has become a major player in 
global trade, October: 34.
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
China’s
exports to
the world
(2001)
China’s
exports to
the world
(2010)
China’s
exports to
the US
(2010)
China’s
exports to
the US
(2001)
0
Figure 8.6
China’s Imports After Its WTO Entry ($ Billion)
Source: Based on data from China Business Review, 2011, Since its WTO entry, China has become a major player in 
global trade, October: 34.
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
China’s
imports from
the world
(2001)
China’s
imports from
the world
(2010)
China’s
imports from
the US
(2010)
China’s
imports from
the US
(2001)
0
in the global economy. And it would help put 
China on a path toward sustainable growth 
that benefits more of its own citizens. We 
look forward to working with our Chinese 
counterparts and American stakeholders to 
rekindle this spirit and promote the healthy in-
terdependence that is vital to the prosperity of 
both our nations.
Source: G. Locke, 2011, A message from the US Ambassador to China, China Business Review, October: 16. © US-China Business Council.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

256	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools 
and boosted growth. Membership in the WTO also provided foreign investors with as-
surances that China was part of a system of international rules and disciplines. In addi-
tion, foreign investors found a huge domestic market in which to offer their goods and 
services. Inflows of foreign direct investment rose exponentially from practically zero 
in the early 1990s to $108 billion in 2009. This is important because more than half 
of China’s exports come from subsidiaries or branches of foreign-owned companies 
in China. Sales of these affiliated increased from $10 billion in 1990 to $545 billion 
in 2009. So, defining precisely the impact of China’s WTO accession is difficult, but 
undoubtedly the [WTO’s] contribution to China’s growth has been significant.32
In short, from an institution-based view, China’s experience offers a compelling 
case that the WTO matters. However, globally, this point is being debated. Frustra-
tion associated with the collapse of the Doha Round and other WTO initiatives 
hinges on a crucial assumption that the WTO actually matters. But this assumption 
itself is now subject to debate. Academic research has failed to find any compelling 
evidence that the WTO (and the GATT) has a significantly positive effect on trade.33 
True, trade has blossomed since the GATT was established in 1948. But Andrew 
Rose, a professor at the University of California, Berkeley, reports that trade has 
blossomed for the GATT/WTO members and non-members alike. Therefore, it is 
difficult to find that the GATT/WTO membership caused more trade. The Economist 
thus commented that “the ‘hoopla’ and ‘hype’ that surrounds the WTO’s successes, 
failures, and admissions of new members are just that: hoopla and hype.”34
Defenders of the WTO point out Rose’s methodological imperfections.35 Beyond 
such methodological hair-splitting, in the real world, the collapse of Doha has not 
caused any noticeable collapse of global trade and investment (although the on-
slaught of the 2008–2009 recession has done severe damage). So, perhaps the WTO 
does not matter much? This debate is much more than just academic. Inspired by 
China’s experience, Vietnam recently joined the WTO, and Russia is still negoti-
ating hard to get in. Assuming the governments in these countries are rational 
(Proposition 1 in the institution-based view), one has to believe that there are some 
benefits associated with WTO membership, but perhaps it is not a panacea to solve 
a lot of problems.
8-6 Management Savvy
Of the two major perspectives on global business (institution-based and resource-
based views), this chapter has focused on the institution-based view. In order to 
address the question “What determines the success and failure around the globe?” 
the entire chapter has been devoted to an introduction of the rules of the game 
as institutions governing global and regional economic integration. How does 
this knowledge help managers? Managers need to combine the insights from the 
institution-based view with those from the resource-based view to come up with 
strategies and solutions on how their firms can capitalize on opportunities pre-
sented by global and regional economic integration. Two broad implications for 
action emerge (Table 8.3).
Learning Objective
Draw implications for action.
8-6
Table 8.3
Implications for Action
 	 Think regional, downplay global.
 	 Understand the rules of the game and their transitions, at both global and regional levels.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 8   Capitalizing on Global and Regional Integration	
257
First, given the slowdown of multilateralism and the acceleration of re-
gionalism, managers are advised to focus their attention more at regional 
than global levels.36 To a large extent, they are already doing that. The major-
ity of the multinational enterprises (MNEs) generate most of their revenues 
in their home region (such as within the EU or NAFTA). The largest MNEs 
may have a presence all over the world, but their center of gravity (measured 
by revenues) is often still their home region. Thus, they are not really very 
“global.” Regional strategies make sense, because most countries within a re-
gion share some cultural, economic, and geographic similarities, which can 
lower the liability of foreignness when moving within one region rather than 
moving from one region to another.37 From a resource-based standpoint, most 
firms are better prepared to compete on regional rather than global levels. 
Despite the hoopla associated with “global strategies,” managers, in short, 
need to think local and downplay global (while not necessarily abandoning  
global).
Second, managers also need to understand the rules of the game and their 
transitions, both at global and regional levels. While trade negotiations involve 
a lot of politics that many managers think that they can hardly care less about, 
managers ignore these rules and their transitions at their own peril. While the 
MFA was phased out in 2005, numerous managers at textile firms who had be-
come comfortable under the MFA’s protection cried out loud for their lack of 
preparation. In fact, they had 30 years to prepare for such eventuality. When 
the MFA was signed in 1974, it was agreed that it would be phased out by 2005. 
The typical attitude that “We don’t care about (trade) politics” can lead to a 
failure in due diligence. The best managers expect their firm strategies to shift 
over time, by constantly deciphering the changes in the “big picture” and being 
willing to take advantage of new opportunities brought by global and regional 
trade deals.
C h a p t e r  S u m m a r y
	 8.1	 Make the case for global economic integration.
 	 There are both political and economic benefits for global economic 
integration.
	 8.2	 Understand the evolution of the GATT and the WTO, including current 
challenges.
 	 The GATT (1948–1994) significantly reduced tariff rates on merchandise 
trade. 
 	 The WTO (1995–present) was set up not only to incorporate the GATT, but 
also to cover trade in services, intellectual property, trade dispute settle-
ment, and peer review of trade policy.
 	 The Doha Round to promote more trade and development has failed to ac-
complish its goals thus far. 
	 8.3	 Make the case for regional economic integration.
 	 Political and economic benefits for regional integration are similar to those 
for global integration.
 	 Regional integration may undermine global integration and lead to some 
loss of countries’ sovereignty.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

258	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools 
	 8.4	 Understand regional economic integration efforts in Europe, the Americas, 
the Asia Pacific, and Africa.
 	 The EU has delivered more than half a century of peace and prosperity, 
launched a single currency, and constructed a single market. Its challenges 
include internal divisions and enlargement concerns.
 	 Despite problems, NAFTA has significantly boosted trade and investment 
among members.
 	 Regional integration in the Asia Pacific centers on CER, ASEAN, APEC, 
and TPP.
 	 Regional integration deals in Africa are both numerous and ineffective. 
	 8.5	 Participate in two leading debates concerning global and regional economic 
integration.
 	 (1) Are regional integration building blocks or stumbling blocks for global 
integration? (2) Does the WTO really matter?
	 8.6	 Draw implications for action. 
 	 Think regional, downplay global.
 	 Understand the rules of the game and their transitions, at both global and 
regional levels.
K e y  T e r m s
Andean Community 249
Asia-Pacific Economic 
Cooperation  
(APEC) 251
Association of Southeast 
Asian Nations 
(ASEAN) 251
Australia–New Zealand  
Closer Economic 
Relations Trade Agree-
ment (ANZCERTA/ 
CER) 250
Common market 241
Customs union 241
Doha Round 239
Economic union 241
Euro 243
Euro zone 243
European Union  
(EU) 234
Free trade area  
(FTA) 241
Free Trade Area of the 
Americas (FTAA) 250
General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade 
(GATT) 235
General Agreement 
on Trade in Services 
(GATS) 238
Global economic 
integration 234
Mercosur 249
Monetary union 242
Multilateral trading 
system 236
Non-discrimination 236
North American Free 
Trade Agreement 
(NAFTA) 248
Political union 242
Regional economic  
integration 234
Schengen 243
Trade-Related Aspects  
of Intellectual  
Property Rights 
(TRIPS) 238
Union of South American 
Nations (USAN/
UNASUR) 250
United States– 
Dominican Republic–
Central America Free 
Trade Agreement 
(CAFTA) 250
World Trade Organiza-
tion (WTO) 235
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 ON CULTURE:  Suppose the people of a given country place a very high value 
on their economic independence and control over their economic destiny. 
However, suppose the leaders of that country wish to join the EU and also 
use the euro instead of their own currency. What objections are they likely 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 8   Capitalizing on Global and Regional Integration	
259
to encounter from their citizens? Do you agree with those objections? Why 
or why not? What would you recommend that the leaders use as a response 
to their citizens in order to persuade them to join?
	 2.	 Refer to PengAtlas Map 2.4 (European Union) and note those EU members 
that use the euro. Note also PengAtlas Map 3.4 (Top 10 and Bottom 10 coun-
tries by GDP) and compare to Map 2.4. Which country that is part of the top 10 
in GDP and is also part of the EU does not use the euro? What are the pros and 
cons of it having its own currency? In your opinion, it were to adopt the euro, 
which would gain more—that country or those that currently use the euro? 
	 3.	 Refer to PengAtlas Maps 2.5 (Regional Economic Integration in South 
America) and 2.6 (Regional Integration in the Asia Pacific). Why have these 
examples of economic integration not been as successful as NAFTA or the 
EU? In your opinion, what do you see as the future for economic integration 
outside the EU and NAFTA?
	 4.	 How can economic integration produce the type of political benefits cov-
ered in this chapter?
	 5.	 How has the GATT/WTO played a role relative to global economic 
integration?
	 6.	 What institutional arrangements exist for trade dispute settlement?
	 7.	 In what ways are the benefits of global and regional integration similar?
	 8.	 How may regional integration have a negative effect on global trade and 
global integration?
	 9.	 What do you personally believe about the value of the WTO? Explain why 
you feel the way you do.
	 10.	 Why do some believe that one should think regional and downplay global? 
Do you agree? Why?
	 11.	 What do you recommend that managers do in order to be prepared for 
changes in the rules of the game?
C r i t i c a l  D i s c u s s i o n  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 The Doha Round collapsed because many countries believed that no deal 
was better than a bad deal. Do you agree or disagree with this approach? 
Why?
	 2.	 Will Turkey become a full-fledged member of the EU? Why or why not?
	 3.	 ON ETHICS: In 2012, the German chancellor wanted to consult with you, a 
leading expert on the EU. For years, Germany insisted that countries in the 
euro zone must tame their public finances and could not be bailed out. Now 
Greece is in desperate need of bailouts. But the German economy has also 
suffered a major recession itself and has already been running a budget 
deficit. How would you advise the chancellor: to bail out or not to bail out 
Greece?
	 4.	 ON ETHICS: Critics argue that the WTO single-mindedly promotes trade 
at the expense of the environment. Therefore, trade—or more broadly, 
globalization—needs to slow down. What is your view on the relationship 
between trade and the environment?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

260	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools 
In May 2010, Greece suffered from an economic col-
lapse, which brought the biggest bailout in EU his-
tory. The €110 billion ($146 billion) bailout loan was 
jointly funded by the EU and the IMF, and the harsh 
medicine associated with the rescue dictated that the 
Greek government unleash sweeping reforms to put 
the country’s financial house in order. Public sector 
pensions and wages were cut 15% to 20%. Value-
added and excise taxes were raised twice in 2010. 
Such shock therapy generated widespread misery 
and protests. Yet, the Greek government, led by the 
American-born prime minister George Papandreou, 
who came to power in 2009, stood firm. The prime 
minister argued that Greece must “bite the bullet” to 
avoid the totally tragic ending of this tragedy, such as 
sovereign debt default (known as national bankruptcy 
in layman’s terms).
What led to this mess? Consumer demand in-
crease and government spending binge fueled by the 
2002 adoption of the euro and the 2004 Olympics. 
Excessive borrowing and budget deficits supported 
by low interest rates. Widespread corruption and 
tax evasion. The shadow (informal) economy that 
produced no tax revenue was estimated to be be-
tween 20% and 30% of the GDP. The upshot? Rising 
wage levels not justified by productivity growth, 
which made Greece lose competitiveness in export 
markets relative to countries such as Germany that 
The Greek Tragedy
Ethical 
Dilemma
C l o s i n g  C a s e
G l o b a l  A c t i o n
	 1.	 The WTO membership is viewed by some as a signal of a country’s ability 
to guarantee and protect trade among companies in stable macroeconomic 
conditions. Since your company is looking to expand internationally for 
the first time since 1999, a list of countries that have been admitted to the 
WTO since 2000 is required. This will update your company’s market-entry 
database so that managers can review the international opportunities more 
thoroughly.
	 2.	 Your firm is considering developing business in South America. Many in 
your company are aware that there is considerable economic cooperation 
currently underway in the region. However, there is very little information 
in current internal entry evaluation documents concerning the possible re-
gional trade agreements that may already exist. Identify at least one regional 
trade agreement and its member countries in South America.
V i d e o  C a s e
After watching the video on Mercosur, discuss the following:
	 1.	 What benefits does Uruguay enjoy by being a part of the Mercosur?
	 2.	 How can Uruguay create a competitive advantage?
	 3.	 Is the Mercosur a stumbling block for global integration?
	 4.	 Can the WTO be effective in helping Uruguay with global integration?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 8   Capitalizing on Global and Regional Integration	
261
held down their wage levels. Another symptom is 
skyrocketing government deficit (15% of GDP) and 
crushing national debt (€300 billion—115% of GDP 
or $27,000 per citizen by 2010). In early 2010, when 
the bond market realized that Greece was approach-
ing insolvency, the interest for bonds that the Greek 
government had to pay (technically known as the 
bond yield) rose sharply from a more normal 7% to 
18%—within one month. Facing the unbearable cost 
to borrow and the inability to service debt, the Greek 
government had to ask for help from the EU and the 
IMF. Within one week of the bailout, Greek bond 
yields went down to 12%.
While the tragedy was Greek in origin, its script 
had been in the minds of officials from Greece and 
other euro zone countries who signed the Stability and 
Growth Pact (SGP) in 1997.  To reduce the hesitation 
from Germany and other more disciplined countries 
that they might have to bail out bankrupt members, 
the SGP committed all euro zone countries to bring-
ing their budget deficit to be no more than 3% of 
GDP. Otherwise, countries could be fined. Essentially, 
the SGP meant “no bailouts.” However, even before 
the 2008–2009 global economic crisis, Germany and 
France failed to curtail their own deficits to be less 
than 3%. In other words, they were in open defiance 
of the SGP, essentially free riding. When the recent 
recession hit, virtually all EU members adopted fiscal 
stimulus measures to cope. In 2009, the EU fingered 
not only Greece, but also France, Ireland, Latvia, Mal-
ta, and Spain as violators of the SGP, because they ran 
a budget deficit of more than 3% in 2008. But it was 
hard to imagine how the EU could fine these coun-
tries in the middle of a recession. Overall, the SGP 
failed: Greece’s deficit was more than four times what 
the SGP allowed.
“The best way to think of it is to think of Greece as 
a teenager,” noted one expert, who continued:
Many Greeks view the state with a combination 
of a sense of entitlement, mistrust, and dislike 
similar to that of teenagers vis-à-vis their parents. 
They expect to be funded without contributing; 
they often act irresponsibly without care about 
consequences and expect to be bailed out by 
the state—but that only increases their sense 
of dependency, which only increases their feel-
ing of dislike for the state. And, of course, they 
refuse to grow up. But, like every teenager, 
they will.
While these comments described the relation-
ship between Greek citizens and the state, they also 
provide a great deal of insight into the relationship 
between Greece and the EU. But the metaphor can 
only go so far. At the end of the day, Germany is not 
Greece’s parent. Although both countries belong to 
the “euro family,” German citizens and politicians were 
naturally furious as to why in the middle of their worst 
postwar economic crisis, they had to foot the largest 
bill to bail out the profligate Greeks.
The tragedy was not only Greece’s or Germany’s, 
but also the EU’s. It severely tested the logic of the 
EU—and in particular the logic of the euro—whose 
member countries are not only unequal economically 
but also different in their spending and saving habits. 
Dumping the euro by individual countries was no lon-
ger unthinkable, but was increasingly discussed. Dur-
ing a crisis, leaving the euro zone would allow Greece 
to depreciate its own currency, which would enhance 
its export competitiveness. Dumping the euro would 
also relieve Germany’s responsibility to come to the 
rescue. But here is the catch: a revived Deutsche mark 
would certainly appreciate and undermine Germany’s 
export competitiveness. In the end, a reluctant 
Germany—and a reluctant EU—had little alternative.
In addition, the EU set up a €750 billion 
($980 billion) euro zone stabilization fund (including 
€250 billion from the IMF), which is called European 
Stability Mechanism (ESM). Germany, which pledged 
Rocchi.84/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

262	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools 
€220  billion, demanded stronger fiscal discipline in 
the name of better “economic governance” from all 
members, and threatened sanctions (such as being 
fined and losing voting rights) if certain members 
failed to meet the necessary criteria. Otherwise, the 
EU risked becoming a “fiscal transfer union” draining 
funds from the wealthier and more thrifty North to 
the less wealthy and more heavily spending South. 
Since these proposed new rules could not name any 
individual countries, they had to apply to all member 
countries. But then, Germany and France would never 
agree to being fined or denied a vote. So, debates 
raged and feelings became bitter.
At the same time, other PIGS countries (Portugal, 
Ireland, Greece, and Spain) entered deeper crises 
one after another. In November 2010, Ireland had to 
be rescued by €85 billion ($113 billion). In April 2011, 
Portugal requested to be bailed out. Spain and Italy 
were widely reported to be the next. In July 2011, it 
became increasingly clear that Greece, despite the 
€110 billion first bailout, would default. The same 
drama of the Greek government requesting assis-
tance, of EU governments debating what to do, and 
of the Greek public protesting in the streets unfolded 
again—in a dramatically worsening way. Thanks to the 
harsh austerity measures, the Greek recession since 
2008 worsened. Overall, the Greek GDP had its worst 
decline in 2011, with 27%. About 111,000 firms went 
bankrupt (27% higher than in 2010). Unemployment 
rose from 8% in 2008 to a record high of 20% in 2011, 
while youth unemployment during the same time 
rose from 22% to 48%. There were only so many aus-
terity measures that a frustrated and largely unem-
ployed public (especially the youth) could take. Street 
protests became a daily routine.
By the end of 2011, Papandreou announced that 
his government would subject new austerity mea-
sures demanded by the EU to a referendum, which 
most likely would not approve such measures. For the 
first time, “merkozy”—German chancellor Merkel and 
French president Sarkozy—broke the taboo and openly 
threatened to kick Greece out of the euro zone. While 
Greece would be free to devaluate its revived old cur-
rency (the drachma) to avoid hitting rock bottom, the 
chaos of defaulting on all domestic and international 
contracts denominated in euros and then renominating 
everything in drachmas, with no further help from the 
EU, would have been more unbearable to Greece. In 
December 2011, Papandreou resigned. A new interim 
national union government led by Lucas Papademos 
committed itself to new austerity measures in order 
to sail out of the storm. By the end of 2011, euro zone 
leaders agreed to provide a second, €130 billion bailout 
loan, conditional not only on another austerity pack-
age but also that all private creditors agree to write off 
50% of (some part of) Greek government debt, the 
equivalent of €100 billion. After implementing all of 
the above, Greece’s debt load would be reduced from 
about 200% of GDP in 2012 to a more manageable 
120% by 2020. The second bailout package was finally 
signed off by all parties in February 2012 and activated 
in March 2012. As Greece continues to struggle, how 
(bitter) the tragedy will end remains to be seen.
Case Discussion Questions:
	 1.	 What are the benefits and costs of using a com-
mon currency for Greece, Germany, and the EU?
	 2.	 How do the austerity programs imposed by the 
bailouts help a Greek firm that exports olive oil?
	 3.	 ON ETHICS: While Greece needs help, the 
German economy has also suffered a major re-
cession itself and a budget deficit. How would 
you advise the chancellor: to bail out or not to 
bail out Greece? As a German taxpayer, are 
you willing to pay higher taxes to help Greece? 
(Bear in mind, after Greece, there will be Ireland, 
Portugal, and possibly Italy and Spain.)
	 4.	 ON ETHICS: For the €750 billion European Sta-
bility Mechanism, even Sweden and Poland (EU 
members that do not use the euro) felt they had 
enough at stake to contribute. But Britain (an-
other EU member that does not use the euro) 
decided not to contribute any funds. As a British 
official, how do you defend this decision?
Sources: Based on (1) Bloomberg BusinessWeek, 2010, A more perfect union? December 6: 11–12; (2) Bloomberg BusinessWeek, 2010, Germany 
reaps the euro’s reward, July 19: 13–14; (3) Bloomberg BusinessWeek, 2010, Life amid the ruins, June 28: 52–60; (4) Economist, 2010, No easy exit, 
December 4: 87–88; (5) Economist, 2010, Saving the euro, November 20: 12; (6) Economist, 2011, Bite the bullet, January 15: 77–78; (7) Economist, 
2011, Time for Plan B, January 15: 10; (8) Economist, 2012, Currency disunion, April 7: 65; (9) Economist, 2012, Flaming February, February 18: 53; 
(10) Economist, 2012, Still sickly, March 31: 64.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 8   Capitalizing on Global and Regional Integration	
263
N O T E S
[Journal acronyms] AER—American Economic Review; BW—Business-
Week (before 2010) or Bloomberg Businessweek (since 2010); CBR—
China Business Review; JIBS – Journal of International Business Studies; 
JIE—Journal of International Economics; JIMS—Journal of International 
Management Studies; JWB—Journal of World Business; SMJ—Strategic 
Management Journal.
1 World Trade Organization, 2005, 10 Benefits of the WTO Trading 
System (p. 3), Geneva: WTO.
2 10 Benefits of the WTO Trading System (p. 8).
3 D. Xu, Y. Pan, C. Wu, & B. Yim, 2006, Performance of domestic and 
foreign-invested enterprises in China (p. 268), JWB, 41: 261–274.
4 Economist, 2006, The future of globalization (p. 11), July 29: 11.
5 Economist, 2011, A deadline for Doha, January 29: 75.
6 Economist, 2006, In the twilight of Doha (p. 63), July 29: 63–64.
7 Delegation of the European Commission to the USA, 2005, The 
European Union: A Guide for Americans (p. 2), Washington: Delegation 
of the European Commission to the USA.
8 G. Zestos, 2006, European Monetary Integration: The Euro (p. 64), 
Cincinnati: South-Western Cengage Learning.
9 P. Whyman, 2002, Living with the euro, JWB, 37: 208–215.
10 Economist, 2007, The quest for prosperity, March 17: 6–9.
11 Economist, 2010, No easy exit, December 7: 87–88.
12 Economist, 2007, Europe’s mid-life crisis, March 17: 13. 
13 Economist, 2011, How Britain could leave Europe, December 17: 104.
14 Economist, 2012, To opt in or not to opt in? January 14: 53.
15 Economist, 2004, A club in need of a new vision, May 1: 26.
16 BW, 2009, What’s dragging Europe down? March 9: 36–41.
17 Economist, 2009, The whiff of contagion (p. 28), February 28:  
27–29.
18 Economist, 2006, A case of enlargement fatigue, May 13: 64.
19 Economist, 2006, Babelling on, December 16: 50.
20 BW, 2003, Mexico: Was NAFTA worth it? December 22.
21 A. Rugman & J. Kirton, 1998, Multinational enterprise strategy 
and the NAFTA trade and environment regime, JWB, 33: 438–454.
22 BW, 2003, Happy birthday, NAFTA, December 22; BW, 2003, 
Mexico: Was NAFTA worth it? December 22.
23 J. Garten, 2003, At 10, NAFTA is ready for an overhaul, BW, 
December 22.
24 J. Sargent & L. Matthews, 2006, The drivers of evolution/upgrading  
in Mexico’s maquiladoras, JWB, 41: 233–246.
25 Economist, 2006, Mercosur’s summit: Downhill from here, 
July 29: 36.
26 Economist, 2005, Another such victory, July 30: 66.
27 US Trade Representative, 2005, The Case for CAFTA, February 
(www.ustr.gov).
28  ASEAN Secretariat, 2002, Southeast Asia: A Free Trade Area, Jakarta: 
ASEAN Secretariat (www.asean.org).
29 APEC Secretariat, 2005, APEC at a Glance, Singapore: APEC 
Secretariat (www.apec.org).
30 K. Ofori-Brobbey, L. Ojode, & H. Woldu, 2011, Cutting the um-
bilical cord, JIMS, 6 (1): 1–10.
31 J. Bhagwati, 2002, Free Trade Today (p. 119), Princeton, NJ:  
Princeton University Press.
32 CBR, 2011, China’s role in the WTO: An interview of WTO 
Director-General Pascal Lamy (p. 25), October: 24–27.
33 A. Rose, 2004, Do we really know that the WTO increases trade? 
AER, 94: 98–114.
34 Economist, 2005, Is there any point to the WTO? August 6: 62.
35 A. Rose, 2007, Do we really know that the WTO increases trade? 
Reply, AER, 97: 2019–2025; A. Subramanian & S. Wei, 2007, The 
WTO promotes trade, strongly but unevenly, JIE, 72: 151–175; 
M. Tomz, J. Goldstein, & D. Rivers, 2007, Do we really know that the 
WTO increases trade? Comment, AER, 97: 2005–2018.
36 M. Fratianni & C. Oh, 2009, Expanding RTAs, trade flows, and 
the multinational enterprise, JIBS, 40: 1206–1277; A. Rugman, 2005, 
The Regional Multinationals, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press.
37 G. Qian, T. Khoury, M. W. Peng, & Z. Qian, 2010, The perfor-
mance implications of intra- and inter-regional geographic diversifi-
cation, SMJ, 31: 1018–1030.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

264	
 
part 2
atlas
Hong Kong,
China
511
(10)
1,899
(1)
1,743
(2)
Korea
555
(7)
Korea
524
(9)
Belgium
476
(10)
France
597
(6)
France
715
(5)
Italy
523
(8)
Italy
557
(8)
Germany
1,474
(3)
Germany
1,254
(3)
United Kingdom
636
(6)
United States
1,481
(2)
2,265
(1)
Japan
823
(4)
Japan
854
(4)
Netherlands
660
(5)
Netherlands
597
(7)
ARCTIC
OCEAN
INDIAN
OCEAN
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
Top ten merchandise importers $ billion (ranking)
Top ten merchandise exporters $ billion (ranking)
Other countries
China
Russia
522
(9)
Map 2.1
Top Merchandise Importers and Exporters
Source: Adapted from World Trade Organization, 2011, Word Trade Report 2011. All data are for 2010.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part 2   Atlas	
265
Part 2   Atlas	
265
Map 2.2
Top Service Importers and Exporters 
Source: Adapted from World Trade Organization, 2011, Word Trade Report 2011. All data are for 2010.
China
Italy
115
(9)
Ireland
113
(10)
France
181
(5)
France
141
(6)
Spain
141
(8)
Germany
253
(3)
Germany
284
(2)
United Kingdom
274
(2)
United Kingdom
171
(4)
United States
578
(1)
391
(1)
Japan
143
(7)
Japan
155
(5)
Singapore
125
(10)
Netherlands
128
(9)
Netherlands
118
(8)
ARCTIC
OCEAN
INDIAN
OCEAN
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
Top ten service importers $ billion (ranking)
Top ten service exporters $ billion (ranking)
Other countries
182
(4)
236
(3)
India
148
(6)
India
130
(7)
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

266	
Part 2   Atlas 
Map 2.3
FDI Inflows and Outflows 
Source: Adapted from CIA, The World Factbook, 2011. All data are for 2011.
Japan
88
(8)
Germany
148
(4)
Germany
99
(5)
Belgium
81
(9)
Switzerland
94
(7)
United Kingdom
170
(3)
United States
ARCTIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
INDIAN
OCEAN
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
Top ten FDI outﬂows $ billion (ranking)
Top ten FDI inﬂows $ billion (ranking)
Other countries
400
(1)
France
178
(2)
Belgium
98
(6)
United Kingdom
113
(4)
288
(1)
France
118
(2)
Netherlands
99
(5)
Spain
63
(8)
Spain
68
(10)
Canada
60
(9)
Netherlands
59
(10)
Hong Kong, China
114
(3)
Hong Kong, China
98
(6)
China
77
(7)
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part 2   Atlas	
267
Map 2.4
The European Union
As of July, 2012, Croatia, Iceland, Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, and Turkey are candidate countries. 
Source: Adapted from Europa, The European Union website, europa.eu.
Finland (€)
1995
Austria (€)
1995
Italy (€)
1958
Spain (€)
1986
Sweden
1995
Germany (€)
1958
France (€)
1958
Portugal (€)
1986
Hungary
2004
Romania
2007
Bulgaria
2007
Denmark
1973
Poland
2004
Czech Rep.
2004
Slovakia (€)
2004
Greece (€)
1981
Cyprus (€)
2004
Netherlands (€)
1958
Belgium (€)
1958
Ireland (€)
1973
Lithuania
2004
Latvia
2004
Estonia
2004
Slovenia (€)
2004
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
MEDITERRANEAN
SEA
BLACK   SEA
BAY
OF
BISCAY
United Kingdom
1973
Malta (€)
2004
Luxembourg (€)
1958
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

268	
Part 2   Atlas 
Argentina
Mercosur members
Andean Community members
CAFTA members
Bolivia
Colombia
Venezuela
Peru
Brazil
PACIFIC
OCEAN
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
Ecuador
Paraguay
Uruguay
El Salvador
Guatemala
Honduras
Dominican Republic
Nicaragua
Costa Rica
Map 2.5
Regional Integration in South America 
In May 2008, Andean Community and Mercosur agreed to merge to form the Union of South American 
Nations (USAN, more commonly known by its Spanish acronym, UNASUR, which refers to Unión de Naciones 
Suramericanas).
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part 2   Atlas	
269
Vietnam
United States
Thailand
Taiwan
Hong Kong
PACIFIC
OCEAN
Cambodia
Laos
Myanmar
Russia
Philippines
Peru
Papua New Guinea
New Zealand
New Caledonia
Mexico
Malaysia
Singapore
I n d o n e s i a
S. Korea
Japan
China
Chile
Canada
Brunei
Australia
APEC & ASEAN members
ASEAN-only members
APEC-only members
Non-members
Map 2.6
Regional Integration in the Asia Pacific 
In 2005, four APEC members—Brunei, Chile, New Zealand, and Singapore—established Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP). Six additional APEC members are 
currently negotiating to join TPP.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

270	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools 
Canada and the United States Fight Over Pigs1
Mike W. Peng (University of Texas at Dallas)
I n t e g r a t i v e  C a s e  2 . 1
Canada argues that the US country of origin labeling (COOL) 
requirements discriminate against Canadian imports, and 
complains to the World Trade Organization (WTO). Why do 
these two friendly countries fight over the labeling of pigs?
The Closest Trading Relationship in the World
Sharing the world’s longest undefended border, 
Canada and the United States are the best of friends. 
Their bilateral trading relationship is the world’s larg-
est, with approximately $600 billion in volume. The 
two-way traffic that crosses the Ambassador Bridge 
between Windsor, Ontario, and Detroit, Michigan, 
equals all US exports to Japan. Approximately 73% of 
Canada’s exports (about a quarter of its GDP) go to its 
southern neighbor, making it the largest exporter to 
the United States. Canadian products command ap-
proximately 20% of the US import market share. In 
comparison, China, the second largest exporter to the 
United States, commands slightly over 10%. Canada 
is also the largest importer of US products, absorbing 
about a quarter of US exports (which represent over 
60% of Canadian imports). The United States runs a 
trade deficit with Canada, at $36 billion in 2011. De-
spite such a close relationship, they fight like “cats and 
dogs” in trade disputes. Most recently, they have traded 
blows over pigs. 
Is COOL Discriminatory?
In an effort to tighten food labeling, the US Department 
of Agriculture (USDA) in 2009 implemented the 
Mandatory Country of Origin Labeling (COOL) legis-
lation, requiring US firms to track and notify customers 
of the country of origin of meat and other agricultural 
products at each stage of production, including at the 
retail level. Unfortunately, such a seemingly innocent 
move in the name of protecting consumers provoked 
fierce protests from the Canadian government, hog 
farmers, and other agricultural producers. In a normal 
1) This research was supported by the O. P. Jindal Chair at the Jindal School of 
Management, University of Texas at Dallas. All views and errors are those of 
the author. © Mike W. Peng. Reprinted with permission. 
year, Canada would export approximately $3 billion 
hogs (live pigs) to the United States. In the first three 
quarters of 2009, such exports suffered from a disas-
trous 60% drop. 
The reason is that many young Canadian pigs are 
exported to the United States, and they are mixed and 
raised together with indigenous US pigs for fattening 
and slaughter. After several months, separating the 
(immigrant) Canadian pigs from the (native-born) US 
pigs is challenging and costly. The USDA estimates that 
it will cost the food industry $2.5 billion to comply with 
the new rules. When facing such hassles, several major 
US pork producers, including the top five that account 
for more than half of all pork sold in the United States 
(Cargill, Hormel, JBS SA, Seaboard, and Smithfield), 
simply stopped buying hogs from Canada or gradu-
ally phased out such purchases. In addition to damag-
ing livestock exports, processed meat products from 
Canada, including the legendary Canadian bacon, 
were also broadly affected.
Starting in May 2009, the Canadian and US govern-
ments negotiated. While the United States modified 
some rules to alleviate Canadian concerns, the negotia-
tions eventually broke down. Canada’s frustrated Trade 
Minister Stockwell Day said in October 2009:
The US requirements are so onerous that they affect 
the ability of our hog and cattle exporters to com-
pete fairly in the US market. The US law leaves the 
Canadian government with no choice but to escalate 
its first formal trade dispute with the Obama adminis-
tration by pressing charges at the WTO.
In response, US Trade Representative Ron Kirk and 
Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack in a joint statement 
in October 2009 argued:
We believe that our implementation of COOL pro-
vides information to consumers in a manner consis-
tent with our WTO commitments. Countries have 
agreed since long before the existence of the WTO 
that country-of-origin labeling is a legitimate policy. It 
is common for other countries to require that goods 
be labeled as to their origin. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Two   Integrative Cases	
271
The Gains (and Losses) from Trade
The COOL pig fight is not the only dispute between 
Canada and the United States. The first edition of 
Global Business reported disputes over salmon and soft-
wood lumber. The list of Canada’s trade grievances has 
since grown to include (1) “Buy American” purchas-
ing rules, (2) generous US biofuel tax breaks for paper 
mills, and (3) the Obama administration’s stalling on 
approval for the Keystone oil pipeline from Alberta to 
Texas. 
While Canada and the United States fight over item 
by item on their long list of trade grievances, a useful 
mental exercise is to ask: What if these two friendly 
countries stopped trading altogether? Normally, 
scholars studying this intriguing question would have 
to use simulation methods based on hypothetical data 
to entertain what would happen if they stopped trading. 
But because of 9/11, such an unthinkable scenario did 
take place so we know what could happen. Immediately 
after the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, the 
United States closed all airports, seaports, and land 
crossings with Canada (and Mexico). The world’s largest 
bilateral trading relationship literally shut down. When 
the borders reopened days later, US officials undertook 
intensive inspections of commercial traffic that, among 
other things, delayed truck carriers for up to 18 hours. 
An exhaustive study found that Canadian exports to the 
United States in the fourth quarter of 2001 were 20% 
lower than what they would have been in the absence 
of the border security consequences of 9/11. Even in 
2005, when US exports to Canada had resumed their 
“normal” level, exports from Canada were $12 billion 
less than they would otherwise have been had 9/11 
and the US security responses not occurred. In other 
words, Canadian exporters will suffer disproportionate 
damage due to any unilateral tightening of the border 
by the United States—whether for security reasons 
in the post-9/11 period or for food safety reasons at 
present. 
The Outcome and the Appeal of the COOL Case
In October 2009, Canada formally complained to the 
WTO and requested that a dispute resolution panel 
be composed. In May 2010, a panel consisting of three 
trade officials—from Switzerland (serving as chair-
man), Pakistan, and Portugal—was appointed by the 
WTO’s Director-General. In November 2011, the panel 
issued its report. It determined that the COOL mea-
sure was inconsistent with the WTO obligations of the 
United States, because it provided less favorable treat-
ment to imported Canadian hogs, cattle, and meat prod-
ucts than to similar domestic livestock and products. In 
March 2012, the United States announced its decision 
to appeal the panel’s decision. As of this writing, the 
appeal is still in progress. It remains to be seen whether 
cool heads will prevail when fighting over COOL. 
Case Discussion Questions
	 1.	 Why do Canada and the United States have the 
largest bilateral trading relationship in the world? 
	 2.	 Why do Canadian products have such a large 
market share in the United States?
	 3.	 While 98% of Canada-US trade flows smoothly, 
trade disputes only affect the remaining 2%. 
Some argue that the Canadians have over-
reacted in this case. What do you think? 
Sources: Based on (1) I. Fergusen, 2006, United States-Canada Trade and 
Economic Relationship, Washington: Congressional Research Service; 
(2) Economist, 2011, Canada and the United States: The border two-step, 
December 19: 41; (3) Globe and Mail, 2009, Canada turns to WTO over 
US label law, October 8: B7; (4) S. Globerman & P. Storer, 2008, The Im-
pacts of 9/11 on Canada-US Trade, Toronto: University of Toronto Press; 
(5) Pig Progress, 2009, US-COOL dispute proceeds by WTO, October 8,  
www.pigprogress.net; (6) US Census Bureau, 2012, Trade in goods with 
Canada, www.census.gov; (7) World Trade Organization, 2012, Dispute 
settlement DS384: United States: Certain country of origin labeling (COOL) 
requirements, Geneva: WTO, www.wto.org.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

272	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools 
Foreign Direct Investment in the Indian Retail Industry1
Mike W. Peng (University of Texas at Dallas)
I n t e g r a t i v e  C a s e  2 . 2
Do the benefits of foreign direct investment (FDI) in the Indian 
retail industry outweigh its costs?
The Indian Retail Industry
India has the world’s highest density of retail out-
lets. It has more than 15 million outlets, compared 
with 900,000 in the United States, whose market (by 
revenue) is 13 times bigger. At present, 95% of retail 
sales in India are made in tiny independent mom-
and-pop shops, mostly smaller than 500 square feet 
(46 square meters). In Indian jargon, this is known, 
quite accurately, as the “unorganized” sector. The 
“organized” sector refers to more modern supermar-
kets and chain stores. The organized sector only com-
mands 5% of the country’s $435 billion retail sales. In 
India, the retail industry is the largest provider of jobs 
after agriculture, accounting for 6%–7% of jobs and 
10% of GDP.
Given the two distinct groups of outlets, compe-
tition primarily takes place within the unorganized 
sector and within the organized sector. Customers 
tend to be price sensitive and purchase in small quan-
tities. The mom-and-pop shops are too small to nego-
tiate good deals with middleman companies such as 
wholesalers. But the majority of Indians shop at mom-
and-pop shops—often because of a lack of choice. 
Organized outlets simply do not exist in many rural 
areas. Because of the scarcity of outlets, competition 
among supermarkets is relatively tranquil. However, 
it is heating up. Reliance Group, one of India’s larg-
est conglomerates, is now making huge waves by in-
vesting $5.5 billion to build 1,000 hypermarkets and 
2,000 supermarkets to blanket the country in the next 
five years. 
Gradual Opening to Foreign Direct Investment (FDI)
With a booming economy, a fast-growing middle 
class, and fragmented local competitors, this indus-
try is the world’s biggest untapped retail market. Not 
1) This research was supported by the O. P. Jindal Chair at the Jindal School of 
Management, University of Texas at Dallas. All views and errors are those of 
the author. © Mike W. Peng. Reprinted with permission.
surprisingly, foreign giants such as Wal-Mart, Carre-
four, Metro, and Tesco are knocking at the door try-
ing to expand the organized sector. However, here 
is a catch: The door is still officially closed to FDI in 
this industry. Ever since the 1991 opening to FDI 
brought India into the global spotlight, investing in 
India has become one of the top items on the corpo-
rate to-do list of many multinationals. Yet, there are 
industry-specific restrictions, and the retail industry 
is conspicuous in being one of the last four indus-
tries still officially closed to FDI—the other three be-
ing the more sensitive atomic energy, gambling, and  
agriculture. 
Given the Indian government’s and the public’s 
general appreciation of the contributions made by FDI, 
the retail industry, according to an Economist editorial 
in 2011, is now “the most glaring example of the need 
for foreign investment.” One of the leading arguments 
is that super-efficient retail operations will enhance 
efficiency throughout the entire supply chain. At pres-
ent, about a third of fruits and vegetables spoil while 
in transit, a catastrophe in a country where so many go 
hungry. In countries with more modern retail systems, 
less than a tenth is lost. 
For years, a side door has been open to FDI. Until 
2011, foreign firms could take up to 51% equity in single-
brand shops that sell their own products, such as Nike, 
Nokia, and Starbucks. Foreign firms could also set up 
wholesale and sourcing subsidiaries that supply local 
mass retail partners. In 2006, Australia’s Woolworths 
started to supply Croma stores owned by Tata Group. 
In 2010, Wal-Mart teamed with Bharti by operating 
nine Best Price joint-venture wholesale stores. But until 
November 2011, FDI in multi-brand stores (such as su-
permarkets) had been banned. 
The Political Storm Over FDI in the Retail Industry
To attract more FDI, the Indian government in 
November 2011 announced that foreign firms could 
now own 51% of multi-brand retailers (up from zero) 
and foreign firms’ stake in single-brand retailers 
could now reach 100% (up from 51%). The reforms 
would be very limited—only to be implemented in 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Two   Integrative Cases	
273
53 cities with a population of more than one million. 
Consumers would benefit from increased competi-
tion. The shares of listed local retailers soared, on 
speculation that they might be bought out by foreign 
firms. Farmers would gain from greater investment 
in the supply chain. Currently farmers have little bar-
gaining power. They sell to a wholesale market, which 
dictates prices. The wholesaler then sells the produce 
to another middleman, which further passes the pro-
duce to a distributor. By the time food reaches the 
consumer, it will have been marked up three to four 
times, but nearly all of that goes to various middle-
men, not farmers. Easy profits provide little incentive 
for middlemen to enhance efficiency and invest in 
modern supply chain (such as refrigerated storage), 
and food spoils along the way. To attract farmers, for-
eign retailers would have to offer higher prices. Wal-
Mart set itself a target of increasing farmer income by 
20% over five years. Cost-conscious foreign retailers 
would then invest in modern supply chain to mini-
mize food spoilage. 
A huge political brawl erupted after the announce-
ment. Many shopkeepers, supported by middlemen, 
protested against the alleged onslaught of multination-
als and cited the controversial “Wal-Mart effect” being 
debated in the United States and elsewhere. Interested 
in shopkeepers’ votes, the government thus faced a di-
lemma. In December 2011, a mere two weeks after the 
announcement of the retail reforms, a humiliated gov-
ernment announced that it would suspend the reforms 
that would bring lower prices for consumers and better 
prices for farmers. The incumbents won the day. How-
ever, the reforms were “suspended,” not “cancelled.” So 
stay tuned for the evolution of FDI in this industry. 
Case Discussion Questions
	 1.	 Why is the Indian retail industry so inviting?
	 2.	 From a resource-based view, what are the unique 
resources and capabilities that multinational 
retailers such as Wal-Mart can bring to India?
	 3.	 From an institution-based view, why is the open-
ing of this industry to FDI such a political issue?
	 4.	 ON ETHICS: If you were an elected government 
official in India, would you recommend the full-
blown opening of the retail industry?
	 5.	 ON ETHICS: If you were a career government of-
ficial in India (that is, your career does not de-
pend on your popularity in elections), would you 
recommend the full-blown opening of the retail 
industry?
Sources: Based on (1) Associated Press, 2011, India backtracks on plan 
to let in foreign retail, December 7; (2) Economist, 2011, Fling wide the 
gates, April 16: 16; (3) Economist, 2011, Let Walmart in, December 3: 20;  
(4)  Economist, 2011, Send for the supermarketers, April 16: 67–68; 
(5) Economist, 2011, The supermarket’s last frontier, December 3: 75–76; 
(6)  Times, 2011, Why India should stop fearing Walmart, November 28: 
http://globalspin.blogs.time.com.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

274	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools 
1) This research was supported by the O. P. Jindal Chair at the Jindal School of 
Management, University of Texas at Dallas. All views and errors are those of 
the author. © Mike W. Peng. Reprinted with permission. 
The Fate of Opel1
Mike W. Peng (University of Texas at Dallas)
I n t e g r a t i v e  C a s e  2 . 3
In 2009, when General Motors (GM) was struggling for its own 
survival, it tried to sell its wholly owned subsidiary Opel, which 
operated in Germany and elsewhere in Europe. Different poten-
tial buyers, the German government, and European Union of-
ficials were also involved. Although eventually GM decided to 
keep Opel, as a foreign investor GM received tremendous criti-
cisms for its handling of Opel during these challenging times.
Opel and GM Europe
Opel is a wholly owned subsidiary of General Motors 
(GM) in Germany. Opel was founded in 1863, began 
making cars in 1899, and was acquired by General 
Motors (GM) in 1929. The GM-Opel relationship sur-
vived World War II, during which Opel factories were 
seized by the Nazis and then bombed by the Allies. Only 
in 1948 did GM regain control of Opel. In 2008 Opel 
generated €18 billion in sales and a 7% market share in 
Western Europe. It had 50,000 employees and eight fac-
tories in Europe. About half of the jobs and four factories 
were in Germany. In addition, Opel ran one factory each 
in Belgium, Poland, Spain, and the UK—the latter is a 
Vauxhall plant that produced cars with its own Vauxhall 
brand. Opel formed the backbone of GM Europe. 
A Bankrupt GM Had to Sell Opel
Unfortunately, the 80-year-old relationship between 
GM and Opel experienced some unprecedented tur-
bulence in 2009, during which GM itself declared 
bankruptcy on June 1. Before June 1, the German 
(federal) government, in an effort to protect Opel as-
sets and jobs in the event of a GM bankruptcy, took 
unprecedented action by offering a €1.5 billion bridge 
loan to Opel and pushing GM to form an Opel Trust. 
The Opel Trust controlled and protected Opel assets 
during GM’s bankruptcy. The board of the trust con-
sisted of representatives from GM, German employees, 
the German federal government, and the governments 
of the four German states in which Opel  operated. 
Losing money for a decade, Opel was indeed struggling 
RONALD WITTEK/dpa /Landov
desperately despite repeated restructuring  efforts. In 
2008 GM Europe lost $2.8 billion. In the first quarter 
of 2009, it burned an additional $2 billion with a 25% 
drop in sales. After June 1, 2009, although the US and 
Canadian governments bailed GM out by injecting 
billions of dollars and taking over 61% and 8% of its 
equity, respectively, there were specific requirements 
preventing GM from using American and Canadian 
taxpayer dollars to fund overseas operations such as 
Opel’s. In desperation, GM felt it had to sell Opel to 
prevent the financial hemorrhage. 
Although initially reluctant, GM in September 2009 
agreed to support a proposal favored by the German 
government to sell 55% of Opel’s equity to a consor-
tium led by Magna, a Canadian auto parts maker that 
would take 20% of equity. Magna has two Russian 
partners—Sherbank and GAZ, Russia’s second largest 
automaker—that would take 35% of equity. German 
employees would get 10% and GM the remaining 35%. 
Magna agreed to invest €500 million while the German 
government pledged an additional €4.5 billion in state 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Two   Integrative Cases	
275
aid loans, in addition to the €1.5 billion bridge loan 
already provided. German Chancellor Angela Merkel 
extracted a promise from Magna to keep job cuts to 
a minimum (not exceeding 2,500 jobs) in Germany—
a significantly better outcome than a more ruthless 
restructuring process during which 40% of Opel’s 
German jobs (10,000) might disappear. In part due to 
her extraordinary efforts to save jobs, Merkel was re-
elected for a second term in September 2009. 
But GM was never enthusiastic for the sale to the 
Magna consortium. Of the four bids GM received, it 
quickly dropped one from Italy’s Fiat and another from 
China’s Beijing Automotive, but strongly favored one 
from RHJ International, a Belgian private equity firm, 
which would eventually consider selling Opel back to 
GM in the future. The Germans saw RHJ as a pawn for 
GM. From a fair bidding standpoint, the fact that RHJ 
offered only €275 million, substantially lower than the 
€400 million offered by the Magna consortium, made it 
impossible for GM to offer Opel to RHJ and bypass the 
Magna consortium. To lock in the sale to Magna, the 
German government also announced that its financing 
would only support Magna and its partners, but not RHJ. 
GM had legitimate concerns about the sale to the 
Magna consortium. It would be hit by a “double whammy.” 
First, GM would lose important passenger car expertise 
that has fueled a lot of GM’s models beyond those carry-
ing the Opel and Vauxhall plates, including many mod-
els that are branded as Cadillac, Buick, and Chevrolet. 
Second, the sale would turn Magna into a major competi-
tor overnight, although the deal forbad Opel from selling 
in China until 2015 and forbad any entry into the United 
States. Further, GAZ would take advantage of Opel tech-
nology and boost its position in Russia, soon to overtake 
Germany as Europe’s largest car market. RHJ would pres-
ent none of these strategic headaches. 
Intervention from the Eurocrats
In October 2009, a significant player previously not in-
volved entered the fray. The European Commissioner 
for Competition, Neelie Kroes, was pressured by the 
Belgian, Polish, Spanish, and British governments that 
complained that Opel’s sale to Magna would result in 
disproportionate and thus “unfair” job losses in these 
countries. Kroes wrote to the German government, ex-
pressing her concerns that state aid promised by the 
German government to the “new Opel” was tied to one 
bidder and discriminated against other EU bidders 
such as RHJ. The letter demanded that GM and the 
Opel Trust “be given the opportunity to reconsider the 
outcome of the bidding process,” because state aid “can-
not be used to impose political constraints concerning 
the location of production activities within the EU.” Af-
ter talks between Berlin and the EU, Germany assured 
that its state aid would be available to any investor with 
a decent plan. Unfortunately, RHJ had already walked 
away, so this assurance was entirely theoretical. Satisfied 
by the assurance, the Eurocrats eventually backed off. 
They argued that the assurance set a good precedent in 
the future and that dragging Germany’s previously un-
acceptable behavior into a full-scale probe would push 
Opel into legal limbo, and the firm could collapse.
GM Changed Its Mind
However, in the middle of such intense politicking 
and strategizing, in November 2009, GM’s board an-
nounced a startling shift in direction by cancelling the 
sale to the Magna consortium and keeping Opel. Out-
raged, Opel workers took to the streets. German media 
pointed out that GM might close two factories and lay 
off 10,000 workers in Germany. The German Minister 
for Economy and Technology said that “the behav-
ior of GM against the Opel workers as well as against 
Germany is completely unacceptable.” The German 
government demanded that its €1.5 billion bridge loan 
be repaid. There were significant concerns about the 
fate of Opel. Once GM repaid the loan, it could dissolve 
Opel Trust and could do whatever it pleased with Opel.
In 2010 GM repaid the German government loan 
and announced that its restructuring would cut over 
8,000 jobs, including 4,000 in Germany. But the blow of 
the widely feared plant closing would only fall on one 
factory in Antwerp, Belgium, which employed 2,600 
people. In an effort to save Opel, GM closed the plant 
by the end of 2010. 
Case Discussion Questions
	 1.	 What are the costs and benefits of FDI inflows 
for a host country such as Germany?
	 2.	 Will foreign firms such as GM make decisions in 
the best interest of Germany?
	 3.	 How would you vote if you were a member of the 
GM board regarding the fate of Opel?
Sources: Based on (1) BusinessWeek, 2009, Green light for Opel? 
November  2; (2) Economist, 2009, Looking for reverse, August 29: 55; 
(3) Huffpost Business, 2010, GM’s Opel job cuts, January 20, www.huffing-
tonpost.com; (4) Just Auto, 2009, Government denies GM-Opel-Magna scru-
tiny needed, October 19, www.just-auto.com; (5) New York Times, 2009, GM 
opts to keep Opel, scraps sale to Magna, November 3, www.nytimes.com;  
(6) Wall Street Journal, 2009, At last, GM sets deal to cede control of Opel, 
September 11, online.wsj.com; (7) Wall Street Journal, 2009, GM advances 
Opel restructuring, November 7, online.wsj.com. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

276	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools 
Jobek do Brasil’s Foreign Exchange Challenges1
Dirk Michael Boehe (Insper Institute of Education and Research)
I n t e g r a t i v e  C a s e  2 . 4
Facing rising costs and unfavorable exchange rates, how can 
Jobek do Brasil, a Brazil-based outdoor furniture and ham-
mock manufacturer and exporter, cope? 
Friday morning, Barny sipped his black coffee and 
shrugged his head when he glanced at the headlines 
of Valor Econômico, Brazil’s leading business newspaper: 
the US dollar lost value again and the Brazilian govern-
ment was considering additional measures to halt the 
accelerating appreciation of the real. What a mess, he 
thought, and flipped nervously through the remaining 
pages of the finance section. 
Barny’s firm, Jobek do Brasil, an outdoor furniture 
and hammock manufacturer and exporter, has hardly 
recovered from its biggest crisis. In September 2008, 
when he returned with full order books from an inter-
national fair, he did not even suspect that sales would go 
down by more than 60% in the following months thanks 
to the global financial crisis. His French distributor went 
bankrupt, his former US partner shifted purchasing to 
cheaper producers in India and China, and his clients 
reduced or cancelled order volumes in response to the 
financial crisis. The existing business model—based on 
in-house manufacturing in Brazil’s northeast and  an 
administrative, purchasing, quality assurance, and sales 
unit in Germany—was no longer viable. Fixed costs 
were substantial and manufacturing inputs had already 
been purchased. Sitting on debt and running short of 
working capital, Barny shut down Jobek’s plant in 2010; 
outsourced production to Reed Isaac, a former local 
partner; closed down the German unit; and signed a 
long-term supply contract with Stern GmbH & Co KG 
in Germany. In addition, Jobek temporarily discontin-
ued the already low sales outside Europe as well as the 
always insignificant domestic sales in Brazil. The mea-
sures were necessary to refocus the business and ride 
down costs.
Brazil’s Foreign Exchange Policy 
After more than a decade of high inflation, low 
growth, debt default, and failed stabilization policies, 
the Brazilian government introduced a new currency, 
the real (R$), in 1994. The new currency, valued at 
R$1 per US$1 in 1994, was pegged to the US dollar 
and could oscillate within an adjustable band until 
1999. At that time, the effects of the Asian and the 
Russian crises also increased pressures on Brazil that 
still suffered from repetitive trade balance deficits and 
current account deficits. In 1998, Brazil earned only 
around US$51 billion from export sales, correspond-
ing to 6.5% of GDP. Then, subject to central bank in-
terventions, the real depreciated rapidly and reached 
R$2.25 per dollar in late January 2002. When it became 
increasingly likely that José Ignácio Lula da Silva would 
be elected Brazil’s new president, hot money quickly 
left Brazil and the real dropped to R$3.83 per dollar in 
late October 2002. Roughly at parity with the US dollar 
at that time, the R$/euro exchange rate was similar 
(see Exhibit 1). Contrary to initial expectations, Lula’s 
government gained the confidence of the internation-
al financial markets. Brazil’s monetary policy aimed to 
quickly reduce inflationary pressures by raising real 
interest rates. During the 2003 crisis, for instance, the 
central bank’s reference nominal interest rates (the so-
called Special System of Clearance and Custody rate or 
SELIC—using the Portuguese acronym) topped 26%. 
Even at the beginning of 2012, nominal interest rates 
were around 10% and real interest rates were close to 
5%, the highest worldwide. Brazil’s conservative fiscal 
and monetary policy quickly showed positive results. 
After paying back its last IMF loan in 2005, the coun-
try obtained the investment grade rating in 2008. 
The international financial markets honored that and 
billions of US dollars poured into the country over the 
last few years. In addition, higher export sales, partly 
triggered by record commodity prices, led to a high 
level of foreign exchange reserves of US$356 billion 
in March 2012. However, the long expected and well-
received macroeconomic stabilization came at a cost: 
the R$ had been appreciating since 2004 and about 
2,700 exporters (or approximately 12% of all Brazil-
based exporters as of 2004) quit international markets 
between 2004 and 2011 (see Exhibit 2). 
1) © Dirk Michael Boehe. Reprinted with permission. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Two   Integrative Cases	
277
Exhibit 1
Brazilian Real to Euro Exchange Rate
Source:  http://www.indexmundi.com/xrates/graph.aspx?c1=BRL&c2= 
EUR&days=3650
“Custo Brasil”: The Costs of Doing Business in Brazil 
As if foreign exchange pressures were not enough, other 
charges, colloquially summarized as “Custo Brasil” or 
“Brazil costs,” were also causing headaches to Barny. 
Hourly compensation costs in the manufacturing 
industry are more than six times as high as in China, 
while port and road infrastructure, critical to the export 
industry, lag behind. According to World Bank data, in 
Brazil an average business takes 2,600 hours a year to 
prepare, file, and pay taxes and other mandatory con-
tributions, which compares unfavorably against China 
(398 hours) or the United States (187 hours). Over the 
years, the government has increased minimum wages 
from R$200 in 2002 to R$622 in 2012. While this 
government policy has been very positive to increase  
domestic market demand and to uplift millions of 
poor Brazilians to join the economy, competitiveness 
of several industries has been suffering. Barny com-
plained in an interview: 
Brazil is too expensive, also because salaries rose too 
much. For instance, in 2002, a sewer earned about 
US$200 per month, today she costs us US$700. The 
problem about this is that productivity did not rise the 
same way, it practically remained the same over time.
Counter Measures 
Over the last 20 years, Jobek do Brasil built up a strong 
premium brand, especially in the German market. 
The branding strategy successfully associated Jobek’s 
products with the Latin American lifestyle. In addition, 
Jobek managed to link its brand with environmental 
friendliness by using Foreign Stewardship Council 
(FSC) certified wood for accessories and with social re-
sponsibility by treating employees fairly and by sponsor-
ing community projects. In addition, the Jobek brand 
was associated with high quality standards. Selling this 
brand asset to Stern GmbH was a harsh decision. Now, 
Stern GmbH owned the rights of the Jobek brand for 
Europe while Barny and his brother maintained the 
rights for the rest of the world. In exchange, Stern com-
mitted to buying all products it sold under the Jobek 
brand from Barny for the next ten years. If Stern pur-
chases from third parties, it was required to pay royal-
ties for the use of the Jobek brand. Barny commented 
on the terms of the contract: 
We were lucky and negotiated with Stern a cash ad-
vance of 66% for each order. When we negotiate a 
supply contract, we also include a risk-factor of about 
10% into the bill.
The product mix also suffered several changes. Dis-
continuing manufacturing of cheaper hammocks, with 
export prices of less than €20, was probably the most 
dramatic. Emphasis was on higher value-added products 
that could sell for up to €400 (distributor price). Due 
to the restructuring of the company’s operations, mar-
keting to access alternative markets has been delayed.
In addition, Barny also approached their account 
manager at Banco do Brasil, Brazil’s largest and partly 
state-owned bank, and asked them to make an offer 
for a swap contract over R$1 million. After six months, 
BRL
Date
4.1428
3.9183
3.6939
3.4694
3.2449
3.0204
2.796
2.347
2.5715
2.1226
1.8981
3/5/2002
10/17/2002
6/6/2003
1/8/2004
9/20/2004
6/22/2005
4/19/2006
1/12/2007
11/20/2007
8/8/2008
5/11/2009
1/5/2010
8/12/2010
4/5/2011
11/16/2011
Exhibit 2
Number of Brazilian Exporter
Source: SECEX/MDIC
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
18.796 19.741
21.925 21.252 20.588 20.888 20.408 19.823 19.275 19.194
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

278	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools 
Barny still had not received the contract and grumbled 
that “here in the northeast of Brazil, they are 20 years 
back in some areas.” Indeed, hedging the exposure to 
the euro is sometimes a problem in a country where, 
according to a financial risk consultant, “the US dollar 
is still a synonym for foreign exchange.”
Getting Squeezed 
As if the past turbulence was not yet enough, more 
black clouds moved across the horizon and tapped 
the usually strong sunshine in Brazil’s northeast. With 
the euro in its deepest crisis since its introduction in 
2002, many fear that quantitative easing might be 
used to get rid of the euro zone’s mounting debt. With 
these thoughts passing through his mind, Barny’s 
attention was captured by another article in Valor 
Econômico’s politics section: “Dilma Roussef [the new 
Brazilian president] sent a message to Mrs. Merkel [the 
German Chancellor] complaining about ‘the monetary 
tsunami’ that is threatening to flood Brazil and other 
emerging economies with cheap money made available 
by the European Central Bank.” In fact, Brazil was 
attracting foreign money as never before and received 
a record amount of foreign direct investment (FDI) of 
US$66 billion in 2011. 
Barny complained that “with the resulting real ap-
preciation, our clients are not very happy.” He noted: 
“On November 29, 2011, Stern placed an order based on 
an exchange rate of R$2.49 per euro. Today, on Friday, 
March 2, 2012, the euro dropped to R$2.28, that’s an 
appreciation of about 10% in a very short period. The 
only way we can sell our products is because we have a 
strong brand name.” 
The telephone ringing interrupted Barny’s thoughts. 
It was João Gonçalves, the boss at Reed Isaac, shouting  
through the handset: “Bom dia, Barny, tudo bem? You 
know, I am very concerned with the high minimum 
wage increases that Mrs. Dilma Roussef has pushed 
through the congress, not to mention the ever rising 
tax charges. We can hardly survive at such costs, and 
I am sorry but I need to talk to you about a price ad-
justment.” Barny was almost infuriated but he avoided 
letting João feel his wrath. Barny politely asked João 
if he would like to have lunch together. “We cannot 
be too hard with them, otherwise they back off. But 
if you are too soft with them, they will take advantage 
of you,” Barny scratched his head about what to say to 
João at lunchtime. When Barny tried to sip again, he 
noticed that his coffee mug was empty. Time to think 
of the turnaround strategy’s next steps . . . .
Case Discussion Questions
	 1.	 How do you evaluate Jobek’s situation from the 
resource-based and institution-based views? Why 
have resources and institutions hindered Barny 
from coping with the foreign exchange situation, 
but simultaneously helped him turn his company 
around? 
	 2.	 How do you evaluate Jobek’s strategic response 
to foreign exchange risks? 
	 3.	 What would you do if you were Barny? Why? 
Sources: Based on (1) authors’ interviews; (2) internal information provided 
by Jobek do Brasil, http://www.jobek.com.br; (3) Brazilian Central Bank, 
http://www.bacen.gov.br; (4) Brazilian Ministry of Economic Development, 
http://www.mdic.gov.br; (5) Exchange rate converter, http://www.oanda.com; 
(6) Forbes, 2011. BRIC worker: A look at labor costs in the big EMs, March 11,  
http://www.forbes.com/sites/kenrapoza/2011/03/11/bric-worker-a-look-at-
labor-costs-in-the-big-ems/; (7) Doing Business 2012–Paying taxes, The World  
Bank, http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploretopics/paying-taxes; (8) Valor  
Econômico, 2012, Dilma: países ricos estão inundando o mundo com um 
“tsunami monetário,” March 1; (9) Economist, 2011, Latin America’s econo-
mies: Waging the currency war, January 13, http://www.economist.com/
node/17906027. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Two   Integrative Cases	
279
The EU–Korea Free Trade Agreement1 
Charles M. Byles (Virginia Commonwealth University)
I n t e g r a t i v e  C a s e  2 . 5
The EU embarks upon its most ambitious free trade agreement 
(FTA). For South Korea, the FTA is part of building a free 
trade network around the world that will allow over 70% of 
its exports to achieve duty-free access by 2014. But, bilateral 
agreements have been criticized for undermining the multilat-
eral process (WTO) by allowing preferential treatments. Will 
this bilateral deal deliver what it promises?
After more than two years of negotiating, the 
European Union (EU) and the Republic of Korea of-
ficially signed the EU–Korea Free Trade Agreement 
(EU–Korea FTA) on October 6, 2010, during the EU–
Korea summit in Brussels. The agreement provision-
ally became effective on July 1, 2011. It is not only the 
most comprehensive FTA ever negotiated by the EU, it 
is also the first in Asia and the largest FTA by market 
size entered into by South Korea (hereafter “Korea”). 
The EU–Korea FTA reduces and eliminates tariffs and 
other trade barriers in manufactured goods, agricul-
tural products, and services. Import duties into the 
EU are to be eliminated on nearly all Korean products 
(99% on duties within the next five years) and there 
will be liberalization of trade in services, including 
telecommunications, environmental services, ship-
ping, and financial and legal services. The agreement 
also covers trade-related activities such as govern-
ment procurement, intellectual property rights, labor 
rights, and environmental issues. In addition, the FTA 
also addresses nontariff barriers, specifically in the au-
tomotive, pharmaceutical, medical devices, and elec-
tronics industries. 
Regional and Bilateral Trade Agreements  
in the Context of Multilateral Trade
An Economist article noted that bilateral and regional 
trade agreements had increased significantly from 
49 in 2001 to 167 in 2009. The increase was attrib-
uted to frustration in the progress of the World Trade 
Organization’s (WTO) Doha Development Agenda—
more commonly referred to as the Doha Round, which 
had not achieved much of what it had promised. The 
article contrasted the criticisms and benefits of re-
gional and bilateral FTAs. Two broad criticisms are 
(1) that these deals are overly complex, and (2) that 
they do not serve as a stepping-stone to multilateral 
deals but instead distract governments from the mul-
tilateral process. Complexity is evidenced by the large 
amount of paperwork and bureaucracy resulting in 
few countries using many of the provisions in the 
agreement. In addition, the Economist article notes, 
FTAs contribute to a confusing set of rules rather 
than the predictability that multilateralism promis-
es. Finally, regional and bilateral deals are criticized 
because they give advantages (through lower tariffs) 
to less efficient companies and hence hurt the more 
efficient ones. What are the advantages? The main 
advantage is that some deal is better than no deal at 
all. If little or no progress is being made in the Doha 
Round, regional or bilateral deals are better than 
nothing. 
Consider these criticisms in light of certain pro-
posed benefits of the EU–Korea FTA: The FTA pur-
ports to strengthen existing WTO agreements. In ad-
dition, the proponents of the FTA argue that certain 
aspects of trade are better addressed in a bilateral 
rather than a multilateral agreement. Thus, the FTA 
both has aspects very similar to those found in the 
WTO agreement and the added benefits of fine-tuning 
to better meet the specific needs of the EU and Korea. 
The EU–Korea FTA and the WTO 
The EU–Korea FTA represents a shift from an em-
phasis on multilateral trade (WTO) to an accelerated 
negotiation of bilateral FTAs. The EU has been more 
aggressive in developing FTAs. Korea has recently 
moved towards developing several FTAs in Asia, Latin 
America, and Oceania. The EU–Korea FTA is part of 
a broad EU strategy called “Global Europe in a Com-
peting World,” which called for renewed engagement 
with Asia. “Global Europe” was a response to increas-
ing globalization with the goal of reducing tariff and 
nontariff barriers and to opening markets for foreign 
investment. 
1) © Charles M. Byles. Reprinted with permission.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

280	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools 
Interestingly, the EU believes that the EU–Korea 
FTA is more effective than the WTO at address-
ing issues of competition policy, regulatory issues, 
government procurement, and stronger intellectual 
property protection. EU–Korea accepts much of the 
existing WTO commitments (for example, on anti-
dumping and antisubsidy remedies) while making 
modifications to some aspects of WTO agreements. 
EU–Korea fits into South Korea’s broad strategy of 
creating a free trade network to offset competitive 
pressures from Japanese and Chinese firms. The 
Korean government has sought FTAs with both large 
advanced economies such as the EU and the United 
States as well as natural resource-rich developing 
countries such as Chile and Association of Southeast 
Asian Nations (ASEAN). 
The agreement comprises 15 chapters, several an-
nexes and appendices, three protocols, and four un-
derstandings. What follows is not a detailed discussion 
of each chapter, annex, or protocol, but rather the key 
provisions.
Trade in Manufactured Goods
A major aspect of EU–Korea is the removal of du-
ties and nontariff barriers (NTBs) on the trading 
of goods. Virtually all (98.7%) customs duties on 
manufactured goods will be removed within the 
first five years of the FTA. Several agricultural and 
fisheries products will have longer transitional peri-
ods, and rice and a few other agricultural products 
are excluded from the agreement. While NTBs are 
generally addressed in the FTA, NTBs relating to 
consumer electronics, motor vehicles, pharmaceuti-
cal products, and chemicals are addressed in sepa-
rate annexes. The annexes represent a more detailed 
treatment of NTBs in these industries over what cur-
rently exists under the WTO agreement. These NTBs 
are essentially regulatory and other barriers that in 
some cases reflect the pursuit of legitimate quality 
and safety goals. The FTA broadly seeks to have the 
EU and Korea accept each other’s standards with an 
emphasis on conformity with international standards 
and practices. For example, in consumer electronics, 
the agreement removes duplicate testing and certifi-
cation (for example, where a Korean product would 
have to go through testing and certification in the 
EU before it may be sold there). Similarly, for auto-
mobiles, tests conducted in the EU to show compli-
ance with EU standards will be accepted in Korea. In 
the case of pharmaceutical products, transparency in 
pricing and reimbursement rules are key aspects of 
the agreement since health authorities set drug pric-
es in both the EU and Korea.
The Duty Drawback and Rule of Origin  
Concessions by the EU
A “duty drawback” is a provision in trade rules where 
the government refunds the import tariff paid by 
a company (thus reducing production costs) if the 
imported parts are used in a product that is then 
re-exported (such as a car). The EU generally does 
not allow duty drawbacks once the tariff on the fin-
ished product is removed as would be the case in the  
EU–Korea FTA. The EU has, however, allowed the duty  
drawback to continue for Korean producers (for the 
first time in any bilateral deal), much to the dismay of 
the EU automobile industry. The duty drawback would 
give Korean manufacturers a competitive advantage 
because they could purchase inexpensive components 
from China duty free. In contrast, European firms still 
have to pay duty on imports of foreign components. 
The agreement includes a provision that will allow a 
cap of 5% on that duty drawback should there be a 
significant increase in foreign sourcing by Korean 
manufacturers. 
The “rule-of-origin” concession also offers advan-
tages to the Korean manufacturers because it allows 
them to reduce the cost of the exported product by 
importing more inexpensive components from China 
rather than using more expensive Korean components. 
This will occur where the rule-of-origin content was 
reduced from 60% to 55% in the case of automobiles.
Trade in Services
EU–Korea is the most extensive FTA in services agreed 
on by the EU. In general, Korea’s services market is more 
restricted than the EU’s. The agreement significantly 
opens the Korean market to a wide variety of service 
sectors. EU firms will have increased access to Korean 
markets in telecommunications, environmental servic-
es, shipping, construction services, financial services, 
express delivery, air transport, and legal services. Korea 
obtained increased access to EU markets for architec-
ture, engineering, urban planning, landscaping, print-
ing and publishing, telecommunications, construction, 
finance, and transportation services. The FTA uses 
the “positive list” approach whereby the EU and Korea 
must specifically identify the kinds of services for which 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Two   Integrative Cases	
281
market access will apply. The agreement also includes 
liberalization of investment in both services and non-
services sectors. For example, in telecommunications, 
Korea would allow EU firms to own 100% of the shares 
of Korean-based providers (with some exceptions where 
the share of ownership is limited to 49%).
Trade Remedies
The EU–Korea FTA includes a chapter addressing 
the use of antidumping and antisubsidy remedies by 
the two parties. The FTA recognizes the right of each 
party to use these remedies, but it attempts to limit 
use to situations of real injury to one of the partners. 
The agreement stipulates that the amount of the 
antidumping or antisubsidy duty should be lower than 
the amount of the dumping or subsidy to the extent 
that it is adequate to remedy the injury. The FTA also 
provides for increased transparency in the investigation 
of dumping or subsidy cases and establishes a working 
group to facilitate cooperation in the use of trade 
remedies.
A safeguard action is taken when there is a surge of 
imports that causes or threatens serious material injury 
to a domestic industry. The FTA allows either party to 
use safeguard actions (i.e., to impose temporary tariffs) 
in the event that a surge in imports threatens serious 
injury.
Technical Barriers to Trade
Technical barriers to trade are regulations, standards, 
and testing and certification procedures that may cre-
ate an obstacle to trade. WTO policy recognizes the 
need for such regulations to achieve safety, health, and 
environmental objectives, but seeks to avoid such regu-
lations being used for protectionist reasons. The EU–
Korea chapter on technical barriers to trade commits to 
the spirit of the WTO policy. The EU–Korea FTA, how-
ever, tries to improve on the WTO policy by agreeing to 
cooperate on standards and regulations and to estab-
lish dialogues between regulators with the intention of 
simplifying and standardizing the regulations. In addi-
tion, EU–Korea incorporates transparency in making 
rules, encourages use of international standards, and 
allows either party to discuss the rules before they are  
implemented. 
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
Under existing WTO agreements, member countries 
are allowed to enact procedures to protect human, 
animal, and plant health, as long as those measures are 
not intended for protectionism. EU–Korea builds on 
existing rules by making specific commitments on 
transparency, and emphasizing the use of international 
standards in determining these rules. EU–Korea also 
provides a mechanism for cooperation between the 
parties and provides a forum for discussion of prob-
lems arising from the implementation of any sanitary 
and phytosanitary measures.
Government Procurement
Within the WTO, the agreement on government 
procurement is known as a “plurilateral agreement” 
because not all members are signatories to that 
agreement (the EU and Korea are signatories). The 
purpose of EU–Korea is to make laws, regulations, 
procedures, and practices governing government 
procurement transparent and to ensure that they do  
not become instruments of protectionism or discrimi-
nate against foreign products or suppliers. EU–Korea 
will extend the existing WTO agreement to include 
public works concessions and build-operate-transfer 
(BOT) contracts that are not covered under the ex-
isting WTO agreement. This aspect of government 
procurement is of particular interest to European 
suppliers that are global leaders in this area. Essen-
tially, this agreement would provide opportunities for 
BOT contracts in cities, counties, and provinces in  
Korea.
Intellectual Property
The EU–Korea FTA builds on the existing WTO 
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 
(TRIPS) to fill certain gaps in TRIPS. Within the 
WTO framework, TRIPS is a minimal agreement and 
members are permitted to have more stringent stan-
dards. EU–Korea complements and updates the exist-
ing TRIPS rules for three areas: copyrights, industrial 
designs, and geographical indications. Enforcement of 
intellectual property rights is based on EU standards. 
Copyright provisions are in line with the latest inter-
national developments and include music and other 
artistic works. Enforcement of industrial designs fills 
some gaps in TRIPS and includes provisions for un-
registered designs. Finally, EU–Korea will provide a 
high level of protection for geographical indications 
important to the EU such as wines (e.g., champagne), 
spirits (e.g., Scotch or Irish whisky), and cheeses (e.g., 
manchego). 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

282	
Part Two   Acquiring Tools 
Competition Policy
Within the WTO, competition policy is a relatively 
new area that addresses how policy instruments such 
as antitrust or competition laws interact with inter-
national trade. The WTO working group assigned to 
look at competition policy issues is currently inactive. 
As such, EU–Korea has developed a more concrete 
competition policy. The FTA prohibits actions by 
firms that are intended to reduce competition. Exam-
ples of prohibited practices are cartels, mergers that 
have the effect of reducing competition, and abusive 
behavior by market leaders. Both the EU and Korea 
have agreed to maintain competition laws and an au-
thority to enforce those laws. In addition, both par-
ties agree to prohibit certain kinds of subsidies that 
distort competition, such as subsidies covering debts 
or liabilities of an enterprise without any limitation to 
the duration or subsidies to ailing enterprises without 
a plan to restructure that enterprise and remove the 
subsidy.
Dispute Settlement
EU–Korea has a dispute settlement mechanism based 
on the WTO dispute settlement model, but with the im-
provement of being faster. The first step of the mecha-
nism is a consultation between the parties with the goal 
of reaching a solution. If no solution is reached, the dis-
pute goes to an arbitration panel consisting of three ex-
perts chosen by the disputing parties or selected from 
a list agreed upon in advance. The panel then holds 
a public hearing where interested parties and compa-
nies may submit their views. The panel’s ruling, which 
is binding on both parties, must be delivered within 
120 days of the panel being formed. The party found 
in breech of the FTA rules has a period in which to 
bring itself into compliance. At the end of that period, 
if the complainant believes that the other party has not 
complied and the panel agrees, the complainant is al-
lowed to impose sanctions in the form of tariffs. For 
urgent situations, the time limits for arbitration may be 
reduced.
Expected Benefits
Most studies estimate that the agreement will have a 
small but positive benefit to both economies but that 
the larger relative benefit will accrue to Korea. The 
smaller Korean economy (relative to the EU), greater 
dependence on the EU’s market, and higher trade bar-
riers explain this larger relative benefit. The overall 
positive effect is small because of the larger role played 
by other countries in EU and Korean trade. For ex-
ample, the EU’s trade with South Korea represents 
2%–2.5% of total extra-EU trade.
EU service providers in retail and wholesale trade, 
transportation services, financial services, and busi-
ness services will be expected to gain from the FTA. 
Also benefitting from the agreement will be EU goods 
exporters, especially in pharmaceuticals, auto parts, 
industrial machinery, electronics parts, and some agri-
cultural and processed foods. The FTA will give Korea 
access to the largest market in the world. Korean pro-
ducers of cars, ships, wireless communication devises, 
chemical products, and imaging equipment will be 
expected to increase their exports to the EU.
Winners and Losers of the EU–Korea FTA
Free Enterprise (a publication of the US Chamber of 
Commerce) published an article in July 2011 entitled 
“Winners and Losers of the EU–Korea FTA.” According 
to the article, the winners were EU and Korean companies 
and consumers. The losers were Americans. Why? 
Failure to ratify the US-Korea FTA (which was signed 
by both governments) resulted in lost opportunities to 
exports and to create more jobs in America. Since that 
time, much has changed. On March 15, 2012, the US–
Korea FTA came into force amid much fanfare. The 
US International Trade Commission estimated that the 
FTA will add $10 billion to $12 billion to annual US GDP 
and around $10 billion to annual merchandise exports 
to Korea. EU–Korea and US-Korea are good examples of 
the recent surge in bilateral signing of FTAs noted at the 
beginning of the case. A question is worth considering 
is: Is the WTO becoming less important and are regional 
and bilateral agreements the wave of the future?
Case Discussion Questions
	 1.	 Is the WTO becoming less important, and are 
regional and bilateral agreements the wave of 
the future? Consider in your answer whether 
the EU–Korea FTA improves upon certain WTO 
mechanisms for facilitating free trade.
	 2.	 Why would an FTA such as EU–Korea permit 
protectionist measures such as antidumping and 
the safeguard action? 
	 3.	 While trade theories generally support free trade, 
political realities ensure that trade barriers still 
exist. How does the EU–Korea FTA address the 
realities of international trade?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Two   Integrative Cases	
283
	 4.	 Some argue that regional or bilateral trade agree-
ments are building blocks for global trade agree-
ments. Others argue that such “balkanization” 
of world trade represents stumbling blocks to 
multilateral trade. Is the EU–Korea FTA a build-
ing block or a stumbling block? Use specific 
features of this FTA to defend your answer.
	 5.	 How does the EU–Korea FTA address sensitive 
competition policy issues such as antidumping, 
antitrust, and cartels?
Sources: Based on (1) W. H. Cooper, R. Jurenas, M. D. Platzer, & M. E. Manyin, 
2011, The EU-South Korea Free Trade Agreement and Its Implications for the 
United States, Congressional Research Service, December 1; (2) D. K. Das, 
2011, Impact of EU–Korea FTA positive but small, The Korea Times, June 19;  
(3) Economist, 2010, One-way street, June 8; (4) The European Commission, 
2010, EU-South Korea Free Trade Agreement: A Quick Reading Guide, 
Brussels; (5) The European Commission, 2011, The EU–Korea Free 
Trade Agreement in Practice, Brussels; (6) V. C. Jones, 2007, Trade 
Remedies: A Primer, Congressional Research Service, May 1; (7) T. Overby, 
2011, Winners and losers of the EU–Korea FTA: The EU vs. America, Free 
Enterprise, July 22; (8)  US Trade Representative, 2012, US-Korea Free  
Trade Agreement: New Opportunities for US Exporters Under the US–Korea 
Trade Agreement, Office of USTR; (9) World Trade Organization, 2012, 
www.wto.org.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

cisale/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Strategizing around the Globe
Chapters
	
9	 Growing and Internationalizing 
the Entrepreneurial Firm
	 10	 Entering Foreign Markets
	 11	 Managing Global Competitive Dynamics
	 12	 Making Alliances and Acquisitions Work
	 13	 Strategizing, Structuring, and Learning 
around the World
p a r t
3
Digital Art/Spirit/Corbis 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 
9 
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
	 9-1	 define entrepreneurship, entrepreneurs, and 
entrepreneurial firms.
	 9-2	 identify the institutions and resources that 
affect entrepreneurship.
	 9-3	 identify three characteristics of a growing 
entrepreneurial firm.
	 9-4	 describe how international strategies for 
entering foreign markets are different from 
those for staying in domestic markets.
	 9-5	 participate in two leading debates 
concerning entrepreneurship.
	 9-6	 draw implications for action.
John Keatley/Redux
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Growing and 
Internationalizing the 
Entrepreneurial Firm
Saturna Capital Corporation, adviser to both the 
Saturna Investment Trust and the Amana Mutual 
Funds Trust, is one of the world’s most successful 
companies in the rapidly growing and specialized ac-
tivity of Islamic investing. As of 2010, Saturna man-
aged approximately $2.6 billion in assets, represent-
ing a tenfold increase since the beginning of 2005. 
The vast majority of these assets are invested in eq-
uities according to Islamic finance principles, which 
prohibit the use of interest and forbid investments in 
firms involved in alcohol, tobacco, and gambling ac-
tivities. Indeed, the Amana Mutual Funds Trust’s two 
largest equity mutual funds, the Amana Income Fund 
(AMANX) and the Amana Growth Fund (AMAGX), are 
recognized as the largest in the world that invest ac-
cording to sharia (Islamic law).
Considering its unlikely location, Saturna’s success 
within the global market of Islamic finance products 
is even more remarkable. Its headquarters are located 
in the small city of Bellingham, Washington (popula-
tion: 67,200), about midway between the much larger 
cities of Seattle, Washington, and Vancouver, British 
Columbia. Saturna is named for one of the larger 
islands in northern Puget Sound’s beautiful San Juan 
archipelago, easily visible from Bellingham. Further-
more, it is a relatively small company—with only about 
40 employees. Therefore, Saturna provides an apt ex-
ample of an entrepreneurial firm’s ability to transcend 
geographical barriers and compete on a global scale 
through persistent leverage of core competencies.
In the mid-1980s, when Saturna’s founder, Nick 
Kaiser, was initially approached by a group of Islamic 
investors with the idea for an Islamic mutual fund, 
Islamic investing was certainly off the radar of major 
financial players in the United States. In fact, the 
group’s idea had already been rejected by at least one 
well-established firm. It was Kaiser’s openness to 
learning about sharia-compliant investment principles 
and his willingness to enter uncharted territory that 
allowed him, as a non-Muslim, native-born American, 
to acquire a skill set that would prove to complement 
his portfolio management expertise. Today, Saturna 
is the beneficiary of the corporate-wide transfer of 
his highly developed knowledge of Islamic investing, 
which allows the company to compete successfully 
in this global market.
O p e n i n g  C a s e
Saturna Capital: A Leader in Islamic Finance
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

288	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
To some extent, Saturna’s rapid growth mirrors the 
rapid growth of the Islamic financial industry. By some 
estimates, the industry more than doubled in size 
between 1998 and 2008 with the growth driven by, 
among other things, a surge in oil-related wealth. Nev-
ertheless, Saturna’s growth has markedly exceeded 
that of the industry as a whole, which includes hun-
dreds of financial institutions located in major finan-
cial capitals that also compete for clients who want 
to invest in accordance with Islamic law. Saturna’s 
competitors include such corporate behemoths as 
HSBC, Citicorp, Deutsche Bank, and UBS, as well as 
large banks headquartered in the Persian Gulf region 
and Southeast Asia, where the majority of the world’s 
Muslims live.
In light of what many may see as formidable 
competitive disadvantages related to its location and 
relatively small size, how does one explain Saturna’s 
remarkable success? One of the most compelling ex-
planations is Kaiser’s exceptional talent as an invest-
ment manager. The Amana Income and Amana Growth 
mutual funds are consistently ranked at the top of their 
peer categories for long-term performance, despite 
being measured against funds with no restrictions on 
where they can invest. The Amana funds are prohibited 
from investing in firms that earn a significant amount 
of revenue from alcohol, tobacco, or gambling as well 
as investments based on interest (such as bonds or 
financial derivatives). While avoiding investments in 
banks and other financial companies proved fortuitous 
in the aftermath of the collapse of financial stocks in 
2008, such limitations can handicap overall financial 
performance.
Saturna’s outstanding corporate governance also 
undoubtedly contributes to its success. In particular, it 
has a sterling reputation for financial integrity, includ-
ing vigilance in complying with financial regulations 
governing the mutual fund industry. Its commitment 
to upholding the ethical principles of its investors is 
supported by its board of directors mostly consist-
ing of prominent Muslim community leaders, as well 
as its use of sharia scholars as advisors regarding its 
compliance with Islamic laws of investing. Saturna’s 
director of Islamic investing, Monem Salam, serves 
as a vital interface between the company and the 
population of potential Islamic investors. Both a de-
vout Muslim and an MBA graduate, Salam is very ef-
fective in ensuring that Saturna’s investments meet 
the needs of its Muslim clientele as well as communi-
cating Saturna’s remarkable performance to potential 
Muslim investors.
The investment management business is ul-
timately about serving customer needs. Besides 
providing industry-leading financial returns, Saturna 
dedicates considerable resources to providing value-
added services for its current customers and to the 
broader American Muslim community. For example, 
Saturna will estimate zakah (the percentage of in-
vestment earnings to set aside for charitable giving 
according to sharia) on behalf of investors in affili-
ated accounts. It also creates a worksheet to help 
investors save for Hajj (a Muslim’s obligatory pilgrim-
age to Mecca).
Perhaps the most impressive evidence of Saturna’s 
success is the fact that many Amana Fund shareown-
ers are not Muslim. They are quite happy to abide by 
the Islamic law and appreciate Saturna’s uncompro-
mising standards of customer service. Saturna and the 
dedicated efforts of its employees clearly demonstrate 
how a small entrepreneurial firm in an unlikely location 
can leverage a niche market strategy to earn respect 
and recognition in a global industry.
Sources: This case was written by Professor Steven Globerman (Kaiser 
Professor of International Business, Western Washington University). It 
is based on (1) the author’s interviews with Nick Kaiser; (2) D. Kathman, 
2009, Nick Kaiser, Saturna Capital, Morningstar Advisor, January 30.
How do entrepreneurial firms such as Saturna Capital grow? How do they enter interna-
tional markets? What are the challenges and constraints they face? This chapter deals 
with these important questions. This is different from many international business (IB) 
textbooks that typically focus on large firms. To the extent that every large firm today 
started out small and that some (although not all) of today’s small and medium-sized 
enterprises (SMEs) will become tomorrow’s multinational enterprises (MNEs), current 
Small and medium-sized 
enterprises (SMEs)
Firms with fewer than 500 em-
ployees in the United States and 
with fewer than 250 employees 
in the European Union.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 9   Growing and Internationalizing the Entrepreneurial Firm	
289
and would-be managers will not gain a complete picture of the global business land-
scape if they focus only on large firms. SMEs are firms with fewer than 500 employees 
in the United States and with fewer than 250 employees in the European Union. Most 
students will join SMEs for employment. Some readers of this book will also start up 
their own SMEs, thus further necessitating our attention to these numerous “Davids” 
instead of the smaller number of “Goliaths.”
This chapter first defines entrepreneurship. Next, we outline how our two leading 
perspectives, institution-based and resource-based views, shed light on entrepreneur-
ship. Then we introduce characteristics of a growing entrepreneurial firm and multiple 
ways to internationalize.
9-1 Entrepreneurship and Entrepreneurial Firms
Although entrepreneurship is often associated with smaller and younger firms, 
there is no rule banning larger and older firms from being “entrepreneurial.” So 
what exactly is entrepreneurship? Recent research suggests that firm size and age 
are not defining characteristics of entrepreneurship. Instead, entrepreneurship is 
defined as “the identification and exploitation of previously unexplored oppor-
tunities.”1 Specifically, it is concerned with “the sources of opportunities; the pro-
cesses of discovery, evaluation, and exploitation of opportunities; and the set of 
individuals who discover, evaluate, and exploit them.”2 These individuals, thus, 
are entrepreneurs. French in origin, the word “entrepreneurs” traditionally means 
intermediaries connecting others. Today, the word mostly refers to founders and 
owners of new businesses or managers of existing firms. Consequently, interna-
tional entrepreneurship is defined as “a combination of innovative, proactive, and 
risk-seeking behavior that crosses national borders and is intended to create wealth 
in organizations.”3 
Although SMEs are not the exclusive domain of entrepreneurship, the conven-
tion that many people use is to associate entrepreneurship with SMEs because, 
on average, SMEs tend to be more entrepreneurial than large firms. To minimize 
confusion, the remainder of this chapter will follow that convention, although it is 
not totally accurate. In other words, while we acknowledge that some managers at 
large firms can be very entrepreneurial, we will limit the use of the term “entrepre-
neurs” to owners, founders, and managers of SMEs. Further, we will use the term 
“entrepreneurial firms” when referring to SMEs.
SMEs are important. Worldwide, they account for over 95% of the number of 
firms, create approximately 50% of total value added, and generate 60%–90% of 
employment (depending on the country).4 Obviously, entrepreneurship has both 
rewarding and punishing aspects.5 Many entrepreneurs will try, and many SMEs 
will fail.6 Only a small number of entrepreneurs and SMEs will succeed.
9-2 Institutions, Resources, and Entrepreneurship
Both institution-based and the resource-based views shed light on entrepre-
neurship, as shown in Figure 9.1. In this section, we will look at how institutions 
constrain or facilitate entrepreneurs and how firm-specific (and in many cases 
entrepreneur-specific) resources and capabilities determine entrepreneurial 
success and failure.
Learning Objective
Define entrepreneurship, 
entrepreneurs, and 
entrepreneurial firms.
9-1
Entrepreneurship
The identification and exploita-
tion of previously unexplored 
opportunities.
Entrepreneurs
Founders and/or owners of 
new businesses or managers of 
existing firms who identify and 
exploit new opportunities.
International entrepreneurship
A combination of innovative, pro-
active, and risk-seeking behavior 
that crosses national borders 
and is intended to create wealth 
in organizations.
Learning Objective
Identify the institutions 
and resources that affect 
entrepreneurship.
9-2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

290	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
9-2a Institutions and Entrepreneurship
First introduced in Chapters 2 and 3, both formal and informal institutional 
constraints, as rules of the game, affect entrepreneurship (see Figure 9.1). Although 
entrepreneurship is thriving around the globe in general, its development is 
uneven. Whether entrepreneurship is facilitated or retarded significantly depends 
on formal institutions governing how entrepreneurs start up new firms.7 A World 
Bank survey, Doing Business (see PengAtlas Map 3.1), reports some striking 
differences in government regulations concerning how easy it is to start up new 
entrepreneurial firms in terms of registration, licensing, and incorporation. A 
relatively straightforward (or even “mundane”) task of connecting electricity to a 
newly built commercial building illustrates such tremendous differences (In Focus 
9.1). In general, governments in developed economies impose fewer procedures 
(an average of 4.6 procedures for OECD high-income countries) and a lower total 
cost (free in Japan and 5.1% of per capita GDP in Germany). On the other hand, 
entrepreneurs have to put up with harsher hurdles in poor countries. As a class 
of its own, Burundi imposes a total cost of 430 times of its per capita GDP for 
entrepreneurs to obtain electricity. Sierra Leone leads the world in requiring 
entrepreneurs to spend 441 days to obtain electricity. Overall, it is not surprising 
that the more entrepreneur-friendly these formal institutional requirements are, 
the more flourishing entrepreneurship is, and the more developed the economies 
become—and vice versa (Figure 9.2). As a result, more countries are now reforming 
their formal institutions in order to become more entrepreneur-friendly.
In addition to formal institutions, informal institutions such as cultural val-
ues and norms also affect entrepreneurship.8 For example, because entrepreneurs 
necessarily take more risks, individualistic and low uncertainty-avoidance societies 
tend to foster relatively more entrepreneurs, whereas collectivistic and high uncer-
tainty-avoidance societies may result in relatively fewer entrepreneurs. Among de-
veloped economies, Japan has the lowest rate of start-ups—one-third of America’s 
rate and half of Europe’s.9 In another example, Russians make heavy use of social 
networks online, averaging 9.8 hours per month—more than double the world av-
erage. While spending that much time online makes sense during the long and 
cold Russian winter, another important reason is the long-held Russian tradition 
Institution-Based View
- Formal institutions
- Informal institutions
(both at home and abroad)
Resource-Based View
- Value
- Rarity
- Imitability
- Organization
Entrepreneurship
Growth
Innovation
Financing
Internationalization
Figure 9.1
Institutions, Resources, and Entrepreneurship
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 9   Growing and Internationalizing the Entrepreneurial Firm	
291
The World Bank’s Doing Business report tracks all 
procedures, time, and direct costs required for a new 
business to obtain electricity for a newly constructed 
commercial building. To ensure that the data are com-
parable across economies, the respondents were pre-
sented with a standard case study:
An entrepreneur would like to connect his 
newly built warehouse for cold meat storage 
to electricity. The internal wiring up to the me-
tering point has already been completed by 
the electrician employed by the construction 
firm, and the entrepreneur would now like to 
obtain the final electricity connection from the 
local distribution utility. The electrician working 
for the entrepreneur estimates that the ware-
house will need a 140 kilovolt ampere (kVA) 
connection.
Electricity distribution utilities in the largest busi-
ness city of each of the 140 economies were sur-
veyed. The results are very informative.
Getting Electricity
IN Focus 9.1 
Ethical 
Dilemma
Selected countries
Direct cost  
(% of per capita GDP)
Time (days)
Procedures (number)
Japan
0*
105
3*
Hong Kong, China 
1.8%
101
4
Germany
5.1%
17*
3*
Australia
15.4%
46
5
United States
16.8%
48
5
Singapore
34.2%
76
5
United Kingdom
42.2%
111
5
Brazil
163.2%
36
6
Canada
164.4%
133
8**
India
504.9%
67
6
China
835.7%
118
4
Sierra Leone
1,279.1%
441**
8**
Russia
4,521.6%
272
8**
Burundi
43,020.5%**
158
4
Regional averages
OECD (high income)
58.3%
87.6
4.6
Latin America & Caribbean
526.3%
65.4
5.3
Eastern Europe & Central Asia
804.0%
156.4
5.8
East Asia & Pacific
1,108.9%
91.1
4.8
Middle East & North Africa
1,355.0%
78.9
4.8
South Asia
1,695.8%
172.5
5.5
Sub-Saharan Africa
6,409.0%
162.4
5.2
Source: Data extracted from World Bank, 2010, Doing Business 2010 (database at www.doingbusiness.org).
* Lowest in the world. ** Highest in the world.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

292	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
of relying more on informal information networks for daily life. These informal 
norms help nurture social network entrepreneurs such as Russia’s Vkontakte and 
attract foreign entrants such as Facebook.10 Overall, the institution-based view sug-
gests that both formal and informal institutions matter. Later sections will discuss 
how they matter.
9-2b Resources and Entrepreneurship
The resource-based view, first introduced in Chapter 4, sheds considerable light 
on entrepreneurship, with a focus on its value, rarity, imitability, and organiza-
tional (VRIO) aspects (see Figure 9.1). First, entrepreneurial resources must create 
value.11 For example, by offering cheap fares, convenient schedules, Wi-Fi, and a 
power port on every seat, Megabus offers superb value to travelers for medium-haul 
trips that are too far for a leisurely drive but too close to justify the expenses and 
the increasing hassle to fly (see Chapter 10 Closing Case). On medium-haul routes, 
Megabus is rapidly changing the way Americans—especially the young—travel, so 
much so that it may help kill plans for the new high-speed rail, which after all may 
not offer that much value.
Second, resources must be rare. As the cliché goes, “If everybody has it, you can’t 
make money from it.” The best-performing entrepreneurs tend to have the rarest 
knowledge and deeper insights about business opportunities. For example, in the 
1980s, a small-fry entrepreneur in China, Zong Qinghou, peddled school supplies 
and ice cream from a bicycle-drawn cart. He noticed that Chinese kids, who were 
products of the “one child policy” and spoiled by their parents and grandparents, 
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
OECD (high income)
Eastern Europe & Central Asia
East Asia & Paciﬁc
Middle East & North Africa
Latin American & Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Ranking: 1–183 out of
183 contries surveyed,
the lower the better
Figure 9.2
Average Ranking on the Ease of Doing Business
Source: Data extracted from World Bank, 2010, Doing Business 2010 (database at www.doingbusiness.org).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 9   Growing and Internationalizing the Entrepreneurial Firm	
293
preferred junk food over more nutritious food. These “little emperors” 
could benefit from nutritional supplements that supply needed vitamins 
and minerals. But all the numerous nutritional supplements marketed in 
China at that time targeted adults, claiming to boost their longevity and 
sexual potency. Armed by this powerful insight, Zong founded a start-
up called Wahaha that pioneered the category of children’s nutritional 
supplements.12 Wahaha has now grown to become China’s number-one 
beverage company, and Zong one of the richest men in China.
Third, resources must be inimitable. For example, in the ocean of 
e-commerce companies, the ability to do the “dirtiest job on the Internet” 
as an online moderator is very hard to imitate. After being exposed to, 
and then cleaning up, the most nasty and most undesirable racism and 
bigotry on a daily basis, sometimes online moderators “feel you need to 
spend two hours in the shower just because it is so disgusting.”13 But then 
that is why firms such as eModeration and ICUC Moderation can charge 
up to $50,000 per month to clean up comments and tweets for established 
organizations.
Fourth, entrepreneurial resources must be organizationally embedded. 
For example, as long as wars have been fought, there have been merce-
naries for hire. But only in recent times have private military companies 
(PMCs) become a global industry, thanks to the superb organizational 
capabilities of entrepreneurial firms such as Blackwater, now known as Xe.
In sum, the resource-based view suggests that firm-specific (and in 
many cases, entrepreneur-specific) resources largely determine entrepre-
neurial success and failure. Overall, institution-based and resource-based 
views combine to shed light on entrepreneurial strategies.
9-3 Growing the Entrepreneurial Firm
This section discusses three major characteristics associated with a growing en-
trepreneurial firm: (1) growth, (2) innovation, and (3) financing. A fourth one, 
internationalization, will be highlighted in the next section.
9-3a Growth
For many entrepreneurs, such as Nick Kaiser (see the Opening Case) and David 
Neeleman (see Emerging Markets 9.1), the excitement associated with growing a 
new company is the very thing that attracts them in the first place.14 Recall from 
the resource-based view that a firm can be conceptualized as a bundle of resources 
and capabilities. The growth of an entrepreneurial firm can thus be viewed as an 
attempt to more fully use currently underutilized resources and capabilities. An 
entrepreneurial firm can leverage its (intangible) vision, drive, and leadership in 
order to grow, even though it may be shorter on (tangible) resources such as finan-
cial capital than a larger firm would be.
One hallmark of entrepreneurial growth is a dynamic, flexible, guerrilla strat-
egy. As underdogs, entrepreneurial SMEs cannot compete against their larger and 
more established rivals head-on. “Going for the crumbs” (at least initially), smaller 
firms often engage in indirect and subtle attacks that large rivals may not immedi-
ately recognize as competitive challenges.15 In the lucrative market of US defense 
Learning Objective
Identify three characteristics of 
a growing entrepreneurial firm.
9-3
Chinese businessman Zong 
Qinghou has made a success 
of his Wahaha brand bever-
ages. If you were to run a quick 
VRIO analysis on Wahaha, what 
qualities would you say set this 
entrepreneur and his company 
apart?
ChinaFotoPress/ChinFotoPress/Newscom
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

294	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
David Neeleman was born in São Paolo to parents 
who were Mormon missionaries. He spent several 
years living the life of a well-to-do Brazilian child in 
the country’s southeast, which typically revolves 
around beaches, barbecues, and private sports 
clubs. Many Brazilians lament the contrast be-
tween the rich and the poor. But it is less marked 
now than it was in Neeleman’s childhood thanks to 
a recent spell of growth that has favored the poor 
in particular. In that he sees an opportunity. Brazil’s 
middle class is swelling; at the last count, 97 million 
people were in marketing bracket “C,” which means 
they are rich enough to contemplate getting on an 
airplane. Neeleman, in turn, has some experience 
getting people onto planes, having founded JetBlue, 
an American airline that aims to combine low cost 
with relatively lavish service.
Neeleman had taken the JetBlue from an idea to 
an IPO, and then as chief executive officer helped it 
grow to a $1.6 billion company. But in 2007, Neeleman 
resigned after blunders had left passengers stranded 
during a spell of bad weather. In 2008, he insisted 
that he was “pretty much done with the airline busi-
ness.”
He tried to put all this behind him by returning to 
Brazil. He was surprised to find that Brazilian air fares 
were 70% higher than in the United States, despite 
being considerably poorer. The two biggest Brazilian 
carriers, TAM and Gol, had a combined share of 85%, 
and large areas of the country were scantily served 
by any airlines. All this tempted him back into a busi-
ness that in the words of Sir Richard Branson, British 
founder of the Virgin family of carriers, excels at turn-
ing billionaires into millionaires.
Brazil is nearly the size of the continental Unit-
ed States, but the infrastructure is weak and many 
families have been scattered by internal migration. 
Thus making air travel more accessible was a noble 
aim—and potentially a lucrative one. ”It sometimes 
feels like this country is built for 20 million people,” 
says Neeleman. In fact, Brazil has close to 190 million 
souls. Neeleman started his Brazilian airline, Azul 
(which means blue), in December 2008. Azul’s tickets 
are cheaper than a bus for some routes.
In nine months, the company has gone from hav-
ing no employees to a staff of 1,300. It has 12 planes 
made by the Brazilian aerospace company Embraer, 
which pleases the Brazilian government. By the end 
of 2009 it will have 14 planes. Azul is already the coun-
try’s third biggest carrier, although it is still a long way 
behind TAM and Gol.
The speed with which Neeleman has gotten his 
new company airborne is perhaps surprising given 
Brazil’s reputation for a bureaucracy that makes life 
hard for entrepreneurs. In its Doing Business survey, 
the World Bank ranks Brazil 121 places lower than 
the United States in ease of starting a business. Ac-
cording to Neeleman, many things that companies 
need, from capital to telephone lines and computing 
expertise, are indeed more expensive in Brazil than 
in America, and labor is not actually much cheaper 
when taxes are taken into account. Although the 
corporate tax rate is lower in Brazil, Azul needs an 
army of accountants to pay it correctly. Brazilian cus-
tomers also have less access to credit compared to 
Americans, so Azul has had to perform some of the 
services of a bank, offering interest-free credit for 
ten months, and so on.
But the feebler competition and growing market 
compensate for this. ”America has an excess of ev-
erything: cars, credit cards,” says Neeleman. ”Down 
here, people are getting their first car, first credit card, 
owning their first home. It feels like the beginning of 
the cycle.”
Azul Takes Off from Brazil 
E m e r g i n g  M a r k e t s  9 . 1
Source: Excerpted from Economist, 2009, Missionary man, August 29: 58. © The Economist.
Danny Lehman/Corbis; Björn Meyer/sitox/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 9   Growing and Internationalizing the Entrepreneurial Firm	
295
contracts, large firms such as Boeing and Raytheon like “doing the impossible.” 
Meanwhile, smaller firms, such as Alliant Techsystems (known for its stock sym-
bol ATK), focus on the possible and the cheap—upgrading missiles and making 
mortar munitions more accurate based on proven, off-the-shelf solutions. As a re-
sult, ATK is able to consistently beat larger competitors and supply the US military, 
which has become increasingly concerned about cost overruns.16 
9-3b Innovation 
Innovation is at the heart of an entrepreneurial mindset.17 Israeli SMEs, for exam-
ple, are known for their innovation capabilities (see Emerging Markets 9.2). Exam-
ples include firewalls (Checkpoint) and ICQ instant messaging software (Mirabilis) 
as well as the Pentium chip (developed by Intel’s subsidiary in Israel).18 
The young must shout if they want to be heard. In a 
stone hanger in the old port of Jaffa, 30 entrepreneurs 
have five minutes each to present their start-up com-
panies to a panel of digital luminaries and an audience 
that includes potential investors. Not everyone in the 
room is ready to shut up and listen, so the hopefuls 
must battle against the din. Feng-GUI explains how, by 
simulating human vision, it can tell advertisers and de-
signers which areas of a web page are most likely to 
grab people’s attention. CopyV promises to send large 
files quickly and securely. With Fooducate, “a dietician 
in your pocket,” on your smartphone, you can scan bar 
codes in the supermarket and find out what’s really 
going into your trolley [shopping cart].
Israel’s legions of young technology firms clam-
or for attention and money. Rapid-pitch events like 
this one, at DLD Tel Aviv, a two-day conference in 
November, are common. More than 300 firms ap-
plied for a slot at DLD; 100 turned up; the lucky 30 
were chosen by raffle. Yossi Vardi, a technology entre-
preneur who has invested in 75 start-ups since 1996, 
says that he receives between three and eight ap-
proaches every day.
Dan Senor and Saul Singer called Israel The Start-
Up Nation in a book of that name in 2009. The label 
has stuck because it fits. Everybody and his brother-
in-law seems to be starting a company—with old 
schoolmates or army colleagues, in a spare room 
or the parental home. Starting a business is easier 
than ever, thanks to advances in information technol-
ogy. Budding designers of smartphone apps can rent 
space when they need it on a remote server rather 
than buying huge amounts of computing power. 
”The Internet has democratized the right to inno-
vate,” says Mr. Vardi.
Israelis innovate because they have to. The land is 
arid, so they excel at water and agricultural technol-
ogy. They have little oil, so they furrow their brows to 
find alternatives. They are surrounded by enemies, so 
their military technology is superb and creates lucra-
tive spin-offs, especially in communications. The rela-
tionships forged during military service foster frenetic 
networking in civilian life. A flood of immigrants in 
the 1990s gave national brainpower a mighty boost. 
The results are the envy of almost everyone outside 
Silicon Valley.
Israel: The Start-Up Nation 
E m e r g i n g  M a r k e t s  9 . 2
Source: Excerpted from Economist, 2012, What next for the start-up nation? January 21: 69–70. © The Economist.
Danny Lehman/Corbis; Björn Meyer/sitox/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

296	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
An innovation strategy offers three advantages. First, it allows a potentially more 
sustainable basis for competitive advantage. Firms that are first to introduce new goods 
or services are likely to earn (quasi) “monopoly profits” until competitors emerge. If 
entrepreneurial firms come up with “disruptive technologies,” then they may rede-
fine the rules of competition, thus wiping out the advantages of incumbents.19 
Second, innovation should be regarded broadly. Not only are technological 
breakthroughs innovations, less novel but still substantially new ways of doing 
business are also innovations. Most start-ups reproduce existing organizational 
routines but recombine them to create some novel product/service offerings. Think 
of FedEx’s (re)combination of existing air and ground assets to create a new market.
Entrepreneurial firms are uniquely ready for innovation. Owners, managers, 
and employees at entrepreneurial firms tend to be more innovative and risk-taking 
than those at large firms. In fact, many SMEs are founded by former employees 
of large firms who were frustrated by their inability to translate innovative ideas 
into realities at those firms. A group of programmers at IBM’s German affiliate 
proposed to IBM that standard programming solutions could be profitably sold 
to clients. After their ideas were turned down, they left and founded SAP, now the 
number-one player in the thriving enterprise resource planning (ERP) market. 
Innovators at large firms also have limited ability to personally profit from their 
innovations because property rights usually belong to the corporation. In contrast, 
innovators at entrepreneurial firms are better able to reap the financial gains as-
sociated with innovation, thus fueling their motivation to charge ahead.
9-3c Financing
All start-ups need to raise capital.20 Here is a quiz (also a joke): Of the “4F” sources 
of entrepreneurial financing, the first three Fs are founders, family, and friends, 
but what is the other F source? The answer is . . . fools (!). While this is a joke, it 
strikes a chord in the entrepreneurial world: Given the well-known failure risks of 
start-ups (a majority of them will fail), why would anyone other than a fool be willing 
to invest in start-ups? In reality, most outside, strategic investors, who can be angels 
(wealthy individual investors), venture capitalists (VCs), banks, foreign entrants, and 
government agencies, are not fools. They often examine business plans, require a 
strong management team, and scrutinize financial reviews and analyses. They also 
demand some assurance (such as collateral) indicating that entrepreneurs will not 
simply “take the money and run.”21
Around the world, the extent to which entrepreneurs draw on resources from 
outside investors (such as venture capitalists) rather than family and friends varies. 
Figure 9.3 shows that Sweden, South Africa, Belgium, and the United States lead the 
world in VC investment as a percentage of GDP. In contrast, Greece and China have 
the lowest level of VC investment. Figure 9.4 illustrates a different picture: informal 
investment (mostly by family and friends) as a percentage of GDP. In this case, China 
leads the world with the highest level of informal investment as a percentage of GDP. 
In comparison, Brazil and Hungary have the lowest level of informal investment. 
While there is a lot of “noise” in such worldwide data, the case of China (second 
lowest in VC investment and highest in informal investment) is easy to explain: Chi-
na’s lack of formal market-supporting institutions, such as VCs and credit-reporting 
agencies, requires a high level of informal investment for Chinese entrepreneurs 
and new ventures, particularly during a time of entrepreneurial boom.22 
A highly innovative solution, called microfinance, has emerged in re-
sponse to the lack of financing for entrepreneurial opportunities in many  
Venture capitalist (VC)
Investor who provides risk 
capital for early stage ventures.
Microfinance
A practice to provide micro loans 
($50–$300) used to start small 
businesses with the intention of 
ultimately lifting the entrepre-
neurs out of poverty.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 9   Growing and Internationalizing the Entrepreneurial Firm	
297
developing countries. Microfinance involves lending small sums ($50–$300) 
used to start small businesses with the intention of ultimately lifting them out 
of poverty. Starting in the 1970s in countries such as Bangladesh and India, mi-
crofinance has now become a global movement and has become controversial  
lately.
0.00%
Greece
0.05%
0.10%
0.15%
0.20%
0.25%
0.30%
0.35%
China
Japan
Italy
Austria
Germany
Switzerland
Australia
Finland
Spain
New Zealand
United Kingdom
Ireland
France
Canada
Singapore
Hungary
Denmark
Netherlands
Norway
United States
Belgium
South Africa
Sweden
Mean
Figure 9.3
Venture Capital Investment as a Percentage of GDP
Source: Adapted from M. Minniti, W. Bygrave, & E. Autio, 2006, Global Entrepreneurship Monitor 2006 Executive Report (p. 49), Wellesley, MA: Babson College/GEM.
0.0%
Brazil
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
3.5%
4.0%
4.5%
5.0%
5.5%
Hungary
Japan
Mexico
Finland
Norway
United Kingdom
Italy
Spain
Sweden
Austria
Venezuela
Slovenia
United States
South Africa
Ireland
Australia
Canada
Germany
Argentina
Switzerland
Denmark
Belgium
Singapore
Netherlands
Croatia
France
Thailand
New Zealand
Greece
Latvia
Chile
Jamaica
Iceland
China
Mean
Figure 9.4
Informal Investment as a Percentage of GDP
Source: Adapted from M. Minniti, W. Bygrave, & E. Autio, 2006, Global Entrepreneurship Monitor 2006 Executive Report (p. 53), Wellesley, MA: Babson College/GEM.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

298	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
9-4 Internationalizing the Entrepreneurial Firm
There is a myth that only large MNEs do business abroad and that SMEs mostly 
operate domestically. This myth, based on historical stereotypes, is being increas-
ingly challenged as more SMEs go international.23 Further, some start-ups attempt 
to do business abroad from inception. These are often called born global firms (or 
international new ventures).24 This section examines how entrepreneurial firms in-
ternationalize.
9-4a Transaction Costs and Entrepreneurial Opportunities
Compared with domestic transaction costs (the costs of doing business), inter-
national transaction costs are qualitatively higher. Some costs are high, due to 
numerous innocent differences in formal institutions and informal norms (see 
Chapters 2 and 3). Other costs, however, may be due to a high level of deliber-
ate opportunism that is hard to detect and remedy. For example, when a small 
manufacturer in Texas with $5 million annual revenues receives an unsolicited 
order of $1 million from an unknown buyer in Alaska, most likely the Texas firm 
will fill the order and allow the Alaska buyer to pay within 30 or 60 days after 
receiving the goods—a typical practice among domestic transactions in  the 
United States. But what if this order comes from an unknown buyer (an im-
porter in this case) in Algeria? If the Texas firm ships the goods, but foreign 
payment does not arrive on time (after 30, 60, or even more days), it is difficult 
to assess whether firms in Algeria simply do not have the norm of punctual 
payment, or that particular importer is being deliberately opportunistic. If the 
latter is indeed the case, suing the importer in a court in Algeria, where Arabic 
is the official language, may be so costly that it is not an option for a small US 
exporter.
Maybe the Algerian importer is an honest and capable firm with every inten-
tion and ability to pay. But because the Texas firm may not be able to ascertain, 
prior to the transaction, that the Algerian side will pay upon receiving the goods, 
the Texas firm may simply say, “No, thanks!” Conceptually, this is an example of 
transaction costs being so high that many firms may choose not to pursue inter-
national opportunities. Therefore, entrepreneurial opportunities exist to lower 
transaction costs and bring distant groups of people, firms, and countries to-
gether. Table 9.1 shows that while entrepreneurial firms can internationalize by 
entering foreign markets, they can also add an international dimension without 
actually going abroad. Next, we discuss how a SME can undertake some of these 
strategies.
Learning Objective
Describe how international 
strategies for entering foreign 
markets are different from 
those for staying in domestic 
markets.
9-4
Born global firm
A start-up company that  
attempts to do business abroad 
from inception.
Table 9.1
Internationalization Strategies for Entrepreneurial Firms
Entering foreign markets 
Staying in domestic markets
  	 Direct exports
  	 Indirect exports (through export intermediaries)
  	 Franchising/licensing
  	 Supplier of foreign firms 
  	 Foreign direct investment (through strategic alliances, 
greenfield wholly owned subsidiaries, and/or foreign 
acquisitions)
  	 Franchisee/licensee of foreign brands
  	 Alliance partner of foreign direct investors
  	 Harvest and exit (through sell-off to foreign entrants)
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 9   Growing and Internationalizing the Entrepreneurial Firm	
299
9-4b International Strategies for Entering Foreign Markets
SMEs can enter foreign markets through three broad modes: (1) direct exports, 
(2) licensing/franchising, and (3) foreign direct investment (FDI) (see Chapter 10 
for more details). First, direct exports entail the sale of products made by entrepre-
neurial firms in their home country to customers in other countries. This strategy 
is attractive because entrepreneurial firms are able to reach foreign customers di-
rectly. When domestic markets experience some downturns, sales abroad may com-
pensate for such drops. However, one major drawback is that SMEs may not have 
enough resources to turn overseas opportunities into profits.
Export transactions are complicated. One particular concern is how to over-
come the lack of trust between exporters and importers when receiving an export 
order from unknown importers abroad. For example, while the US exporter in 
Figure 9.5 does not trust the Chinese importer, banks on both sides can facilitate 
this transaction by a letter of credit (L/C), which is a financial contract that states 
that the importer’s bank (Bank of China in this case) will pay a specific sum of 
money to the exporter upon delivery of the merchandise. It has three steps:
  	 The US exporter may question the unknown Chinese importer’s assurance 
that it will promptly pay for the merchandise. An L/C from the highly repu-
table Bank of China will assure the US exporter that the importer has good 
creditworthiness and sufficient funds for this transaction. If the US exporter 
is not sure whether Bank of China is a credible bank, it can consult its own 
bank, Bank of America, which will confirm that an L/C from Bank of China 
is as good as gold.
  	 With this assurance through the L/C, the US exporter can release the mer-
chandise, which goes through a US freight forwarder, then a shipping com-
pany, and then a Chinese customs broker. Finally, the goods will reach the 
Chinese importer.
Direct export
The sale of products made by 
firms in their home country to 
customers in other countries.
Letter of credit (L/C)
A financial contract that states 
that the importer’s bank will pay 
a specific sum of money to the 
exporter upon delivery of the 
merchandise.
Letter
of credit
Letter of credit
Shipping documents
Merchandise
Shipping
documents
Merchandise
Bank of China
Chinese importer
Chinese
customs broker
Shipping company
Bank of America
US exporter
US freight
forwarder
Shipping company
Figure 9.5
An Export/Import Transaction
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

300	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
  	 Once the US exporter has shipped the goods, it will present to Bank of 
America the L/C from Bank of China and shipping documents. On behalf 
of the US exporter, Bank of America will then collect payment from Bank of 
China, which, in turn, will collect payment from the Chinese importer.
In short, instead of having unknown exporters and importers deal with each 
other, transactions are facilitated by banks on both sides that have known each 
other quite well because of numerous such dealings. In other words, the L/C re-
duces transaction costs by reducing transaction risks.
A second way to enter international markets is through licensing and/or fran-
chising. Usually used in manufacturing industries, licensing refers to Firm A’s agree-
ment to give Firm B the rights to use A’s proprietary technology (such as a patent) 
or trademark (such as a corporate logo) for a royalty fee paid to A by B. Assume 
(hypothetically) that a US exporter cannot keep up with demand in Turkey. It may 
consider granting a Turkish firm the license to use its technology and trademark 
for a fee. Franchising is essentially the same idea, except it is typically used in ser-
vice industries, such as fast food. One great advantage is that SME licensors and 
franchisors can expand abroad while risking relatively little of their own capital. 
Foreign firms interested in becoming licensees or franchisees have to put their own 
capital up front. For example, a McDonald’s franchise now costs the franchisee ap-
proximately one million dollars. But licensors and franchisors also take a risk be-
cause they may suffer a loss of control over how their technology and brand names 
are used. If McDonald’s (hypothetical) licensee in Finland produces substandard 
products that damage the brand and it refuses to improve quality, McDonald’s 
has two difficult choices: (1) sue its licensee in an unfamiliar Finnish court, or 
(2) discontinue the relationship. Either choice is complicated and costly.
A third entry mode is FDI (see Chapter 6). FDI may involve greenfield wholly 
owned subsidiaries (see Chapter 10), strategic alliances with foreign firms (see 
Chapter 12), and/or acquisitions of foreign firms (see Chapter 12). By planting 
some roots abroad, a firm becomes more committed to serving foreign markets. It 
is physically and psychologically closer to foreign customers. Relative to licensing 
and franchising, a firm is better able to control how its proprietary technology is 
used. However, FDI has two major drawbacks: its cost and complexity. It requires 
both a nontrivial sum of capital and a significant managerial commitment.
While many entrepreneurial firms have aggressively gone abroad, a majority of 
SMEs probably will be unable to do so—they already have enough headaches strug-
gling with the domestic market. However, as discussed next, some SMEs can still 
internationalize by staying at home.
9-4c International Strategies for Staying in Domestic Markets
Table 9.1 also shows a number of strategies for entrepreneurial SMEs to internation-
alize without leaving their home country. The five main strategies are (1) export 
indirectly, (2) become suppliers for foreign firms, (3) become licensees or franchi-
sees of foreign brands, (4) become alliance partners of foreign direct investors, or 
(5) harvest and exit through sell-offs.
First, whereas direct exports may be lucrative, many SMEs simply do not have 
the resources to handle such work. But they can still reach overseas customers 
through indirect exports, which involve exporting through domestic-based export 
intermediaries. Export intermediaries perform an important middleman function 
Licensing
Firm A’s agreement to give 
Firm B the rights to use A’s pro-
prietary technology (such as a 
patent) or trademark (such as a 
corporate logo) for a royalty fee 
paid to A by B. This is typically 
done in manufacturing industries.
Franchising
Firm A’s agreement to 
give Firm B the rights to use A’s 
proprietary assets for a royalty 
fee paid to A by B. This is typi-
cally done in service industries.
Indirect export
A way to reach overseas cus-
tomers by exporting through 
domestic-based export 
intermediaries.
Export intermediary
A firm that performs an impor-
tant middleman function by 
linking domestic sellers and 
foreign buyers that otherwise 
would not have been connected.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 9   Growing and Internationalizing the Entrepreneurial Firm	
301
by linking domestic sellers and overseas buyers who otherwise would not have been 
connected.25 Being entrepreneurs themselves, export intermediaries facilitate the 
internationalization of many SMEs.26
A second strategy is to become a supplier for a foreign firm that is doing busi-
ness in the domestic market. For example, when Subway opened restaurants in 
Northern Ireland, it secured a contract for chilled part-bake bread with a domestic 
bakery. This relationship was so successful that the bakery now supplies Subway 
franchisees throughout Europe. SME suppliers thus may be able to international-
ize by piggybacking on the larger foreign entrants.
Third, an entrepreneurial firm may consider becoming a licensee or franchisee 
of a foreign brand. Foreign licensors and franchisors provide training and technol-
ogy transfer—for a fee, of course. Consequently, an SME can learn a great deal 
about how to operate at world-class standards. Further, if enough learning has 
been accomplished, it is possible to discontinue the relationship and to reap great-
er entrepreneurial profits. In Thailand, Minor Group, which had held the Pizza 
Hut franchise for 20 years, broke away from the relationship. Then its new venture, 
The Pizza Company, became the market leader in Thailand.27 
A fourth strategy is to become an alliance partner of a foreign direct investor.28 
Facing an onslaught of aggressive MNEs, many entrepreneurial firms may not be 
able to successfully defend their market positions. Then it makes great sense to 
follow the old adage, “If you can’t beat them, join them!” While dancing with the 
giants is tricky, it is better than being crushed by them.
Finally, as a harvest and exit strategy, entrepreneurs may sell an equity stake 
or the entire firm to foreign entrants.29 An American couple, originally from Se-
attle, built a Starbucks-like coffee chain in Britain called Seattle Coffee. When 
Starbucks entered Britain, the couple sold the chain of 60 stores to Starbucks for a 
hefty $84 million. In light of the high failure rates of start-ups (see the Closing Case), 
being acquired by foreign entrants may help preserve the business in the long run.
9-5 Debates and Extensions
Entrepreneurship has attracted significant debates (see the Closing Case). This 
section discusses two leading debates: (1) traits versus institutions, and (2) slow 
versus rapid internationalization.
9-5a Traits versus Institutions
This is probably the oldest debate on entrepreneurship. It focuses on the question: 
“What motivates entrepreneurs to establish new firms, while most others are simply 
content to work for bosses?” The “traits” school of thought argues that it is personal 
traits that matter. Compared with non-entrepreneurs, entrepreneurs seem more 
likely to possess a stronger desire for achievement and are more willing to take 
risks and tolerate ambiguities. Overall, entrepreneurship inevitably deviates from 
the norm to work for others, and this deviation may be in the “blood” of entre-
preneurs.30 For example, serial entrepreneurs are people who start, grow, and sell 
several businesses throughout their career. One example is David Neeleman (see 
Emerging Markets 9.1), who as a serial entrepreneur has founded four airlines in 
three countries (Morris Air and JetBlue in the United States, WestJet in Canada, 
and Azul in Brazil).
Learning Objective
Participate in two leading 
debates concerning 
entrepreneurship.
9-5
Serial entrepreneur
An entrepreneur who starts, 
grows, and sells several 
businesses throughout his/
her career.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

302	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
Critics, however, argue that some of these traits, such as a strong achievement 
orientation, are not necessarily limited to entrepreneurs, but instead are 
characteristic of many successful individuals. The diversity among entrepreneurs 
makes any attempt to develop a standard psychological or personality profile 
futile. Critics suggest what matters is institutions—namely, the environments 
that set formal and informal rules of the game (see PengAtlas Map 3.1 and 3.2). 
Consider the ethnic Chinese, who have exhibited a high degree of entrepreneur-
ship throughout Southeast Asia. As a minority group (usually less than 10% of the 
population in countries such as Indonesia and Thailand) they control 70%–80% 
of the wealth. Yet, in mainland China, for three decades (the 1950s to the 1970s), 
there had been virtually no entrepreneurship, thanks to harsh communist poli-
cies. Over the last three decades, however, as government policies became rela-
tively more entrepreneur-friendly, the institutional transitions have opened the 
floodgates of entrepreneurship in China.31 
A high-profile case documents how institutions constrain or enable entre-
preneurship. In 2005, Chinese Internet start-up Baidu listed on NASDAQ, and 
its shares surged 354% on the same day (from $27 to $154), scoring the biggest 
one-day stock surge in US capital markets since 2000. While there might be 
some “irrational exuberance” among US investors chasing “China’s Google,” 
it is evident that they did not discriminate against Baidu. The sad reality for 
Baidu is that, at home, it was blatantly discriminated against by the Chinese 
securities authorities. As a private start-up, it was not allowed to list its stock 
on China’s stock exchanges—only state-owned firms need apply. Essentially, 
Baidu was pushed out of China to list in the United States, whose entrepreneur-
friendly institutional frameworks, such as NASDAQ regulations, are able to fa-
cilitate more entrepreneurial success.32 In a nutshell, it is not what is in people’s 
“blood” that makes or breaks entrepreneurship—it is institutions that encour-
age or constrain entrepreneurship. 
Beyond the macro societal-level institutions, more micro institutions also 
matter. Family background and educational attainment have been found to cor-
relate with entrepreneurship. Children of wealthy parents, especially those who 
own businesses, are more likely to start their own firms. So are people who 
are better educated. Taken together, informal norms governing one’s socio-
economic group assert some powerful impact on the propensity to create new 
ventures. Overall, this debate is an extension of the broader debate on “nature 
versus nurture.” Most scholars now agree that entrepreneurship is the result of 
both nature and nurture.
9-5b Slow Internationalizers versus “Born Global” Start-ups
Two components should be considered here: (1) Can SMEs internationalize 
faster than what has been suggested by traditional stage models (models that 
portray SME internationalization as a slow, stage-by-stage process)? (2) Should 
they rapidly internationalize? The dust has largely settled on the first component: 
it is possible for some (but not all) SMEs to make very rapid progress in interna-
tionalization. Consider Logitech, now a global leader in computer peripherals. 
It was established by entrepreneurs from Switzerland and the United States, 
where the firm set up dual headquarters. Research and development (R&D) and 
manufacturing were initially split between these two countries and then quickly 
spread to Ireland and Taiwan through FDI. Its first commercial contract was with 
Stage model
Model of internationalization that 
portrays the slow step-by-step 
(stage-by-stage) process an 
SME must go through to interna-
tionalize its business.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 9   Growing and Internationalizing the Entrepreneurial Firm	
303
a Japanese company. Logitech is not alone among 
such “born global” firms.
What is currently being debated is the second 
component.33 On the one hand, advocates argue that 
every industry has become “global” and that entre-
preneurial firms need to go after these opportunities 
rapidly.34 On the other hand, stage models suggest 
that firms need to enter culturally and institution-
ally close markets first, spend enough time there to 
accumulate overseas experience, and then gradually 
move from more primitive modes (such as exports) 
to more sophisticated strategies (such as FDI) in dis-
tant markets. Consistent with stage models, Sweden’s 
IKEA, for example, waited 20 years (1943 to 1963) 
before entering a neighboring country, Norway. Only 
more recently has it accelerated its internationaliza-
tion. Stage models caution that inexperienced swim-
mers may be drowned in unfamiliar foreign waters.
One key issue, therefore, is whether it is better for 
entrepreneurs to start the internationalization process soon after founding (as 
“born global” firms do) or to postpone until the firm has accumulated significant 
resources (as IKEA did). One view supports rapid internationalization. Specifically, 
firms following the prescription of stage models, when eventually international-
izing, must overcome substantial inertia because of their domestic orientation.35 
In contrast, firms that internationalize earlier need to overcome fewer of these 
barriers. Therefore, SMEs without an established domestic orientation (such as 
Logitech, discussed earlier) may outperform their rivals that wait longer to interna-
tionalize.36 In other words, contrary to the inherent disadvantages in international-
ization associated with SMEs as suggested by stage models, there may be “inherent 
advantages” of being small while venturing abroad.
On the other hand, some scholars argue that “the born-global view, although ap-
pealing, is a dangerous half-truth.” They maintain that “You must first be successful 
at home, then move outward in a manner that anticipates and genuinely accommo-
dates local differences.”37 In other words, the teachings of stage models are still rel-
evant. Consequently, indiscriminate advice to “go global” may not be warranted.38
9-6 Management Savvy
Entrepreneurs and their firms are quintessential engines of the “creative destruc-
tion” process underpinning global capitalism first described by Joseph Schumpeter. 
What determines the success and failure of entrepreneurial firms around the globe? 
The answers boil down to two components. First, the institution-based view argues 
that the larger institutional frameworks explain a great deal about what is behind 
the differences in entrepreneurial and economic development around the world. 
Second, the resource-based view posits that it is largely intangible resources, such 
as vision, drive, and willingness to take risks, that fuel entrepreneurship around 
the globe. Overall, the performance of entrepreneurial firms depends on how they 
take advantage of formal and informal institutional resources and how they lever-
age their capabilities at home, abroad, or both.
Learning Objective
Draw implications for action.
9-6
Although Sweden’s IKEA is now active in distant 
markets such as China, it waited 20 years (1943 to 
1963) before first entering a neighboring country, 
Norway. Did IKEA’s slow, cautious approach in 
initial internationalization—suggested by stage 
models—make sense?
LIU JIN/Stringer/AFP/Getty Images
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

304	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
Two clear implications for action emerge (Table 9.2). First, institutions that 
facilitate entrepreneurship development—both formal and informal—are im-
portant.39 As a result, savvy entrepreneurs have a vested interest in pushing for 
more entrepreneur-friendly formal institutions in various countries, such as rules 
governing how to set up new firms (see Figure 9.2 and In Focus 9.1). Entrepre-
neurs also need to cultivate strong informal norms granting legitimacy to entre-
preneurs. Talking to high-school and college students, taking on interns, and 
providing seed money as angels for new ventures are some of the actions that 
entrepreneurs can undertake.
Second, when internationalizing, entrepreneurs are advised to be bold and 
venture abroad. Thanks to globalization, the costs of doing business abroad have 
fallen recently (see Emerging Markets 9.2). But being bold does not mean being 
reckless. One specific managerial insight from this chapter is that it is possible 
to internationalize without venturing abroad. A variety of international strategies 
enable entrepreneurial firms to stay in domestic markets. When the entrepreneur-
ial firm is not ready to take on higher risk abroad, this more limited involvement 
may be appropriate. In other words, be bold, but not too bold.40
C h a p t e r  S u m m a r y
	 9.1	 Define entrepreneurship, entrepreneurs, and entrepreneurial firms.
  	 Entrepreneurship is the identification and exploitation of previously unex-
plored opportunities.
  	 Entrepreneurs may be founders and owners of new businesses or managers 
of existing firms.
  	 Entrepreneurial firms in this chapter are defined as SMEs.
	 9.2	 Identify the institutions and resources that affect entrepreneurship.
  	 Institutions enable and constrain entrepreneurship around the world.
  	 Resources and capabilities largely determine entrepreneurial success and 
failure.
	 9.3	 Identify the three characteristics of a growing entrepreneurial firm.
  	 (1) Growth, (2) innovation, and (3) financing.
	 9.4	 Describe how international strategies for entering foreign markets are 
different from those for staying in domestic markets.
  	 Entrepreneurial firms can internationalize by entering foreign markets, 
through entry modes such as (1) direct exports, (2) licensing/franchising, 
and (3) FDI.
  	 Entrepreneurial firms can also internationalize without venturing abroad, 
by (1) exporting indirectly, (2) supplying foreign firms, (3) becoming 
licensees/franchisees of foreign firms, (4) joining foreign entrants as alli-
ance partners, and (5) harvesting and exiting through sell-offs to foreign 
entrants.
Table 9.2
Implications for Action
  	 Push for institutions that facilitate entrepreneurship development—both formal and informal
  	 When internationalizing, be bold, but not too bold
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 9   Growing and Internationalizing the Entrepreneurial Firm	
305
	 9.5	 Participate in two leading debates concerning entrepreneurship.
  	 (1) Traits versus institutions, and (2) slow versus rapid internationalization.
	 9.6	 Draw implications for action.
  	 Push for both formal and informal institutions that facilitate entrepreneur-
ship development.
  	 When internationalizing, be bold, but not too bold.
K e y  T e r m s
Born global firm  
(international new 
venture) 298
Direct export 299
Entrepreneurs 289
Entrepreneurship 289
Export intermediaries 300
Franchising 300
Indirect export 300
International 
entrepreneurship 289
Letter of credit  
(L/C) 299
Licensing 300
Microfinance 296
Serial entrepreneur 301
Small and medium- 
sized enterprises 
(SMEs) 288
Stage model 302
Venture capitalist  
(VC) 296
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 Based on your definition of entrepreneurship, can a firm be truly entrepre-
neurial if it does not expand globally? 
	 2.	 How prevalent and important are small entrepreneurial firms in economies 
around the globe?
	 3.	 ON CULTURE: Which societal norms tend to encourage entrepreneurship, 
and which tend to discourage it?
	 4.	 How important are an entrepreneur’s resources and capabilities in deter-
mining his or her success? Why?
	 5.	 Name and describe three major characteristics associated with an entrepre-
neurial firm’s growth.
	 6.	 What qualities typically compensate for an entrepreneurial firm’s lack of 
tangible resources?
	 7.	 Summarize three modes that SMEs can use to enter foreign markets.
	 8.	 Name and describe at least three of the five ways that SMEs can internation-
alize without leaving their home countries.
	 9.	 Compare PengAtlas Maps 3.1 and 3.4. Based on that information, which 
country would be most attractive to you as a place to expand your business? 
The global economy is subject to constant change. In your opinion, what po-
tential changes in one of the countries shown, including the United States, 
may make that country less attractive as a place to expand?
	 10.	 ON CULTURE: In the entrepreneurial nature-versus-nurture debate, which do 
you think carries more power: traits (nature) or institutions (nurture)? Does 
your response apply equally to all countries around the world? Why or why not?
	 11.	 We know that it is possible for an SME to be born global by immediately 
engaging in FDI, but do you think it is wise? Why?
	 12.	 Describe two or three examples of institutions that can be made friendlier 
and more supportive of entrepreneurs.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

306	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
	 13.	 In comparing PengAtlas Maps 3.1 and 3.4, note that one of the countries 
that is at the bottom of the list regarding ease of doing business is also 
among the poorest. Note that the two groups are not identical. However, to 
what extent can ease of doing business affect the wealth of a country?
	 14.	 ON CULTURE: Devise your own example of an entrepreneurial action that 
demonstrates your understanding of the difference between being bold and 
being reckless. Why may the view of what is bold or reckless vary among 
countries and cultures?
C r i t i c a l  D i s c u s s i o n  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 Given that most entrepreneurial start-ups fail, why do entrepreneurs start 
so many new firms? Why are (most) governments interested in promoting 
more start-ups? 
	 2.	 Some suggest that foreign markets are graveyards where entrepreneurial 
firms overextend themselves. Others argue that foreign markets represent 
the future for SMEs. If you were the owner of a small, reasonably profitable 
domestic firm, would you consider expanding overseas? Why or why not?
	 3.	 ON ETHICS: Your former high-school buddy invites you to join an entrepre-
neurial start-up that specializes in making counterfeit (generic) drugs to 
combat HIV/AIDS, which would potentially help millions of patients world-
wide who cannot afford the high-priced patented drugs. He has lined up 
financing and offers you the job of CEO and 10% of the equity of the firm. 
You are currently unemployed. How would you respond?
G l o b a l  A c t i o n
	 1.	 You work for a small foreign-language-services company. You have been 
asked to present a market assessment of the largest translation companies 
for competitor evaluation. Your report must include the following attributes 
for the global industry: company, size, locations, and ownership status. 
What do your findings suggest about possible worldwide opportunities?
	 2.	 An entrepreneurship research firm has asked you to identify the most 
entrepreneurial countries in the world. Based on your knowledge of the 
entrepreneurship field, find a database that may assist in your research. 
Once the information has been secured, compare the top five countries 
across the multiple years included in the database. Are there any countries 
that are included in the database in all years? What is the general percentage 
of new start-ups in the overall economy for each of the top countries? Is the 
size of each country similar? Explain these dynamics in your report.
V i d e o  C a s e
After watching the video on outsourcing, discuss the following; 
	 1.	 What characteristics identify Adam as an entrepreneur?
	 2.	 How has Adam overcome the usual regulations governing a start-up firm?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 9   Growing and Internationalizing the Entrepreneurial Firm	
307
	 3.	 How has Adam’s firm created value?
	 4.	 What transaction costs and opportunities may lie ahead in the pomegranate 
juice industry?
	 5.	 How should the timing of internationalization be determined?
Corporate bankruptcies* have climbed to new heights 
in the Great Recession. Firms ranging from huge cor-
porations (such as General Motors) to tiny entrepre-
neurial outfits have gone bankrupt left and right around 
the world. Since bankruptcies do not sound too good 
or inspiring, is there anything that we—the govern-
ment, financial institutions, consumers, or the society 
at large—can do to prevent widespread bankruptcies? 
Efforts to rescue failing firms from bankruptcies 
stem from an “anti-failure” bias that is widely shared 
among entrepreneurs, scholars, journalists, and of-
ficials. Although a majority of entrepreneurial firms 
fail, this “anti-failure” bias leads to strong interest in 
entrepreneurial success (remember how many times 
Google and Facebook were written up by the press?), 
and to scant attention devoted to the vast majority of 
entrepreneurial firms that end up in failure and bank-
ruptcy. However, one perspective suggests that bank-
ruptcies, which are undoubtedly painful to individual 
entrepreneurs and employees, may be good for the 
society. Consequently, bankruptcy laws need to be 
reformed to become more entrepreneur-friendly by 
making it easier for entrepreneurs to declare bank-
ruptcy and to move on. Thus, financial, human, and 
physical resources stuck with failed firms can be rede-
ployed in a socially optimal way.
One leading debate concerns how to treat failed 
entrepreneurs who file for bankruptcy. Do we let them 
walk away from debt or punish them? Historically, 
entrepreneur friendliness and bankruptcy laws are like 
an oxymoron, because bankruptcy laws are usually 
harsh and even cruel. The very term “bankruptcy” 
is derived from a harsh practice: In medieval Italy, 
if bankrupt entrepreneurs did not pay their debt, 
debtors would destroy the trading bench (booth) of the 
bankrupt—the Italian word for broken bench, “banca 
rotta,” has evolved into the English word “bankruptcy.” 
The pound of flesh demanded by the creditor in 
Shakespeare’s The Merchant of Venice is only a slight 
exaggeration. The world’s first bankruptcy law, passed 
in England in 1542, considered a bankrupt individual a 
criminal, and penalties ranged from incarceration to a 
death sentence.
Recently, many governments have realized that 
entrepreneur-friendly bankruptcy laws can not only 
lower exit barriers, but also can lower entry barriers for 
entrepreneurs. Although we are confident that many 
start-ups will fail, at present it is impossible to predict 
which ones will go under. Thus, from an institution-
based standpoint, if entrepreneurship is to be encour-
aged, there is a need to ease the pain associated with 
bankruptcy by means such as allowing entrepreneurs 
to walk away from debt, a legal right that bankrupt US 
entrepreneurs appreciate. In contrast, until the recent 
bankruptcy law reforms, bankrupt German entrepre-
neurs might remain liable for unpaid debt for up to 
30 years. Further, German and Japanese managers of 
bankrupt firms can also be liable for criminal penalties. 
Numerous bankrupt Japanese entrepreneurs have 
committed suicide. As rules of the “end game,” harsh 
bankruptcy laws thus become grave exit barriers. They 
can also be significant entry barriers, as fewer would-
be entrepreneurs may decide to launch their ventures.
At a societal level, if many would-be entrepre-
neurs abandon their ideas in fear of failure, there will 
not be a thriving entrepreneurial sector. Given the 
Boom in Busts: Good or Bad?
Ethical 
Dilemma
C l o s i n g  C a s e
*The term “bankruptcies” in this case refers to corporate bankruptcies 
and does not concern personal bankruptcies.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

308	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
[Journal acronyms] AME—Academy of Management Executive; AMJ—
Academy of Management Journal; AMP—Academy of Management Per-
spectives; AMR—Academy of Management Review; APJM—Asia Pacific 
Journal of Management; BW—BusinessWeek (before 2010) or Bloomberg 
Businessweek (since 2010); ETP—Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice; 
FEER—Far Eastern Economic Review; HBR—Harvard Business Review; 
JBV—Journal of Business Venturing; JIBS—Journal of International 
Business Studies; JMS—Journal of Management Studies; JWB—Journal of 
World Business; SEJ—Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal; SMJ—Strategic 
Management Journal; SMR—MIT Sloan Management Review
1 M. Hitt, R. D. Ireland, S. M. Camp, & D. Sexton, 2001, Strategic entre-
preneurship (p. 480), SMJ, 22: 479–491. See also M. Hitt, R. D. Ireland, 
D. Sirmon, & C. Trahms, 2011, Strategic entrepreneurship, AMP, 
May: 57–75; R. Hoskisson, J. Covin, H. Volberda, & R. Johnson, 2011, 
Revitalizing entrepreneurship, JMS, 48: 1141–1168; J. McMullen & 
D. Shepherd, 2006, Entrepreneurial action and the role of uncertainty 
in the theory of the entrepreneur, AMR, 31: 132–152; S. Venkataraman, 
S. Sarasvathy, N. Dew, & W. Forster, 2012, Reflections on the 2010 AMR 
Decade Award: Whither the promise? AMR, 37: 21–33.
2 S. Shane & S. Venkataraman, 2000, The promise of entrepreneur-
ship as a field of research (p. 218), AMR, 25: 217–226.
3 P. McDougall & B. Oviatt, 2000, International entrepreneurship 
(p. 903), AMJ, 43: 902–906. See also T. Baker, E. Gedajlovic, & M. 
Lubatkin, 2005, A framework for comparing entrepreneurship pro-
cesses across nations, JIBS, 36: 492–504; Y. Chandra & N. Coviello, 
2010, Broadening the concept of international entrepreneurship, 
JWB, 45: 228–236; D. Cumming, H. Sapienza, D. Siegel, & M. Wright, 
2009, International entrepreneurship, SEJ, 3: 283–296.
4 Z. Acs & C. Armington, 2006, Entrepreneurship, Geography, and Amer-
ican Economic Growth, New York: Cambridge University Press.
5 V. Lau, M. Shaffer, & K. Au, 2007, Entrepreneurial career success 
from a Chinese perspective, JIBS, 38: 126–146.
6 R. Mudambi & S. Zahra, 2007, The survival of international new 
ventures, JIBS, 38: 333–352.
7 S. Anokhin & J. Wincent, 2012, Start-up rates and innovation, 
JIBS, 43: 41–60; H. Bowen & D. De Clercq, 2008, Institutional con-
text and the allocation of entrepreneurial efforts, JIBS, 39: 747–767;  
N O T E S
risks and uncertainties, it is not surprising that many 
entrepreneurs do not make it the first time. However, 
if they are given second, third, or more chances, some 
of them will succeed. Approximately 50% of US en-
trepreneurs who filed bankruptcy resumed a new ven-
ture in four years. This high level of entrepreneurialism 
is, in part, driven by the relatively entrepreneur-friendly 
bankruptcy laws in the United States (such as the pro-
vision of Chapter 11 bankruptcy reorganization, instead 
of straight liquidation). On the other hand, a society 
that severely punishes failed entrepreneurs (such as 
forcing financially insolvent firms to liquidate) is not 
likely to foster widespread entrepreneurship. Over-
all, worldwide evidence from 29 countries—involving 
both developed and emerging economies—has iden-
tified a strong linkage between entrepreneur-friendly 
bankruptcy laws and new firm entries.
Institutionally, there is an urgent need to remove 
some of our anti-failure bias and design entrepreneur-
friendly bankruptcy policies so that failed entrepre-
neurs are given more chances. At a societal level, 
entrepreneurial failures may be beneficial, since it is 
through a large number of entrepreneurial experimen-
tations—although many will fail—that winning solu-
tions will emerge and that economies will develop. In 
short, the boom in busts is not necessarily bad.
Case Discussion Questions: 
	 1.	 What are the pros and cons for entrepreneur-
friendly bankruptcy laws?
	 2.	 Why can bankruptcy laws become exit barriers 
for an entrepreneurial firm? Entry barriers?
	 3.	 Having studied this case, how would you respond 
to a friend’s comment: “Recent news about the 
boom in bankruptcies is so depressing”? 
Najlah Feanny/Corbis
Sources: Based on (1) S. Lee, M. W. Peng, & J. Barney, 2007, Bankruptcy law and entrepreneurship development, Academy of Management Review, 
32: 257–272; (2) S.Lee, Y. Yamakawa, & M. W. Peng, 2007, How does bankruptcy law affect entrepreneurship development? Washington, DC: US Small 
Business Administration (SBA Best Research Papers Collection, www.sba.gov/advo/research/rs326tot.pdf); (3) S. Lee, Y. Yamakawa, M. W. Peng, 
& J. Barney, 2011, How do bankruptcy laws affect entrepreneurship development around the world? Journal of Business Venturing, 28: 505–520; 
(4) M. W. Peng, Y. Yamakawa, & S. Lee, 2010, Bankruptcy laws and entrepreneur-friendliness, Entrepreneur Theory and Practice, 34: 517–530.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 9   Growing and Internationalizing the Entrepreneurial Firm	
309
J. Capelleras, K. Mole, F. Freene, & D. Storey, 2008, Do more heavily 
regulated economies have poorer performing new ventures? JIBS, 39: 
688–704; R. Coeurderoy & G. Murray, 2008, Regulatory environments 
and the location decision, JIBS, 39: 670–687; J. Levie & E. Autio, 2011, 
Regulatory burden, rule of law, and entry of strategic entrepreneurs, 
JMS, 48: 1392–1419; T. Manolova, R. Eunni, & B. Gyoshev, 2008, Insti-
tutional environments for entrepreneurship, ETP, January: 203–218.
8 D. Kim, E. Morse, R. Mitchell, & K. Seawright, 2010, Institutional 
environment and entrepreneurial cognitions, ETP, 34: 491–516.
9 Economist, 2011, Son also rises, November 27: 71–72.
10 BW, 2011, In Russia, Facebook is more than a social network, 
January 3: 32–33.
11 A. Arikan & A. McGrahan, 2010, The development of capabili-
ties in new firms, SMJ, 31: 1–18; A. Arora & A. Nandkumar, 2012, 
Insecure advantage? SMJ, 33: 231–251; B. Campbell, M. Ganco, 
A. Franco, & R. Agarwal, 2012, Who leaves, where to, and why worry? 
SMJ, 33: 65–87; A. Chatterji, 2009, Spawned with a silver spoon? SMJ, 
30: 185–206; G. Knight & D. Kim, 2009, International business com-
petence and the contemporary firm, JIBS, 40: 255–273; D. Lepak, 
K. Smith, & M. S. Taylor, 2007, Value creation and value capture, 
AMR, 32: 180–194; H. Park & H. K. Steensma, 2012, When does cor-
porate venture capital add value for new ventures? SMJ, 33: 1–22.
12 D. Sull, 2005, Strategy as active waiting (p. 125), HBR, September: 
121–129.
13 BW, 2011, The dirtiest job on the Internet, December 5: 95–97.
14 M. Cardon, J. Wincent, J. Singh, & M. Drnovsek, 2009, The na-
ture and experience of entrepreneurial passion, AMR, 34: 511–532; 
J. Clarke, 2011, Revitalizing entrepreneurship, JMS, 48: 1365–1391; 
V. Rindova, D. Barry, & D. Ketchen, 2009, Entrepreneuring as eman-
cipation, AMR, 34: 477–491; D. Souder, Z. Simsek, & S. Johnson, 
2012, The differing effects of agent and founder CEOs on the firm’s 
market expansion, SMJ, 33: 23–41.
15 J. Ebben & A. Johnson, 2005, Efficiency, flexibility, or both? SMJ, 
26: 1249–1259; G. George, 2005, Slack resources and the perfor-
mance of privately held firms, AMJ, 48: 661–676.
16 BW, 2005, The little contractor that could, July 4: 78–79.
17 G. Dess & G. T. Lumpkin, 2005, The role of entrepreneurial orien-
tation in stimulating effective corporate entrepreneurship, AME, 19: 
147–156; J. Dyer, H. Gregerson, & C. Christensen, 2008, Entrepreneur 
behaviors, opportunity recognition, and the origins of innovative ven-
tures, SEJ, 2: 317–338; I. Filatotchev & J. Piesse, 2009, R&D, interna-
tionalization, and growth of newly listed firms, JIBS, 40: 1260–1276; 
A. Gaur, D. Mukherjee, S. Gaur, & F. Schmid, 2011, Environmental 
and firm-level influences on inter-organizational trust and SME per-
formance, JMS, 48: 1752–1781; B. George, 2011, Entrepreneurial orien-
tation, JMS, 48: 1291–1313; E. Golovko & G. Valentini, 2011, Exploring 
the complementarity between innovation and export for SMEs’ 
growth, JIBS, 42: 362–380; S. Kotha, 2010, Spillovers, spill-ins, and stra-
tegic entrepreneurship, SEJ, 4: 284–306; F. Santos & K. Eisenhardt, 
2009, Constructing markets and shaping boundaries, AMJ, 52: 
643–671; M. Terziovski, 2010, Innovative practice and its performance 
implications in SMEs in the manufacturing sector, SMJ, 31: 892–902.
18 Economist, 2009, Lands of opportunity, March 14: 16–17; Economist, 
2011, Beyond the start-up nation, January 1: 60.
19 C. Christensen, 1997, The Innovator’s Dilemma, Boston: Harvard 
Business School Press.
20 P. Vaaler, 2011, Immigrant remittances and the venture invest-
ment environment of developing countries, JIBS, 42: 1121–1149.
21 T. Dalziel, R. White, & J. Arthurs, 2011, Principal costs in initial 
public offerings, JMS, 48: 1346–1364; A. Zacharakis, J. McMullen, & 
D. Shepherd, 2007, Venture capitalists’ decision policies across three 
countries, JIBS, 38: 691–708.
22 D. Ahlstrom, G. Bruton, & K. Yeh, 2007, Venture capital in China: 
Past, present, future, APJM, 24: 247–268; K. Au & H. Kwan, 2009, Start-
up capital and Chinese entrepreneurs, ETP, 33: 889–908; M. Wright, 
2007, Venture capital in China: A view from Europe, APJM, 24: 269–282.
23 C. Bingham, 2009, Oscillating improvisation, SEJ, 3: 321–345; S. 
Fernhaber, B. Gilbert, & P. McDougall, 2008, International entrepre-
neurship and geographic location, JIBS, 39: 267–290; M. Giarratana &  
S. Torrisi, 2010, Foreign entry and survival in a knowledge-intensive 
market, SEJ, 4: 85–104.
24 N. Hashai, 2011, Sequencing the expansion of geographic scope 
and foreign operations by “born global” firms, JIBS, 42: 995–1015.
25 M. W. Peng, 1998, Behind the Success and Failure of US Export Interme-
diaries, Westport, CT: Quorum.
26 M. W. Peng & A. York, 2001, Behind intermediary performance in 
export trade, JIBS, 32: 327–346.
27 FEER, 2002, Pepperoni power, November 14: 59–60.
28 V. Aggarwal & D. Hsu, 2009, Modes of cooperative R&D commer-
cialization by start-ups, SMJ, 30: 835–864; P. Ozcan & K. Eisenhardt, 
2009, Origin of alliance portfolios, AMJ, 52: 246–279.
29 M. Graebner, 2009, Caveat venditor, AMJ, 52: 435–472.
30 G. Cassar, 2010, Are individuals entering self-employment overly 
optimistic? SMJ, 31: 822–840; D. Gregoire, A. Corbett, & J. McMullen, 
2011, The cognitive perspective in entrepreneurship, JMS, 48: 
1443–1477.
31 D. Ahlstrom, S. Chen, & K. Yeh, 2010, Managing in ethnic Chinese 
communities, APJM, 27: 341–354; J. Lu & Z. Tao, 2010, Determinants 
of entrepreneurial activities in China, JBV, 25: 261–273; M. W. Peng, 
2001, How entrepreneurs create wealth in transition economies, 
AME, 15: 95–108.
32 Y. Yamakawa, M. W. Peng, & D. Deeds, 2008, What drives new ven-
tures to internationalize from emerging to developed economies?, 
ETP, 32: 59–82.
33 S. Loane, J. Bell, & R. McNaughton, 2007, A cross-national study on 
the impact of management teams on the rapid internationalization 
of small firms, JWB, 42: 489–504; H. Sapienza, E. Autio, G. George, 
& S. Zahra, 2006, A capabilities perspective on the effects of early 
internationalization on firm survival and growth, AMR, 31: 914–933.
34 V. Govindarajan & A. Gupta, 2001, The Quest for Global Dominance, 
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
35 S. Nadkarni, P. Herrmann, & P. Perez, 2011, Domestic mindset 
and early international performance, SMJ, 32: 510–531.
36 J. Mathews & I. Zander, 2007, The international entrepreneurial 
dynamics of accelerated internationalization, JIBS, 38: 387–403.
37 S. Rangan & R. Adner, 2001, Profits and the Internet (pp. 49–50), 
SMR, summer: 44–53.
38 L. Lopez, S. Kundu, & L. Ciravegna, 2009, Born global or born 
regional? JIBS, 40: 1228–1238.
39 D. Ahlstrom & G. Bruton, 2010, Rapid institutional shifts and the 
co-evolution of entrepreneurial firms in transition economies, ETP, 
34: 531–554; G. Bruton, D. Ahlstrom, & H. Li, 2010, Institutional the-
ory and entrepreneurship, ETP, 34: 421–440; C. Moore, R. G. Bell, 
& I. Filatotchev, 2010, Institutions and foreign IPO firms, ETP, 34: 
469–490; R. Nasra & M. T. Dacin, 2010, Institutional arrangements 
and international entrepreneurship, ETP, 34: 583–609; S. Puffer, 
D. McCarthy, & M. Boisot, 2010, Entrepreneurship in Russia and 
China, ETP, 34: 441–467; J. Webb, G. Kistruck, R. D. Ireland, & 
D. Ketchen, 2010, The entrepreneurship process in base of the pyra-
mid markets, ETP, 34: 555–581.
40 M. W. Peng, C. Hill, & D. Wang, 2000, Schumpeterian dynamics 
versus Williamsonian considerations, JMS, 37: 167–184.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 
10 
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
	 10-1	 understand how institutions and resources 
affect the liability of foreignness.
	10-2	 match the quest for location-specific 
advantages with strategic goals (where to 
enter).
	10-3	 compare and contrast first-mover and 
late-mover advantages (when to enter).
	10-4	 follow the comprehensive model of foreign 
market entries (how to enter).
	10-5	 participate in three leading debates 
concerning foreign market entries.
	10-6	 draw implications for action.
B MATHUR/Reuters/Landov
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Entering Foreign 
Markets
Indian billionaire Ravi Ruia has flown to Africa at least 
once a month for the past year and a half. He is in-
terested in coal mines in Mozambique, an oil refinery 
in Kenya, and a call center in South Africa. Soon, he 
may also have a power plant in Nigeria. “Africa looks 
remarkably similar to what India was 15 years ago,” 
says Firdhose Coovadia, director of African operations 
at Essar Group, the $15 billion conglomerate headed 
by Ruia and his brother, Shashi. “We can’t lose this 
opportunity.”
Faced with increasing competition and a welter 
of bureaucratic obstacles at home, Indian companies 
are looking to Africa for growth. Since 2005, they have 
spent $16 billion on the continent, versus at least 
$31  billion spent by the Chinese, according to data 
compiled by Bloomberg and the Heritage Foundation, 
respectively. Bharti Airtel, India’s largest mobile-phone 
provider, in June 2010 paid $9 billion for the African 
cellular operations of Kuwait’s Zain. In 2008, India’s 
Videocon Industries paid $330 million for two coal 
mines in Mozambique, and India’s state-run fertilizer 
maker bought an idled Senegalese phosphorus pro-
ducer for $721 million.
Beyond these big deals are dozens of smaller acqui-
sitions and investments by Indian companies. “Com-
pared to India, valuations in Africa are quite attractive,” 
says Anuj Chande, who heads the South Asia Group at 
accounting firm Grant Thornton in London.“We’re ex-
pecting to see a lot of midsize deals across a variety 
of sectors.”
The Indians view Africa as a place where they 
can replicate the low-cost, high-efficiency business 
model they have honed at home. Like India, Africa 
has hundreds of millions of underserved consumers 
eager to buy products tailored to their needs. Con-
sumer spending in Africa may double, to as much 
as $1.8 trillion by 2020. McKinsey & Co. predicts an 
increase that would be the equivalent of adding a 
consumer market the size of Brazil. As a pioneer in 
sales of single-use sachets of soap and shampoo 
(along with Unilever and Procter & Gamble) for lower-
income Indians, Mumbai-based Godreh Consumer 
Products understands “low-cost, value-for-money 
products,” Chairman Adi Godrej said in an inter-
view. In June 2010, his company acquired Nigerian 
cosmetics maker Tura, and in 2008, it bought South 
African hair-care company Kinky. “We want growth. 
Whether it’s from inside or outside India, we are ag-
nostic,” Godrej said.
Indian companies also see Africa as a hedge against 
a possible slowdown at home. “If tomorrow the Indian 
economy was to take a U-turn, then at least you 
have other markets which are growing,” says Neeraj 
Kanwar, managing director of Apollo Tyres, India’s 
O p e n i n g  C a s e
EMERGING MARKETS: Corporate India Finds Greener Pastures—in Africa
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

312	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
How do numerous Indian firms enter Africa? Why do they enter certain countries but 
not others? How do they overcome their liability of foreignness? These are some of the 
key questions driving this chapter. Entering foreign markets is one of the most important 
topics in international business (IB). This chapter first draws on the institution-based 
and resource-based views to discuss ways to overcome the liability of foreignness.1 
Then we focus on three crucial dimensions: Where, when, and how—known as the 
“2W1H dimensions.” Our discussion culminates in a comprehensive model, followed 
by debates and extensions.
10-1 Overcoming the Liability of Foreignness
It is not easy to succeed in an unfamiliar environment. Recall from Chapter 1 
that foreign firms have to overcome a liability of foreignness, which is the in-
herent disadvantage that foreign firms experience in host countries because of 
their non-native status.2 Such a liability is manifested in at least two dimensions. 
First, there are numerous differences in formal and informal institutions govern-
ing the rules of the game in different countries. While local firms are already 
well versed in these rules, foreign firms have to invest resources to learn such 
rules. Some of the rules are in favor of local firms. For example, after working 
for years to familiarize itself with US defense procurement rules, European Aero-
nautic Defence and Space (EADS), the maker of Airbus, in 2008 won a major 
$35 billion contract to supply the US Air Force with next-generation refueling 
tankers. Then EADS (along with its US partner, Northrop Grumman) was dis-
appointed to find out that Boeing was able to twist the arms of politicians and 
change the rules so that in 2010, Boeing emerged as the winner of this rich prize, 
and EADS had to drop out.3 Many governments ban foreigners and foreign firms 
from owning assets in certain strategic sectors. For example, governments in 
Central and Eastern Europe are concerned about investments from Russia (see 
Emerging Markets 10.1).
Learning Objective
Understand how institutions 
and resources affect the 
liability of foreignness.
10-1
No. 2 tiremaker. His company bought South Africa’s 
Dunlop Tyres for $62 million in 2006, giving Apollo two 
manufacturing plants on the continent and brand rights 
in 32 African countries. Apollo aims to triple sales, to 
$6 billion, by 2015, with 60% of revenue from abroad, 
versus 38% today. “Africa is going to give me growth,” 
says Kanwar.
Essar has endured endless squabbles with Indian 
landowners who refuse to make way for steel mills. 
Like other Indian companies tired of regulatory head-
aches at home, it moved into Africa and now has 
2,000 employees there. Bangalore-based Karuturi 
Global, the world’s largest rose producer, couldn’t 
get enough land in India to compete with European 
and African rivals. Many times flowers wilted on the 
tarmac as cargo flights were delayed or cancelled, 
including a big Valentine’s Day shipment. So in 2004, 
Karuturi bought a small plot in Ethiopia, and sales 
have since grown elevenfold, to $113 million in the 
year ended March 31, 2010. Karuturi now leases 
1,200 square miles of land in Ethiopia—larger than 
the state of Rhode Island—and sells more than half 
a billion roses a year. “Africa offered us a scale we 
could never reach in India,” says Managing Director 
Sai Ramakrishna Karuturi. “I’d love to do more in 
India, but getting even 1,000 acres near Bangalore 
took years.”
Sources: Bloomberg Businessweek, 2010, Corporate India finds greener 
pastures—in Africa, November 8: 61–62.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 10   Entering Foreign Markets	
313
Second, although customers in this age of globalization supposedly no longer 
discriminate against foreign firms, the reality is that foreign firms are often still 
discriminated against, sometimes formally and other times informally. For years, 
American rice and beef, suspected (although never proven) to contain long-term 
health hazards because of genetic modification, have been informally resisted by 
individual consumers in Japan and Europe, after formal discriminatory policies 
imposed by their governments were removed. In India, activists singled out both 
Coca-Cola and Pepsi products as containing pesticides higher than permitted 
levels and chose not to test any Indian soft drinks that might contain even higher 
After the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, Russia suffered 
a decade of turmoil. Since 1999, the Russian economy 
has staged a spectacular comeback, largely thanks to 
consistently high prices of its main export items, oil 
and gas. The 2008–2009 global crisis created another 
setback. But with the Middle East up in flames since 
2011 (think of Libya), the more stable oil and gas pro-
duction from Russia bodes well for the country’s eco-
nomic performance.
Accumulation of earnings and lucrative opportu-
nities abroad have turned a series of Russian firms 
into multinational enterprises (MNEs), spreading 
their wings around the globe. Russian firms active 
in foreign direct investment (FDI) can be found in 
three categories: (1) One group focuses on acquisi-
tion targets in Western Europe and North America 
to access technological innovations and advanced 
management know-how. (2) Another group focuses 
on the “near abroad”—the Commonwealth of In-
dependent States (CIS), whose member countries 
were all parts of the Soviet Union. (3) A third group 
channels funds through offshore financial centers, 
such as Cyprus and the British Virgin Islands 
and reinvests back in Russia—a process known 
as capital round-tripping. Experts estimate that 
about 10% of the Russian outward FDI is involved 
in round-tripping, leaving the other 90% to be 
real FDI.
Thanks to the liability of foreignness, Russian FDI 
abroad is not without controversies. Host-country 
governments and the media often voice concern 
that Russian MNEs, especially large energy compa-
nies, may represent the “long arm of the Kremlin.” 
The political hard line recently taken by the Russian 
government (such as the war with Georgia and the 
decision to cut off gas supply to Ukraine) height-
ens such concerns, especially in sensitive Central 
and Eastern European countries such as Hungary, 
Lithuania, and Poland. Russian MNEs claim that 
their FDI is solely driven by profit motives. However, 
host-country governments face the dilemma of how 
to accommodate the legitimate economic interests 
of Russia MNEs, harness the FDI dollars they bring, 
and limit the potential damage when dealing with 
the bears (or eagles) from Russia. In Central and 
Eastern Europe, this dilemma has intensified after 
the Great Recession, when traditionally active MNEs 
from Germany and Austria were pulling back while 
Russian firms possessed fat checkbooks ready to 
invest.
Russian Firms Spread Their Wings 
E m e r g i n g  M a r k e t s  1 0 . 1
Ethical 
Dilemma
Sources: Based on (1) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2011, The Russians are buying, and buying, September 19: 17–18; (2) A. Panibratov & K. Kalotay, 2009, 
Russia outward FDI and its policy context, Columbia FDI Profiles, No. 1, www.vcc.columbia.edu; (3) United Nations, 2011, World Investment Report 
2010, New York: UN.
Danny Lehman/Corbis; Björn Meyer/sitox/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

314	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
pesticide levels in a country where pesticide residues are present in virtually all 
groundwater. Although both Coca-Cola and Pepsi denied these charges, their 
sales suffered.
Against such significant odds, how do foreign firms crack new markets? The an-
swer boils down to our two core perspectives (Figure 10.1). The institution-based 
view suggests that firms need to take actions deemed legitimate and appropriate 
by the various formal and informal institutions governing market entries.4 Dif-
ferences in formal institutions may lead to regulatory risks due to differences in 
political, economic, and legal systems (see Chapter 2). There may be numerous 
trade and investment barriers (see Chapters 5, 6, and 8). The existence of mul-
tiple currencies—and currency risks as a result—can be viewed as another formal 
barrier (see Chapter 7). The experience of the euro shows how much more trade 
and investment can take place when multiple countries remove such a barrier by 
adopting the same currency (see Chapter 8). Informally, numerous differences in 
cultures, norms, and values create another source of liability of foreignness (see 
Chapter 3).5 
The resource-based view argues that foreign firms need to deploy 
overwhelming resources and capabilities to offset their liability of foreignness.6 
Applying the VRIO framework introduced in Chapter 4 to our Opening Case, 
we can suggest that some Indian firms possess some overwhelmingly valuable 
and rare capabilities in successfully penetrating African markets. The winners 
from India excel in their low-cost, high-efficiency business model. Their value-
for-money products (such as single-use sachets of soap and shampoo) and 
their ability to profit from such high-volume and low-price products make it 
very hard for rivals in Africa to imitate. Entering foreign markets, financing 
international acquisitions, and hiring local workers require an enormous 
amount of organizational capabilities. Honed at home, many Indian firms’ 
organizational capabilities have proven to be a tremendous asset in their 
African forays.
Overall, our two core perspectives shed a lot of light on firms’ internationaliza-
tion.7 Next, we investigate the 2W1H dimensions associated with foreign market 
entries.
Figure 10.1
Institutions, Resources, and Foreign Market Entries
Institution-Based View
- Regulatory risks
- Trade and investment barriers
- Differences in cultures,
norms, and values 
Resource-Based View
- Value
- Rarity
- Imitability
- Organization
Foreign Market Entries:
Where
When
How 
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 10   Entering Foreign Markets	
315
10-2 Where to Enter?
Like real estate, the motto for IB is “Location, location, location.” In fact, such a 
spatial perspective (that is, doing business outside of one’s home country) is a defin-
ing feature of IB.8 Two sets of considerations drive the location of foreign entries: 
(1) strategic goals and (2) cultural and institutional distances. Each is discussed 
next.
10-2a Location-Specific Advantages and Strategic Goals
Favorable locations in certain countries may give firms operating there location-
specific advantages. Certain locations simply possess geographical features that are 
difficult for others to match. For example, Miami, the self-styled “Gateway of the 
Americas,” is an ideal location both for North American firms looking south and 
Latin American companies coming north. Vienna is an attractive site as MNE re-
gional headquarters for Central and Eastern Europe. Dubai is an ideal stopping 
point for air traffic between Asia and Europe, and between Asia and Africa.
Beyond geographic advantages, location-specific advantages also arise from the 
clustering of economic activities in certain locations, usually referred to as agglom-
eration (see Chapter 6). The basic idea dates back at least to Alfred Marshall, a 
British economist who first published it in 1890. Essentially, location-specific advan-
tages stem from (1) knowledge spillovers among closely located firms that attempt 
to hire individuals from competitors, (2) industry demand that creates a skilled 
labor force whose members may work for different firms without having to move 
out of the region, and (3) industry demand that facilitates a pool of specialized 
suppliers and buyers to also locate in the region.9 For example, due to agglomera-
tion, Dallas has the world’s heaviest concentration of telecom companies. US firms 
such as AT&T, HP, Raytheon, TI, and Verizon cluster there. Numerous leading 
foreign telecom firms such as Alcatel-Lucent, Ericsson, Fujitsu, Huawei, Siemens, 
and STMicroelectronics have also converged in this region.
Given that different locations offer different benefits, it is imperative that a 
firm match its strategic goals with potential locations. The four strategic goals are 
shown in Table 10.1.
  	 Natural resource–seeking firms have to go to particular foreign locations 
where those resources are found. For example, the Middle East, Russia, and 
Learning Objective
Match the quest for location-
specific advantages with 
strategic goals (where to enter).
10-2
Location-specific advantages
The benefits a firm reaps from 
the features specific to a place.
Table 10.1
Matching Strategic Goals with Locations
Strategic goals
Location-specific advantages
Examples in the text
Natural resource–seeking
Possession of natural resources and 
related transport and communication 
infrastructure
Oil in the Middle East, Russia, and 
Venezuela 
Market-seeking
Abundance of strong market demand 
and customers willing to pay
GM in China
Efficiency-seeking
Economies of scale and abundance of 
low-cost factors
Manufacturing in China (especially in 
Shanghai)
Innovation-seeking
Abundance of innovative individuals, 
firms, and universities
IT in Silicon Valley and Bangalore; 
telecom in Dallas; aerospace in Russia
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

316	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
On the banks of the sleepy river Loire, across the val-
ley from Amboise’s historical château royal, stands a 
model of modern high-tech French manufacturing. In 
a neatly landscaped business park in Amboise, Pfizer, 
an American pharmaceutical giant, produces 80% of 
the world’s Viagra and the entire supply for the US 
market. Every bottle of Viagra bought in an American 
drugstore will have been filled, packaged, labeled, bar-
coded, and shipped from this site. The Amboise fac-
tory manufactures Viagra in 227 different guises, from 
pill jars to blister packs. In all, the site turns out nearly 
70 million packs or bottles of pills of various kinds of 
Viagra each year, labeled in 44 different languages.
Pfizer’s Amboise plant shows that, for foreign in-
vestors, France remains an attractive location. This par-
ticular site offers a mix of high productivity, technical 
expertise (it has a big research facility, and nearby 
Tours is home to a pharmaceutical college), and reli-
ability in a market troubled by fakes.
Source: Excerpted from Economist, 2006, Insiders and outsiders (p. 5), 
October 28 (supplement: The art of the impossible: A survey of France): 
5–7.
The World’s Best Place to Make Viagra
IN Focus 10.1 
Venezuela are all rich in oil. Even when the Venezuelan government became 
more hostile, Western oil firms had to put up with it.
  	 Market-seeking firms go to countries that have a strong demand for their prod-
ucts and services. For example, China is now the largest car market in the 
world, and practically all the automakers in the world are now elbowing into 
this fast-growing market. General Motors (GM) has emerged as the leader. It 
now sells more cars in China than in the United States.
  	 Efficiency-seeking firms often single out the most efficient locations featuring 
a combination of scale economies and cost factors (see In Focus 10.1). It is 
the search for efficiency that induced numerous MNEs to enter China. China 
now manufactures two-thirds of the world’s photocopiers, shoes, toys, and 
microwave ovens; one-half of the DVD players, digital cameras, and textiles; 
one-third of the desktop computers; and one-quarter of the mobile phones, 
television sets, and steel. Shanghai alone reportedly has a cluster of over 400 
of the Fortune Global 500 firms. Approximately one 
quarter of all foreign direct investment (FDI) in 
China has been absorbed by Shanghai.10 It is im-
portant to note that China does not present the 
absolutely lowest labor costs in the world, and 
Shanghai is the highest-cost city in China. However, 
Shanghai’s attractiveness lies in its ability to en-
hance efficiency for foreign entrants by lowering 
total costs.
  	 Innovation-seeking firms target countries and 
regions renowned for world-class innovations, 
such as Silicon Valley and Bangalore (in IT), 
Dallas (in telecom), and Russia (in aerospace).11 
(See Chapter 13 for details.)
It is important to note that location-specific 
advantages may grow, change, and/or decline, 
prompting firms to relocate. If policy makers fail  
What environmental factors have changed that have 
made this car manufacturer stop touting that its 
products are “made in Germany”?
Buzz Pictures/Alamy Limited
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 10   Entering Foreign Markets	
317
to maintain the institutional attractiveness (for example, by raising taxes) and if 
companies overcrowd and bid up factor costs such as land and talents, some firms 
may move out of certain locations previously considered advantageous. For exam-
ple, BMW and Daimler-Benz had proudly projected a 100% “Made in Germany” 
image until the early 1990s. Now both firms produce in a variety of countries, such 
as Brazil, China, Mexico, South Africa, the United States, and Vietnam, and instead 
boast “Made by BMW” and “Made by Daimler-Benz.” Both the relative decline of 
Germany’s location-specific advantages and the rise of other countries’ advantages 
prompted BMW and Daimler-Benz to do this.
10-2b Cultural/Institutional Distances  
and Foreign Entry Locations
In addition to strategic goals, another set of considerations centers on cultural/in-
stitutional distances (see also Chapters 2 and 3). Cultural distance is the difference 
between two cultures along some identifiable dimensions (such as individualism).12 
Considering culture as an informal part of institutional frameworks governing a 
particular country, institutional distance is “the extent of similarity or dissimilarity 
between the regulatory, normative, and cognitive institutions of two countries.”13 
Many Western consumer products firms, such as L’Oreal, have shied away from 
Saudi Arabia, citing its stricter rules of personal behavior—in essence, its cultural 
and institutional distances being too large.
Two schools of thought have emerged. The first is associated with stage models, 
arguing that firms will enter culturally similar countries during their first stage of 
internationalization, and that they may gain more confidence to enter culturally 
distant countries in later stages.14 This idea is intuitively appealing: It makes sense 
for Belgian firms to first enter France, taking advantage of common cultural, lan-
guage, and historical ties.15 Business between countries that share a language is, on 
average, three times greater than between countries without a common language. 
Firms from common-law countries (English-speaking countries and Britain’s former 
colonies) are more likely to be interested in other common-law countries. Colony-
colonizer links (such as Britain’s ties with the Commonwealth and Spain’s with Latin 
America) boost trade significantly. In general, MNEs from emerging economies 
perform better in other developing countries, presumably because of their closer 
institutional distance and similar stages of economic development.16 There is some 
evidence documenting certain performance benefits of competing in culturally and 
institutionally adjacent countries (see PengAtlas maps 1.2, 1.3, and 1.4).17 
Citing numerous counterexamples, a second school of thought argues that con-
siderations of strategic goals, such as market and efficiency, are more important 
than cultural/institutional considerations.18 For instance, natural resource–seeking 
firms have compelling reasons to enter culturally and institutionally distant coun-
tries (such as Papua New Guinea for bauxite and Zambia for copper). On Sakhalin 
Island, a remote, oil-rich part of the Russian Far East, Western oil firms have to live 
with Russia’s strong-arm tactics to grab more shares and profits that are described 
as “thuggish ways” by the Economist.19 Because Western oil firms have few alterna-
tives elsewhere, cultural, institutional, and geographic distance in this case do not 
seem relevant—they simply have to be there and let the Russians dictate the terms. 
Overall, in the complex calculus underpinning entry decisions, locations represent 
but one of several important sets of considerations. As shown next, entry timing 
and modes are also crucial.
Cultural distance
The difference between two 
cultures along identifiable dimen-
sions such as individualism.
Institutional distance
The extent of similarity or dis-
similarity between the regula-
tory, normative, and cognitive 
institutions of two countries.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

318	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
Table 10.2
First-Mover Advantages and Late-Mover Advantages
First-mover advantages
Examples in the text
Late-mover advantages
Examples in the text
Proprietary, technological 
leadership
Apple’s iPod, iPad, and 
iPhone
Opportunity to free ride on 
first-mover investments
Ericsson won big contracts in 
Saudi Arabia, free-riding on 
Cisco’s efforts
Pre-emption of scarce 
resources
Japanese MNEs in Southeast 
Asia
Resolution of technological 
and market uncertainty
GM and Toyota have patience 
to wait until the Nissan Leaf 
resolves uncertainties about 
the electric car
Establishment of entry 
barriers for late entrants
Poland’s F-16 fighter jet 
contract
First mover’s difficulty to 
adapt to market changes
Greyhound is stuck with 
the bus depots, whereas 
Megabus simply uses 
curbside stops
Avoidance of clash with 
dominant firms at home
Sony, Honda, and Epson go 
to the US market ahead of 
their Japanese rivals
Relationships with key stake-
holders such as governments
Citigroup, JP Morgan Chase, 
and Metallurgical Corporation 
of China enter Afghanistan
10-3 When to Enter?
Entry timing refers to whether there are compelling reasons to be an early or late 
entrant in a particular country. Some firms look for first-mover advantages, de-
fined as the benefits that accrue to firms that enter the market first and that later 
entrants do not enjoy.20 Speaking of the power of first-mover advantages, “Xerox,” 
“FedEx,” and “Google” have now become verbs, such as “Google it.” In many African 
countries, “Colgate” is the generic term for toothpaste. Unilever, a late mover, was 
disappointed to find out that its African customers call its own toothpaste “the red 
Colgate” (!). Table 10.2 outlines such advantages.
  	 First movers may gain advantage through proprietary technology. Think 
about Apple’s iPod, iPad, and iPhone.
  	 First movers may also make pre-emptive investments. A number of Japanese 
MNEs have cherrypicked leading local suppliers and distributors in Southeast 
Asia as new members of the expanded keiretsu networks (alliances of Japanese 
businesses with interlocking business relationships and shareholdings) and 
have blocked access to the suppliers and distributors by late entrants from the 
West.21 
  	 First movers may erect significant entry barriers for late entrants, such as high 
switching costs due to brand loyalty. Buyers of expensive equipment are likely 
to stick with the same producers for components, training, and services for 
a long time. That is why American, British, French, German, and Russian 
aerospace firms competed intensely for Poland’s first post–Cold War order of 
fighters—America’s F-16 eventually won.
  	 Intense domestic competition may drive some non-dominant firms abroad 
to avoid clashing with dominant firms head-on in their home market. 
Matsushita, Toyota, and NEC were the market leaders in Japan, but Sony, 
Honda, and Epson all entered the United States in their respective industries 
ahead of the leading firms.
Learning Objective
Compare and contrast 
first-mover and late-mover 
advantages (when to enter).
10-3
First-mover advantages
Benefits that accrue to firms that 
enter the market first and that 
late entrants do not enjoy.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 10   Entering Foreign Markets	
319
  	 First movers may build precious relationships with key stakeholders such as 
customers and governments. For example, Citigroup, JP Morgan Chase, and 
Metallurgical Corporation of China have entered Afghanistan, earning a 
good deal of goodwill from the Afghan government, which is interested in 
wooing more FDI.22 
The potential advantages of first movers may be counterbalanced by various 
disadvantages, which result in late-mover advantages (also listed in Table 10.2). 
Numerous first-mover firms—such as EMI in CT scanners and Netscape in Inter-
net browsers—have lost market dominance in the long run. It is such late-mover 
firms as GE and Microsoft (Explorer), respectively, that win. Specifically, late-
mover advantages are manifested in three ways: 
  	 Late movers can free-ride on first movers’ pioneering investments. In Saudi 
Arabia, Cisco invested millions of dollars to rub shoulders with dignitaries, 
including the king, in order to help officials grasp the promise of the Inter-
net in fueling economic development, only to lose out to late movers, such as 
Ericsson, that offered lower-cost solutions. For instance, the brand new King 
Abdullah Economic City awarded an $84 million citywide telecom project to 
Ericsson, whose bid was more than 20% lower than Cisco’s—in part because 
Ericsson did not have to offer basic education and did not have to entertain 
that much. “We’re very proud to have won against a company that did as much 
advance work as Cisco did,” an elated Ericsson executive noted.23
  	 First movers face greater technological and market uncertainties. Nissan, for 
example, has launched the world’s first all-electric car, the Leaf, which can 
run without a single drop of gasoline. However, there are tremendous uncer-
tainties. After some of these uncertainties are removed, late movers such as 
GM and Toyota will join the game with their own electric cars.
  	 As incumbents, first movers may be locked into a given set of fixed assets 
or reluctant to cannibalize existing product lines in favor of new ones. Late 
movers may be able to take advantage of the inflexibility of first movers by 
leapfrogging them. Although Greyhound, the incumbent in intercity bus ser-
vice in the United States, is struggling financially, it cannot get rid of the ex-
pensive bus depots in inner cities that are often ill-maintained and dreadful. 
Megabus, the new entrant from Britain, simply has not bothered to build and 
maintain a single bus depot. Instead, Megabus uses curbside stops (like regu-
lar city bus stops), which have made travel by bus more appealing to a large 
number of passengers (see the Closing Case).
Overall, evidence points out both first-mover advantages and late-mover ad-
vantages. Unfortunately, a mountain of research is still unable to recommend 
conclusively a particular entry-timing strategy.24 Although first movers may have 
an opportunity to win, their pioneering status is not a guarantee of success. For 
example, among the three first movers into the Chinese automobile industry in the 
early 1980s, Volkswagen captured significant advantages, Chrysler had very moder-
ate success, and Peugeot failed and had to exit. Although many of the late movers 
that entered in the late 1990s are struggling, GM, Honda, and Hyundai gained sig-
nificant market shares. It is obvious that entry timing cannot be viewed in isolation, 
and entry timing per se is not the sole determinant of success and failure of foreign 
entries. It is through interaction with other strategic variables that entry timing has 
an impact on performance.
Late-mover advantages
Benefits that accrue to firms that 
enter the market later and that 
early entrants do not enjoy.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

320	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
10-4 How to Enter?
This section first focuses on large-scale versus small-scale entries. Then it intro-
duces a comprehensive model. The first step is to determine whether to pursue eq-
uity or non-equity modes of entry. Finally, we outline the pros and cons of various 
equity and non-equity modes.
10-4a Scale of Entry: Commitment and Experience
One key dimension in foreign entry decisions is the scale of entry, which refers to 
the amount of resources committed to entering a foreign market. The benefits of 
large-scale entries are a demonstration of strategic commitment to certain mar-
kets. This helps to assure local customers and suppliers (“We are here for the long 
haul!”) while deterring potential entrants. The drawbacks are (1) limited strategic 
flexibility elsewhere and (2) huge losses if these large-scale “bets” turn out to be 
wrong.
Small-scale entries are less costly. They focus on “learning by doing” while 
limiting the downside risk.25 For example, to enter the market of Islamic finance 
whereby no interest can be charged (per teaching of the Koran), Citibank set up a 
subsidiary Citibank Islamic Bank, HSBC established Amanah, and UBS launched 
Noriba. They were all designed to experiment with different interpretations of 
the Koran on how to make money while not committing religious sins. It is sim-
ply not possible to acquire such an ability outside the Islamic world. Overall, the 
longer foreign firms stay in host countries, the less liability of foreignness they 
experience. The drawbacks of small-scale entries are a lack of strong commit-
ment, which may lead to difficulties in building market share and in capturing 
first-mover advantages.
10-4b Modes of Entry: The First Step—Equity  
versus Non-equity Modes
Managers are unlikely to consider the numerous modes of entry (methods used to 
enter a foreign market) at the same time. Given the complexity of entry decisions, 
it is imperative that managers prioritize, by considering only a few manageable, key 
variables first and then other variables later.26 Therefore, a comprehensive model 
shown in Figure 10.2 and explained in Table 10.3 is helpful.
In the first step, considerations for small-scale versus large-scale entries usually 
boil down to the equity issue. Non-equity modes tend to reflect relatively smaller 
commitments to overseas markets, whereas equity modes are indicative of relatively 
larger, harder-to-reverse commitments. Equity modes call for the establishment of 
independent organizations overseas (partially or wholly controlled). Non-equity 
modes do not require such independent establishments. Overall, these modes dif-
fer significantly in terms of cost, commitment, risk, return, and control.
The distinction between equity and non-equity modes is not trivial. In fact, it is 
what defines an MNE: An MNE enters foreign markets via equity modes through 
FDI. A firm that merely exports or imports with no FDI is usually not regarded as 
an MNE. As discussed at length in Chapter 6, an MNE, relative to a non-MNE, en-
joys the three-pronged advantages along ownership, location, and internalization 
dimensions—collectively known as the OLI advantages.27 Overall, the first step in 
Learning Objective
Follow the comprehensive 
model of foreign market entries 
(how to enter).
10-4
Scale of entry
The amount of resources 
committed to entering a 
foreign market.
Mode of entry
Method used to enter a foreign 
market.
Non-equity mode
A mode of entry (exports and 
contractual agreements) that 
tends to reflect relatively smaller 
commitments to overseas 
markets.
Equity mode
A mode of entry (JV and WOS) 
that indicates relatively larger, 
harder-to-reverse commitments 
to overseas markets.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 10   Entering Foreign Markets	
321
Figure 10.2
The Choice of Entry Modes: A Comprehensive Model
Source: Adapted from Y. Pan & D. Tse, 2000, The hierarchical model of market entry modes (p. 538), Journal of International Business Studies, 31: 535–54. The 
dotted area labeled “strategic alliances” is added by the present author.
Choice of entry modes
Non-equity
modes
Direct exports
Exports
Contractual
agreements
Indirect exports
Others
Licensing/franchising
Turnkey projects
R&D contracts
Co-marketing
Equity (FDI)
modes
Minority JVs
Joint
ventures
(JVs)
Wholly owned
subsidiaries
(WOS)
50/50 JVs
Majority JVs
Green-ﬁelds
Acquisitions
Others
Strategic alliances
entry mode considerations is crucial. A strategic decision has to be made in terms 
of whether or not to undertake FDI and to become an MNE by selecting equity 
modes.
10-4c Modes of Entry: The Second Step—Making  
Actual Selections
During the second step, managers consider variables within each group of non-
equity and equity modes. If the decision is to export, then the next consideration is 
direct exports or indirect exports. Direct exports are the most basic mode of entry, 
capitalizing on economies of scale in production concentrated in the home country 
and providing better control over distribution. Shown in Emerging Markets 10.2, 
the world’s largest piano maker, Pearl River, exports its pianos from China to over 
80 countries. This strategy essentially treats foreign demand as an extension of do-
mestic demand, and the firm is geared toward designing and producing first and 
foremost for the domestic market. While direct exports may work if the export vol-
ume is small, it is not optimal when the firm has a large number of foreign buyers. 
Marketing 101 suggests that the firm needs to be closer, both physically and psycho-
logically, to its customers, prompting the firm to consider more intimate overseas 
involvement such as FDI. In addition, direct exports may provoke protectionism, 
potentially triggering antidumping actions (see Chapters 5 and 11).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

322	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
Another export strategy is indirect exports—namely, exporting through 
domestically based export intermediaries. This strategy not only enjoys the 
economies of scale similar to direct exports but is also relatively worry-free. A 
significant amount of export trade in commodities such as textiles and meats, 
which compete primarily on price, is indirect through intermediaries.28 Indirect 
Table 10.3
Modes of Entry: Advantages and Disadvantages
Entry modes (examples in the text)
Advantages
Disadvantages
1. Non-equity modes: Exports
Direct exports (Pearl River piano  
exports to over 80 countries)
  	 Economies of scale in production 
concentrated in home country
  	 Better control over distribution
  	 High transportation costs for bulky 
products
  	 Marketing distance from customers
  	 Trade barriers and protectionism
Indirect exports (Commodities trade in 
textiles and meats)
  	 Focus on production
  	 Avoid export processes
  	 Less control over distribution 
  	 Inability to learn how to compete 
overseas
2. Non-equity modes:  
Contractual agreements
Licensing/Franchising (Pizza Hut in 
Thailand)
  	 Low development costs
  	 Low risk in overseas expansion
  	 Little control over technology and 
marketing
  	 May create competitors
  	 Inability to engage in global coordination
Turnkey projects (A German, Italian, 
and Iranian consortium on a BOT project 
in Iran)
  	 Ability to earn returns from process 
technology in countries where FDI is 
restricted
  	 May create efficient competitors
  	 Lack of long-term presence
R&D contracts (IT work in India and 
aerospace research in Russia)
  	 Ability to tap into the best locations 
for certain innovations at low costs
  	 Difficult to negotiate and enforce 
contracts
  	 May nurture innovative competitors
  	 May lose core innovation capabilities
Co-marketing (McDonald’s campaigns 
with movie studios and toy makers; 
airline alliances)
  	 Ability to reach more customers
  	 Limited coordination
3. Equity modes: Partially  
owned subsidiaries
Joint ventures (Shanghai Volkswagen
and Sony Ericsson)
  	 Sharing costs, risks, and profits
  	 Access to partners’ assets
  	 Politically acceptable
  	 Divergent goals and interests of 
partners
  	 Limited equity and operational control
  	 Difficult to coordinate globally
4. Equity modes: Wholly  
owned subsidiaries
Greenfield operations (Microsoft’s R&D 
center in China; TI in Japan; Japanese 
auto transplants in the United States)
  	 Complete equity and operational 
control
  	 Protection of know-how
  	 Ability to coordinate globally
  	 Potential political problems and risks
  	 High development costs
  	 Add new capacity to industry
  	 Slow entry speed (relative to 
acquisitions)
Acquisitions (Indian firms’ acquisitions 
in Africa)
  	 Same as greenfield (above)
  	 Do not add new capacity
  	 Fast entry speed
  	 Same as greenfield (above), except 
adding new capacity and slow speed
  	 Post-acquisition integration problems
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 10   Entering Foreign Markets	
323
To many readers of this book, Pearl River is likely to 
be the world’s largest piano maker you have never 
heard of. It is also the fastest-growing piano maker 
in North America, with the largest dealer network in 
Canada and the United States (over 300 dealers). Its 
website proudly announces that Pearl River is “the 
world’s best selling piano.” Although some of you 
may say, “Sorry, I don’t play piano, so I don’t know 
anything about leading piano brands,” you most 
likely have heard about Yamaha and Steinway. There-
fore, your excuse for not knowing Pearl River would 
collapse.
The problem is both yours and Pearl River’s. 
Given the relatively low prestige associated with 
made-in-China goods, you probably would not as-
sociate a piece of fine musical instrument such as 
piano with a Chinese firm. Pearl River Piano Group 
(PRPG) is China’s largest piano maker and has recent-
ly dethroned Japan’s Yamaha to become the world 
champion by volume. Despite PRPG’s outstanding 
capabilities, it is difficult for one firm to change the 
negative country-of-origin image associated with 
made-in-China goods.
PRPG was founded in 1956 in Guangzhou, China, 
where the Pearl River flows by. Pearl River (the com-
pany) in fact exported its very first piano to Hong Kong. 
Yet, its center of gravity has remained in China. Pianos 
have become more affordable with rising income. 
The one-child policy has made families willing to in-
vest in their only child’s education. As a result, the 
Chinese now buy half of the pianos produced in the  
world.
If you think life will be easy for the leading firm 
in the largest market in the world, you are wrong. 
In fact, life is increasingly hard for PRPG. This is be-
cause rising demand has attracted numerous new 
entrants, many of which compete at the low end in 
China. Over 140 competitors have pushed PRPG’s 
domestic market share from 70% at its peak a 
decade ago to about 25% now—although it is still 
the market leader.
Savage domestic competition has pushed PRPG 
to increasingly look for overseas opportunities. It now 
exports to over 80 countries. In North America, PRPG 
started in the late 1980s by relying on US-based im-
porters. Making its first ever FDI, it set up a US-based 
sales subsidiary, PRPG America, Ltd., in Ontario, 
California, in 1999. Acknowledging the importance 
of the US market and the limited international caliber 
of his own managerial rank, PRPG’s CEO, Tong Zhi 
Cheng, attracted Al Rich, an American with long expe-
rience in the piano industry, to head the subsidiary. In 
two years, the greenfield subsidiary succeeded in get-
ting Pearl River pianos into about one third of the spe-
cialized US retail dealers. In ten years, the Pearl River 
brand became the undisputed leader in the low end of 
the upright piano market in North America. Efforts to 
penetrate the high end of the market, however, were 
still frustrated.
Despite the enviable progress made by PRPG it-
self in general and by its US subsidiary in particular, 
the Pearl River brand suffers from all the usual trap-
pings associated with Chinese brands. “We are very 
cognizant that our pricing provides a strong incen-
tive to buy,” Rich noted in a media interview, “but 
$6,000 is still a lot of money. ” In an audacious move 
to overcome buyers’ reservation about purchasing a 
high-end Chinese product, PRPG made its second 
major FDI move in 2000 by acquiring Ritmüller of 
Germany.
Ritmüller was founded in 1795 by Wilhelm Ritmüller, 
during the lifetimes of composers Beethoven and 
Haydn. It was one of the first piano makers in Germany 
and one of the most prominent in the world. Unfor-
tunately, during the post-WWII era, Ritmüller’s style 
of small-scale, handicraft-based piano making had a 
hard time surviving the disruptive, mass-production 
technologies first unleashed by Yamaha and, more 
Pearl River’s Modes of Foreign Market Entries 
E m e r g i n g  M a r k e t s  1 0 . 2
Danny Lehman/Corbis; Björn Meyer/sitox/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

324	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
exports have some drawbacks. For example, third parties, such as export trading 
companies, may not share the same objectives as exporters. Exporters choose in-
termediaries primarily because of information asymmetries concerning foreign 
markets.29 Intermediaries with international contacts and knowledge essentially 
make a living by taking advantage of such information asymmetries.30 They are 
not interested in reducing such asymmetries. Intermediaries, for example, may 
repackage the products under their own brand and insist on monopolizing the 
communication with overseas customers. If the exporter is interested in knowing 
more about how its products perform overseas, indirect exports would not pro-
vide such knowledge.
The next group of non-equity entry modes involves the following types of con-
tractual agreement: (1) licensing or franchising, (2) turnkey projects, (3) research 
and development contracts, and (4) co-marketing. In licensing/franchising agree-
ments, the licensor/franchisor sells the rights to intellectual property such as 
patents and know-how to the licensee/franchisee for a royalty fee. The licensor/
franchisor, thus, does not have to bear the full costs and risks associated with 
foreign expansion. On the other hand, the licensor/franchisor does not have tight 
control over production and marketing.31 Pizza Hut, for example, was disappointed 
when its franchisee in Thailand discontinued the relationship and launched a com-
peting pizza restaurant to eat Pizza Hut’s lunch.
In turnkey projects, clients pay contractors to design and construct new facili-
ties and train personnel. At project completion, contractors hand clients the pro-
verbial key to facilities ready for operations, hence the term “turnkey.” This mode 
allows firms to earn returns from process technology (such as construction) in 
countries where FDI is restricted. The drawbacks, however, are twofold. First, if 
foreign clients are competitors, turnkey projects may boost their competitiveness. 
Second, turnkey projects do not allow for a long-term presence after the key is 
handed to clients. To obtain a longer-term presence, build-operate-transfer agree-
ments are now often used, instead of the traditional build-transfer type of turnkey 
projects. A build-operate-transfer (BOT) agreement is a non-equity mode of entry 
used to build a longer-term presence by building and then operating a facility for 
a period of time before transferring operations to a domestic agency or firm. For 
example, a consortium of German, Italian, and Iranian firms obtained a large-
scale BOT power-generation project in Iran. After completion of the construction, 
the consortium will operate the project for 20 years before transferring it to the 
Iranian government.
Turnkey project
A project in which clients pay 
contractors to design and 
construct new facilities and 
train personnel.
Build-operate-transfer (BOT) 
agreement
A non-equity mode of entry used 
to build a longer-term presence 
by building and then operating 
a facility for a period of time 
before transferring operations to 
a domestic agency or firm.
recently, by Pearl River. Prior to being acquired by 
Pearl River, Ritmüller ended up being inactive. Today, 
Ritmüller has entered a new era in its proud history 
and operated a factory in Germany with full capac-
ity. The entire product line has been re-engineered to 
reflect a new commitment to a classic heritage and 
standards of excellence. PRPG has commissioned in-
ternational master piano designers to marry German 
precision craftsmanship with the latest piano making 
technology.
Sources: Based on (1) Beijing Review, 2009, The return of the king, May 21, www.bjreview.com; (2) Funding Universe, 2009, Guangzhou Pearl River 
Piano Group Ltd., www.fundinguniverse.com; (3) Y. Lu, 2009, Pearl River Piano Group’s international strategy, in M. W. Peng, Global Strategy, 2nd ed. 
(pp. 437–440), Cincinnati: South-Western Cengage Learning; (4) Pearl River Piano Group, 2012, www.pearlriverpiano.com; (5) Pearl River USA, 2012, 
www.pearlriverusa.com.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 10   Entering Foreign Markets	
325
Research and development (R&D) contracts refer to outsourcing agreements in 
R&D between firms. Firm A agrees to perform certain R&D work for Firm B. Firms 
thereby tap into the best locations for certain innovations at relatively low costs, 
such as aerospace research in Russia. However, three drawbacks may emerge. 
First, given the uncertain and multidimensional nature of R&D, these contracts 
are often difficult to negotiate and enforce. While delivery time and costs are 
relatively easy to negotiate, quality is often hard to assess. Second, such contracts 
may cultivate competitors. A number of Indian IT firms, nurtured by such work, 
are now on a global offensive to take on their Western rivals. Finally, firms that rely 
on outsiders to perform a lot of R&D may lose some of their core R&D capabilities 
in the long run.
Co-marketing refers to efforts among a number of firms to jointly market their 
products and services. Toy makers and movie studios often collaborate in co-
marketing campaigns with fast-food chains such as McDonald’s to package toys 
based on movie characters in kids’ meals. Airline alliances such as One World and 
Star Alliance engage in extensive co-marketing through code sharing (multiple 
airlines share the code of one flight operated by one partner firm). The advantages 
are the ability to reach more customers. The drawbacks center on limited control 
and coordination.
Next are equity modes, all of which entail some FDI and transform the firm to 
an MNE. A joint venture (JV) is a corporate child, a new entity jointly created and 
owned by two or more parent companies. It has three principal forms: Minority 
JV (less than 50% equity), 50/50 JV (equal equity), and majority JV (more than 
50% equity). JVs, such as Shanghai Volkswagen and Sony Ericsson, have three ad-
vantages. First, an MNE shares costs, risks, and profits with a local partner, so the 
MNE possesses a certain degree of control but limits risk exposure. Second, the 
MNE gains access to knowledge about the host country; the local firm, in turn, 
benefits from the MNE’s technology, capital, and management. Third, JVs may be 
politically more acceptable in host countries.
In terms of disadvantages, JVs often involve partners from different back-
grounds and with different goals, so conflicts are natural. Furthermore, effective 
equity and operational control may be difficult to achieve, since everything has to 
be negotiated—in some cases, fought over. Finally, the nature of the JV does not 
give an MNE the tight control over a foreign subsidiary that it may need for global 
coordination. Overall, all sorts of non-equity-based contractual agreements and 
equity-based JVs can be broadly considered as strategic alliances (within the dotted 
area in Figure 10.2). Chapter 12 will discuss them in detail.
The last entry mode is to establish a wholly owned subsidiary (WOS), defined as a 
subsidiary located in a foreign country that is entirely owned by the parent multina-
tional. There are two primary means to set up a WOS. One is to establish greenfield 
operations, building new factories and offices from scratch (on a proverbial piece 
of “green field” formerly used for agricultural purposes). For example, Microsoft 
established a greenfield R&D center in Beijing. There are three advantages. First, 
a greenfield WOS gives an MNE complete equity and management control, thus 
eliminating the headaches associated with JVs. Second, this undivided control leads 
to better protection of proprietary technology. Third, a WOS allows for centrally 
coordinated global actions. Sometimes, a subsidiary will be ordered to lose money. 
In the semiconductor market, Texas Instruments (TI) faced the low-price Japanese 
challenge in many countries, whereas rivals such as NEC and Toshiba were able to 
R&D contract
Outsourcing agreement in 
R&D between firms.
Co-marketing
Efforts among a number of firms 
to jointly market their products 
and services.
Joint venture (JV)
A new corporate entity created 
and jointly owned by two or 
more parent companies.
Wholly owned subsidiary 
(WOS)
A subsidiary located in a foreign 
country that is entirely owned by 
the parent multinational.
Greenfield operations
Building factories and offices 
from scratch (on a proverbial 
piece of “green field” formerly 
used for agricultural purposes).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

326	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
charge high prices in Japan and use domestic profits to cross-subsidize overseas 
expansion. By entering Japan via a WOS and slashing prices there, TI retaliated by 
incurring a loss. However, this forced the Japanese firms to defend their profit sanc-
tuary at home, where they had more to lose. Consequently, Japanese rivals had to 
reduce the ferocity of their price wars outside of Japan. Local licensees/franchisees 
or JV partners are unlikely to accept such a subservient role—being ordered to lose 
money (!).
In terms of drawbacks, a greenfield WOS tends to be expensive and risky, not 
only financially but also politically. Its conspicuous foreignness may become a target 
for nationalistic sentiments. Another drawback is that greenfield operations add 
new capacity to an industry, which will make a competitive industry more crowd-
ed. For example, think of all the Japanese automobile plants built in the United 
States, which have severely squeezed the market share of US automakers. Finally, 
greenfield operations suffer from a slow entry speed of at least one to several years 
(relative to acquisitions).
The other way to establish a WOS is an acquisition. Indian firms’ acquisitions 
in Africa are cases in point (see the Opening Case). Acquisition shares all the 
benefits of greenfield WOS but enjoys two additional advantages: (1) adding no 
new capacity and (2) faster entry speed. In terms of drawbacks, acquisition shares 
all of the disadvantages of greenfield WOS except adding new capacity and slow 
entry speed. But acquisition has a unique disadvantage: post-acquisition integra-
tion problems (see Chapter 12 for details).
Overall, while we have focused on one entry mode at a time, firms in practice 
are not limited by any single entry choice.32 For example, IKEA stores in China are 
JVs, and its stores in Hong Kong and Taiwan are separate franchises. Pearl River 
has used a variety of entry modes (exports, greenfields, and acquisitions) to tackle 
various markets (Emerging Markets 10.2). In addition, entry modes may change 
over time.33 Starbucks, for instance, first used franchising. It then switched to JVs 
and, more recently, to acquisitions.
10-5 Debates and Extensions
This chapter has already covered some crucial debates, such as first-mover versus 
late-mover advantages. Here we discuss three heated recent debates: (1) liability 
versus asset of foreignness, (2) global versus regional geographic diversification, 
and (3) old-line versus emerging multinationals.
10-5a Liability versus Asset of Foreignness
While we do not need to spill more ink on the term “liability of foreignness,” one 
contrasting view argues that under certain circumstances, being foreign can be 
an asset (that is, a competitive advantage). German cars are viewed as of higher 
quality in the United States and Japan. In China, consumers discriminate against 
made-in-China luxury goods. Although these made-in-China luxury goods sport 
Western brands, they are viewed inferior to made-in-France handbags and made-
in-Switzerland watches. American cigarettes are “cool” among smokers in Central 
and Eastern Europe. Anything Korean—ranging from handsets and TV shows to 
kimchi (pickled cabbage)-flavored instant noodles—are considered hip in South-
east Asia. Conceptually, this is known as the country-of-origin effect, which refers 
Learning Objective
Participate in three leading 
debates concerning foreign 
market entries.
10-5
Country-of-origin effect
The positive or negative percep-
tion of firms and products from a 
certain country.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 10   Entering Foreign Markets	
327
to the positive or negative perception of firms and 
products from a certain country. Pearl River’s pro-
motion of the Ritmüller brand, which highlights its 
German origin, suggests that the negative country-
of-origin effect can be (at least partially) overcome 
(see Emerging Markets 10.2). Pearl River is not alone 
in this regard. Here is a quiz: What is the country 
of origin of Häagen-Dazs ice cream? My students 
typically answer: Germany, Belgium, Switzerland, 
or some other European countries. Sorry, all wrong. 
Häagen-Dazs is American and always has been (!).
Whether foreignness is indeed an asset or a li-
ability remains tricky. Tokyo Disneyland became 
wildly popular in Japan, because it played up its 
American image. But Paris Disneyland received re-
lentless negative press coverage in France because 
it insisted on its wholesome American look. To play 
it safe, Hong Kong Disneyland endeavored to strike the elusive balance between 
American image and Chinese flavor. All eyes are now on the forthcoming Shanghai 
Disneyland in terms of such balance.
Over time, the country-of-origin effect may shift. A number of British firms 
used to proudly sport names such as British Telecom and British Petroleum. 
Recently, they have shied away from being “British” and rebranded themselves 
simply as BT and BP. In Britain, these changes are collectively known as the 
“B  phenomenon.” These costly rebranding campaigns are not casual changes. 
They reflect less confidence in Britain’s positive country-of-origin effect. Recent-
ly, BAE Systems, formerly British Aerospace, has complained that its British origin 
is undermining its business in its largest market, the US defense market. Only US 
citizens are allowed to know the details of its most sensitive US contracts, and even 
its British CEO cannot know such details. This is untenable, now that two-fifths 
of its sales are in the United States. Thus, BAE Systems is seriously considering 
becoming “American.” However, in an interesting twist, an “Americanized” BAE 
Systems may encounter liability of foreignness in Britain.34 Not surprisingly, the 
“B phenomenon” is controversial in Britain. One lesson we can draw is that for-
eignness can either be a liability or an asset, and that changes are possible. One 
solution is to blur the country of origin. For example, Gucci positions itself as a 
firm with Italian roots that has a Dutch address (where it is registered) and sells 
French fashion.
10-5b Global versus Regional Geographic Diversification
In this age of globalization, debate continues on the optimal geographic scope for 
MNEs.35 Despite the widely held belief that MNEs are expanding “globally,” Alan 
Rugman and colleagues report that, surprisingly, even among the largest Fortune 
Global 500 MNEs, few are truly “global.”36 Using some reasonable criteria (at least 
20% of sales in each of the three regions of the Triad consisting of Asia, Europe, and 
North America but less than 50% in any one region), only nine MNEs are found to 
be really “global” (Table 10.4).
Should most MNEs further “globalize”? There are two answers. First, most 
MNEs know what they are doing, and their current geographic scope is the 
In Hong Kong Disneyland, is foreignness an asset 
or a liability?
Tsugufumi Matsumoto/AP Images
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

328	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
maximum they can manage. Some of them may have already over-diversified 
and will need to downscope. Second, these data only capture a snapshot (in 
the 2000s) and some MNEs may become more “globalized” over time. However, 
more recent data do not show major changes.37 While the debate goes on, it has 
at least taught us one important lesson: Be careful when using the word “global.” 
The majority of the largest MNEs are not necessarily very “global” in their geo-
graphic scope.
10-5c Old-Line versus Emerging Multinationals:  
OLI versus LLL
As discussed extensively in Chapter 6, MNEs presumably possess OLI advan-
tages. The OLI framework is based on the experience of MNEs headquartered 
in developed economies that typically possess high-caliber technology and man-
agement know-how. However, emerging multinationals, such as those from India 
(see the Opening Case), Russia (see Emerging Markets 10.1), and China (see 
Emerging Markets 10.2), are challenging some of this conventional wisdom.38 
While these emerging multinationals, like their old-line counterparts, hunt for 
lucrative locations and internalize transactions—conforming to the L and I 
parts of the OLI framework—they typically do not own better proprietary tech-
nology, and their management capabilities are usually not world-class. In other 
words, the O part is largely missing. How can we make sense of these emerging 
multinationals?
One interesting new framework is the “linkage, leverage, and learning” (LLL) 
framework advocated by John Mathews.39 Linkage refers to emerging MNEs’ 
ability to identify and bridge gaps. Pearl River has identified the gap between what 
its pianos can actually offer and what price it can command, given the negative 
country-of-origin effect associated with Chinese products. Pearl River’s answer 
has been two-pronged: (1) develop the economies of scale to bring down the unit 
cost of pianos while maintaining a high standard for quality and (2) acquire and 
revive the Ritmüller brand to reduce some of the negative country-of-origin effect. 
Thus, Pearl River links China and Germany to propel its global push (see Emerging 
Markets 10.2).
Leverage refers to emerging multinationals’ ability to take advantage of their 
unique resources and capabilities, which are typically based on a deep under-
standing of customer needs and wants. For example, Naver enjoys a 76% market 
share for Internet searches in South Korea. It intends to leverage its deep under-
standing of Asian languages and cultures by charging into Japan. In the long run, 
it also aspires to launch other culturally specific search engines, such as “Naver 
Table 10.4
There Are Only Nine “Global” Multinational Enterprises (MNEs) Measured by Sales
1
2

3
4
5
6
7
8
9
IBM
Sony
Philips
Nokia
Intel
Canon
Coca-Cola
Flextronics
LVMH
Source: Adapted from A. Rugman & A. Verbeke, 2004, A perspective on regional and global strategies of multinational enterprises (pp. 8–10), Journal of 
International Business Studies, 35: 3–18. “Global” MNEs have at least 20% of sales in each of the three regions of the Triad (Asia, Europe, and North America), 
but less than 50% in any one region.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 10   Entering Foreign Markets	
329
Korean-American” and “Naver Chinese-American.” On a global scale, Naver’s 
skills obviously pale in comparison with Google’s capabilities. But in certain 
markets, such as South Korea, emerging multinationals such as Naver have been 
beating Google.
Learning probably is the most unusual aspect among the motives behind the 
internationalization push of many emerging multinationals.40 Instead of the 
“I-will-tell-you-what-to-do” mentality typical of old-line MNEs from developed 
economies, many MNEs from emerging economies openly profess that they go 
abroad to learn. When India’s Tata Motors acquired Jaguar and Land Rover 
and China’s Geeley acquired Volvo, they expressed a strong interest in learning 
how to manage world-class brands. Additional skills they need to absorb range 
from basic English skills (for managers from non-English-speaking countries 
such as Brazil, China, and Russia) to high-level executive skills in transpar-
ent governance, market planning, and management of diverse multicultural 
workforces.
 Of course, there is a great deal of overlap between OLI and LLL frameworks. 
So, the debate boils down to whether the differences are fundamental, which would 
justify a new theory, such as LLL advantages, or just a matter of degree, in which 
case OLI would be just fine to accommodate the new MNEs. Given the rapidly 
moving progress of these emerging multinationals, one thing for certain is that our 
learning and debate about them will not stop anytime soon.41
10-6 Management Savvy
Entering foreign markets represent a foundation for IB. Without these crucial 
first steps, firms will remain domestic players. The challenges associated with 
internationalization are daunting, the complexities enormous, and the stakes 
high. Returning to our fundamental question, we ask: What determines the 
success and failure in foreign market entries? The answers boil down to the two 
core perspectives, institution-based and resource-based views. Consequently, 
three implications for action emerge (Table 10.5). First, from an institution-
based view, managers need to understand the rules of the game, both formal 
and informal, governing competition in foreign markets. Failure to understand 
these rules can be costly. Why did Chinese MNEs’ high-profile acquisition 
attempts in the United States (such as CNOOC’s bid for Unocal) and Australia 
(such as Chinalco’s bid for Rio Tinto) often fail? Arabic MNEs’ similar attempts 
(such as DP World’s bid for US ports) often fail too, as have some Russian 
MNEs’ high-profile acquisitive forays (such as Sherbank’s bid for Opel). While 
there are many reasons, one key reason is these foreign entrants’ failure in 
LLL advantages
A firm’s quest for linkage 
(L) advantages, leverage (L) 
advantages, and learning (L) 
advantages. These advantages 
are typically associated with 
multinationals from emerging 
economies.
Learning Objective
Draw implications for action.
10-6
Table 10.5
Implications for Action
  	 Understand the rules of game—both formal and informal—governing competition in 
foreign markets.
  	 Develop overwhelming resources and capabilities to offset the liability of foreignness.
  	 Match efforts in market entry and geographic diversification with strategic goals.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

330	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
understanding the informal, unwritten rules of the game that often have 
protectionist (or even racist) undertones in developed economies. Knowing 
these rules of the game does not mean these emerging MNEs need to be 
discouraged. They just need to do better homework, keep their heads low, and 
work on low-profile acquisitions, which are routinely approved in developed 
economies.
Second, from a resource-based view, managers need to develop overwhelm-
ing capabilities to offset the liability of foreignness. Merely outstanding, but 
not overwhelming, capabilities cannot ensure success in the face of strong 
incumbents—a painful lesson that DHL learned when it withdrew from the 
United States. 
Finally, managers need to match entries with strategic goals. If the goal is 
to deter rivals in their home markets by slashing prices there (as TI did when 
entering Japan), then be prepared to fight a nasty price war and lose money. If 
the goal is to generate decent returns, then withdrawing from some tough nuts 
to crack may be necessary (as Wal-Mart withdrew from Germany and South 
Korea).
In conclusion, entry strategies obviously have something to do with the inter-
national success and failure of firms.42 However, appropriate entry strategies, while 
certainly important, are only the beginning.43 It takes a lot more to succeed overseas, 
as we will discuss in later chapters.
C h a p t e r  S u m m a r y
	10.1	 Understand how institutions and resources affect the liability of foreignness.
  	 When entering foreign markets, firms confront a liability of foreignness.
  	 Both institution-based and resource-based views advise managers on how 
to overcome such liability.
	10.2	 Match the quest for location-specific advantages with strategic goals (where 
to enter).
  	 Where to enter depends certain foreign countries’ location-specific ad-
vantages and firms’ strategic goals, such as seeking (1) natural resources, 
(2) market, (3) efficiency, and (4) innovation.
	10.3	 Compare and contrast first-mover and late-mover advantages (when to 
enter).
  	 Each has pros and cons, and there is no conclusive evidence pointing to one 
direction.
	10.4	 Follow the comprehensive model of foreign market entries (how to enter).
  	 How to enter depends on the scale of entry: large-scale versus small-scale 
entries.
  	 A comprehensive model of foreign market entries first focuses on the equity 
(ownership) issue.
  	 The second step focuses on making the actual selection, such as exports, 
contractual agreements, JVs, and WOS.
	10.5	 Participate in three leading debates concerning foreign market entries.
  	 (1) Liability versus asset of foreignness, (2) global versus regional geographic 
diversification, and (3) old-line versus emerging multinationals.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 10   Entering Foreign Markets	
331
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 ON CULTURE: How do foreign firms suffer from liability of foreignness?
	 2.	 What does the institution-based view suggest about how a firm should ad-
dress the liability of foreignness? What does the resource-based view advise?
	 3.	 ON CULTURE: What risk does a firm take in putting strategic goals ahead of 
cultural distance?
	 4.	 Describe how four strategic goals may affect the decision of where to enter.
	 5.	 Summarize the advantages of being a first mover.
	 6.	 Regarding PengAtlas Map 3.4, consider emerging economies that are later 
movers in the economic realm. To what extent do they have some of the 
same advantages as firms that are later movers? 
	 7.	 How does a large-scale entry differ from a small-scale entry?
	 8.	 What are some of the hallmarks of each type of equity mode?
	 9.	 How may the country-of-origin effect change for a firm over time?
	 10.	 Devise your own example of how a firm may use its capabilities to overwhelm-
ingly offset the liability of foreignness as it moves into a new foreign market.
	 11.	 If you owned a firm that was entering a foreign market, under what circum-
stances might your strategic goal require price slashing?
	 12.	 ON CULTURE: If you were a manager charged with choosing a new loca-
tion for your firm’s business, how would you go about matching the location 
options with your firm’s strategic goals?
	 13.	 Compare PengAtlas Maps 3.1 and 3.5.
	 a.	 To what extent are the richest countries also among the easiest in which 
to do business? Are any of the richest countries among the most difficult 
in which to do business? Indicate whether you think the relationship is 
coincidental or causal and why you think that way.
	 b.	 If you were thinking of expanding your firm’s operations, you would 
probably wish to go where it is easier to do business and where income is 
Build-operate-transfer 
(BOT) agreement 324
Co-marketing 325
Country-of-origin  
effect 326
Cultural distance 317
Equity mode 320
First-mover advantages 318
Greenfield operations 325
Institutional distance 317
Joint venture (JV) 325
Late-mover advantages 319
LLL advantages 329
Location-specific  
advantages 315
Modes of entry 320
Non-equity mode 320
R&D contract 325
Scale of entry 320
Turnkey project 324
Wholly owned subsidiary 
(WOS) 325
K e y  T e r m s
	10.6	 Draw implications for action.
  	 Understand the rules of game governing competition in foreign markets.
  	 Develop overwhelming resources and capabilities to offset the liability of 
foreignness.
  	 Match efforts in market entry with strategic goals.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

332	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
higher. Furthermore, at least some of the poorest countries would like to 
have your firm expand into them to help lift income. If such is the case, 
why don’t they simply make it easier to do business? What do you think?
	 c.	 Although at present the United States is regarded as one of the easier 
countries for doing business, do you think that the long-term trend is for 
it to become even easier or to become more difficult? Why?
C r i t i c a l  D i s c u s s i o n  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 Pick an industry in which firms from your country are internationally active. 
What are the top five most favorite foreign markets for firms in that indus-
try? Why?
	 2.	 From institution-based and resource-based views, identify the liability of 
foreignness confronting MNEs from emerging economies interested in ex-
panding overseas. How can such firms overcome them? 
	 3.	 ON ETHICS: Entering foreign markets, by definition, means not investing 
in a firm’s home country. For example, Nissan closed factories in Japan and 
added a new factory in the United States. GM shut down factories at home 
but kept them open in Europe. What are the ethical dilemmas here? 
G l o b a l  A c t i o n 
	 1.	 The most important element of your company’s success in its domestic mar-
ket thus far has been its electronic readiness and competitiveness. This has 
allowed the organization to develop very stringent internal processes and 
controls that are the envy of the industry. As such, entering a foreign market 
requires a sufficient level of technological prowess among possible target lo-
cations. An evaluation of the “e-readiness” of specific locations can provide 
considerable insight for your company’s anticipated internationalization in 
Asia. Using globalEDGE, gather information and provide an overview of 
the five most technologically ready Asian locations.
	 2.	 Global competition is determined in part by both efficiency and innovation. 
To develop a foreign market entry strategy for your company, a colleague 
informed you of a competitiveness report that is published periodically to 
evaluate the standing of each specific economy worldwide. Locate this re-
port on globalEDGE for assessment. Which countries rank highest on both 
measures of efficiency and innovation? Which regions of the world appear 
to rank well for each category? What conclusions may be drawn from this 
information?
V i d e o  C a s e
After watching the video on Yum! Brands in China, discuss the following: 
	 1.	 What strategic goals did Yum! Brands/KFC have when entering China?
	 2.	 What approach to and mode of entry do you believe Yum! Brands/KFC used 
to enter the China market?
	 3.	 What has Yum! Brands/KFC done to overcome the liability of foreignness?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 10   Entering Foreign Markets	
333
If you are a college student studying in the Midwestern 
or Northeastern parts of the United States, you may 
have heard of (or may have taken a ride on) Megabus. 
Its website announces that it is “the first, low-cost ex-
press bus service to offer city-to-city travel for as low as 
$1 via the Internet.” Currently serving 50 US cities from 
five hubs (Chicago, New York, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, 
and Washington, DC), Megabus, according to Bloom-
berg Businessweek, “has fundamentally changed the 
way Americans—especially the young—travel.”
A generation ago, Greyhound was a national icon 
for intercity travel. Unfortunately, as Americans fell 
more in love with cars and the cost of airfares dropped 
further, intercity bus ridership steadily decreased. Fur-
ther, as inner cities, where the bus depots (terminals) 
were situated, decayed, bus travel had become the 
travel mode of last resort. In 1990, Greyhound filed for 
Chapter 11 bankruptcy.
Yet, the demand for medium-distance trips that are 
ideal for intercity buses does not go away. For some of 
the most travelled routes (such as between Chicago and 
Detroit, and between New York and DC), the distance 
is too far for a leisurely drive but too close to justify the 
expense (and increasingly the hassle) of air travel. While 
Greyhound has been in decline, small, entrepreneurial 
bus operators, known as the “Chinatown buses,” have 
emerged. They started by shuttling passengers (primar-
ily recent Chinese immigrants) between Chinatowns 
in New York and Boston. Such niche operators quickly 
grabbed the attention of many college students. De-
spite four decades of decline, overall US intercity bus 
ridership spiked in 2006, the year Megabus entered.
Although Megabus is a brand new, no-frills en-
trant into the US market, it is backed by the full 
strengths of the second largest transport firm in the 
UK, Stagecoach Group, which employs 18,000 people 
there. Founded in 1980 and headquartered in Perth, 
Scotland, Stagecoach not only operates buses, but 
also trains, trams, and ferries throughout the UK, 
moving 2.5 million people every day. It is listed on the 
London Stock Exchange, where it is a member of the 
FTSE 250. Megabus is a brand of Stagecoach’s wholly 
owned US subsidiary, Coach USA.
Stagecoach is not a stranger to international for-
ays, having previously operated in Hong Kong, Kenya, 
Malawi, New Zealand, Portugal, and Sweden. However, 
those operations turned out to be lackluster and were all 
sold. For now, the sole international market it focuses on 
is North America. (Megabus entered Canada in 2008.) 
Although Megabus is clearly a late mover in North 
America, its future looks bright. So what allows 
Megabus to turn a declining national trend of bus rid-
ership around? At least four features stand out. First, 
tickets are super-cheap, starting at $1 (!). Megabus 
uses a yield management system, typically used 
by airlines, which offers early passengers dirt-cheap 
deals and late passengers higher prices. Although only 
one or two passengers per trip can get the $1 deal, 
even the “higher” prices are very competitive. In 
routes where it competes with Amtrak (the railway), a 
Megabus tickets costs about one-tenth of Amtrak. All 
tickets have to be booked online. This not only elimi-
nates the expenses of maintaining ticket booths, but 
also attracts a more educated demographic group.
Second, instead of using depots, Megabus follows 
the Chinatown buses by using curbside stops (like 
regular city bus stops) to board and disembark pas-
sengers. Interestingly, dumping the depot model not 
only saves a lot of money but also makes Megabus 
more attractive, because passengers do not have to 
spend time in the poorly maintained (and sometimes 
filthy and unsafe) bus depots.
Enter the United States by Bus
C l o s i n g  C a s e
	 4.	 Can the Yum! Brands/KFC approach be successful multinationally?
	 5.	 What preparations must Yum! Brands/KFC make to sustain their competi-
tive advantage?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

334	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
Third, all Megabus coaches are equipped with 
Wi-Fi and power outlets, allowing the time on board 
to be more productive (or more fun). These features, 
which are sometimes not available even when flying 
first class, have made travel by bus totally cool to the 
online savvy, younger crowd. Among surveyed pas-
sengers, 37% said that Wi-Fi and power outlets were 
central to their decision to travel by Megabus.
Finally, as gas prices and environmental con-
sciousness rise, bus travel offers an unbeatable 
“green” advantage. At eight cents per mile, a bus is 
four times more fuel-efficient than a car. US curbside 
carriers, led by Megabus, have already reduced fuel 
consumption by 11 million gallons a year, equivalent 
to taking 24,000 cars off the road. While politicians 
like to talk about the “bright future” of high-speed rail 
and $10 billion has been budgeted to jump-start the 
new rail projects, not a single mile of high-speed rail 
tracks has been laid as of this writing. At the same 
time, Megabus has been charging ahead and carrying 
more than 13 million passengers since its entry, while 
requiring zero additional investment in infrastructure. 
Texas, Florida, and California are some of the mar-
kets it may enter soon. Given the cost and political 
headache to build new high-speed rail, Bloomberg 
Businessweek speculated: “The Megabus approach 
works so well, it may scuttle plans for high-speed rail.”
Case Discussion Questions:
	 1.	 As a late mover into the US intercity bus mar-
ket, what advantages and disadvantages does 
Megabus have?
	 2.	 Does Megabus have any overwhelming resources 
and capabilities?
	 3.	 As a college student, among choices of private 
car, train, airplane, Greyhound, and Megabus 
between Chicago and Columbus, which mode 
would you choose? Why?
Sources: Based on (1) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2011, How to keep the world moving, December 5: 80–86; (2) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2011, The 
Megabus effect, April 11: 62–67; (3) Megabus, 2012, www.megabus.com; (4) Stagecoach Group, 2012, www.stagecoachgroup.com.
Bloomberg/Contributor/Getty Images
[Journal acronyms] AMJ—Academy of Management Journal; AMR—
Academy of Management Review; APJM – Asia Pacific Journal of Manage-
ment; BJM—British Journal of Management; BW—BusinessWeek (before 
2010) or Bloomberg Businessweek (since 2010); EJIM—European Journal 
of International Management; GSJ—Global Strategy Journal; HBR—
Harvard Business Review; IBR—International Business Review; JIBS —
Journal of International Business Studies; JIM—Journal of International 
Management; JM—Journal of Management; JMS—Journal of Manage-
ment Studies; JWB—Journal of World Business; MIR—Management In-
ternational Review; SMJ—Strategic Management Journal
1 K. Meyer, S. Estrin, S. Bhaumik, & M. W. Peng, 2009, Institutions, re-
sources, and entry strategies in emerging economies, SMJ, 30: 61–80.
2 A. Cuervo-Carurra, M. Maloney, & S. Manrakhan, 2007, Causes of 
the difficulties in internationalization, JIBS, 38: 709–725; B. Elango,  
2009, Minimizing effects of “liability of foreignness,” JWB, 44: 
51–62; J. Johanson & J. Vahlne, 2009, The Uppsala internationaliza-
tion process model revisited, JIBS, 40: 1411–1431; H. Yildiz & C. Fey, 
2012, The liability of foreignness reconsidered, IBR, 21: 269–280.
3 BW, 2010, Northrop gives up, March 22: 8; Economist, 2010, The 
best plane loses, March 13: 66.
4 C. Asmussen, T. Pedersen, & C. Dhanaraj, 2009, Host-country envi-
ronment and subsidiary performance, JIBS, 40: 42–57.
5 C. Chan, S. Makino, & T. Isobe, 2006, Interdependent behavior in 
FDI, JIBS, 37: 642–665; J. Gimeno, R. Hoskisson, B. Beal, & W. Wan, 
2005, Explaining the clustering of international expansion modes, 
AMJ, 48: 297–319.
6 M. W. Peng, 2001, The resource-based view and international busi-
ness, JM, 27: 803–829.
7 H. Berry, 2006, Shareholder valuation of foreign investment ex-
pansion, SMJ, 27: 1123–1140; D. Tan & J. Mahoney, 2007, The dy-
namics of Japanese firm growth in US industries, MIR, 47: 259–279.
8 J. Dunning, 2009, Location and the MNE: A neglected factor? JIBS, 
40: 5–19. See also R. Belderbos R. Belderbos, W. Olffen, & J. Zou, 
2011, Generic and specific social learning mechanisms in foreign 
entry location choice, SMJ, 32: 1309–1330; J. Cantwell, 2009, Loca-
tion and the MNE, JIBS, 40: 35–41; M. Enright, 2009, The location 
of activities of manufacturing multinationals in the Asia-Pacific, 
JIBS, 40: 818–839; R. Flores & R. Aguilera, 2007, Globalization and 
location choice, JIBS, 38: 1187–1210; E. Garcia-Canal & M. Guillen, 
2008, Risk and the strategy of foreign location choice in regulated 
industries, SMJ, 29: 1097–1115; S. Zaheer & L. Nachum, 2011, Sense 
of place, GSJ, 1: 96–108.
9 A. Arikan & M. Schilling, 2011, Structure and governance in indus-
trial districts, JMS, 48: 772–803; S. Bell, P. Tracey, & J. Heide, 2009,  
N O T E S
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 10   Entering Foreign Markets	
335
The organization of regional clusters, AMR, 34: 623–642; B. McCann 
& G. Vroom, 2010, Pricing response to entry and agglomeration 
effects, SMJ, 31: 284–305.
10 BW, 2007, Shanghai rising, February 19: 51–55.
11 W. Chung & S. Yeaple, 2008, International knowledge sourcing, 
SMJ, 29: 1207–1224.
12 S. Lee, O. Shenkar, & J. Li, 2008, Cultural distance, investment 
flow, and control in cross-border cooperation, SMJ, 29: 1117–1125; 
R. Parente, B. Choi, A. Slangen, & S. Ketkar, 2010, Distribution 
system choice in a service industry, JIM, 16: 275–287.
13 D. Xu & O. Shenkar, 2002, Institutional distance and the multi-
national enterprise (p. 608), AMR, 27: 608–618. See also M. Cho & 
V. Kumar, 2010, The impact of institutional distance on the inter­national 
diversity-performance relationship, JWB, 45: 93–103; G. Delmestri &  
F. Wezel, 2011, Breaking the wave, JIBS, 42: 828–852.
14 H. Barkema & R. Drogendijk, 2007, Internationalizing in small, 
incremental or larger steps? JIBS, 38: 1132–1148.
15 S. Makino & E. Tsang, 2011, Historical ties and foreign direct 
investment, JIBS, 42: 545–557.
16 E. Tsang & P. Yip, 2007, Economic distance and survival of for-
eign direct investments, AMJ, 50: 1156–1168.
17 M. Myers, C. Droge, & M. Cheung, 2007, The fit of home to for-
eign market environment, JWB, 42: 170–183.
18 J. Steen & P. Liesch, 2007, A note on Penrosian growth, resource 
bundles, and the Uppsala model of internationalization, MIR, 47: 
193–206.
19 Economist, 2006, Don’t mess with Russia, December 16: 11.
20 A. Delios, A. Gaur, & S. Makino, 2008, The timing of international 
expansion, JMS, 45: 169–195; J. G. Frynas, K. Mellahi, & G. Pigman, 
2006, First mover advantages in international business and firm-
specific political resources, SMJ, 27: 321–345.
21 M. W. Peng, S. Lee, & J. Tan, 2001, The keiretsu in Asia, JIM, 7: 
253–276.
22 BW, 2011, Land of war and opportunity, January 10: 46–54.
23 BW, 2008, Cisco’s brave new world (p. 68), November 24: 56–68.
24 S. Dobrev & A. Gotsopoulos, 2010, Legitimacy vacuum, structural 
imprinting, and the first mover disadvantage, AMJ, 53: 1153–1174; 
J. Gomez & J. Maicas, 2011, Do switching costs mediate the relation-
ship between entry timing and performance? SMJ, 32: 1251–1269; 
G. Lee, 2008, Relevance of organizational capabilities and its dy-
namics, SMJ, 29: 1257–1280; M. Semadeni & B. Anderson, 2010, The 
follower’s dilemma, AMJ, 53: 1175–1193; F. Suarez & G. Lanzolla, 
2005, The half-truth of first-mover advantage, HBR, April: 121–128; 
J. Woo, R. Reed, S. Shin, & D. Lemak, 2009, Strategic choice and 
performance in late movers, JMS, 46: 308–335.
25 G. Gao & Y. Pan, 2010, The pace of MNEs’ sequential entries, 
JIBS, 41: 1572–1580; L. Lages, S. Jap, & D. Griffith, 2008, The role 
of past performance in export ventures, JIBS, 39: 304–325; P. Li & 
K. Meyer, 2009, Contextualizing experience effects in international 
business, JWB, 44: 370–382; A. Nadolska & H. Barkema, 2007, Learn-
ing to internationalize, JIBS, 38: 1170–1187; L. Qian & A. Delios, 
2008, Internationalization and experience, JIBS, 39: 231–248; J. Xia, 
K. Boal, & A. Delios, 2009, When experience meets national institu-
tional environmental change, SMJ, 30: 1286–1309.
26 C. Bouquet, A. Morrison, & J. Birkinshaw, 2009, International 
attention and MNE performance, JIBS, 40: 108–131; L. Brouthers, 
S.  Mukhopadhyay, T. Wilkinson, & K. Brouthers, 2009, Interna-
tional market selection and subsidiary performance, JWB, 44: 
262–273.
27 J. Galan & J. Gonzalez-Benito, 2006, Distinctive determinant 
factors of Spanish foreign direct investment in Latin America, 
JWB, 41: 171–189; H. Zou & M. Adams, 2008, Corporate ownership, 
equity risk, and returns in the People’s Republic of China, JIBS, 39: 
1149–1168.
28 M. W. Peng, Y. Zhou, & A. York, 2006, Behind make or buy deci-
sions in export strategy, JWB, 41: 289–300.
29 A. Chintakananda, A. York, H. O’Neill, & M. W. Peng, 2009, 
Structuring dyadic relationships between export producers and in-
termediaries, EJIM, 3: 302–327.
30 M. W. Peng, 1998, Behind the Success and Failure of US Export Inter-
mediaries, Westport, CT: Quorum.
31 A. Akremi, K. Mignonac, & R. Perrigot, 2011, Opportunistic be-
haviors in franchise chains, SMJ, 32: 930–948; P. Aulakh, M. Jiang, & 
Y. Pan, 2010, International technology licensing, JIBS, 41: 587–605; 
J. Barthelemy, 2008, Opportunism, knowledge, and the perfor-
mance of franchise chains, SMJ, 29: 1451–1463.
32 T. Jandik & R. Kali, 2009, Legal systems, information asymmetry, 
and firm boundaries, JIBS, 40: 578–599.
33 G. Benito, B. Petersen, & L. Welch, 2009, Towards more realistic 
conceptualizations of foreign operation modes, JIBS, 40: 1455–1470.
34 Economist, 2006, BAE Systems: Changing places, October 28: 
66–67.
35 E. Banalieva & K. Eddleston, 2011, Home-region focus and perfor-
mance of family firms, JIBS, 42: 1060–1072; L. Cardinal, C. C. Miller, &  
L. Palich, 2011, Breaking the cycle of iteration, GSJ, 1: 175–186; 
J. Dunning, J. Fujita, & N. Yakova, 2007, Some macro-data on the 
regionalization/globalization debate, JIBS, 38: 177–199;  J. Hennart, 
2011, A theoretical assessment of the empirical literature on the impact 
of multinationality on performance, GSJ, 1: 135–151; T. Osegowitsch &  
A. Sammartino, 2008, Reassessing (home-)regionalization, JIBS, 
39: 184–196; G. Qian, T. Khoury, M. W. Peng, & Z. Qian, 2010, The 
performance implications of intra- and inter-regional geographic di-
versification, SMJ, 31: 1018–1030; M. Wiersema & H. Bowen, 2011, 
The relationship between international diversification and firm 
performance, GSJ, 1: 152–170.
36 S. Collinson & A. Rugman, 2007, The regional character of Asian 
multinational enterprises, APJM, 24: 429–446; A. Rugman & A. Verbeke, 
2004, A perspective on regional and global strategies of multinational 
enterprises, JIBS, 35: 3–18.
37 A. Rugman & C. Oh, 2012, Why the home region matters, BJM 
(in press).
38 M. W. Peng, 2012, The global strategy of emerging multinationals 
from China, GSJ, 2: 97–107.
39 J. Mathews, 2006, Dragon multinationals: Emerging players in 
21st century globalization, APJM, 23: 5–27.
40 Y. Luo & R. Tung, 2007, International expansion of emerging 
market enterprises, JIBS, 38: 481–498.
41 M. W. Peng, R. Bhagat, & S. Chang, 2010, Asia and global busi-
ness, JIBS, 41: 373–376.
42 M. Chari, S. Devaraj, & P. David, 2007, International diversifi-
cation and firm performance, JWB, 42: 184–197; F. Contractor, 
V. Kumar, & S. Kundu, 2007, Nature of the relationship between 
international expansion and performance, JWB, 42: 401–417.
43 S. Chang & J. Rhee, 2011, Rapid FDI expansion and firm 
performance, JIBS, 42: 979–994; W. Hejazi & E. Santor, 2010, Foreign 
asset risk exposure, DOI, and performance, JIBS, 41: 845–860; 
S. Li & S. Tallman, 2011, MNC strategies, exogenous shocks, 
and performance outcomes, SMJ, 32: 1119–1127; T. Pedersen & 
J. M. Shaver, 2011, Internationalization revisited, GSJ, 1: 263–274; J. 
Puck, D. Holtbrugge, & A. Mohr, 2009, Beyond entry mode choice, 
JIBS, 40: 388–404; J. M. Shaver, 2011, The benefits of geographic 
sales diversification, SMJ, 32: 1046–1060; D.  Tan, 2009, Foreign 
market entry strategies and post-entry growth, JIBS, 40: 1046–1063.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
	 11-1	 understand the industry conditions 
conducive to cooperation and collusion.
	 11-2	 outline how formal institutions affect 
domestic and international competition.
	 11-3	 articulate how resources and capabilities 
influence competitive dynamics.
	 11-4	 identify the drivers for attacks, 
counterattacks, and signaling.
	 11-5	 discuss how local firms fight multinational 
enterprises (MNEs).
	 11-6	 participate in two leading debates 
concerning competitive dynamics.
	 11-7	 draw implications for action.
imago stock&people/Newscom
Chapter 
11 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Managing Global 
Competitive Dynamics
Launched in 1985 in Dubai, United Arab Emirates 
(UAE), Emirates Airlines has become one of the 
world’s most powerful airlines. It has an all wide-
body fleet of 138 planes and 140 more on order (in-
cluding 50 Airbus A380s). It flies to over 100 cities in 
over 60 countries. It is the largest customer of the 
ultra-long-range Boeing 777s and one of the earliest 
and largest users of A380s. With these capable jets, 
any two cities in the world can be linked with one 
stop via Dubai.
Emirates is blessed by its location. Geographically, 
Dubai International Airport (DXB) may be regarded as 
the center of the world, known as a natural “pinch 
point.” It is the ideal stopping point for air traffic be-
tween Europe and Asia and between Africa and Asia. 
Two billion people live within four hours of flying time 
from Dubai, and four billion can be reached within sev-
en hours. Connecting 220 destinations, DXB handles 
over 40 million passengers a year. New expansion will 
allow DXB to serve 60 million a year in the near future. 
Since Dubai’s own population is fewer than four million 
(most are expatriates), the majority of the passengers 
are connecting (transit) passengers who are not from 
or going to Dubai. DXB’s expansion will have to rely on 
customers from the rest of the world. Will they come?
Firmly believing that connecting passengers will 
come, Emirates positions itself as a “super-connector”  
airline. It has directly challenged traditional long-haul 
carriers such as British Airways (BA), Air France-KLM, 
and Lufthansa. These legacy airlines fear that, just like 
no-frills competitors squeeze their short-haul flights, 
Emirates can threaten their profitable long-haul busi-
ness. This fear is understandable, as Emirates already 
has more intercontinental seats than BA and Air 
France combined. Emirates has launched services 
connecting Dubai with secondary (but still sizable) cit-
ies, such as Manchester, Hamburg, and Kolkata. These 
cities are, respectively, neglected by BA, Lufthansa, 
and Air India, which focus on their hubs. Passengers 
flying, for example, from Hamburg to Sydney may 
not care whether they change planes at Frankfurt or 
Dubai, especially when Emirates flies newer and qui-
eter planes, offers cheaper tickets, and provides nicer 
amenities at DXB. One of Emirates’ open secrets of 
success is to fly super-sized planes—one A380 can 
carry 500 passengers—to reduce cost per passenger. 
The savings help it undercut fares of legacy airlines.
While legacy airlines fight back with their own ag-
gressive pricing, they have also complained that Emir-
ates receives “unfair” subsidies ranging from cheaper 
fuel to lower airport fees. In fact, Emirates pays slightly 
more for fuel at home (DXB) than abroad, because 
of the lack of refining capacity in the Gulf. It and 129 
other airlines at DXB pay the same airport fees. True, 
O p e n i n g  C a s e
EMERGING MARKETS: Emirates Fights Legacy Airlines and Regional Rivals
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

338	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
neither Emirates nor its employees pay taxes. But the 
upshot is that Dubai’s social services are poor for expa-
triates. Emirates ends up spending $400 million a year 
to provide accommodation, health care, and schools 
for its staff—a huge expense that rivals do not have to 
cough up.
From an institution-based view, Emirates thrives on 
treaties that permit flights between two countries by 
an airline from a third country. The model works best 
on long-haul flights requiring refueling at DXB. As the 
chorus of complaints from its rivals grows, in theory, 
if these rivals mobilize enough political muscle, they 
can convince European governments to deny route 
applications from Emirates. But chances are slim be-
cause such a political decision would hurt Airbus and 
European jobs. So Emirates is in an advantageous po-
sition in its dog fights against legacy airlines.
Emirates does face emerging competition from 
two regional rivals, which have realized that geograph-
ic advantage is not a Dubai or Emirates monopoly. 
Doha, Qatar, is only 200 miles from Dubai. Imitating 
Emirates, Qatar Airways was founded in 1992. It now 
has 82 aircraft plus 180 on order (including five A380s 
and 50 all-new A350s—Airbus’s answer to the Boeing 
787). Qatar Airways will be the launch customer of the 
A350. Replacing its aging Doha International Airport 
(handling 15 million passengers in 2010), Qatar will 
open a brand new international airport in 2012 with a 
capacity of 24 million and an expanded capacity of 48 
million by 2015. 
Closer to Dubai, Abu Dhabi (a fellow emirate in the 
UAE) launched Etihad Airlines in 2003. It quickly be-
came the fastest-growing airline in the history of com-
mercial aviation. Now with 64 aircraft, it has another 
100 on order. Only a 45-minutes drive from DBX, Abu 
Dhabi International Airport currently serves a total of 
11 million passengers. It is also aggressively expanding 
its capacity to reach 20 million in 2012 and 40 million a 
few years later.
Not to be outgunned, Dubai has upped the ante 
in the arms race in airport building. Starting in 1950, 
DXB has experienced an annual growth rate of 15%. 
Today, it is already the world’s third busiest interna-
tional passenger airport (after London Heathrow and 
Hong Kong) and the seventh busiest cargo airport, 
and is being expanded (as noted earlier). Yet, Dubai is 
building an even larger airport, Dubai World Central-Al 
Maktoum International (DWC), which partially opened 
in 2010 (with one runway and for cargo flights only). 
When completed, this new airport will be the largest 
in the world, with five parallel runways and an annual 
passenger capacity of 160 million (!).
By 2015, the expanded DXB, the new DWC, Doha’s 
new airport, and Abu Dhabi’s expanded airport—all 
within “spitting distance” of each other (according to 
the Economist)—will surpass the capacity of London 
Heathrow, New York JFK, Tokyo Narita, Singapore, 
and Frankfurt airports combined. (None of those air-
ports can be expanded easily.) The three “super-duper-
connectors” from the Gulf are destined to grab a big-
ger piece of the sky. But not all is likely to be rosy. Will 
there be that much air traffic? Some analysts specu-
late that there may only be two survivors of the three 
“super-connectors.” Facing such a future, Emirates is 
determined to stay in the game and lead the pack.
Sources: Based on (1) Aviation News, 2011, Dubai International Airport, 
December: 34-39; (2) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2010, Emirates wins 
with big planes and low costs, July 5: 18–19; (3) Economist, 2010, Rulers 
of the new silk road, June 5: 75–77; (4) Economist, 2010, Super-duper-
connectors from the Gulf, June 5: 21.
In the rivalry among Emirates, Western legacy airlines, and regional rivals from the 
Persian Gulf, why are certain actions taken but not others? Once one side initiates 
an action, how does the other side respond? These are some of the key questions in 
this chapter, which focuses on such competitive dynamics—actions and responses 
undertaken by competing firms. Since one firm’s actions rarely go unnoticed by rivals, 
the initiating firm would naturally like to predict its rivals’ responses before making its 
move.1 This process is called competitor analysis, advocated by the ancient Chinese 
strategist Sun Tzu, who taught that you must know not only “yourself” but also “your 
opponents.”
Competitive dynamics
Actions and responses under-
taken by competing firms.
Competitor analysis
The process of anticipating 
rivals’ actions in order to both 
revise a firm’s plan and prepare 
to deal with rivals’ response.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 11   Managing Global Competitive Dynamics	
339
As military officers have long known, a good plan never survives the first con-
tact with the enemy because the enemy does not act according to our plan (!). The 
key word is interaction—how firms interact with rivals. This chapter first discusses 
competition, cooperation, and collusion. Then, we draw on the institution-based and 
resource-based views to shed light on competitive dynamics. Attack, counterat-
tack, and signaling are then outlined, with one interesting extension on how local 
firms fight multinational enterprises (MNEs) in emerging economies. Debates and 
extensions follow.
11-1 Competition, Cooperation, and Collusion
11-1a War and Peace
While militaries fight over territories, waters, and air space, firms compete over 
market shares. Note the military tone of such terms as “attacks” and “price wars.”2 
While it often seems that “business is war,” it is obvious that military principles 
cannot be completely applied in business. The marketplace, after all, is not a battle-
field where participants must either “kill or be killed.” In business, it is possible to 
compete and win without destroying the opposition. Business is simultaneously war 
and peace. Alternatively, most competetive dynamics terms can also be explained 
in terms of sports analogies, such as “offense” and “defense.”
11-1b Cooperation and Collusion
In The Wealth of Nations (1776), Adam Smith wrote: “People of the same trade sel-
dom meet together, even for merriment and diversion, but their conversation often 
ends in a conspiracy against the public.” In modern jargon, this means that com-
peting firms in an industry may have an incentive to engage in collusion, defined as 
collective attempts to reduce competition.
Because managers (and students) generally do not like to discuss “collusion,” 
another “C” word, coordination, is now frequently used in preference to collu-
sion.3 However, given the legal battles centered on collusion, managers (and 
students) cannot shy away from it; instead, they need to confront the legal def-
initions and debates about collusion. Collusion can be tacit or explicit. Firms 
engage in tacit collusion when they indirectly coordinate actions by signaling their 
intention to reduce output and maintain pricing above competitive levels. Explicit 
collusion exists when firms directly negotiate output and pricing and divide mar-
kets. Explicit collusion leads to a cartel, an output-fixing and price-fixing entity 
involving multiple competitors. A cartel is also known as a trust, whose members 
have to trust each other in honoring agreements. Since the Sherman Act of 1890, 
cartels have often been labeled “anticompetitive” and outlawed by antitrust laws 
in many countries.
In addition to antitrust laws, collusion often suffers from a prisoners’ dilemma, 
which underpins game theory. The term “prisoners’ dilemma” derives from a 
simple game in which two prisoners suspected of a major joint crime (such as 
burglary) are separately interrogated and told that if either one confesses, the 
confessor will get a one-year sentence while the other will go to jail for ten years. 
Since the police do not have strong incriminating evidence for the more serious 
burglary charges, if neither confesses, both will be convicted of a lesser charge 
Learning Objective
Understand the industry 
conditions conducive to 
cooperation and collusion.
11-1
Collusion
Collective attempts between 
competing firms to reduce 
competition.
Tacit collusion
Firms indirectly coordinate ac-
tions by signaling their intention 
to reduce output and maintain 
pricing above competitive levels.
Explicit collusion
firms directly negotiate output 
and pricing and divide markets.
Cartel (trust)
An output- and price-fixing entity 
involving multiple competitors.
Antitrust law
Law that outlaws cartels (trusts).
Prisoners’ dilemma
In game theory, a type of game 
in which the outcome depends 
on two parties deciding whether 
to cooperate or to defect.
Game theory
A theory that studies the interac-
tions between two parties that 
compete and/or cooperate with 
each other.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

340	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
(such as trespassing), each for two years. If both confess, both will go to jail for 
ten years. At a first glance, the solution to this problem seems clear enough. The 
maximum joint payoff would be for neither of them to confess. However, even if 
both parties agree not to confess before they are arrested, there are still tremen-
dous incentives to confess.
Translated to an airline setting, Figure 11.1 illustrates the payoff structure 
for both airlines A and B in a given market, let’s say, between Dubai and Cairo. 
Assuming a total of 200 passengers, Cell 1 represents the most ideal outcome for 
both airlines to maintain the price at $500, and each gets 100 passengers and 
makes $50,000—the “industry” revenue reaches $100,000. In Cell 2, if B main-
tains its price at $500 while A drops it to $300, B is likely to lose all customers. 
Assuming perfectly transparent pricing information on the Internet, who would 
want to pay $500 when you can get a ticket for $300? Thus, A may make $60,000 
on 200 passengers while B gets nobody. In Cell 3, the situation is reversed. In 
both Cells 2 and 3, although the industry decreases revenue by 40%, the price 
dropper increases its own revenue by 20%. Thus, both A and B have strong incen-
tives to reduce price and hope the other side become a “sucker.” However, neither 
likes to be a “sucker.” Thus, both A and B may want to chop prices, as in Cell 4, 
whereby each still gets 100 passengers. But both firms, as well as the industry, end 
up with a 40% reduction of revenue. A key insight of game theory is that even 
if A and B have a prior agreement to fix the price at $500, both still have strong 
incentives to cheat, thus pulling the industry to Cell 4, whereby both are clearly 
worse off.4
11-1c Industry Characteristics and Collusion 
vis-à-vis Competition
Given the benefits of collusion and the incentives to cheat, what industries are con-
ducive to collusion vis-à-vis competition? Five factors emerge (Table 11.1). The first 
relevant factor is the number of firms or—more technically—the concentration ratio, 
Concentration ratio
The percentage of total industry 
sales accounted for by the top 
four, eight, or twenty firms. 
(Cell 1)
A: $50,000
B: $50,000
(Cell 2)
A: $60,000
B: 0
Action 1
A keeps 
price at $500
Airline A
Airline B
Action 2
A drops
price to $300
Action 1
B keeps
price at $500
(Cell 3)
A: 0
B: $60,000
(Cell 4)
A: $30,000
B: $30,000
Action 2
B drops
price to $300
Figure 11.1
A “Prisoner’s’ Dilemma” for Airlines and Payoff Structure 
(assuming a total of 200 passengers)
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 11   Managing Global Competitive Dynamics	
341
defined as the percentage of total industry sales accounted for by the top four, 
eight, or twenty firms. In general, the higher the concentration, the easier it is to 
organize collusion. Because the top four concentration in mobile wireless telecom-
munications services in the United States accounted for more than 90% of mar-
ket share, the antitrust authorities blocked the merger of the second largest firm, 
AT&T, with the fourth largest firm, T-Mobile. Specifically, the US Department of 
Justice argued:
The substantial increase in concentration that would result from this merger, and 
the reduction in the number of nationwide providers from four to three, likely will 
lead to lessened competition due to an enhanced risk of anticompetitive coordina-
tion. Certain aspects of mobile wireless communications services markets, including 
transparent pricing, little buyer-side market power, and high barriers to entry and 
expansion, make them particularly conductive to coordination.5 
Second, the existence of a price leader—a firm that has a dominant market 
share and sets “acceptable” prices and margins in the industry—helps maintain 
order and stability needed for tacit collusion. The price leader can signal to the 
entire industry with its own pricing behavior, when it is appropriate to raise or re-
duce prices, without jeopardizing the overall industry structure. The price leader 
also possesses the capacity to punish, defined as sufficient resources to deter and 
combat defection. To combat cheating, the most frequently used punishment en-
tails undercutting the defector by flooding the market with deep discounts, thus 
making the defection fruitless. Such punishment is very costly because it will bring 
significant financial losses in the short run. However, if small-scale cheating is not 
addressed, defection may become endemic, and the price leader will have the most 
to lose if collusion collapses. Thus, a price leader such as De Beers needs to have 
both the willingness and capability to carry out punishments and bear the costs 
(see In Focus 11.1). Otherwise, an industry without an acknowledged price leader 
is likely to be more chaotic. 
Third, an industry with homogeneous products, in which rivals are forced to 
compete on price (rather than differentiation), is likely to lead to collusion.6 Be-
cause price competition is often “cut throat,” firms may have stronger incentives to 
collude. Since the 1990s, many firms in commodity industries around the globe, 
such as shipping and vitamins, have been convicted of price fixing.
Fourth, an industry with high entry barriers for new entrants (such as shipbuild-
ing) is more likely to facilitate collusion than an industry with low entry barriers 
(such as restaurants). New entrants are likely to ignore the existing industry norms 
Price leader
A firm that has a dominant 
market share and sets “accept-
able” prices and margins in the 
industry.
Capacity to punish
Sufficient resources possessed 
by a price leader to deter and 
combat defection.
Table 11.1
Industry Characteristics and Possibility of Collusion 
vis-à-vis Competition
Collusion possible
Collusion difficult (competition likely)
  	 Few firms (high concentration)
  	 Many firms (low concentration)
  	 Existence of an industry price leader
  	 No industry price leader
  	 Homogeneous products
  	 Heterogeneous products
  	 High barriers to entry
  	 Low barriers to entry
  	 High market commonality (mutual 
forbearance) 
  	 Lack of market commonality (no mutual 
forbearance) 
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

342	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
by introducing less homogeneous products with newer technologies (in other 
words, “disruptive technologies”).7 As “mavericks,” new entrants “can be thought of 
as loose cannons in otherwise placid and calm industries.”8 Incumbents have col-
lective interest in resisting such new entrants.
Finally, market commonality, defined as the degree of overlap between two 
rivals’ markets, also has a significant bearing on the intensity of rivalry.9 A high 
degree of market commonality may restrain firms from aggressively going after 
each other. Multimarket competition occurs when firms engage the same rivals in 
multiple markets.10 Multimarket firms may respect their rivals’ spheres of influence 
in certain markets, and their rivals may reciprocate, leading to tacit collusion—an 
outcome known as mutual forbearance.11
Market commonality
The overlap between two rivals’ 
markets.
Multimarket competition
Firms engage the same rivals in 
multiple markets.
Mutual forbearance
Multimarket firms respect their 
rivals’ spheres of influence in 
certain markets, and their rivals 
reciprocate, leading to tacit 
collusion. 
Most cartels collapse due to organizational and incen-
tive problems. The longevity of the De Beers diamond 
cartel, now running for more than 100 years, is very 
unusual. A crucial reason behind such longevity is 
that De Beers is the undisputed industry price leader. 
It possesses both the willingness and the capability 
to enforce cartel arrangements. As in all cartels, the 
incentives to cheat are tremendous: Both producers 
and buyers are interested in cutting De Beers out of 
the process. As a price leader with a significant ca-
pacity to punish, De Beers’s reactions are typically 
swift and powerful.
In 1981, President Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire 
(now the Democratic Republic of Congo) announced 
that his country would break away from De Beers by 
directly marketing its diamonds. Although only 3% of 
De Beers’ sales were lost, its world order would be at 
stake if such actions were unpunished. Consequently, 
De Beers drew on its stockpiles to flood the market, 
driving the price of Zairian industrial diamonds from 
$3 per carat to $1.80 and wiping out any gains the 
Zairians hoped to grab. While incurring disproportional 
losses, De Beers made its point and Zaire crawled 
back to its knees.
In another example, many sightholders (De Beers’ 
approved diamond merchants) in Tel Aviv began 
to hoard diamonds purchased from De Beers in 
the 1970s, hoping to combat Israel’s rampant infla-
tion. The disappearance of a substantial amount of 
diamonds from global circulation tightened supply, 
leading to skyrocketing prices and encouraging mer-
chants elsewhere also to hoard and profit. While De 
Beers actually benefited from such higher prices in 
the short run, it realized that in the long run, such an 
uncontrolled speculative bubble would burst. In re-
sponse, De Beers purged one third of sightholders 
and kicked out the most aggressive Israeli specula-
tors. Cut off from their supplies, speculative mer-
chants were forced to draw down their stockpiles, 
thus restoring prices to normal levels.
Source: Based on (1) A. Cockburn, 2002, Diamonds: The real story, 
National Geographic, March: 2–35; (2) Economist, 2011, Betting on 
De Beers, November 12: 73; (3) M. W. Peng, 2009, Is a diamond 
(cartel) forever? in Global Strategy, 2nd ed. (pp. 441–447), Cincinnati: 
South-Western Cengage Learning; (4) D. Spa, 1994, The Cooperative 
Edge: The Internal Politics of International Cartels, Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press.
De Beers as an Industry Price Leader
IN Focus 11.1
Ethical 
Dilemma
Sebastian Kaulitzki/Shutterstock
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 11   Managing Global Competitive Dynamics	
343
Mutual forbearance, due to a high degree of market commonality, primarily 
stems from two factors: (1) deterrence and (2) familiarity.12 Deterrence is impor-
tant because a high degree of market commonality suggests that if a firm attacks 
in one market, its rivals may engage in cross-market retaliation, leading to a costly 
all-out war that nobody can afford. Familiarity is the extent to which tacit collu-
sion is enhanced by a firm’s awareness of the actions, intentions, and capabilities 
of rivals.13 Repeated interactions lead to such familiarity, resulting in more mutual 
respect. In the words of GE CEO Jeff Immelt:
GE has tremendous respect for traditional rivals like Siemens, Philips, and Rolls-Royce. 
But it knows how to compete with them; they will never destroy GE. By introduc-
ing products that create a new price-performance paradigm, however, the emerging 
giants [such as Mindry, Suzlon, Goldwind, and Haier] very well could.14
Overall, the effectiveness of a firm’s actions depends significantly on the domes-
tic and international institutions governing competitive dynamics as well as firm-
specific resources and capabilities. The next two sections expand on these points, 
which are illustrated in Figure 11.2.
11-2 Institutions Governing Domestic  
and International Competition
In a nutshell, the institution-based view advises managers to be well versed in the 
rules governing domestic and international competition. A lack of understanding 
of these institutions may land otherwise successful firms (such as Microsoft) in 
deep trouble.
11-2a Formal Institutions Governing Domestic Competition:  
A Focus on Antitrust
Formal institutions governing domestic competition are broadly guided by 
competition policy, which “determines the institutional mix of competition and 
cooperation that gives rise to the market system.”15 Of particular relevance to us 
is one branch called antitrust policy, which is designed to combat monopolies and 
Cross-market retaliation
Retaliatory attacks on a competi-
tor’s other markets if this competi-
tor attacks a firm’s original market. 
Competition policy
Government policy governing the 
rules of the game in competition.
Antitrust policy
Government policy designed to 
combat monopolies and cartels. 
Learning Objective
Outline how formal institutions 
affect domestic and 
international competition.
11-2
Institution-Based View
- Domestic competition
(competition/antitrust policy)
- International competition
(trade/antidumping policy)
Resource-Based View
- Value
- Rarity
- Imitability
- Organization
Competitive Dynamics
Attack/Counterattack/
Cooperation
Figure 11.2
Institutions, Resources, and Competitive Dynamics
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

344	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
cartels. Competition and antitrust policy seeks to balance efficiency and fairness. 
While efficiency is relatively easy to understand, it is often hard to agree on what is 
fair. In the United States, fairness means equal opportunities for incumbents and 
new entrants. It is “unfair” for incumbents to fix prices and raise entry barriers to 
shut out new entrants. However, in Japan, fairness means the opposite—that is, in-
cumbents that have invested in and nurtured an industry for a long time deserve to 
be protected from new entrants. What Americans approvingly describe as “market 
dynamism” is negatively labeled by Japanese as “market turbulence.” The Japanese 
ideal is “orderly competition,” which may be labeled “collusion” by Americans.
Overall, the American antitrust policy is pro-competition and pro-consumer, while 
the Japanese approach is pro-incumbent and pro-producer. It is difficult to argue who is 
right or wrong here, but we need to be aware of such crucial differences. In general, 
because of stronger, pro-consumer antitrust laws, competitive forces have been 
stronger in the United States than in most other developed economies. As a result, 
on average, American consumers enjoy the lowest prices (except for drugs), and 
Japanese consumers endure the highest prices (except for cars) (see Table 11.2).
Competition and antitrust policy focuses on (1) collusive price setting and 
(2) predatory pricing. Collusive price setting refers to price setting by monopolists 
or collusion parties at a level higher than the competitive level. The global vitamin 
cartel convicted in the 2000s artificially jacked up prices by 30%–40%.
Another area of concern is predatory pricing, which is defined as (1) setting 
prices below cost and (2) intending to raise prices after eliminating rivals to cover 
its losses in the long run (“an attempt to monopolize”). This is an area of significant 
contention. First, it is not clear what exactly constitutes “cost.” Second, even when 
firms are found to be selling below cost, US courts have ruled that if rivals are too 
numerous to eliminate, one firm cannot recoup the losses incurred by charging 
low prices by later jacking up prices, so its pricing cannot be labeled “predatory.” 
This seems to be the case in most industries. These two legal tests have made it ex-
tremely difficult to win a (domestic) predation case in the United States.16
Collusive price setting
Price setting by monopolists or 
collusion parties at a level higher 
than the competitive level.
Predatory pricing
An attempt to monopolize a mar-
ket by setting prices below cost 
and intending to raise prices to 
cover losses in the long run after 
eliminating rivals.
Table 11.2
International Price Comparisons  
(Ratio of Domestic Retail Prices to World Prices)
Australia
Canada
Germany
Japan
Netherlands
UK
US
Agriculture and fisheries
1.067
1.112
1.529
1.584
1.080
1.648
1.158
Processed food
1.086
1.192
1.447
2.099
1.299
1.202
1.090
Textiles
1.111
1.163
1.101
1.478
1.140
1.237
1.051
Printing and publishing
1.120
1.205
1.024
1.186
1.342
1.029
1.005
Drugs and medicines
1.001
2.680
2.643
1.217
3.349
1.845
3.105
Petroleum and coal
2.127
1.320
2.847
3.359
4.335
4.067
1.007
Motor vehicles
1.224
1.197
1.315
1.000
1.648
1.680
1.106
Professional goods
1.125
1.082
1.379
1.077
1.369
1.586
1.074
Weighted means
1.266
1.270
1.539
1.567
1.541
1.48
1.118
Source: Adapted from OECD, 2004, Product market competition and economic performance in the United States, Economics Department Working Paper 398, 
Paris: OECD, 14. Bold type face indicates the lowest price of this category.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 11   Managing Global Competitive Dynamics	
345
11-2b Formal Institutions Governing International 
Competition: A Focus on Antidumping
In the same spirit of predatory pricing, dumping is defined as (1) an exporter sell-
ing below cost abroad and (2) planning to raise prices after eliminating local rivals. 
While domestic predation is usually labeled “anticompetitive,” cross-border dump-
ing is often emotionally accused of being “unfair.”
Consider the following two scenarios. First, a steel producer in Indiana enters 
a new market in Texas, where it offers prices lower than those in Indiana, result-
ing in a 10% market share in Texas. Texas firms have two choices. The first one is 
to initiate a lawsuit against the Indiana firm for “predatory pricing.” However, it 
is difficult to prove (1) that the Indiana firm is selling below cost and (2) that its 
pricing is an “attempt to monopolize.” Under US antitrust laws, a predation case 
like this will have no chance of succeeding. In other words, domestic competition/
antitrust laws offer no hope for protection. Thus, Texas firms are most likely to opt 
for their second option—to retaliate in kind by offering lower prices to customers 
in Indiana, benefitting consumers in both Texas and Indiana.
Now in the second scenario, the “invading” firm is not from Indiana but India. 
Holding everything else constant, Texas firms can argue that the Indian firm is 
dumping. Under US antidumping laws, Texas producers “would almost certainly ob-
tain legal relief on the very same facts that would not support an antitrust claim, let 
alone antitrust relief.”17 Note that imposing antidumping duties on Indian imports 
reduces the incentive for Texas firms to counterattack by entering India, resulting 
in higher prices in both Texas and India, where consumers are hurt. These two hy-
pothetical scenarios are highly realistic. An OECD study in Australia, Canada, the 
EU, and the US reports that 90% of the practices found to be unfairly dumping in 
these countries would never have been questioned under their own antitrust laws 
if used between domestic firms.18 In a nutshell, foreign firms are discriminated 
against by the formal rules of the game.
Discrimination is also evident in the actual antidumping investigation. A case 
is usually filed by a domestic firm with the relevant government authorities. In the 
United States, the authorities are the International Trade Administration (a unit 
of the Department of Commerce) and International Trade Commission (an inde-
pendent government agency). These government agencies then send lengthy ques-
tionnaires to the foreign firms accused of dumping and request comprehensive, 
proprietary data on their cost and pricing, in English, using US generally accepted 
accounting principles (GAAP), within 30–45 days. Many foreign defendants fail to 
provide such data on time because they are not familiar with US GAAP. The inves-
tigation can have one of the four following outcomes:
  	 If no data are forthcoming from abroad, the estimated data provided by the 
accusing firm become the evidence, and the accusing firm can easily win.
  	 If foreign firms do provide data, the accusing firm can still argue that these 
unfair foreigners have lied—“There is no way their costs can be so low!” In the 
case of Louisiana versus Chinese crawfish suppliers, the authenticity of the 
$9 per week salary made by Chinese workers was a major point of contention.
  	 Even if the low-cost data are verified, US (and EU) antidumping laws allow 
the complainant to argue that these data are not “fair.” In the case of China, 
the argument goes, its cost data reflect huge distortions due to govern-
ment intervention because China is still a “nonmarket” economy. Wages 
may be low, but workers may also be provided with low-cost housing and 
Dumping
An exporter selling goods below 
cost.
Antidumping law
Law that makes it illegal for an 
exporter to sell goods below 
cost abroad with the intent to 
raise prices after eliminating 
local rivals.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

346	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
government-subsidized benefits. Thus, the crawfish case boiled down to how 
much it would cost hypothetically to raise crawfish in a market economy. In 
this particular case, Spain was mysteriously chosen. Because Spanish costs 
were about the same as Louisiana costs, despite vehement objections, the 
Chinese were found guilty of dumping in America by selling below Spanish 
costs. Thus, 110% to 123% import duties were levied on Chinese crawfish.
  	 The fourth possible outcome is that the defendant wins the case. But this 
is rare and happens in only 5% of the antidumping cases in the United 
States.
One study found that simply filing an antidumping petition (regardless of the 
outcome) may result in a nontrivial 1% increase in the stock price for US listed 
firms (an average of $46 million increase in market value).19 Evidently, Wall Street 
knows that Uncle Sam favors US firms. Globally, this means that governments 
usually protect their domestic firms in antidumping investigations. Not surpris-
ingly, antidumping cases have proliferated throughout the world. It is ironic that 
the rising tide of globalization in the last two decades has been accompanied by 
the rising proliferation of antidumping cases, which are allowed by the WTO. The 
institution-based message to firms defending home markets is clear: Get to know 
your country’s antidumping laws. The institution-based message to firms interested 
in doing business abroad is also clear: Your degree of freedom in overseas pricing 
is significantly less than that in domestic pricing. Let’s drop the “F” word (free) in 
“free market” competition.
Overall, institutional conditions such as the availability of antidumping protec-
tion are not just the “background.” They determine directly what weapons a firm 
has in its arsenal to wage competitive battles. Next, we outline resources and capa-
bilities used in such battles.
11-3 Resources Influencing Competitive Dynamics
A number of resource-based imperatives, informed by the VRIO framework first 
outlined in Chapter 4, drive decisions and actions associated with competitive dy-
namics (see Figure 11.2).
11-3a Value
Firm resources must create value when engaging rivals.20 For example, the ability 
to attack in multiple markets—of the sort Gillette (now part of P&G) possessed 
when launching its Sensor razors in 23 countries simultaneously—throws rivals off 
balance, thus adding value. Likewise, the ability to respond rapidly to challenges 
also adds value.21 Another example is a dominant position in key markets (such 
as flights in and out of Dallas/Fort Worth for American Airlines). Such a strong 
sphere of influence poses credible threats to rivals, which understand that the firm 
will defend its core markets vigorously.
One way to add value is by patenting. Firms are rapidly expanding their 
scale and scope of patenting. Only about 5% of patents end up having any eco-
nomic value. So, why do firms spend so much money on the “patent race” (on 
average, half a million dollars in R&D for one patent)? The answer is that the 
proliferation of patents makes it very easy for one firm to unwittingly infringe 
Learning Objective
Articulate how resources 
and capabilities influence 
competitive dynamics.
11-3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 11   Managing Global Competitive Dynamics	
347
on rivals’ patents. When being challenged, a firm without a defensive portfo-
lio of patents is at a severe disadvantage: It has to pay its rivals for using their 
patents. On the other hand, a firm with strong patents can challenge rivals for 
their infringements, thus making it easier to reach some understanding—or 
mutual forbearance.
11-3b Rarity
Either by nature or nurture (or both), certain assets are very rare, thus generating 
significant advantage in competitive dynamics. Emirates Airlines, in addition to 
claiming one of the best locations connecting Europe and Asia as its home base, 
is a well-run organization supported by a supportive government (see the Open-
ing Case). Airlines elsewhere, such as British Airways (BA) at London Heathrow 
airport, cannot run certain flights at night and cannot expand the airport due to 
complaints from the surrounding community. Emirates is unhindered by airport 
curfews in Dubai and is able to push through dramatic airport expansion propos-
als. Also, because Emirates primarily flies long-haul routes, its aircraft are in the 
air 18 hours a day—making its fleet one of the hardest working and most utilized in 
the industry. This combination of both geographic advantage and organizational 
advantage is rare, thus fueling Emirates to soar.
11-3c Imitability
Most rivals watch each other and probably have a fairly comprehensive (although 
not necessarily accurate) picture of how their rivals compete. However, the next hur-
dle lies in how to imitate successful rivals. Many major airlines have sought to imitate 
discount carriers such as Southwest and Ryanair but have failed repeatedly. Qatar 
Airways and Etihad Airlines have realized that Dubai’s geographic advantage is not 
rare and can be imitated once they build up their airports in Doha and Abu Dhabi, 
respectively (see the Opening Case). Whether these ambitious regional rivals can 
successfully imitate Emirates’ strong organizational capabilities remains to be seen.
11-3d Organization
Some firms are better organized for competitive actions, such as stealth attacks and 
answering challenges “tit-for-tat.”22 An intense “warrior-like” culture requires not 
only top management commitment, but also employee involvement down to the 
“soldiers in the trenches.” It is such a self-styled “wolf” culture that has propelled 
Huawei to become Cisco’s leading challenger. It is difficult for slow-moving firms to 
suddenly wake up to become more aggressive.23
On the other hand, more centrally coordinated firms may be better mutual for-
bearers than firms whose units are loosely controlled. For an MNE competing with 
rivals across many countries, a mutual forbearance strategy requires some units, 
out of respect for rivals’ sphere of influence, to sacrifice their maximum market 
gains by withholding some efforts. Of course, such coordination helps other units 
with dominant market positions to maximize performance, thus helping the MNE 
as a whole. Successfully carrying out such mutual forbearance calls for organiza-
tional reward systems (such as those concerning bonuses and promotions) that 
encourage cooperation between units. Conversely, if a firm has competitive reward  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

348	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
systems (for example, bonuses linked to unit perfor-
mance), unit managers may be unwilling to give up 
market gains for the greater benefits of the whole 
firm, thus undermining mutual forbearance.24
11-3e Resource Similarity
Resource similarity is defined as “the extent to which 
a given competitor possesses strategic endowment 
comparable, in terms of both type and amount, to 
those of the focal firm.”25 Firms with a high degree 
of resource similarity are likely to have similar com-
petitive actions. For instance, Apple and IBM used 
to have a lot of resource similarity in the 1990s, so 
they fought a lot. Why have they not been fighting 
a lot recently? One reason is that their level of re-
source similarity decreased. 
If we put together resource similarity and market commonality (discussed 
earlier), we can yield a framework of competitor analysis for any pair of rivals 
(Figure 11.3). In Cell 4, because two firms have a high degree of resource similarity 
but a low degree of market commonality (little mutual forbearance), the intensity 
of rivalry is likely to be the highest. Conversely, in Cell 1, since both firms have 
little resource similarity but a high degree of market commonality, the intensity 
of their rivalry may be the lowest. Cells 2 and 3 present an intermediate level of 
competition. 
For example, the high-flying Starbucks and the down-to-earth McDonald’s 
used to have little resource similarity. Both had high market commonality—in the 
United States, both blanketed the country with chain stores. In other words, they 
were in Cell 1 with the lowest intensity of rivalry. However, recently, McDonald’s 
aspired to go “up market” and offered products such as iced coffee designed to 
Resource similarity
The extent to which a given 
competitor possesses strategic 
endowment comparable, in 
terms of both type and amount, 
to those of the focal firm.
(Cell 1)
Intensity of rivalry
Lowest
(Cell 2)
Intensity of rivalry
Second lowest
Low
Resource Similarity
Market Commonality
High
High
(Cell 3)
Intensity of rivalry
Second highest
(Cell 4)
Intensity of rivalry
Highest
Low
Figure 11.3
A Framework for Competitor Analysis Between a Pair of Rivals
Sources: Adapted from (1) M. Chen, 1996, Competitor analysis and interfirm rivalry: Toward a theoretical integration, 
Academy of Management Review, 21: 108; (2) J. Gimeno & C. Y. Woo, 1996, Hypercompetition in a multimarket envi-
ronment: The role of strategic similarity and multimarket contact in competitive de-escalation, Organization Science, 
7: 338.
Why is Apple no longer considered a fierce competi-
tor for IBM?
Bloomberg/Contributor/Getty Images
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 11   Managing Global Competitive Dynamics	
349
eat some of Starbucks’ lunch (or drink some of Starbuck’s coffee). Starbucks, 
due to profit pressures, seemed to go “down market” by offering cheaper drinks 
and instant coffee. We can say that their resource similarity increased. Given 
that they still maintained high market commonality, their rivalry migrated to 
Cell 2, whose intensity of rivalry was higher than that in Cell 1. To further illus-
trate, In Focus 11.2 describes how Fox’s entry into the US broadcasting industry 
intensified the rivalry. Overall, conscientious mapping along the dimensions out-
lined in Figure 11.3 can help managers sharpen their analytical focus, allocate 
resources in proportion to the degree of threat each rival presents, and avoid 
nasty surprises.
Prior to 1996, the US TV broadcasting industry could 
be viewed as a relatively tranquil “hen house.” The 
Big Three networks (ABC, NBC, and CBS) dominated 
mainstream programming, and CNN ran its 24-hour 
news show. Like hens sharing a house, there was 
some rivalry. But there were well-understood rules of 
engagement, such as not raiding each other’s affiliate 
stations. Overall, competition was gentlemanly.
However, the 1996 arrival of Fox News Channel, 
a subsidiary of Rupert Murdoch’s News Corporation, 
transformed the industry. First, Fox violated industry 
norms by raiding Big Three affiliate stations. It convinced 
some affiliates to switch and become Fox stations. Thus, 
in some markets, affiliate defections gave Fox overnight 
success at the expense of one of the Big Three. Second, 
Fox paid up to $11 per subscriber to cable operators. This 
violated another norm where cable operators only paid 
stations carriage fees for programming (but not cable 
subscribers). Having outfoxed the Big Three, Fox turned 
its guns to CNN. When Time Warner bought CNN, it 
was required by an antitrust consent to carry a second 
news channel in addition to CNN. It chose MSNBC in-
stead of Fox; Fox sued Time Warner. The media war 
became dirty: CNN owner Ted Turner publicly compared 
Murdoch to Hitler, while Murdoch’s New York Post 
questioned Turner’s sanity. Perhaps controversy was 
exactly what Fox wanted. Critics repeatedly accused 
Fox of promoting a conservative (allegedly Republican) 
point of view. Viewers did not care. By 2006, Fox was 
the most watched news channel in the United States, 
reaching 96% of US households.
Using Figure 11.3, we can suggest that the pre-
1996 industry was in Cell 2. The intensity of rivalry 
was the second lowest because the Big Three and 
CNN had high market commonality (all focusing on 
the US) and high resource similarity (TV program-
ming). However, Fox’s entry has transformed the 
game. News Corporation is a global player that was 
historically headquartered in Australia but is now 
headquartered and listed in New York. In addition 
to its Australian roots, News Corporation has major 
operations in Asia, Canada, and Europe. Its first US 
acquisition took place in 1973, and Murdoch became 
an American citizen in 1985 to satisfy a requirement 
that only US citizens could own American TV sta-
tions. In other words, while Fox shares high resource 
similarity with the Big Three and CNN, it has low 
market similarity with the Big Three because they 
have little non-US presence. The upshot? The indus-
try is now in Cell 4 with the highest intensity of ri-
valry. Fox can beat up the Big Three because it has 
little fear of retaliation against its non-US markets. 
The Big Three thus pay a heavy price for their US-
centric mentality. Being more international, CNN 
is in a better position to fight Fox. In 1997, Turner 
and Murdoch settled, with Time Warner agreeing to 
carry Fox and News Corporation giving Time Warner 
access to News Corporation’s satellites in Asia and 
Europe. In other words, they have established some 
mutual forbearance.
Sources: Based on (1) BusinessWeek, August 21/28, 2006: 82; (2) www. 
newscorp.com.
A Fox in the Hen House
IN Focus 11.2 
Ethical 
Dilemma
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

350	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
11-4 Attacks, Counterattacks, and Signaling
11-4a Attacks and Counterattacks
In the form of price cuts, advertising campaigns, market entries, and new product 
introductions, attack can be defined as an initial set of actions to gain competitive 
advantage, and counterattack is consequently defined as a set of actions in response 
to attack. This section focuses on a key question: What kinds of attack are more 
likely to be successful?
Obviously, unopposed attacks are more likely to be successful. Thus, attackers 
need to be aware of the three drivers for counterattacks: (1) awareness, (2) motiva-
tion, and (3) capability.26
  	 If an attack is so subtle that rivals are not aware of it, attacker’s objectives are 
likely to be attained. One interesting idea is the “blue ocean strategy” that avoids 
attacking core markets defended by rivals.27 A thrust on rivals’ core markets is very 
likely to result in a bloody price war—in other words, a “red ocean.” In the 1990s, 
Netscape drew tremendous publicity by labeling Microsoft the “Death Star” (of 
Star Wars movie fame) and predicting that the Internet would make Windows 
obsolete. Such a challenge helped make Netscape Microsoft’s number-one en-
emy, leading to the demise of Netscape (or its drowning in the “red ocean”).
  	 Motivation is also crucial. If the attacked market is of marginal value, managers 
may decide not to counterattack. Consider how China’s Haier entered the US 
white goods market. Although Haier dominates its home country with a broad 
range of products, it chose to enter the US market in a most non-threatening 
segment: mini-bars (compact refrigerators) for hotels and dorms. Do you re-
member the brand of the mini-bar in the last hotel room where you stayed? 
Evidently, not only did you fail to pay attention to that brand, but incumbents 
such as GE and Whirlpool also dismissed this segment as peripheral and low 
margin. In other words, they were not motivated to counterattack. Thanks in 
part to the incumbents’ lack of motivation to counterattack, Haier now com-
mands a 50% US market share in compact refrigerators and has built a factory 
in South Carolina to go after more lucrative product lines.
  	 Even if an attack is identified, and a firm is motivated to respond, it requires 
strong capabilities to carry out counterattacks—as discussed in our earlier sec-
tion on resources.
Overall, minimizing an opponent’s awareness, motivation, and capabilities is 
more likely to result in successful attacks. Frontal, infrequent, and predictable at-
tacks typically find rivals well prepared. Winning firms excel at making subtle, fre-
quent, but unpredictable moves.
11-4b Cooperation and Signaling
Some firms choose to compete, and others choose to cooperate. How do firms 
signal their intention to cooperate in order to reduce competitive intensity? Short of 
illegally talking directly to rivals, firms have to resort to signaling—that is, “While 
you can’t talk to your competitors on pricing, you can always wink at them.” We 
outline four means of such winking:
  	 Firms may enter new markets, not necessarily to challenge incumbents but to 
seek mutual forbearance by establishing multimarket contact.28 Thus, MNEs 
Learning Objective
Identify the drivers for attacks, 
counterattacks, and signaling.
11-4
Attack
An initial set of actions to gain 
competitive advantage.
Counterattack
A set of actions in response to 
attack.
Blue ocean strategy
Strategy that focuses on de-
veloping new markets (“blue 
ocean”) and avoids attacking 
core markets defended by 
rivals, which is likely to result 
in a bloody price war or a “red 
ocean.”
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 11   Managing Global Competitive Dynamics	
351
often chase each other, entering one country after another. Airlines that meet 
in many routes are often less aggressive than airlines that meet in one or a few 
routes.
  	 Firms can send an open signal for a truce. As GM faced grave financial dif-
ficulties in 2005, Toyota’s chairman told the media twice that Toyota would 
“help GM” by raising Toyota prices in the United States. Toyota’s signal could 
not have been more unambiguous, short of talking directly to GM, which 
would have been illegal.
  	 Sometimes firms can send a signal to rivals by enlisting the help of 
governments. Although it is illegal to hold direct negotiations with rivals on 
what constitutes “fair” pricing, holding such discussions is legal under the 
auspices of government investigations. Thus, filing an antidumping petition 
or suing a rival does not necessarily indicate a totally hostile intent but rather 
a signal to talk. When Cisco sued Huawei, Cisco was able to legally discuss a 
number of strategic issues during settlement negotiations, which were medi-
ated by US and Chinese governments. In the end, Cisco dropped its case 
against Huawei after both firms negotiated a solution.
  	 Firms can organize strategic alliances with rivals for cost reduction. Although 
price fixing is illegal, reducing cost by 10% through an alliance, which is legal, has 
the same impact on the financial bottom line as collusively raising price by 10%.
Overall, because of the sensitive nature of interfirm cooperation designed to 
reduce competition, we do not know a lot about them. However, to the extent that 
business is both war and peace, managers need to pay as much attention to making 
peace with rivals as fighting wars against them.
11-5 Local Firms versus Multinational Enterprises
While managers, students, and journalists are often fascinated by MNE rivalries such 
as those between Coca-Cola and Pepsi, Samsung and Sony, and SAP and Oracle, 
much less is known about how local firms cope when with an MNE attacks. Given the 
broad choices of competing and/or cooperating, local firms can adopt one of four 
strategic postures, depending on (1) the industry conditions and (2) the nature of 
competitive assets. Shown in Figure 11.4, these factors suggest four strategic actions.29 
Cell 3 shows how in some industries, the pressures to globalize are relatively low, 
and local firms’ strengths lie in a deep understanding of local markets. In this case, 
local assets where MNEs are weak are leveraged in a defender strategy. For exam-
ple, facing an onslaught from MNE cosmetics firms, a number of local Israeli firms 
turned to focus on products suited to the Middle Eastern climate and managed to 
defend their turf. Ahava has been particularly successful, partly because of its highly 
unique components that are extracted from the Dead Sea that MNEs cannot find 
elsewhere. In other words, while local firms such as Ahava cede some markets (such 
as mainstream cosmetics) to MNEs, they build strongholds in narrower, but deeper, 
product markets (such as the “Dead Sea mud”). 
Cell 4 shows industries where pressures for globalization are relatively low, and 
local firms may possess some skills that are transferable overseas, thus leading to 
an extender strategy. This strategy centers on leveraging home-grown competencies 
abroad. For example, Asian Paints controls 40% of the house paint market in India. 
Asian Paints developed strong capabilities tailored to this environment, character-
ized by thousands of small retailers serving numerous poor consumers, who only 
Learning Objective
Discuss how local firms fight 
multinational enterprises 
(MNEs).
11-5
Defender
Strategy that centers on local 
assets in areas in which MNEs 
are weak.
Extender
Strategy that centers on leverag-
ing homegrown competencies 
abroad. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

352	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
want small quantities of paint that can be diluted to save money. Such capabilities are 
a winning formula not only in India, but also in much of the developing world. In con-
trast, MNEs, whose business model typically centers on affluent customers in devel-
oped economies, have had a hard time coming up with profitable low-end products.
Cell 1 depicts local firms that compete in industries with high pressures for glo-
balization. Thus, a dodger strategy is necessary. This is largely centered on cooper-
ating through joint ventures (JVs) with MNEs and sell-offs to MNEs. In the Chinese 
automobile industry, all major domestic automakers have entered JVs with MNEs. 
In the Czech Republic, the government sold Skoda to Volkswagen. In essence, to the 
extent that local firms are unable to successfully compete head-on against MNEs, 
cooperation becomes necessary. In other words, if you can’t beat them, join them!
Finally, in Cell 2, some local firms, through a contender strategy, engage in rapid 
learning and then expand overseas. A number of Chinese mobile phone makers, 
such as TCL and Bird, rapidly caught up with global heavyweights such as Motorola 
and Nokia. Domestic firms in China then commanded more than 50% market share. 
Following their success at home, TCL and Bird have now entered foreign markets.
Particularly in emerging economies, how domestic firms respond is crucial for 
managers. For example, in China, despite initial dominance, MNEs do not always 
stay on top. In numerous industries (such as sportswear, cellular phones, personal 
computers, and home appliances), many MNEs have found themselves losing mar-
ket share to domestic firms. While weak domestic players are washed out, some of 
the stronger domestic firms not only succeed in the competitive domestic environ-
ment, but now challenge MNEs overseas. In the process, they become a new breed 
of MNEs themselves. The upshot is that when facing the onslaught of MNEs, local 
firms are not necessarily “sitting ducks” guaranteed to lose (see the Closing Case). 
11-6 Debates and Extensions
Debates abound in this sensitive area. Two of the most significant are discussed: (1) com-
petition versus antidumping, and (2) competitive strategy versus antitrust policy.
Dodger
Strategy that centers on cooper-
ating through joint ventures with 
MNEs and sell-offs to MNEs.
Contender
Strategy that centers on a firm 
engaging in rapid learning and 
then expanding overseas.
Learning Objective
Participate in two leading 
debates concerning competitive 
dynamics.
11-6
(Cell 1)
Dodger
(Cell 2)
Contender
Customized to
home markets
Competitive Assets
Industry Pressures
 to Globalize
Transferable
abroad
High
(Cell 3)
Defender
(Cell 4)
Extender
Low
Figure 11.4
How Local Firms in Emerging Economies Respond to Multinationals
Source: Adapted from N. Dawar & T. Frost, 1999, Competing with giants: Survival strategies for local companies in 
emerging markets, Harvard Business Review, March–April: 122. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 11   Managing Global Competitive Dynamics	
353
11-6a Competition versus Antidumping
Two arguments exist against the practice of imposing antidumping restrictions on 
foreign firms. First, because dumping centers on selling “below cost,” it is often dif-
ficult (if not impossible) to prove the case, given the ambiguity concerning “cost.” 
The second argument is that if foreign firms are indeed selling below cost, so what? 
This is simply a (hyper)competitive action. When entering a new market, virtually 
all firms lose money on Day 1 (and often in Year 1). Until some point when the 
firm breaks even, it will lose money because it sells below cost. Domestically, cases 
abound of such dumping, which is perfectly legal. We all receive numerous cou-
pons in the mail offering free or cheap goods. Coupon items are frequently sold (or 
given away) below cost. Do consumers complain about such good deals? Probably 
not. “If the foreigners are kind enough (or dumb enough) to sell their goods to our 
country below cost, why should we complain?”30
One classic response is: What if, through “unfair” dumping, foreign rivals drive 
out local firms and then jack up prices? Given the competitive nature of most in-
dustries, it is often difficult to eliminate all rivals and then recoup losses by charg-
ing higher monopoly prices. The fear of foreign monopoly is often exaggerated by 
special interest groups who benefit at the expense of consumers in the entire coun-
try. Joseph Stiglitz, a Nobel laureate in economics, wrote that antidumping duties 
“are simply naked protectionism” and that one country’s “fair trade laws” are often 
known elsewhere as “unfair trade laws.”31
One solution is to phase out antidumping laws and use the same standards 
against domestic predatory pricing. Such a waiver of antidumping charges has 
been in place between Australia and New Zealand, between Canada and the US, 
and within the EU. Thus, a Canadian firm, essentially treated as a US firm, can 
be accused of predatory pricing but cannot be accused of dumping in the United 
States. Since antidumping is about “us versus them,” such harmonization repre-
sents essentially an expanded notion of “us.” However, domestically, as noted ear-
lier, a predation case is very difficult to make. In such a way, competition can be 
fostered, aggressiveness rewarded, and “dumping” legalized.
11-6b Competitive Strategy versus Antitrust Policy
Managers deploy strategy to lead their firms to compete. But antitrust officials, 
influenced by economics and law, sometimes get in the way by accusing firms (such 
as Microsoft) of being “anticompetitive.” Most business school students do not study 
antitrust policy. When they graduate and become managers, they do not care about 
it either. Antitrust officials, on the other hand, tend to study economics and law 
but not business. A background in economics and law, however, does not give an-
titrust officials an intimate understanding of how firm-level competition and/or 
cooperation unfolds, which is something that a business school education provides. 
These officials often believe that in the absence of government intervention (specif-
ically, antitrust action), competitive advantage of large firms is likely to last forever 
and that monopoly will prevail. Managers know better: given rapid technologi-
cal changes, ambitious new entrants, and strong global competition, no competi-
tive advantage lasts forever, even in the absence of government intervention (see  
Chapter 4).32 It is possible that none of the antitrust officials has ever studied a glob-
al business textbook like this one. But officials who have a static (and unrealistic) 
view of the sustainability of competitive advantage end up deciding and enforcing 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

354	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
the rules governing competition. Such a disconnect naturally breeds mutual sus-
picion and frustration on both sides. Business school students and managers will 
be better off if they arm themselves with knowledge about antitrust concerns and 
engage in intelligent conversations and debates with officials and policy makers.
Because the United States has the world’s oldest antitrust frameworks (dating 
back to the 1890 Sherman Act), the US debate is the most watched in the world. So, 
rather than adopting a US-centric approach, here we treat the US debate as a case 
study that may have global ramifications. In fact, antitrust issues, which originated 
from a domestic orientation, have been globalized recently.33
On behalf of managers, concerned management scholars have made four argu-
ments.34 First, antitrust laws were often created in response to the old realities of 
mostly domestic competition—the year 1890 for the Sherman Act is not a typo for 
1990. However, the largely global competition today means that a large, dominant 
firm in one country (think of Boeing) does not automatically translate into a dan-
gerous monopoly. The existence of foreign rivals (such as Airbus) forces the large 
domestic incumbent to be more competitive.
Second, the very actions accused of being “anticompetitive” may actually be 
highly “competitive” or “hypercompetitive.” In the 1990s, the hypercompetitive Mi-
crosoft was charged with “anticompetitive” behavior. Its alleged crime? Not volun-
tarily helping its competitors. It is puzzling why Microsoft should have voluntarily 
helped its competitors. Just imagine: If your manager were to ask you to voluntarily 
help your firm’s competitors, would you just do it or would you think that your man-
ager was out of his or her mind?
Third, US antitrust laws create strategic confusion.35 Because the intention to 
destroy your firm’s rivals is the smoking gun of antitrust cases, managers are forced 
to use milder language. Don’t say or write a memo that says, “We want to beat 
our competitors!” Otherwise, managers could end up in court. In contrast, non-
US firms often use war-like language: Komatsu is famous for “Encircling Caterpil-
lar!” and Honda for “Annihilate, crush, and destroy Yamaha!” The inability to talk 
straight creates confusion among lower-level managers and employees in US firms. 
A confused firm is not likely to be aggressive. 
Finally, US antitrust laws may be unfair because these laws discriminate against 
US firms. In 1983, if GM and Ford had proposed to jointly manufacture cars, an-
titrust officials would have turned them down, citing an (obvious!) intent to col-
lude. The jargon is per se (in and of itself) violation 
of antitrust laws. Ironically, starting in 1983, GM 
was allowed to jointly make cars with Toyota. Now 
30 years later, Toyota is the number-one automaker 
in the United States. The upshot? American anti-
trust laws have helped Toyota but not Ford or GM. 
One country’s (or region’s) antitrust laws may be 
used against other countries’ firms. For example, 
the EU antitrust authorities have been very harsh 
on US firms: stopping the merger between GE 
and Honeywell and severely fining Microsoft and 
Intel. While these actions provoked protests from 
the American side, they are at least understand-
able from a protectionist standpoint (see Emerging 
Markets 11.1). What is difficult to understand is the 
reason why sometimes US firms are discriminated 
Why has Microsoft been the subject of so much 
close government scrutiny?
allfive/Alamy Limited
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 11   Managing Global Competitive Dynamics	
355
In the 21st century, trade wars are often threatened 
but seldom fought. However, a new style of trade 
wars centered on protectionism is on the rise. These 
new trade wars are increasingly known as antitrust 
wars, because antitrust policy, which historically fo-
cuses on domestic competition, has been used to 
score international points.
In 2001, the EU antitrust authorities vetoed the 
proposed merger of two US-based firms, GE and 
Honeywell. In 2009, the EU fined Intel a record 
$1.45 billion for alleged anticompetitive conduct against 
its smaller US-based rival, AMD. In 2004, the EU fined 
Microsoft $660 million for bundling its own Media 
Player with Windows and thus excluding market ac-
cess for RealNetworks, a US-based rival. In 2009, 
the EU prosecuted Microsoft for tying Windows with 
its own web browser, Internet Explorer, and stifling 
competition from other browsers—exactly the same 
alleged crime as pursued by US authorities a decade 
ago. The only viable US competitor from the earlier 
US case against Microsoft, Netscape, had essen-
tially vanished by 2009, accounting for less than 1% 
of browsers usage. This time, the EU case against 
Microsoft was triggered by a complaint from Opera 
Software, an Oslo, Norway–based browser maker. 
In comparison with Explorer’s 86% global browser 
market share in 1999, the 2009 case came at a time  
when Microsoft’s dominance in browsers was weak-
ened. In 2009, Explorer only had 68% of the global 
market, and its nearest competitor, Firefox (devel-
oped by the US-based Mozilla) enjoyed 20%. In 
Europe, Microsoft was even weaker, with Explorer 
accounting for only 60% of the market, followed by 
Opera’s 5% and Firefox’s 3%. Overall, the EU antitrust 
authorities appeared to more vigorously pursue  
leading US firms, suggesting a potential protectionist 
undertone.
Not to be outdone, the fledgling Chinese 
antitrust authorities entered the foray by start-
ing to enforce China’s new Antimonopoly Law 
in 2008. Mergers of firms not headquartered in 
China, as long as their combined China turnover 
reached $120 million in the previous year, had to 
be cleared by Chinese authorities. For example, 
the merger between the Belgium-based InBev 
and the US-based Anheuser-Busch was approved 
by the Chinese authorities, subject to some con-
ditions. What was controversial was the very first 
decision to stop an acquisition announced in 2009: 
the proposed acquisition of China’s leading fruit 
juice maker, Huiyuan, by Coca-Cola. At $2.4 billion, 
the  price was 50  times Huiyuan’s expected earn-
ings in 2008 and a 200% premium to Huiyuan’s 
share price. Huiyuan’s delighted owners agreed to 
sell. The only party blocking the transaction was 
the Chinese Ministry of Commerce. The Ministry 
cited the adverse impact on small- and medium-
sized domestic juice makers as a major reason—in 
other words, protectionism. Beyond the antitrust 
merit of this individual case, there is a possibility 
that the Chinese authorities used this case to signal 
displeasure to the United States, which recently 
disallowed high-profile Chinese acquisitions in the 
United States. Such signals may be mixed. In 2011, 
Yum! Brands’ acquisition of an iconic national chain 
restaurant, Little Sheep Hot Pot, did receive ap-
proval from the Chinese antitrust authorities. Yum! 
Brands thus could add Little Sheep to its success-
ful restaurants, such as Kentucky Fried Chicken and 
Pizza Hut, in China.
From Trade Wars to Antitrust Wars 
Ethical 
Dilemma
Sources: Based on (1) M. Bachrack, 2009, Merger control under China’s Antimonopoly Law, China Business Review, July: 18–21; (2) J. Clougherty, 2005, 
Antitrust holdup source, cross-national institutional variation, and corporate political strategy implications for domestic mergers in a global context, Stra-
tegic Management Journal, 26: 769–790; (3) Wall Street Journal, 2009, EU hits Microsoft with new antitrust charges, January 17; (4) Wall Street Journal, 
2011, Yum!’s proposed Little Sheep takeover approved, November 8, online.wsj.com.
E m e r g i n g  M a r k e t s  1 1 . 1
Danny Lehman/Corbis; Björn Meyer/sitox/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

356	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
against by their own government. The most recent case in point: In 2011, AT&T was 
forced to abandon its merger of T-Mobile, a wholly owned subsidiary of Deutsche 
Telekom (DT) and was forced to pay a $3 billion (!) breakup fee to T-Mobile. A US 
firm was thus forced by the US government to subsidize a foreign firm, which did 
not even want to compete in the United States anymore. 
Far from being merely theoretical, this institution-based debate has far-reaching 
ramifications for the future of global competition. Business students and future 
managers should pay attention to this debate and be prepared to engage in it.
11-7 Management Savvy
Let us revisit our fundamental question: What determines the success and 
failure in managing competitive dynamics around the world? Drawing on the 
two core perspectives (institution-based and resource-based views), we suggest 
that to manage competitive dynamics successfully, managers not only need to 
become masters of maneuvers (both confrontation and cooperation), but also 
experts in government regulations at home and abroad if they aspire to be suc-
cessful globally.
Consequently, three implications emerge for savvy managers (Table 11.3). First, 
managers need to understand the rules of the game governing competition around 
the world. Aggressive language such as “Let’s beat competitors” may not be allowed 
in countries such as the United States. Remember, an e-mail, like a diamond, is 
forever, and “deleted” e-mails are still stored on servers and can be uncovered. 
However, carefully crafted ambitions such as Wal-Mart’s “We want to be number 
one in grocery business” are legal, because such wording (at least on paper) shows 
no illegal intention to destroy rivals. Too bad 31 US supermarket chains declared 
bankruptcy since Wal-Mart charged into groceries in the 1990s—just a tragic co-
incidence (!).36 
The necessity to understand the rules of the game is crucial when venturing 
abroad. What is legal domestically may be illegal elsewhere. Many Chinese manag-
ers are surprised that their low-cost strategy is labeled “illegal” dumping in the very 
countries advocating “free market” competition. In reality, “free markets” are not 
free. However, managers well versed in the rules of the game may launch subtle at-
tacks without incurring the wrath of antidumping officials. Imports commanding 
less than 3% market share or below in a 12-month period are regarded by US an-
tidumping laws as “negligible imports” not worthy of investigation.37 Thus, foreign 
firms not crossing such a “red line” would be safe. As an exporter, would you like to 
maintain a steady 3% of US market share every year over ten years, or a dramatic 
30% upsurge in Year 1, which would attract antidumping actions preventing fur-
ther growth in Year 2 and beyond?
Learning Objective
Draw implications for action.
11-7
Table 11.3
Implications for Action
  	 Understand the rules of the game governing domestic and international competition 
around the world.
  	 Strengthen resources and capabilities to compete and/or cooperate more effectively.
  	 Develop skills in competitor analysis that guide decision making on attacks, 
counterattacks, and cooperation.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 11   Managing Global Competitive Dynamics	
357
Second, managers need to strengthen capabilities that more effectively compete 
and/or cooperate. In attacks and counterattacks, subtlety, frequency, complexity, 
and unpredictability are helpful. In cooperation, market similarity and mutual for-
bearance may be better. As Sun Tzu advised a long time ago, as a manager you need 
to “know yourself”—including your unit, your firm, and your industry.
Finally, as a savvy manager, you also need to “know your opponents” by develop-
ing skills in competitor analysis (see Figure 11.3). Managers need to develop skills 
and instinct to think like their opponents, who are eager to collect competitive 
intelligence (Table 11.4). Overall, since business is simultaneously war and peace, a 
winning formula, as in war and chess, is “Look ahead, reason back.” 
C h a p t e r  S u m m a r y
	11.1	Understand the industry conditions conducive to cooperation and collusion.
  	 Such industries tend to have (1) a smaller number of rivals, (2) a price 
leader, (3) homogenous products, (4) high entry barriers, and (5) high 
market commonality (mutual forbearance).
	11.2	Outline how formal institutions affect domestic and international 
competition. 
  	 Domestically, antitrust laws focus on collusion and predatory pricing.
  	 Internationally, antidumping laws discriminate against foreign firms and 
protect domestic firms.
	11.3	Articulate how resources and capabilities influence competitive dynamics.
  	 Resource similarity and market commonality can yield a powerful frame-
work for competitor analysis.
	11.4	Identify the drivers for attacks, counterattacks, and signaling.
  	 Attackers need to be aware of the three drivers for counterattacks: (1) aware-
ness, (2) motivation, and (3) capability. 
  	 Without talking directly to competitors, firms can use various means to 
signal rivals.
Table 11.4
Tips on Competitive Intelligence and Counterintelligence
  	 If you are bidding against a major local rival in a foreign country, expect aggressive 
efforts to gather your information. If you leave your laptop in a hotel room, expect the 
hard drive to be copied.
  	 Be careful about cell phones, because signals can be intercepted. If you lose your cell 
phone for 30 seconds, your opponents may be able to put in a look-alike battery with a 
chip that will record and transmit your calls. This chip can also secretly turn your phone 
on and use it as a microphone.
  	 Be careful about the high-speed Internet service at your hotel. Go to the office of your 
local subsidiary. If there isn’t such a safe, local office, a random Wi-Fi spot may be safer 
than the hotel Internet service.
  	 If your negotiation counterparts offer to book you into a luxurious suite or hotel, turn it 
down. Book your own. 
Source: Based on text in G. Morse, 2005, H. Keith Melton on corporate espionage, Harvard Business Review, 
November: 26. Note this is an interesting but extremely cautious view. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

358	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
	11.5	Discuss how local firms fight multinational enterprises (MNEs).
  	 When confronting MNEs, local firms can choose a variety of strategic 
choices: (1) defender, (2) extender, (3) dodger, or (4) contender. They may 
not be as weak as many people believe.
	11.6	Participate in two leading debates concerning competitive dynamics.
  	 (1) Competition versus antidumping and (2) competitive strategy versus 
antitrust policy.
	11.7	Draw implications for action.
  	 Understand the rules of the game governing domestic and international 
competition around the world.
  	 Strengthen resources and capabilities for more effective competitor analysis. 
  	 Develop skills in competitor analysis that guide decision making on attacks, 
counterattacks, and cooperation.
K e y  T e r m s
Antidumping law 345
Antitrust law 339
Antitrust policy 343
Attack 350
Blue ocean  
strategy 350
Capacity to  
punish 341
Cartel (trust) 339
Collusion 339
Collusive price  
setting 344
Competition policy 343
Competitive  
dynamics 338
Competitor analysis 338
Concentration ratio 340
Contender 352
Counterattack 350
Cross-market  
retaliation 343
Defender 351
Dodger 352
Dumping 345
Explicit collusion 339	
Extender 351
Game theory 339
Market commonality 342
Multimarket  
competition 342
Mutual forbearance 342
Predatory pricing 344
Price leader 341
Prisoners’ dilemma 339
Resource similarity 348
Tacit collusion 339
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 Explain the differences between tacit and explicit collusion.
	 2.	 Name and describe the five factors that make an industry particularly con-
ducive to collusion.
	 3.	 Some countries’ competition and antitrust policies are pro-competition and 
pro-consumer, whereas other countries’ policies are pro-incumbent and 
pro-producer. How do they differ?
	 4.	 Suppose in Country A, a widget firm has absorbed all of its fixed costs 
(costs that do not change with the level of output such as rent), and now all 
additional costs are only variable costs—costs that do vary with the level 
of output such as raw materials. In Country A, the price was enough to 
cover both its fixed cost of $100 and variable cost of $10 and provide an 
additional profit of $10. It sold only one for a price of $120. Suppose the 
widget firm received an order from Country B for one widget and indicated 
that it would pay $20—enough to cover the variable cost of $10 and provide 
a $10 profit. If the widget firm agrees, it will have total costs for the two 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 11   Managing Global Competitive Dynamics	
359
widgets (one sold in Country A and one sold in Country B) of $100 fixed 
costs plus $20 variable cost—i.e., an average total cost for two units of $60. 
If it sells the widget to Country B for $20, will it be selling it above or below 
cost? Explain.
	 5.	 Use your own examples to identify how resources and capabilities affect 
competitive dynamics.
	 6.	 ON CULTURE: How do a firm’s corporate culture and organization affect its 
ability to engage in competitive actions?
	 7.	 Name and describe three drivers for counterattacks.
	 8.	 Military terminology and strategy are often used in dealing with global com-
petitors. In your opinion, is there any risk in doing so? Is there a risk in 
failing to do so? Why?
	 9.	 Under what conditions may a firm assume a defender strategy?
	 10.	 Under what conditions may a firm adopt an extender strategy?
	 11.	 What criteria may induce a firm to choose a dodger strategy over a contender 
strategy, and vice versa?
	 12.	 Do you support or oppose antidumping restrictions? Why?
	 13.	 Using the United States as a case study, describe four arguments that man-
agers may make regarding antitrust law.
	 14.	 Using Peng Atlas Map 3.1, in your option would it be easier or more difficult 
to engage in competitive actions in those countries that are at the bottom? 
	 15.	 As part of your firm’s strategy to gain competitive advantage, it wants to 
cut prices by looking for alternate locations in which to manufacture and 
market its products. You are part of a committee attempting to select a new 
manufacturing location. Would the information in PengAtlas Map 3.4 or 
3.5 be most relevant? Based on your choice, what will your committee rec-
ommend and why? 
C r i t i c a l  D i s c u s s i o n  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 ON ETHICS: As a CEO, you feel that the price war in your industry is kill-
ing profits for all firms. However, you have been warned by corporate 
lawyers not to openly discuss pricing with rivals, whom you know person-
ally because you went to school with them. How would you signal your 
intentions?
	 2.	 ON ETHICS: As a CEO, you are concerned that your firm and the industry 
in your country are being devastated by foreign imports. Trade lawyers sug-
gest filing an antidumping case against leading foreign rivals and assure you 
a win. Would you file an antidumping case? Why or why not?
	 3.	 ON ETHICS: As part of a feint attack, your firm (firm A) announces that in 
the next year, it intends to enter country X, where the competitor (firm B) 
is strong. Your firm’s real intention is to march into country Y, whereby B is 
weak. There is actually no plan to enter X. However, in the process of trying 
to “fool” B, customers, suppliers, investors, and the media are also being 
intentionally misled. What are the ethical dilemmas here? Do the pros of 
this action outweigh its cons?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

360	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
G l o b a l  A c t i o n 
	 1.	 An element of understanding global competitive dynamics is to assess the 
industry concentration of different industries. To accomplish this, the per-
centage of overall industry sales coming from the largest manufacturing 
companies in an industry can be used as a proxy. Based on this approach, 
categorize the following four industries from most to least concentrated 
by using the sales of the top four companies in the report you locate on 
globalEDGE: aerospace and defense, beverages, chemicals, and food. Which 
countries are represented across these four industries? What insights con-
cerning competitive dynamics in each industry can your evaluation provide?
	 2.	 The structure of international trade and tariff systems is highly complex. 
To maintain order, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Devel-
opment (UNCTAD) has developed a coding system that categorizes the 
different trade control measures that may be required when conducting 
business internationally. Find this coding system on globalEDGE and 
then outline the nature of the main categories included.
V i d e o  C a s e
After watching the video on US-China trade issues, discuss the following:
	 1.	 How are consumers affected by the Chinese tire dumping and the subse-
quent US tariffs?
	 2.	 How would you describe the competitive dynamics between China and 
the United States?
	 3.	 How might China and the United States signal their intention to cooperate 
in order to reduce competitive intensity?
	 4.	 Is China simply a hypercompetitor rather than a dumper?
	 5.	 Are antidumping laws effective?
The arrival of Hong Kong Disneyland in 2005 caused 
many pundits to predict the demise of Hong Kong’s 
homegrown amusement park, Ocean Park. Sever-
al of Disney’s characters, such as Mickey Mouse, 
Donald Duck, and Goofy, were household names all 
over the world. With its legendary “Imagineering,” 
Disney was cranking out new animated characters 
that debuted in movies, making them well-known 
by the time visitors encountered them in Disney 
parks.
In comparison, few people outside of Hong Kong 
had even heard of Ocean Park. Founded in 1977, Ocean 
Park had been the only amusement park in town. The 
lack of competition did not push it to strengthen its 
brand image, symbolized by its Seahorse logo. The 
nonsmiling seahorse was far from warm and cuddly to 
the impressionable younger customers—it was hard 
for children to imagine snuggling with a seahorse. “You 
could say that we had no brand image at all at that time,” 
conceded one manager. Hearing that Disney would 
EMERGING MARKETS: Ocean Park Fights Disneyland 
C l o s i n g  C a s e
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 11   Managing Global Competitive Dynamics	
361
be coming, Ocean Park introduced a sea lion named 
Whiskers as its new mascot. Whiskers was bigger and 
cuter with a big smile, triggering a much warmer and 
easily approachable feeling to customers. Soon after  
Whiskers was introduced, he became a house-
hold name in Hong Kong, particularly with children 
and families. In addition to stronger brand building, 
Ocean Park also geared up to prepare for Disney’s 
onslaught by installing new attractions, upgrading ex-
isting rides, and enhancing interactive activities with 
animals (including Hong Kong’s only pandas). Yet, the 
dazzling commencement ceremony of Hong Kong 
Disneyland made Ocean Park look relatively tired  
and dated by comparison.
Most local people were sympathetic to Ocean 
Park, as it seemed like a classic David versus Goli-
ath competition. Ocean Park, the clear underdog, had 
become a fixture of Hong Kong’s cultural heritage. 
Disneyland, playing the part of Goliath, represented 
the quintessential multinational giant set out to de-
stroy the local icon. But the fact was that despite some 
improvement, Ocean Park was beginning to look and 
feel tired and shabby, and its attractions paled when 
compared with the glitz and glamour of Disney. Would 
Ocean Park be able to survive?
While Ocean Park did have thrill rides, its primary 
focus was on nature and wildlife with many animal-
related activities. Its Ocean Theater staged dolphin 
and sea lion shows. Its world-class Atoll Reef, Shark 
Aquarium, Bird Aviary, and Pacific Pier gave visitors 
opportunities to view wild animals and beautiful scen-
ery up-close—a rarity in urban Hong Kong. In addition, 
Ocean Park had distinct Chinese characteristics that 
reflected its roots in Hong Kong.
“The only way we can survive is to make our 
park world class,” stated Allan Zeman, Ocean Park’s 
Board Chairman. Early on, Ocean Park made a clear 
decision that it would not try to beat Disneyland at 
its own game. Zeman stated: “We do not want to try 
to ‘out-Disney’ Disney.” The result was an ambitious 
$700 million* master plan, including schemes for a 
new roller coaster that would be operating by 2012, 
a subzero Ice Palace, and a 7.6-million liter aquarium 
with an underwater restaurant. An extra 33 animal 
species would be brought in, and the number of rides 
doubled to 70. Ocean Park hoped to position itself as a 
world-class marine-based attraction with real animals 
in this ambitious overhaul. It would further strength-
en its core competencies in “real” nature rather in 
contrast to Disney’s strengths in cartoon characters, 
castles, virtual reality, and fantasy. It was hoped that 
Ocean Park could differentiate itself more clearly from 
Disneyland. However, the huge $700 million invest-
ment would put a severe financial burden on Ocean 
Park as half of the investment would come from 
bank loans. Ocean Park’s profit in 2005 was only 
$15 million. Despite the high cost of the redevelop-
ment plan, management kept Ocean Park’s admission 
fee at 30% lower than Disney’s: $36 versus $51 for 
adults in 2011.
To boost attendance of local visitors, Ocean Park 
introduced an annual pass with unlimited admission 
for an entire year. It hoped that annual pass holders 
might also bring along other visitors. Besides the new 
pricing campaign, seasonal holiday themes became 
another field of battle between Ocean Park and Hong 
Kong Disneyland. This battle highlighted the different 
approaches taken by East and West. For instance, in 
the Halloween of 2009, a creative campaign was laid 
out. While Hong Kong Disneyland was fashioning a sin-
ister, dark world, like the one in Hollywood blockbust-
ers, Ocean Park tapped into the local psyche, derived 
from old tales like the madness at the high street police 
station and the long-haired girl who was said to haunt 
a university laboratory. There was a clear contrast be-
tween Ocean Park that played the Hong Kong card and 
Disneyland that deployed strong Western elements.
* While Hong Kong uses the Hong Kong dollar, all monetary units in this 
case have been converted to the US dollar. At the time of this case, ap-
proximately exchange rate was HK$7.8 5 US$1.
Panorama Media (Beijing) Ltd./Alamy Limited
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

362	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
By 2010, Ocean Park had not only overcome 
Disney’s challenges, but had even managed to turn 
a threat into an opportunity. Far from being the death 
knell as predicted by many analysts, Disney’s arrival in 
Hong Kong had been a boon for Ocean Park. Disney’s 
opening had spurred Ocean Park into action with a 
dramatic turnaround. In 2010, Ocean Park achieved 
the highest recorded attendance (5.1 million) in its his-
tory, surpassing Disneyland’s 5 million visitors. Some 
commentators suggested that Ocean Park was a 
bigger benefactor from Disneyland than was Disney 
itself. The opening of Disneyland had rejuvenated lo-
cal interest in amusement parks. Furthermore, Hong 
Kong Disneyland increased the number of tourists 
from China and Southeast Asia to Hong Kong—
particularly families interested in amusement parks. 
In addition to seeing Disney, it was natural for them 
to want to see Ocean Park. As a result, Ocean Park 
enjoyed increasing profits, while Hong Kong Disney-
land struggled by missing attendance goals and facing 
doubtful profitability.
Case Discussion Questions:
	 1.	 Why was Ocean Park able to turn a threat into an 
opportunity?
	 2.	 Ocean Park made the decision not to compete 
head-to-head with Disneyland. Will this strategy 
always work when local companies face multina-
tional giants? Explain.
	 3.	 How can Ocean Park further capitalize on  
Disneyland’s presence? (Hint: Check out how 
other parks surrounding Disney, such as Sea 
World and Universal Studios, survive and thrive 
in Anaheim, California, and Orlando, Florida.)
	 4.	 How can Hong Kong Disneyland turn around its 
lackluster performance?
Sources: This case was written by Professor Michael N. Young (Hong Kong Baptist University). © Michael N. Young. Reprinted with permission.
[Journal acronyms] AMJ—Academy of Management Journal; AMR—
Academy of Management Review; BW—BusinessWeek (before 2010) or 
Bloomberg Businessweek (since 2010); HBR—Harvard Business Review; 
JEP—Journal of Economic Perspectives; JIBS—Journal of International 
Business Studies; JWB—Journal of World Business; SMJ—Strategic Man-
agement Journal
1 L. Capron & O. Chatain, 2008, Competitors’ resource-oriented 
strategies, AMR, 33: 97–121; K. Coyne & J. Horn, 2009, Predicting 
your competitors’ reaction, HBR, April: 90–97; N. Kumar, 2006, 
Strategies to fight low-cost rivals, HBR, December: 104–112; W. Tsai, 
K. Su, & M. Chen, 2011, Seeing through the eyes of a rival, AMJ, 
54: 761–778.
2 G. Markman, P. Gianiodis, & A. Buchholtz, 2009, Factor-market 
rivalry, AMR, 34: 423–441; V. Rindova, M. Becerra, & I. Contardo, 
2004, Enacting competitive wars, AMR, 29: 670–686.
3 J. Baker, 1999, Developments in antitrust economics, JEP, 13:  
181–194. 
4 S. Brenner, 2011, Self-disclosure at international cartels, JIBS, 
42: 221–234; Y. Zhang & J. Gimeno, 2010, Earnings pressure and 
competitive behavior, AMJ, 53: 743–768.
5 United States et al. v. AT&T Inc. et al., 2011, Second amended com-
plaint (p. 17), September 30, Washington, DC: US District Court for 
the District of Columbia.
6 M. Semadeni, 2006, Minding your distance, SMJ, 27: 169–187.
7 M. Benner, 2007, The incumbent discount, AMR, 32: 703–720; 
C. Hill & F. Rothaermel, 2003, The performance of incumbent firms 
in the face of radical technological innovation, AMR, 28: 257–274.
8 J. Barney, 2002, Gaining and Sustaining Competitive Advan- 
­tage (p. 359), Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
9   M. Chen, 1996, Competitor analysis and interfirm rivalry (p. 106), 
AMR, 21: 100–134.
10 J. Anand, L. Mesquita, & R. Vassolo, 2009, The dynamics of multi-
market competition in exploration and exploitation activities, AMJ, 
52: 802–821; H. Greve, 2008, Multimarket contact and sales growth, 
SMJ, 29: 229–249; Z. Guedri & J. McGurie, 2011, Multimarket com-
petition, mobility barriers, and firm performance, JMS, 48: 857–890; 
J. Prince & D. Simon, 2009, Multimarket contact and service quality, 
AMJ, 52: 336–354.
11 M. Semadeni, 2006, Minding your distance, SMJ, 27: 169–187; 
T. Yu, M. Subramanian, & A. Cannella, 2009, Rivalry deterrence in 
international markets, AMJ, 52: 127–147.
12 G. Clarkson & P. Toh, 2010, “Keep out” signs, SMJ, 31: 1202–1225.
13 G. Kilduff, H. Elfenbein, & B. Staw, 2010, The psychology of ri-
valry, AMJ, 53: 943–969; R. S. Livengood & R. Reger, 2010, That’s 
our turf! AMR, 35: 48-66.
14 J. Immelt, V. Govindarajan, & C. Trimble, 2009, How GE is dis-
rupting itself, HBR, October: 56–65.
15 E. Graham & D. Richardson, 1997, Issue overview (p. 5), 
in E. Graham & D. Richardson (eds.), Global Competition Policy, 
Washington: Institute for International Economics.
16 Economist, 2009, The unkindest cuts, August 22: 68.
17 R. Lipstein, 1997, Using antitrust principles to reform antidump-
ing law (p. 408, original italics), in E. Graham & D. Richardson 
(eds.), Global Competition Policy, Washington: Institute for Interna-
tional Economics.
18 OECD, 1996, Trade and Competition: Frictions After the Uruguay 
Round (p. 18), Paris: OECD.
N O T E S
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 11   Managing Global Competitive Dynamics	
363
19 S. Marsh, 1998, Creating barriers for foreign competitors, SMJ, 
19: 25–37.
20 D. Sirmon, S. Gove, & M. Hitt, 2009, Resource management in 
dynamic competitive rivalry, AMJ, 51: 919–935.
21 H. Ndofor, D. Sirmon, & X. He, 2011, Firm resources, competitive 
actions, and performance, SMJ, 32: 640–657.
22 M. Chen, H. Lin, & J. Michel, 2010, Navigating in a hypercompeti-
tive environment, SMJ, 31: 1410–1430; G. Vroom & J. Gimeno, 2007, 
Ownership form, managerial incentives, and the intensity of rivalry, 
AMJ, 50: 901–922.
23 J. Boyd & R. Bresser, 2008, Performance implications of delayed 
competitive responses, SMJ, 29: 1077–1096; B. Connelly, L. Tihanyi, 
S. T. Certo, & M. Hitt, 2010, Marching to the beat of different drum-
mers, AMJ, 53: 723–742; V. Rindova, W. Ferrier, & R. Wiltbank, 2010, 
Value from gestalt, SMJ, 31: 1474–1497.
24 B. Golden & H. Ma, 2003, Mutual forbearance, AMR, 28: 479–493; 
A. Kalnins, 2004, Divisional multimarket contact within and between 
multiunit organizations, AMJ, 47: 117–128.
25 Chen, 1996, Competitor analysis and interfirm rivalry (p. 107). See 
also W. Desarbo, R. Grewal, & J. Wind, 2006, Who competes with whom?, 
SMJ, 27: 101–129; L. Fuentelsaz & J. Gomez, 2006, Multipoint competition, 
strategic similarity, and entry into geographic markets, SMJ, 27: 477–499.
26 M. Chen, K. Su, & W. Tsai, 2007, Competitive tension, AMJ, 
50: 101–118; T. Yu & A. Cannella, 2007, Rivalry between multinational 
enterprises, AMJ, 50: 665–686.
27 W. C. Kim & R. Mauborgne, 2005, Blue Ocean Strategy, Boston: 
Harvard Business School Press.
28 E. Rose & K. Ito, 2008, Competitive interactions, JIBS, 39: 864–879.
29 N. Dawar & T. Frost, 1999, Competing with giants, HBR, March: 
119–129.
30 R. Griffin & M. Pustay, 2003, International Business, 3rd ed. (p. 241), 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
31 J. Stiglitz, 2002, Globalization and Its Discontent (pp. 172–173), New 
York: Norton.
32 R. D’Aveni, G. Dagnino, & K. Smith, 2010. The age of temporary 
advantage, SMJ, 31: 1371–1385.
33 J. Clougherty, 2005, Antitrust holdup source, cross-national insti-
tutional variation, and corporate political strategy implications for 
domestic mergers in a global context, SMJ, 26: 769–790.
34 R. D’Aveni, 1994, Hypercompetition, New York: Free Press.
35 E. Rockefeller, 2007, The Antitrust Religion, Washington: Cato 
Institute.
36 C. Fishman, 2006, The Wal-Mart Effect, New York: Penguin.
37 M. Czinkota & M. Kotabe, 1997, A marketing perspective of the 
US International Trade Commission’s antidumping actions (p. 183), 
JWB, 32: 169–187.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 
12 
Bloomberg/Getty Images
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
	 12-1	 define alliances and acquisitions.
	 12-2	 articulate how institutions and resources 
influence alliances and acquisitions.
	12-3	 describe how alliances are formed.
	12-4	 outline how alliances are evolved and 
dissolved.
	12-5	 discuss how alliances perform.
	12-6	 explain why firms undertake acquisitions.
	 12-7	 understand why acquisitions often fail.
	12-8	 participate in two leading debates concerning 
alliances and acquisitions.
	12-9	 draw implications for action.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Making Alliances  
and Acquisitions Work
Today, climbers can have 3G access on Mount Everest 
to brag about their experience on top of the world. 
However, not many people know that it is a Nordic 
company providing this service in such an alien environ-
ment. The company is TeliaSonera, which provides tele-
communications services in a wide geographic area, 
from Nordic countries to Nepal, including the emerging 
and highly valued Eurasian markets. TeliaSonera is the 
fifth largest telecom operator in Europe. It has opera-
tions in Azerbaijan, Belarus, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, 
Georgia, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Moldova, Nepal, 
Norway, Russia, Spain, Sweden, Tajikistan, Turkey, 
Ukraine, and Uzbekistan.
How could a Nordic company with roots in highly 
developed markets in Europe expand in such politically 
risky and institutionally ambiguous settings? Savvy use 
of alliances and acquisitions throughout Eurasia ap-
peared to be a key. Itself the result of the merger be-
tween Telia of Sweden and Sonera of Finland in 2002, 
TeliaSonera certainly understood the importance of al-
liances and acquisitions. Its alliances and acquisitions 
throughout Eurasia resulted in enviable performance 
in many host countries, often commanding either the 
number-one or number-two position shown in Table 12.1.
To overcome its liability of foreignness, TeliaSonera 
leveraged its decades of telecom expertise developed 
in Nordic countries in Eurasia. It was the world’s first 
operator of 4G networks first deployed in Europe. Al-
though it did not offer 4G in Eurasia, the generally better-
quality network investments provided TeliaSonera a 
leading edge in Eurasia compared to local competi-
tors. This high investment cost turned into a larger and 
more satisfied customer base, upgrading TeliaSonera 
into leading positions in most countries.
TeliaSonera faced certain challenges due to weak 
institutional settings, especially in former Soviet Union 
countries in Eurasia. Although each country was in 
a different phase of transition to become a market 
economy, the economic, legal, and regulatory systems 
were still highly bureaucratic and risky. The ambiguity 
in the institutional frameworks brings additional risks 
for businesses, significantly increasing the costs of 
investments. The telecom industry has further liabili-
ties in terms of heavy infrastructure spending and re-
lated fixed costs. TeliaSonera’s success in its Eurasia 
expansion was largely due to its utilization of strong 
business and government ties that had been devel-
oped over decades throughout the company’s (and its 
predecessors’) history in the region.
In addition to the challenges, the markets in emerg-
ing economies in Eurasia presented many opportuni-
ties. In contrast to Europe, fixed landlines were not as 
developed in Eurasia. This, in turn, made these coun-
tries rely more on mobile networks, which meant a 
O p e n i n g  C a s e
Emerging Markets: TeliaSonera’s Alliances and Acquisitions in Eurasia
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

366	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
jump into a higher technology for consumers in Eurasia. 
Moreover, mobile network penetration was lower in 
Eurasia than in TeliaSonera’s mature markets, thus 
offering a great deal of potential for TeliaSonera. There 
were fewer competitors, which enabled TeliaSonera to 
attain higher margins.
Another significant aspect of market conditions 
is the expanding and younger population in Eurasia, 
in contrast to the stagnant and older population in 
Europe. Eurasia thus provides enormous growth op-
portunities for TeliaSonera. Moreover, improved mac-
roeconomic situations and economic growth led to 
strong subscription intake, which increased revenues 
by 16% in 2010.
Nepal is an interesting case study for TeliaSonera’s 
challenges in Eurasia. After TeliaSonera’s acquisition 
of 80% equity of Nepalese youth brand MeroMobile 
in 2008, the start-up company, which was now called 
Ncell, grew into a GSM (global system for mobile com-
munications) leader in the whole country. However, 
the road to success had serious difficulties. There 
was an ongoing political and security crisis involving 
terrorist attacks and union strikes, which negatively 
affected multinationals. TeliaSonera contributed to 
the efforts to overcome such host-country difficulties 
by offering world-class technologies to this country 
traditionally suffering from poor telecommunica-
tions and by generating local jobs and employment 
opportunities. The base stations (cell transmission 
towers) increased from 300 to 1,500 in three years. 
As a result, the percentage of the population covered 
by mobile TeliaSonera networks increased from 44% 
to 80%. Another significant contributor was the use 
of local employees. Other than employing 25 expatri-
ates, Ncell created 500 solid jobs for locals in a variety 
of positions.
TeliaSonera’s operations in Eurasia aimed to be 
the trendsetter in these highly dynamic and low-
penetration markets. For example, its alliance with 
a local player, Kcell (in which TeliaSonera held a 51% 
share), was the first company to launch GPRS tech-
nologies that provided the people of Kazakhstan the 
opportunity to access mobile Internet, WAP, and MMS 
services. Kcell owed its reputation to providing the 
best network coverage and also distribution systems 
in the whole country. There was also a great potential 
for mobile data in Kazakhstan due to the young and 
dynamic population. Already 8% of total Kcell rev-
enues in Kazakhstan came from mobile data in Kcell.
Sources: This case was written by Canan Mutlu (University of Texas 
at Dallas) under the supervision of Professor Mike Peng. It was based 
on publicly available information and press releases of TeliaSonera. The 
following sources were especially helpful: (1) TeliaSonera CEO’s speech, 
Annual General Shareholders’ Meeting, April 6, 2011; (2) TeliaSonera 
Annual Report 2010.
Table 12.1
TeliaSonera’s Operations in Eurasia
Country
Population
GDP Growth 
(projected-2011)
Brand name
TeliaSonera 
ownership
Market 
position
Subscription  
rate
Market share
Azerbaijan
9 million
2.8%
Azercell
  51.3%
1
4 million
55%
Georgia
4.4 million
5.5%
Geocell
100.0%
1
2 million
44%
Kazakhstan
16.5 million
5.9%
Kcell
51%
1
9 million
50%
Moldova
3.6 million
4.5%
Moldcell
100%
2
907,000
32%
Nepal
28.5 million
4.5%
Ncell
80.0%
2
4.1 million
42%
Russia
141.9 million
4.8%
MegaFon
43.8%
2
57 million
26%
Tajikistan
7.1 million
5.8%
Tcell
60%
1
1.7 million
36%
Turkey
73.7 million
4.6%
Turkcell
38%
1
34 million
55%
Uzbekistan
27.8 million
7%
Ucell
94%
2
7 million
32%
Source: www.teliasonera.com.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 12   Making Alliances and Acquisitions Work	
367
Why did TeliaSonera enter Eurasian markets with alliances and acquisitions? The 
alternative would be to build greenfield businesses. How did TeliaSonera use 
alliances and acquisitions to navigate the complex waters (and airwaves) there? 
To offer wireless service in the Himalayas, where population (and thus revenue 
base) is small and physical requirements for hardware are punishing, is technologi-
cally and physically challenging. Then one can add the institutional intricacies of the 
changing rules of the game in many countries in Eurasia. How could TeliaSonera 
emerge to become a market leader in such diverse markets? These are some of 
the key questions driving this chapter. Alliances and acquisitions are two major 
strategies for growth used by firms around the world, thus necessitating our atten-
tion.1 This chapter first defines alliances and acquisitions, followed by a discussion 
of how institution-based and resource-based views shed light on these topics. We 
then discuss the formation, evolution, and performance of alliances and acquisi-
tions. Finally, we introduce two leading debates and discuss some tips on manag-
ing alliances and acquisitions.
12-1 Defining Alliances and Acquisitions
Strategic alliances are voluntary agreements of cooperation between firms.2 
Figure 12.1 illustrates this further, depicting alliances as degrees of compromise 
between pure market transactions and acquisitions. Contractual (non-equity-
based) alliances are associations between firms that are based on contracts 
and do not involve the sharing of ownership. They include co-marketing, re-
search and development (R&D) contracts, turnkey projects, strategic suppliers, 
strategic distributors, and licensing/franchising. Equity-based alliances, on the 
other hand, are based on ownership or financial interest between the firms. 
They include strategic investment (one partner invests in another) and cross-
shareholding (each partner invests in the other). Equity-based alliances also 
include joint ventures (JVs), which involve the establishment of a new legally 
independent entity (in other words, a new firm) whose equity is provided by two 
or more partners.
An acquisition is a transfer of the control of operations and management from 
one firm (target) to another (acquirer), the former becoming a unit of the latter. 
For example, Volvo is now a unit of China’s Geely. A merger is the combination 
Learning Objective
Define alliance and acquisition.
12-1
Strategic alliance
A voluntary agreement of 
cooperation between firms.
Contractual (non-equity-
based) alliances
Associations between firms that 
are based on contracts and do not 
involve the sharing of ownership.
Equity-based alliances
Alliances based on ownership 
or financial interest between the 
firms.
Strategic investment
One firm investing in another 
as a strategic investor.
Cross-shareholding
Both firms investing in each 
other to become cross-
shareholders.
Acquisition
A transfer of the control of 
operations and management 
from one firm (target) to another 
(acquirer), the former becoming 
a unit of the latter.
Merger
The combination of operations 
and management of two firms 
to establish a new legal entity.
Joint
ventures
Cross-
shareholding
Strategic
investment
Strategic
supplier
Strategic
distributor
Licensing/
franchising
Turnkey
project
Contractual (non-equity-based) alliances
Equity-based alliances
R&D
contract
Co-
marketing
Market
transactions
Acquisitions
Figure 12.1
The Variety of Strategic Alliances
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

368	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
of operations and management of two firms to establish a new legal entity. For 
instance, the merger between South African Brewery and Miller Beer resulted in 
SABMiller.
Although the phrase “mergers and acquisitions” (M&As) is often used, in 
reality, acquisitions dominate the scene. Only approximately 3% of cross-border 
M&As are mergers. Even many so-called “mergers of equals” turn out to be one 
firm taking over another (such as DaimlerChrysler). Because the number of 
“real” mergers is very low, for practical purposes, we can use the two terms, 
“M&As” and “acquisitions,” interchangeably. Specifically, we focus on cross-
border (international) M&As, whose various types are illustrated by Figure 12.2. 
Cross-border activities represent approximately 30% of all M&As, and M&As 
represent the largest proportion (about 70%) of foreign direct investment (FDI) 
flows.
12-2 Institutions, Resources, Alliances,  
and Acquisitions
What drives alliances? What drives acquisitions? The institution-based and 
resource-based views shed considerable light on these important questions (see 
Figure 12.3). The institution-based view suggests that, as rules of the game, in-
stitutions affect how a firm chooses between alliances and acquisitions in terms 
of its strategy. However, rules are not made just for one firm. The resource-based 
view argues that, although a number of firms may be governed by the same set of 
rules, some firms, such as TeliaSonera (see the Opening Case), excel more than 
others because of the differences in firm-specific capabilities that make alliances 
and acquisitions work.
Learning Objective
Articulate how institutions and 
resources influence alliances 
and acquisitions.
12-2
Consolidation
(equal mergers)
Cross-border
M&As
Statutory merger
(only one
ﬁrm survives)
Acquisition
of a foreign
afﬁliate
Acquisition
of a
local ﬁrm
Mergers
(about 3% of
M&A cases)
Acquisitions
(about 97%
of M&A cases)
Acquisition
of a private
local ﬁrm
Privatization
(acquisition of a
public enterprise)
Figure 12.2
The Variety of Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 12   Making Alliances and Acquisitions Work	
369
2-2a Institutions, Alliances, and Acquisitions
Formal Institutions. Alliances and acquisitions function within formal legal and 
regulatory frameworks.3 The impact of these formal institutions can be found 
along two dimensions: (1) antitrust concerns and (2) entry mode requirements. 
First, many firms establish alliances with competitors. Cooperation between com-
petitors is usually suspected of at least some tacit collusion by antitrust authorities 
(see Chapter 11). However, because integration within alliances is usually not as 
tight as acquisitions (which would eliminate one competitor), antitrust authorities 
are more likely to approve alliances than they are acquisitions.4 For instance, the 
proposed merger between American Airlines and British Airways was blocked by 
both US and UK antitrust authorities. However, the two airlines were allowed to 
form an alliance that has eventually grown to become the multipartner Oneworld. 
In another example, the proposed merger between AT&T and T-Mobile (a wholly 
owned subsidiary of Deutsche Telekom in the United States) was torpedoed by the 
US antitrust authorities. But the US government blessed AT&T and T-Mobile’s col-
laboration in roaming.
Second, formal requirements on market entry modes affect alliances and 
acquisitions. In many countries, governments discourage or simply ban acquisi-
tions to establish wholly owned subsidiaries (WOS), thereby leaving some sort of 
alliances with local firms to be the only entry choice for FDI. For example, the 
Indian government dictates the maximum ceiling of foreign firms’ equity position 
in the retail sector to be 51%, forcing foreign entrants to set up alliances such as 
JVs with local firms. For example, Wal-Mart formed a 50/50 JV with Bharti—Bharti 
Wal-Mart Private Limited.
Recently, two trends have emerged concerning formal government policies 
on entry mode requirements. First is the general trend toward more liberal poli-
cies. Many governments (such as those in Mexico and South Korea) that histori-
cally only approved JVs have now allowed WOS as an entry mode. As a result, 
there is now a noticeable decline of JVs and a corresponding rise of acquisi-
tions in emerging economies.5 A second characteristic is that many governments 
still impose considerable requirements, especially when foreign firms acquire 
domestic assets. Only JVs are permitted in the strategically important Chinese 
Institution-Based View
- Formal institutions
(antitrust and entry mode concerns)
- Informal institutions
(normative and cognitive pillars)
Resource-Based View
- Value
- Rarity
- Imitability
- Organization
Alliances
and
Acquisitions
Figure 12.3
Institutions, Resources, Alliances, and Acquisitions
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

370	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
automobile assembly industry and the Russian oil industry, thus eliminating ac-
quisitions as a choice. US regulations only permit up to 25% of the equity of 
any US airline to be held by foreign carriers, and EU regulations limit non-EU 
ownership to 49% of EU-based airlines.
Informal Institutions. The first set of informal institutions centers on collective 
norms, supported by a normative pillar. One core idea of the institution-based 
view is that because firms act to enhance or protect their legitimacy, copying other 
reputable organizations—even without knowing the direct performance benefits 
of doing so—may be a low-cost way to gain legitimacy. Therefore, when competitors 
have a variety of alliances, jumping on the alliance “bandwagon” may be perceived 
as a cool way to join the norm as opposed to ignoring industry trends.6 When 
M&As are “in the air,” even managers with doubts about the wisdom of M&As 
may nevertheless be tempted to hunt for acquisition targets. Although not every 
alliance or acquisition decision is driven by imitation, this motivation seems to 
explain a lot of these activities. The flipside is that many firms rush into alliances 
and acquisitions without adequate due diligence (investigation prior to signing 
contracts) and then get burned big time. 7
A second set of informal institutions stresses the cognitive pillar, which centers 
on the internalized taken-for-granted values and beliefs that guide firm behav-
ior. BAE Systems (formerly British Aerospace) announced in the 1990s that all its 
future aircraft development programs would involve alliances, evidently believing 
that an alliance strategy was the right thing to do. Likewise, in the area of acquisi-
tions, Spain’s Santander is a firm believer. It has undertaken a total of $70 billion in 
acquisitions throughout Europe, Latin America, and now North America. Clearly, 
managers at BAE Systems and Santander believe that such alliances and acquisi-
tions, respectively, are the right (and sometimes the only) thing to do, which have 
become part of their informal norms and beliefs.
12-2b Resources and Alliances
How does the resource-based view, embodied in the VRIO framework, enhance 
our understanding of strategic alliances (Figure 12.3)?8
Value. Alliances must create value.9 The three global airline alliances—One-
world, SkyTeam, and Star Alliance—create value by reducing 18%–28% of the 
ticket costs booked on two-stage flights, compared with separate flights on the 
same route if these airlines were not allied.10 Table 12.2 identifies three broad cate-
gories of value creation in terms of how advantages outweigh disadvantages. First, 
Due diligence
Investigation prior to signing 
contracts.
Table 12.2
Strategic Alliances: Advantages and Disadvantages
Advantages
Disadvantages
Reducing costs, risks, and uncertainties
Choosing wrong partners
Accessing complementary assets and 
learning opportunities
Potential partner opportunism
Possibilities to use alliances as real options
Risks of helping nurture competitors 
(learning race)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 12   Making Alliances and Acquisitions Work	
371
Gas stations do everything they can to avoid heat 
and fire. But competition in gas stations operated by 
China Petroleum and Chemical Corporation (known as 
Sinopec) was heating up. This was triggered in 2011 
by a strategic alliance agreement signed between 
Sinopec and Yum! Brands, which is the number-one 
fast food chain in China, with about 3,500 Kentucky 
Fried Chicken (KFC) and 560 Pizza Hut restaurants 
in 650 Chinese cities. The agreement announced 
that KFC and Pizza Hut restaurants would open in-
side Sinopec’s gas stations. By revenue, Sinopec is 
the largest Chinese firm and the fifth largest in the 
world (with $273 billion sales in 2011). It operates over 
30,000 gas stations throughout China. As car owner-
ship takes off in China, the growth potential for both 
Sinopec and for Yum! Brands seems enormous.
Both companies expect this important coopera-
tion to have a significant and far-reaching impact 
on the development and strategic growth of 
their businesses. Through the complementary 
advantages of both companies, the combination 
of the strengths will offer better service for cus-
tomers, promote both brands, generate more 
economic returns, and improve their capabilities 
for sustainable development.
This sounds like a quote from the press release 
from Sinopec and Yum! Brands—except it is not (!).  
This is actually a quote from a strategic alliance 
announcement between Sinopec and Yum! Brands’ 
archrival, McDonald’s, which was signed in 2007. 
In their homeland, McDonald’s beat Yum! Brands, 
and KFC was struggling. But in China, McDonalds’ 
1,000 restaurants were no match to the much larger 
number and wider spread of KFC, Pizza Hut, and their 
Chinese cousin East Dawning, a new chain restaurant 
brand that only sells Chinese fast food. In an effort to 
catch up, McDonald’s set up an alliance with Sinopec.
As a result, Yum! Brands was a late mover in 
teaming up with Sinopec. Because the deal between 
Sinopec and McDonald’s was a 20-year deal, Yum! 
Brands restaurants could not displace McDonald’s at 
Sinopec gas stations. Yum! Brands could operate either 
in new Sinopec gas stations not having McDonald’s 
or in Sinopec gas stations alongside McDonald’s. In 
response to such “polygamy,” McDonald’s announced 
that it was the first “spouse,” with all the rights and 
privileges to pick high-priority locations. Emphasizing 
“healthy competition,” Yum! Brands highlighted its 
advantages in two ways: (1) Its multiple restaurant 
brands could cater to different demographic groups. 
(2) Its supply chain was far more widespread, thus en-
abling it to team with Sinopec to reach the far corners 
of inland China. As a late entrant into this tricky three-
way relationship, whether the Sinopec alliance can 
deliver the growth it seems to promise remains to be 
seen for Yum! Brands. Stayed tuned for the evolution 
of the relationship.
Kentucky Fried Chicken and Pizza Hut Team Up with Sinopec
E m e r g i n g  M a r k e t s  1 2 . 1
Sources: Based on (1) 21st Century Business Insights, 2011, KFC and McDonald’s fight over Chinese gas stations, December 16: 60–61; (2) Bloomberg, 
2011, McDonald’s no match for KFC in China as colonels rules fast food, January 26, www.bloomberg. com; (3) China Daily, 2011, Yum! Brands signs 
deal with Sinopec, November 23, www.chinadaily.com.cn; (4) Sinopec, 2007, The first “drive-through” restaurant and gas station complex is opened 
collaboratively by Sinopec and McDonald’s, January 19, english.sinopec.com.
alliances may reduce costs, risks, and uncertainties.11 As Google rises to preemi-
nence, Microsoft has set up alliances with Facebook, Yahoo!, Baidu, RIM, Nokia, 
and Firefox/Mozilla for its Bing search engine. Second, alliances allow firms such 
as McDonald’s, Yum! Brands, and Sinopec to tap into complementary assets of 
partners and facilitate learning (see Emerging Markets 12.1).12
Danny Lehman/Corbis; Björn Meyer/sitox/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

372	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
Finally, one important advantage of alliances lies in their value as real options.13 
Conceptually, an option is the right, but not the obligation, to take some action in 
the future. Technically, a financial option is an investment instrument permitting 
its holder, having paid for a small fraction of an asset (often known as a deposit), 
the right to increase investment to eventually acquire it if necessary. A real option 
is an investment in real operations as distinguished from financial capital.14 A real 
options view has two propositions:
  	 In the first phase, an investor makes a relatively small, initial investment to 
buy an option, which leads to the right to make a future investment without 
being obligated to do so.
  	 The investor then holds the option until a decision point arrives in the second 
phase, and then decides between exercising the option or abandoning it.
For firms interested in eventually acquiring other companies, but not sure about 
such moves, working together in alliances thus affords an insider view to evaluate 
the capabilities of partners. This is similar to trying on new shoes to see if they fit 
before buying them.15 Since acquisitions are not only costly but also very likely to 
fail, alliances permit firms to sequentially increase their investment should they de-
cide to pursue acquisitions. On the other hand, after working together as partners, 
if firms find that acquisitions are not a good idea, there is no obligation to pursue 
them. Overall, alliances have emerged as great instruments of real options because 
of their flexibility to sequentially scale up or scale down the investment.
On the other hand, alliances have a number of non-trivial drawbacks. First, 
there is always a possibility of being stuck with the wrong partner(s).16 Firms are 
advised to choose a prospective mate with caution. Yet, the mate should also be 
sufficiently differentiated to provide some complementary (non-overlapping) 
capabilities.17 Just like many individuals who have a hard time figuring out the 
true colors of their spouses before they get married, many firms find it difficult to 
evaluate the true intentions and capabilities of their prospective partners until it 
is too late.
Another disadvantage is potential partner opportunism. While opportunism is 
likely in any kind of economic relationship, the alliance setting may provide espe-
cially strong incentives for some (but not all) partners to be opportunistic. This is 
because cooperative relationships always entail some elements of trust, which may 
be easily abused.18 For example, Mikhail Fridman, chairman of the board of the 
50/50 TNK-BP JV and BP’s main JV partner in Russia, published an article in the 
Financial Times alleging that BP treated the Russians not as equal partners, but as 
lowly subjects.19
Finally, alliances, especially those between rivals, can be dangerous, because 
they may help competitors. By opening “doors” to outsiders, alliances make it easier 
to observe and imitate firm-specific capabilities. In alliances between competitors, 
there is a potential “learning race” in which partners aim to outrun each other by 
learning the “tricks” from the other side as fast as possible.
Rarity. The abilities to successfully manage interfirm relationships—often called 
relational (or collaborative) capabilities—may be rare. Managers involved in 
alliances require relationship skills rarely covered in the traditional business school 
curriculum that emphasizes competition as opposed to collaboration.20 To truly 
derive benefits from alliances, managers need to foster trust with partners, while at 
the same time being on guard against opportunism.21
Real option
An investment in real operations 
as opposed to financial capital.
Learning race
A situation in which alliance 
partners aim to outrun each 
other by learning the “tricks” 
from the other side as fast as 
possible.
Relational (or collaborative) 
capability
Ability to manage interfirm 
relationships.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 12   Making Alliances and Acquisitions Work	
373
As much as alliances represent a strategic and economic 
arrangement, they also constitute a social, psychological, 
and emotional phenomenon: words such as “courtship,” 
“marriage,” and “divorce” often surface. Given that the 
interests of partner firms do not fully overlap and are often 
in conflict, managers involved in alliances live a precarious 
existence, trying to represent the interests of their respective 
firms while attempting to make the complex relationship 
work. Given the general shortage of good relationship skills 
in the human population (remember: 50% of marriages 
in the United States fail), it is not surprising that sound 
relational capabilities to manage alliances successfully are in 
short supply.
Imitablility. The issue of imitability pertains to two levels: 
(1) the firm level and (2) the alliance level. First, as noted 
earlier, one firm’s resources and capabilities may be imitated 
by partners. For instance, in the late 1980s, McDonald’s set up 
a JV with the Moscow Municipality Government that helped it 
enter Russia. However, during the 1990s, the Moscow mayor 
set up a rival fast-food chain, The Bistro. The Bistro tried 
to eat McDonald’s’ lunch by replicating numerous products 
and practices. There was very little that McDonald’s could do 
because nobody sues the mayor in Moscow and hopes to win.
Another imitability issue refers to the trust and under-
standing among partners in successful alliances. Firms 
without such “chemistry” may have a hard time imitating 
such activities. CFM International, a JV set up by GE and 
Snecma to produce jet engines in France, has successfully operated for over 
30 years. Rivals would have a hard time imitating such a successful relationship.
Organization. Some successful alliance relationships are organized in a way that 
makes it difficult for others to replicate. There is much truth behind Tolstoy’s open-
ing statement in Anna Karenina: “All happy families are like one another; each 
unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.” Given the difficulty for individuals 
in unhappy marriages to improve their relationship (despite an army of profes-
sional marriage counselors, social workers, friends, and family members), it is not 
surprising that firms in unsuccessful alliances (for whatever reason) often find it 
exceedingly challenging, if not impossible, to organize and manage their interfirm 
relationships better.
12-2c Resources and Acquisitions
We now consider how the VRIO framework affects acquisitions.
Value. Do acquisitions create value?22 Overall, their performance record is sober-
ing. As many as 70% of acquisitions reportedly fail. On average, the performance 
of acquiring firms does not improve after acquisitions.23 Target firms, after being 
acquired and becoming internal units, often perform worse than when they were 
independent, stand-alone firms. The only identifiable group of winners is the 
Etienne DE MALGLAIVE/Gamma-Rapho/Getty Images
What factors or behaviors do you think 
have contributed to GE and Snecma’s 
“happy marriage”?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

374	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
shareholders of target firms, who may experience on average a 24% increase in 
their stock value during the period of the transaction. This increase is due to the 
acquisition premium, which is defined as the difference between the acquisition 
price and the market value of target firms.
Acquirers of US firms pay, on average, a 20% to 30% premium, and acquirers 
of EU firms pay a slightly lower premium (about 18%).24 Shareholders of acquiring 
firms experience a 4% loss in their stock value during the same period. The com-
bined wealth of shareholders of both acquiring and target firms is only marginally 
positive, less than 2%.25 Unfortunately, many M&As destroy value.
Rarity. For acquisitions to add value, one or all of the firms involved must have rare 
and unique skills that enhance the overall strategy. In 2004, an executive team at 
Lenovo, China’s leading PC maker, planned to acquire IBM’s PC division. Lenovo’s 
board raised a crucial question: If a venerable American technology company had 
failed to profit from the PC business, did Lenovo have what it took to do better 
when managing such a complex global business? The answer was actually “No.” 
The board gave its blessing to the plan only when the acquisition team agreed to 
acquire the business and to recruit top American executives.
Imitability. While many firms undertake acquisitions, a much smaller number of 
them have mastered the art of post-acquisition integration. Consequently, firms 
that excel in integration possess hard-to-imitate capabilities that are advantages 
in acquisitions. For example, each of Northrop’s acquisitions must conform 
to a carefully orchestrated plan of nearly 400 items, from how to issue press 
releases, to which accounting software to use. Unlike its bigger defense rivals, 
such as Boeing and Raytheon, Northrop thus far has not stumbled with any of 
its acquisitions.
Organization. Fundamentally, whether acquisitions add value boils down to how 
merged firms are organized to take advantage of the benefits while minimizing the 
costs. Pre-acquisition analysis often focuses on strategic fit, which is the effective 
matching of complementary strategic capabilities.26 Yet, many firms do not pay 
adequate attention to organizational fit, which is the similarity in cultures, systems, 
and structures. One of the crucial reasons that Nomura’s integration of Lehman 
Brothers’ assets and personnel is such a mess is because of the almost total lack 
of organizational fit between a hard-charging New York investment bank and a 
hierarchical Japanese firm that still largely practices lifetime employment (see the 
Closing Case).
12-3 Formation of Alliances
How are alliances formed? Figure 12.4 illustrates a three-stage model to address 
this question.27 In Stage One, a firm must decide whether growth can be achieved 
strictly through market transactions, acquisitions, or alliances.28 To grow by pure 
market transactions, the firm has to confront competitive challenges independently. 
This is highly demanding, even for resource-rich multinationals. As noted earlier 
in the chapter, acquisitions have some unique drawbacks, leading many managers 
to conclude that alliances are the way to go. For example, the Dallas-based Sabre 
Travel Network has used alliances to enter Australia, Bahrain, India, Israel, Japan, 
and Singapore.
Acquisition premium
The difference between the 
acquisition price and the market 
value of target firms.
Strategic fit
The effective matching of com-
plementary strategic capabilities.
Organizational fit
The similarity in cultures, 
systems, and structures.
Learning Objective
Describe how alliances are 
formed.
12-3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 12   Making Alliances and Acquisitions Work	
375
In Stage Two, a firm must decide whether to take a contract or an equity ap-
proach. As noted in Chapters 6 and 10, the choice between contract and equity is 
crucial. Table 12.3 identifies four driving forces. The first driving force is shared 
capabilities. The more tacit (that is, hard to describe and codify) the capabilities, 
the greater the preference for equity involvement. Although not the only way, the 
most effective way to learn complex processes is through learning by doing. One 
good example of this is learning to cook by actually cooking and not by simply 
Learning by doing
A way of learning, not by 
reading books but by engaging 
in hands-on activities.
Table 12.3
Equity-Based versus Non-Equity-Based Alliances
Driving forces
Equity-based alliances
Non-equity-based alliances
Nature of shared resources and 
capabilities (degree of tacitness)
High
Low
Importance of direct organizational 
monitoring and control
High
Low
Potential as real options
High (for possible upgrading to M&As)
High (for possible upgrading to  
equity-based relationships)
Influence of formal institutions
High (when required or encouraged by 
regulations)
High (when required or  
encouraged by regulations)
Licensing/franchising
Strategic supplier/distributor
Pursue
cooperative
interﬁrm
relationship
Mergers and
acquisitions
Market
transactions
Turnkey project
Contract
STAGE II
Contract
or equity?
STAGE I
To cooperate or
not to cooperate?
STAGE III
Specifying the
relationship
R&D contracts
Joint venture
Cross-shareholding
Equity
Strategic investment
Co-marketing
Figure 12.4
Alliance Formation
Source: Adapted from S. Tallman & O. Shenkar, 1994, A managerial decision model of international cooperative venture formation (p. 101), Journal of International 
Business Studies, 25(1): 91–113.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

376	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
reading cookbooks. Many business processes are the same way. A firm that wants to 
produce cars will find that the codified knowledge found in books or reports is not 
enough. Much tacit knowledge can only be acquired via learning by doing, prefer-
ably with experts (such as Toyota) as alliance partners.
A second driving force is the importance of direct monitoring and control. 
Equity relationships allow firms to have some direct control over joint activities on 
a continuing basis, whereas contractual relationships usually do not. In general, 
firms that fear their intellectual property may be expropriated prefer equity alli-
ances (and a higher level of equity).
A third driver is real options thinking. Some firms prefer to first establish con-
tractual relationships, which can be viewed as real options (or stepping stones) 
for possible upgrading into equity alliances should the interactions turn out to be 
mutually satisfactory.
Finally, the choice between contract and equity also boils down to institutional 
constraints. As noted earlier, some governments that are eager to help domestic 
firms climb the technology ladder either require or encourage the formation of  JVs 
between foreign and domestic firms. The Chinese auto industry is a case in point.
Eventually, in Stage Three, firms need to choose a specific format that is either 
equity-based or contractual (non-equity-based), depending on the choice made in 
Step Two. Figure 12.4 lists the different format options. Since Chapter 10 has already 
covered this topic as part of the discussion on entry modes, we will not repeat it here.
12-4 Evolution and Dissolution of Alliances
All relationships evolve—some grow, others fail.29 This section deals with two as-
pects of such evolution: (1) combating opportunism and (2) evolving from corpo-
rate marriage to divorce.
12-4a Combating Opportunism
The threat of opportunism looms large on the horizon. Most firms want to make 
their relationship work, but also want to protect themselves in case the other side 
is opportunistic. While it is difficult to completely eliminate opportunism, it is pos-
sible to minimize its threat by (1) walling off critical capabilities or (2) swapping 
critical capabilities through credible commitments.
First, both sides can contractually agree to wall off critical skills and technolo-
gies not meant to be shared. For example, GE and Snecma cooperated to build 
jet engines, yet GE was not willing to share its proprietary technology fully with 
Snecma. GE thus presented sealed “black box” components (the inside of which 
Snecma had no access to), while permitting Snecma access to final assembly. This 
type of relationship, in human marriage terms, is like couples whose premarital 
assets are protected by prenuptial agreements. As long as both sides are willing to 
live with these deals, these relationships can prosper.
The second approach, swapping skills and technologies, is the exact opposite of 
the first approach. Both sides not only agree not to hold critical skills and technolo-
gies back, but also make credible commitments to hold each other as a “hostage.” 
Motorola, for instance, licensed its microprocessor technology to Toshiba, which, 
in turn, licensed its memory chip technology to Motorola. Setting up such a recip-
rocal relationship may increase the incentives for both partners to cooperate.
Learning Objective
Outline how alliances are 
evolved and dissolved.
12-4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 12   Making Alliances and Acquisitions Work	
377
In human marriage terms, mutual “hostage taking” is similar to the following 
commitment: “Honey, I will love you forever. If I betray you, feel free to kill me. But 
if you dare to betray me, I’ll cut your head off!” To think slightly outside the box, 
the precarious peace during the Cold War can be regarded as a case of mutual 
“hostage taking” that worked. Because both the United States and Soviet Union 
held each other as a “hostage,” neither dared to launch a first nuclear strike. As 
long as the victim of the first strike had only one nuclear ballistic missile subma-
rine left (such as the American Ohio class or the Soviet Typhoon class), this single 
submarine would have enough retaliatory firepower to wipe the top 20 Soviet or 
US cities off the surface of earth, an outcome that neither of the two superpowers 
found acceptable. (See the movie The Hunt for Red October.) The Cold War did 
not turn hot, in part because of such a “mutually assured destruction” (MAD!) 
strategy—real military jargon.
Both of these approaches help minimize the threat of opportunism in alliances. 
Unfortunately, sometimes none of these approaches works and the relationship 
deteriorates, as shown next.
12-4b From Corporate Marriage to Divorce30
Alliances are often described as corporate marriages and, when terminated, as 
corporate divorces. Figure 12.5 portrays a dissolution model. To apply the metaphor 
of divorce, we focus on the two-partner alliance. Following the convention in research 
on human divorce, the party who begins the process of ending the alliance is labeled 
the “initiator,” and the other party is termed the “partner”—for lack of a better word.
The first phase is initiation. The process begins when the initiator starts feeling 
uncomfortable with the alliance (for whatever reason). Wavering begins as a quiet, 
unilateral process by the initiator. In the Danone-Wahaha case, Danone seemed 
to be the initiator. After repeated requests to modify Wahaha’s behavior failed, 
Figure 12.5
Alliance Dissolution
Reconciliation
Initiation
Mediation by Third Parties
Going Public
Last Minute Salvage
Uncoupling
Go Alone
New Relationship
Aftermath
Source: M. W. Peng & O. Shenkar, 2002, Joint venture dissolution as corporate divorce (p. 95), Academy of 
Management Executive, 16(2): 92–105.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

378	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
Danone began to escalate its demands. At that 
point, its display of discontent became bolder. Ini-
tially, Wahaha, the partner, might simply not have 
“gotten it.” The initiator’s “sudden” dissatisfaction 
may confuse the partner. As a result, initiation of-
ten leads to escalation.
The second phase is going public. The party 
that breaks the news first has a first-mover advan-
tage. By presenting a socially acceptable reason in 
favor of its cause, this party is able to win sympathy 
from key stakeholders, such as parent company 
executives, investors, and journalists. Not surpris-
ingly, the initiator is likely to go public first. Alter-
natively, the partner may pre-empt by blaming the 
initiator and establishing the righteousness of its 
position—this was exactly what Wahaha did. Even-
tually, both Danone and Wahaha were eager to air 
their grievances publicly.
The third phase is uncoupling. Like human divorce, alliance dissolution can 
be friendly or hostile. In uncontested divorces, both sides attribute the separation 
more to, say, a change in circumstances. For example, Eli Lilly and Ranbaxy phased 
out their JV in India and remained friendly with each other. In contrast, contested 
divorces involve one party accusing the other. The worst scenario is the “death by a 
thousand cuts” inflicted by one party at every turn. A case in point is the numerous 
lawsuits and arbitrations against each other filed in many countries by Danone and 
Wahaha, not only in France and China, but also in the British Virgin Islands, Italy, 
Sweden, and the United States.
The last phase is aftermath. Like most divorced individuals, most (but not 
all) “divorced” firms are likely to search for new partners. Understandably, the 
new alliance is often negotiated more extensively.31 One Italian executive report-
edly signed each of the 2,000 pages (!) of an alliance contract.32 However, excessive 
formalization may signal a lack of trust—in the same way that prenuptials may 
scare away some prospective human marriage partners.
12-5 Performance of Alliances
Alliance performance is important.33 Figure 12.6 illustrates four factors that 
may influence alliance performance: (1) equity, (2) learning and experience, 
(3) nationality, and (4) relational capabilities.
First, the level of equity may be crucial in how an alliance performs. A greater 
equity stake may mean that a firm is more committed, which is likely to result in 
higher performance. Second, whether firms have successfully learned from part-
ners is important when assessing alliance performance. Since learning is abstract, 
experience is often used as a proxy because it is relatively easy to measure.34 While 
experience certainly helps, its impact on performance is not linear. There is a limit 
beyond which further increase in experience may not enhance performance.35 
Third, nationality may affect performance. For the same reason that marriages are 
more stable when both parties have similar backgrounds, dissimilarities in national 
culture may create strains in alliances. Not surprisingly, international alliances 
Learning Objective
Discuss how alliances perform.
12-5
Bloomberg/Contributor/Getty Images
In your opinion, should Danone and/or Wahaha have 
behaved differently to bring a better resolution to 
their situation?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 12   Making Alliances and Acquisitions Work	
379
tend to have more problems than domestic ones. Finally, alliance performance may 
fundamentally boil down to soft, hard-to-measure relational capabilities. The art of 
relational capabilities, which are firm-specific and difficult to codify and transfer, 
may make or break alliances.
However, none of these factors asserts an unambiguous, direct impact on perfor-
mance.36 Research has found that they may have some correlations with performance. 
It would be naïve to think that any of these single factors would guarantee success. It 
is their combination that jointly increases the odds for the success of strategic alliances.
12-6 Motives for Acquisitions
What drives acquisitions? Table 12.4 shows three potential motives for acquisi-
tion: (1) synergistic, (2) hubristic, and (3) managerial motives. All three can be 
explained by the institution-based and resource-based views. From an institution-
based view, synergistic motives for acquisitions are often responses to formal insti-
tutional constraints and transitions that affect a company’s search for synergy.37 It 
is not a coincidence that the number of cross-border acquisitions has skyrocketed 
in the last two decades. This is the same period during which trade and investment 
barriers have gone down and FDI has risen (see Emerging Markets 12.1).
From a resource-based view, the most important synergistic rationale is to le-
verage superior resources.38 Indian firms’ cross-border acquisitions have primarily 
Learning Objective
Explain why firms undertake 
acquisitions.
12-6
Equity
Learning and experience
Strategic Alliance
Performance
Nationality
Relational capabilities
Figure 12.6
What Is Behind Alliance Performance?
Table 12.4
Motives for Acquisitions
Institution-based issues
Resource-based issues
Synergistic motives
  	 Respond to formal institutional constraints 
and transitions
  	 Leverage superior managerial capabilities
  	 Enhance market power and scale economies
  	 Access to complementary resources 
Hubristic motives
  	 Herd behavior—following norms and chasing 
fads of M&As
  	 Managers’ overconfidence in their capabilities
Managerial motives
  	 Self-interested actions such as empire-
building guided by informal norms and 
cognitions 
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

380	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
targeted high-tech and computer services in order to leverage their superior re-
sources in these industries. Finally, another motive is to gain access to complemen-
tary resources, as evidenced by Nomura’s interest in Lehman Brothers’ worldwide 
client base.39
While all the synergistic motives, in theory, add value, hubristic and manage-
rial motives reduce value. Hubris refers to overconfidence in one’s capabilities. 
Managers of acquiring firms make two strong statements. The first is “We can man-
age your assets better than you [target firm managers] can!” This was essentially 
what Brazilian executives at 3G Capital who took over Burger King told the for-
mer management team (see Emerging Markets 12.2). The second statement is even 
bolder. Given that purchasing a publicly listed firm requires paying an acquisition 
premium, managers of an acquiring firm essentially say, “We are smarter than the 
market!” To the extent that the capital market is efficient and that the market price 
of target firms reflects their intrinsic value, there is simply no hope to profit from 
Hubris
Overconfidence in one’s 
capabilities.
In 2010, 3G Capital of Brazil, a private equity firm, 
acquired the Miami-headquartered fast food chain 
Burger King for $3.3 billion. 3G Capital was supported 
by three well-known Brazilian investors: Jorge Paulo 
Lemann, Carlos Alberto Sicupira, and Marcel Telles. 
Lemann founded one of Brazil’s most successful in-
vestment banks, Banco de Investimentos Garantia, in 
the 1970s. Sicupira started in the 1980s at that bank 
and then grew a single Rio de Janeiro store into Lojas 
Americanas, one of Brazil’s biggest retail chains. In 
the 1980s, Telles, with Lemann and Sicupira, gained 
control of a Brazilian brewery that they grew into 
AmBev, which merged with Belgium’s InBev and ac-
quired America’s Anheuser-Busch.
In 2011, Alex Behring, a 3G Capital managing part-
ner, became Burger King’s chairman and CEO. Behring 
worked at GP Investmentos, a private equity firm that 
Sicupira founded. As a result, Brazilians quietly control 
and manage both Anheuser-Busch and Burger King, 
two iconic American brands.
As domestic competition in Brazil intensified, it be-
came tougher for Brazilian companies to grow through 
M&As locally. Therefore, they eyed overseas markets 
with a great deal of interest. Brazilian companies ac-
tive in overseas M&As include Gerdau (which bought 
Ameristeel); JBS-Friboi (which took over Pilgrim’s 
Pride); Petrobras (which acquired Pasadena Refinery 
and Cascade Field); WEG (which picked up Voltran and 
Zest Group); and Vale (which invested in White Plains 
and Fosfertil).
Burger King’s new management team must re-
vitalize the 12,000-store, 75-country chain that was 
a distant number two to McDonald’s. This would 
not be easy. Franchisees resisted the expensive 
face-lift recommended by Burger King. In an effort 
to boost sales, some stores in Virginia and Mary-
land started deliveries. The Latin American con-
nection could help, too. Burger King’s supply chain 
could benefit by procuring more meat and grain in 
South America. The fast-food chain could also ex-
pand across the continent. Two years after the 3G 
takeover, Burger King increased the number of 
restaurants it operated in Latin America by 6%, to  
about 1,200.
Brazil’s Whopper Deal
E m e r g i n g  M a r k e t s  1 2 . 2
Sources: Based on (1) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2010, An expensive face-lift on Burger King’s menu, October 11: 21–22; (2) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2012, 
Burger King: A home delivery program, January 23: 26; (3) F . Luzio, 2010, Brazil’s Whopper deal, Harvard Business Review, September 13: blogs.hbr.org.
Danny Lehman/Corbis; Björn Meyer/sitox/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 12   Making Alliances and Acquisitions Work	
381
such acquisitions. Even when we assume the capital market to be inefficient, it is 
still apparent that when the premium is too high, acquiring firms must have over-
paid. This attitude is especially dangerous when multiple firms are bidding for the 
same target. The winning acquirer may suffer from what is called the “winner’s 
curse” in auctions—the winner has overpaid. From an institution-based view, hu-
bristic motives are at play when managers join the acquisition bandwagon. The 
fact that M&As come in waves speaks volumes about such herd behavior.40 After a 
few first-mover firms start making some deals in the industry, waves of late movers, 
eager to catch up, may rush in, prompted by a “Wow! Get it!” mentality. Not surpris-
ingly, many of those deals turn out to be busts.
While the hubris motives suggest that some managers may unknowingly overpay 
for targets, some managers may knowingly overpay for targets. Such self-interested 
actions are fueled by managerial motives, defined as managers’ desire for power, 
prestige, and money, which may lead to decisions that do not benefit the firm over-
all in the long run. As a result, some managers may deliberately overdiversify their 
firms through M&As for such personal gains. These are known as agency problems 
(see Chapter 16 for details).
Overall, synergistic motives add value, and hubristic and managerial motives 
destroy value. They may simultaneously coexist. Emerging Markets 12.3 uses emerg-
ing multinationals as a new breed of cross-border acquirers to illustrate these 
dynamics. Next, we discuss the performance of M&As.
Managerial motives
Managers’ desire for power, 
prestige, and money, which may 
lead to decisions that do not 
benefit the firm overall in the 
long run.
Multinational enterprises (MNEs) from emerging 
economies, especially from China and India, have 
emerged as a new breed of acquirers around the 
world. Causing “oohs” and “ahhs,” they have grabbed 
media headlines and caused controversies. Anecdotes 
aside, are the patterns of these new global acquirers 
similar? How do they differ? Only recently has rigor-
ous academic research been conducted to allow for 
systematic comparison (Table 12.5).
Overall, China’s stock of outward foreign direct 
investment (OFDI) (1.5% of the worldwide total) is 
about three times India’s (0.5%). One visible similarity 
is that both Chinese and Indian MNEs seem to use 
M&As as their primary mode of OFDI. Throughout the 
2000s, Chinese firms spent $130 billion to engage in 
M&As overseas, whereas Indian firms made M&A 
deals worth $60 billion.
It is clear that MNEs from China and India have tar-
geted industries to support and strengthen their own 
most competitive industries at home. Given China’s 
prowess in manufacturing industries at home, Chinese 
firms’ overseas M&As have primarily targeted energy, 
minerals, and mining—crucial supply industries that 
feed their manufacturing operations. Indian MNEs’ 
world-class leadership position in high-tech and soft-
ware services is reflected in their interest in acquiring 
firms in these industries.
The geographic spread of these MNEs is indicative 
of the level of their capabilities. Chinese firms have un-
dertaken most of their deals in Asia, with Hong Kong 
being their most favorable location. In other words, 
the geographic distribution of Chinese M&As is not 
global; rather, it is quite regional. This reflects a relative 
lack of capabilities to engage in managerial challenges 
Emerging Acquirers from China and India
E m e r g i n g  M a r k e t s  1 2 . 3
Danny Lehman/Corbis; Björn Meyer/sitox/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

382	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
in regions distant from China, especially in more 
developed economies. Indian MNEs have primarily 
made deals in Europe, with the United Kingdom as 
the leading target country. For example, acquisitions 
made by Tata Motors (Jaguar and Land Rover) and Tata 
Steel (Corus Group) propelled Tata Group to become 
the number-one private-sector employer in the UK. 
Overall, Indian firms display a more global spread in 
their M&As, and a higher level of confidence and so-
phistication in making deals in developed economies.
From an institution-based view, the contrasts be-
tween the leading Chinese and Indian acquirers are 
significant. The primary M&A players from China are 
state-owned enterprises (SOEs), which have their own 
advantages (such as strong support from the Chinese 
government) and trappings (such as resentment and 
suspicion from host-country governments). The movers 
and shakers of overseas M&As from India are private 
business groups, which generally are not viewed with 
strong suspicion. The limited evidence suggests that 
M&As by Indian firms tend to create value for their 
shareholders. On the other hand, M&As by Chinese 
firms tend to destroy value for their shareholders—
indicative of potential hubris and managerial motives 
evidenced by empire building and agency problems.
Announcing high-profile deals is one thing, but 
completing them is another matter. Chinese MNEs 
have particularly poor records in completing the over-
seas acquisition deals they announce. Fewer than 
half (47%) of the acquisitions announced by Chinese 
MNEs were completed, which compares unfavor-
ably to Indian MNEs’ 67% completion rate. Chinese 
MNEs’ lack of ability and experience in due diligence 
and financing is one reason, but another reason is the 
political backlash and resistance they encounter, es-
pecially in developed economies. The 2005 failure of 
CNOOC’s bid for Unocal in the United States and the 
2009 failure of Chinalco’s bid for Rio Tinto’s assets in 
Australia are but two high-profile examples.
Even assuming successful completion, integra-
tion is a leading challenge during the post-acquisition 
phase. Both Chinese and Indian firms seem to suffer 
from these challenges. Tata, for example, was famously 
“clawed” by Jaguar. In general, acquirers from China 
and India have often taken the “high road” to acqui-
sitions, in which acquirers deliberately allow acquired 
target companies to retain autonomy, keep the top 
management intact, and then gradually encourage in-
teraction between the two sides. In contrast, the “low 
road” to acquisitions would be for acquirers to act 
quickly to impose their systems and rules on acquired 
target companies. Although the “high road” sounds 
noble, this is a reflection of these acquirers’ lack of in-
ternational management experience and capabilities.
Table 12.5
Comparing Cross-Border M&As Undertaken by Chinese and Indian MNEs
M&As undertaken by Chinese MNEs
M&As undertaken by Indian MNEs
Top target industries
Energy, minerals, and mining
High-tech and software services
Top target countries
Hong Kong
United Kingdom
Top target regions
Asia
Europe
Top acquiring companies involved
State-owned enterprises
Private business groups
% of successfully closed deals
47%
67%
Source: Extracted from S. Sun, M. W. Peng, B. Ren, & D. Yan, 2012, A comparative ownership advantage framework for cross-border M&As: The 
rise of Chinese and Indian MNEs, Journal of World Business, 47(1): 4–16.
Sources: Based on (1) Y. Chen & M. Young, 2010, Cross-border M&As by Chinese listed companies, Asia Pacific Journal of Management, 27: 523–539; 
(2) L. Cui & F. Jiang, 2010, Behind ownership decision of Chinese outward FDI, Asia Pacific Journal of Management, 27: 751–774; (3) P. Deng, 2009, 
Why do Chinese firms tend to acquire strategic assets in international expansion? Journal of World Business, 44: 74–84; (4) S. Gubbi, P. Aulakh, S. Ray, 
M. Sarkar, & R. Chittoor, 2010, Do international acquisitions by emerging economy firms create shareholder value? Journal of International Business 
Studies, 41: 397–418; (5) M. W. Peng, 2012, The global strategy of emerging multinationals from China, Global Strategy Journal, 2: 97-107; (6) M. W. Peng, 
2012, Why China’s investments aren’t a threat, Harvard Business Review, February: blogs.hbr.org; (7) H. Rui & G. Yip, 2008, Foreign acquisitions by 
Chinese firms, Journal of World Business, 43: 213–226; (8) S. Sun, M. W. Peng, B. Ren, & D. Yan, 2012, A comparative ownership advantage framework 
for cross-border M&As: The rise of Chinese and Indian MNEs, Journal of World Business, 47(1): 4–16.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 12   Making Alliances and Acquisitions Work	
383
12-7 Performance of Acquisitions
Why do as many as 70% of acquisitions reportedly fail?41 Problems can be identified 
in both pre- and post-acquisition phases (Table 12.6). During the pre-acquisition 
phase, because of executive hubris and/or managerial motives, acquiring firms may 
overpay for targets—in other words, they fall into a “synergy trap.” For example, in 
1998, when Chrysler was profitable, Daimler-Benz paid $40 billion, a 40% premium 
over its market value, to acquire it. Given that Chrysler’s expected performance 
was already built into its existing share price, at a zero premium, Daimler-Benz’s 
willingness to pay for such a high premium was indicative of (1) strong managerial 
capabilities to derive synergy, (2) high levels of hubris, (3) significant managerial 
self-interests, or (4) all of the above. As it turned out, by the time Chrysler was sold 
in 2007, it only fetched $7.4 billion, destroying four-fifths of the value. In another 
case, in 2010, Microsoft paid $8.5 billion to buy Skype, which was 400 times greater 
than Skype’s income. Although practically every reader of this book has heard 
about Skype, Skype has remained an underachiever. How many people have paid 
money to Skype each other? Not surprisingly, this acquisition, Microsoft’s biggest, 
raised a lot of eyebrows.
Another primary pre-acquisition problem is inadequate screening and failure 
to achieve strategic fit.42 In September 2008, Bank of America, in a hurry to make a 
deal, spent only 48 hours before agreeing to acquire Merrill Lynch for $50 billion. 
Not surprisingly, failure to do adequate homework (technically, due diligence) 
led to numerous problems centered on the lack of strategic fit. Consequently, this 
acquisition was labeled by the Wall Street Journal as “a deal from hell.”43
Acquiring international assets can be even more problematic because 
institutional and cultural distances can be even larger, and nationalistic concerns 
over foreign acquisitions may erupt (see the Closing Case). When Japanese firms 
acquired Rockefeller Center and movie studios in the 1980s and 1990s, the US 
media reacted with indignation. In the 2000s, when DP World of the United Arab 
Emirates and Huawei of China attempted to acquire US assets, they had to back off 
due to political backlash.
Numerous integration problems may surface during the post-acquisition 
phase.44 Organizational fit is just as important as strategic fit. Many acquiring firms 
do not analyze organizational fit with targets. For example, when Nomura decided 
to acquire Lehman Brothers’ assets in Asia and Europe in a lightning 24 hours, no 
consideration was given on the total lack of organizational fit between them. The 
Learning Objective
Understand why acquisitions 
often fail.
12-7
Table 12.6
Symptoms of Acquisition Failures
Problems for all M&As
Particular problems for cross-border M&As
Pre-acquisition:  
Overpayment for targets
  	 Managers overestimate their ability to 
create value
  	 Inadequate pre-acquisition screening
  	 Poor strategic fit
  	 Lack of familiarity with foreign cultures, 
institutions, and business systems
  	 Inadequate number of worthy targets
  	 Nationalistic concerns against foreign 
takeovers (political and media levels)
Post-acquisition:
Failure in integration
  	 Poor organizational fit
  	 Failure to address multiple stakeholder 
groups’ concerns
  	 Clashes of organizational cultures 
compounded by clashes of national cultures
  	 Nationalistic concerns against foreign 
takeovers (firm and employee levels)
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

384	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
result was a mess that knocked out 70% of Nomura’s stock market price (see the 
Closing Case). Firms may also fail to address the concerns of multiple stakehold-
ers, including job losses and diminished power (see Figure 12.7). Most firms focus 
on task issues, such as standardizing reporting, and pay inadequate attention to 
people issues, which typically results in low morale and high turnover.
In cross-border M&As, integration difficulties may be much worse because 
clashes of organizational cultures are compounded by clashes of national cultures.45 
Due to cultural differences, Chinese acquirers such as Geely often have a hard time 
integrating Western firms such as Volvo. But even when both sides are from the 
West, cultural conflicts may still erupt. After Alcatel acquired Lucent, the situation, 
in the words of Bloomberg Businessweek, became “almost comically dysfunctional.”46 
At an all-hands gathering at an Alcatel-Lucent European facility, employees threw 
fruits and vegetables at executives announcing another round of restructuring.
Although acquisitions are often the largest capital expenditures most firms ever 
make, they frequently are the worst planned and executed activities of all.47 Unfor-
tunately, while merging firms are sorting out the mess, rivals are likely to launch 
aggressive attacks. When Daimler-Benz struggled first with the chaos associated 
with the marriage with Chrysler and then was engulfed in the divorce with Chrsyler, 
BMW overtook Mercedes-Benz to become the world’s number-one luxury carmaker. 
Adding all of the above together, it is hardly surprising that most M&As fail.
12-8 Debates and Extensions
While this chapter has introduced a number of debates (such as the merits of 
acquisitions), this section discusses two leading debates: (1) Alliances versus acqui-
sitions and (2) majority JVs versus minority JVs.
Learning Objective
Participate in two leading 
debates concerning alliances 
and acquisitions.
12-8
Will synergy
beneﬁts be
downscaled?
Investors
Optimistic view
of return on
investment?
Will efﬁciency
and short-term
revenues fall?
Synergies
difﬁcult to
attain
Top management
Internal conﬂicts:
fractious management
groups, key staff leave
Unrealistic
euphoria
Concern over
job security
Middle management
Expected to do
M&A + day jobs
at the same time
Overwhelmed by
scale and scope
What should I
tell my
customers?
Front-line employees
When do
lay-offs
begin?
Who is setting
my priorities
and objectives?
So what?
Customers
Service quality
dips, relationship
suffers
No one is listening
to me. Do I
still matter?
Figure 12.7
Stakeholders, Concerns During Mergers and Acquisitions
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 12   Making Alliances and Acquisitions Work	
385
12-8a Alliances versus Acquisitions
Although alliances and acquisitions are alternatives, many firms seem to plunge 
straight into “merger mania.” HP, IBM, Microsoft, and Oracle are known as “rapid-
fire” acquirers, often swallowing a dozen firms in any given year. In many firms, an 
M&A group reports to the CFO, while a separate unit, headed by the VP or director 
for business development, deals with alliances. M&As and alliances are thus often 
undertaken in isolation. A smaller number of firms, such as Eli Lilly, have a sepa-
rate office of alliance management. Few firms have established a combined “merg-
ers, acquisitions, and alliance” function. In practice, it may be advisable to explicitly 
compare acquisitions vis-à-vis alliances.48
Compared with acquisitions, alliances cost less and allow for opportunities to 
learn from working with each other before engaging in full-blown acquisitions. 
While alliances do not preclude acquisitions and may indeed lead to acquisitions, 
acquisitions are often one-off deals swallowing both the excellent capabilities and 
mediocre units of target firms, leading to “indigestion” problems. Many acquisi-
tions (such as DaimlerChrysler) probably would have been better off had firms 
pursued alliances first.
12-8b Majority JVs as Control Mechanisms  
versus Minority JVs as Real Options
A longstanding debate focuses on the appropriate level of equity in JVs. While the 
logic of having a higher level of equity control in majority JVs is straightforward, its 
actual implementation is often problematic. Asserting one party’s control rights, 
even when justified based on a majority equity position and stronger bargaining 
power, may irritate the other party. This is especially likely in international JVs in 
emerging economies, where local partners often resent the dominance of Western 
MNEs. Some authors advocate a 50/50 share of management control even when 
the MNE has majority equity stake.49 However, a 50/50 JV has its own headaches—
everything has to be negotiated or fought over.
In addition to the usual benefits associated with being a minority partner in 
JVs (such as low cost and less demand on managerial resources and attention), an 
additional benefit alluded to earlier is exercising real options. In general, the more 
uncertain the conditions, the higher the value of real options. In highly uncertain 
but potentially promising industries and countries, M&As or majority JVs may be 
inadvisable because the cost of failure may be tremendous. Therefore, minority JVs 
are recommended toehold investments, seen as possible stepping stones for future 
scaling up—if necessary—while not exposing partners too heavily to the risks 
involved.
Since the real options thinking is relatively new, its applicability is still being 
debated. While the real options logic is straightforward, its practice—when 
applied to acquisitions of JVs—is messy. This is because most JV contracts do not 
specify a previously agreed-upon price for one party to acquire the other’s assets. 
Most contracts only give the rights of first refusal to the parties, which agree to 
negotiate in “good faith.” It is understandable that “neither party will be willing 
to buy the JV for more than or sell the JV for less than its own expectation of the 
venture’s wealth generating potential.”50 As a result, how to reach an agreement 
on a “fair” price is tricky.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

386	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
12-9 Management Savvy
What determines the success and failure in alliances and acquisitions? Our two core 
perspectives shed considerable light on this big question. The institution-based 
view argues that alliances and acquisitions depend on a thorough understanding 
and skillful manipulation of the rules of the game governing alliances and acquisi-
tions. The resource-based view calls for the development of firm-specific capabili-
ties to make a difference in enhancing alliance and acquisition performance.
Consequently, three clear implications for action emerge (Tables 12.7, 12.8, and 
12.9). First, managers need to understand and master the rules of the game—
both formal and informal—governing alliances and acquisitions around the world. 
Lenovo clearly understood and tapped into the Chinese government’s support for 
home-grown multinationals. IBM likewise understood the necessity for the new 
Lenovo to maintain an American image when it persuaded Lenovo to give up the 
idea of having dual headquarters in China and the United States and to set up its 
world headquarters in the United States. This highly symbolic action made it easier 
to win approval from the US government. In contrast, GE and Honeywell proposed 
to merge and cleared US antitrust scrutiny, but they failed to anticipate the power 
of the EU antitrust authorities and their incentive for killing the deal. In the end, 
the EU torpedoed the deal. The upshot is that, in addition to the economics of 
alliances and acquisitions, managers need to pay attention to the politics behind 
such high-stakes strategic moves.
Learning Objective
Draw implications for action.
12-9
Table 12.7
Implications for Action
  	 Understand and master the rules of the game governing alliances and acquisitions 
around the world.
  	 When managing alliances, pay attention to the “soft” relationship aspects.
  	 When managing acquisitions, do not overpay, focus on both strategic and organizational 
fit, and thoroughly address integration concerns. 
Table 12.8
Improving the Odds for Alliance Success
Areas
Do’s and don’ts
Contract versus  
“chemistry”
No contract can cover all elements of the relationship. Relying 
on a detailed contract does not guarantee a successful 
relationship. It may indicate a lack of trust.
Warning signs
Identify symptoms of frequent criticism, defensiveness (always 
blaming others for problems), and stonewalling (withdrawal 
during a fight).
Invest in the  
relationship
Like married individuals working hard to strengthen their ties, 
alliances require continuous nurturing. Once a party starts to 
waver, it is difficult to turn back the dissolution process.
Conflict resolution  
mechanisms
“Good” married couples also fight. Their secret weapon 
is to find mechanisms to avoid unwarranted escalation of 
conflicts. Managers need to handle conflicts—inevitable in any 
alliance—in a credible and controlled fashion.
Source: Based on text in M. W. Peng & O. Shenkar, 2002, Joint venture dissolution as corporate divorce 
(pp. 101–102), Academy of Management Executive, 16(2): 92–105.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 12   Making Alliances and Acquisitions Work	
387
Second, when managing alliances, managers need to pay attention to the soft 
relational capabilities that often make or break relationships (see Table 12.8). To 
the extent that business schools usually provide a good training on hard number-
crunching skills, it is time for all of us to beef up on soft, but equally important 
(and perhaps more important), relational capabilities.
Finally, when managing acquisitions, managers are advised not to overpay for 
targets and to focus on both strategic and organizational fit (see Table 12.9). There 
is now systematic evidence that MNEs from emerging economies, such as Tata, are 
likely to overpay for targets in developed economies, relative to other bidders from 
developed economies for the same targets.51 The upshot? More headaches down 
the road.
C h a p t e r  S u m m a r y
12.1	 Define alliance and acquisition.
  	 A strategic alliance is a voluntary agreement of cooperation between firms.
  	 An acquisition is a transfer of the control of operations and management 
from one firm (target) to another (acquirer), the former becoming a unit 
of the latter.
12.2	 Articulate how institutions and resources influence alliances and acquisitions.
  	 Formal institutions influence alliances and acquisitions through antitrust 
and entry mode concerns.
  	 Informal institutions affect alliances and acquisitions through normative 
and cognitive pillars.
  	 The impact of resources on alliances and acquisitions is illustrated by the 
VRIO framework.
12.3	 Describe how alliances are formed.
  	 Alliances are typically formed when managers go through a three-stage 
decision process.
12.4	 Outline how alliances are evolved and dissolved.
  	 Managers need to combat opportunism and, if necessary, manage the dis-
solution process.
12.5	 Discuss how alliances perform.
  	 (1) Equity, (2) learning, (3) nationality, and (4) relational capabilities may 
affect alliance performance.
Table 12.9
Improving the Odds for Acquisition Success
Areas
Do’s and don’ts
Pre-acquisition
  	 Do not overpay for targets, and avoid a bidding war when 
premiums are too high.
  	 Engage in thorough due diligence concerning both strategic 
and organizational fit.
Post-acquisition
  	 Address the concerns of multiple stakeholders, and try to 
keep the best talents.
  	 Be prepared to deal with roadblocks thrown up by people 
whose jobs and power may be jeopardized.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

388	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
12.6	 Explain why firms undertake acquisitions.
  	 Acquisitions are often driven by synergistic, hubristic, and managerial 
motives.
12.7	 Understand why acquisitions often fail.
  	 Many acquisitions fail because managers fail to address pre- and post-
acquisition problems.
12.8	 Participate in two leading debates concerning alliances and acquisitions.
  	 (1) Alliances versus acquisitions and (2) majority JVs versus minority JVs.
12.9	 Draw implications for action.
  	 Understand and master the rules of the game governing alliances and 
acquisitions around the world.
  	 When managing alliances, pay attention to the soft relationship aspects.
  	 When managing acquisitions, do not overpay, and focus on both strategic 
and organizational fit.
K e y  T e r m s
Acquisition 367
Acquisition  
premium 374
Contractual (non-equity- 
based) alliances 367
Cross-shareholding 367
Due diligence 370
Equity-based  
alliances 367
Hubris 380
Learning by doing 375
Learning race 372
Managerial motives 381
Merger 367
Organizational fit 374
Real option 372
Relational (or collabora-
tive) capabilities 372
Strategic alliances 367
Strategic fit 374
Strategic investment 367
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 List several examples of contractual and equity-based alliances.
	 2.	 Are mergers or acquisitions more common? Why?
	 3.	 In what two primary areas do formal institutions affect alliances?
	 4.	 Describe at least one norm (or collective assumption) and how it would 
affect a firm’s perspective on creating an alliance.
	 5.	 Explain the three stages in the formation of an alliance.
	 6.	 Of the two methods allied firms can use to combat opportunism, which one 
do you think is better? Why?
	 7.	 What happens when an alliance fails and must be terminated? Summarize 
the process.
	 8.	 Of the four factors that may influence alliance performance shown in 
Figure 12.6, which do you think is the most important, and which the least 
important? Why?
	 9.	 ON CULTURE: How could dissimilarities in national culture affect the per-
formance of alliances?
	 10.	 Describe the three most common motives for acquisition.
	 11.	 How does hubris affect value in a different way than the other two motives 
for acquisition?
	 12.	 What are some criteria managers should consider to avoid pre- and post-
acquisition problems?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 12   Making Alliances and Acquisitions Work	
389
	 13.	 ON CULTURE: What impact does the combination of organizational culture 
and national culture have on cross-border M&A’s?
	 14.	 If you were part of a firm’s leadership team, under what conditions would 
you choose an acquisition over an alliance and vice versa?
	 15.	 When does a majority JV seem more appropriate, and when is a minority JV 
more appealing?
	 16.	 Identify a country or region on PengAtlas Map 3.1 in which it is relatively diffi-
cult to do business. In spite of any difficulty, suppose you wish to expand into 
that country. Would you expand through an acquisition or an alliance? Why? 
	 17.	 In reference to PengAtlas Map 1.1, firms in which group of countries are 
most likely to overpay for acquisitions in the other group of countries?
C r i t i c a l  D i s c u s s i o n  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 Pick any recent announcement of a cross-border strategic alliance or acqui-
sition. Predict its likelihood of success or failure.
	 2.	 ON ETHICS: During the courtship and negotiation stages, managers often 
emphasize “equal partnerships” and do not reveal (or even try to hide) their 
true intentions. What are the ethical dilemmas here?
	 3.	 ON ETHICS: As a CEO, you are trying to acquire a foreign firm. The size of 
your firm will double, and it will become the largest in your industry. On the 
one hand, you are excited about the opportunity to be a leading captain of 
industry and to attain the associated power, prestige, and income. (You ex-
pect your salary, bonus, and stock option to double next year.) On the other 
hand, you have just read this chapter and are troubled by the findings that 
70% of M&As reportedly fail. How would you proceed?
G l o b a l  A c t i o n
	 1.	 You are an entrepreneur seeking to develop alliances in Ireland and 
generate new business ideas. Based on information found on globalEDGE, 
which region of Ireland may be most conducive to developing your global 
entrepreneurship network? What information and details support your 
thinking?
	 2.	 Identifying new sources of energy has been an important business oppor-
tunity for quite some time. Given recent growth in Asia, your company is 
seeking the acquisition of geothermal and solar energy firms in the region. 
Based on your firm’s energy and resource development emphasis, use re-
sources found on globalEDGE to identify three Asian countries in which 
this is most possible.
V i d e o  C a s e
After watching the video on GM in Shanghai, discuss the following:
	 1.	 How would you characterize the alliance between GM and SAIC Shanghai?
	 2.	 What has driven the GM alliance in Shanghai?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

390	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
	 3.	 How is the VRIO framework established within the GM alliance in Shanghai?
	 4.	 How can GM combat opportunism that may occur from being in the China 
market?
	 5.	 What will determine successful performance from the alliance?
In September 2008, Lehman Brothers went bank-
rupt. Britain’s Barclay Capital bought Lehman’s North 
America operations for $3.75 billion. Lehman’s assets 
in Asia and Europe were purchased by Nomura for 
the bargain-basement price of $200 million. Founded 
in 1925, Nomura is the oldest and largest securities 
brokerage and investment banking firm in Japan. Al-
though Nomura had operated in 30 countries prior to 
the Lehman deal in 2008, it had always been known as 
a significant, but still primarily regional (Asian), player 
in the big league of the global financial services indus-
try. In addition to Lehman, the list of elite investment 
banking firms in early 2008 would include Goldman 
Sachs, Morgan Stanley, Bear Stearns, JP Morgan, and 
Citigroup of the United States; Credit Suisse and UBS 
of Switzerland; and Deutsche Bank of Germany. No one 
would include Nomura in this group. Nomura viewed 
itself primarily as an Asian version of Merrill Lynch.
The tumultuous 2008 left Bear Stearns dead first and 
Lehman second, and all of the firms in the big league 
named above in deep financial trouble. To Nomura, this 
became the opportunity of a lifetime. Within a lightning 
24 hours, CEO Kenichi Watanabe decided to acquire 
Lehman’s remnants in Asia and Europe. Some of the 
Lehman assets were dirt cheap. For example, its French 
investment banking operations were sold to Nomura 
for only one euro (that is, €1!). Overall, by cherry-picking 
Lehman’s Asia and Europe operations and adding 8,000 
employees, who tripled Nomura’s size outside Japan, 
Nomura transformed itself into a global heavyweight 
overnight. The question was: “Does Nomura have what 
it takes to make this acquisition a success?”
The answer was a decisive “No!” from Nomura’s 
investors, who drove its shares down by 70% by 2012. 
Since the purchase price seemed reasonable and 
there was little evidence that Nomura had overpaid, 
the biggest challenge was post-acquisition integration, 
merging a hard-charging New York investment bank 
with a hierarchical Japanese firm that still largely prac-
tices lifetime employment.
Clearly, Lehman’s most valuable, rare, and hard-to-
imitate assets are its talents. To ensure that Nomura 
retained most of the ex-Lehman talents, Nomura set 
aside a compensation pool of $1 billion and guaran-
teed all ex-Lehman employees who chose to stay 
with Nomura not only their jobs but also their 2007 
pay level (including bonuses) for three years. About 
95% of them accepted Nomura’s offer. Given the fero-
ciousness of the financial meltdown in 2008 and 2009 
(which, if you remember, was triggered by Lehman’s 
collapse), many employees at other firms that were 
not bankrupt lost their jobs. The fact that Nomura 
guaranteed both jobs and pay levels was widely ap-
preciated by ex-Lehman employees who otherwise 
would have been devastated.
Nomura Integrates Lehman Brothers in Asia and Europe
Ethical 
Dilemma
C l o s i n g  C a s e
KAZUHIRO NOGI/AFP/Getty Images/Newscom
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 12   Making Alliances and Acquisitions Work	
391
Instead, acquiring Lehman introduced significant 
stress to Nomura’s long-held traditions. One leading 
challenge was pay level. Most senior executives at 
Lehman made, on average, $1 million in 2007. On aver-
age, Nomura employees only received half the pay of 
their Lehman counterparts. Not surprisingly, guaran-
teeing ex-Lehman employees at such an astronomical 
pay level (viewed from a Nomura perspective) created 
a major problem among Nomura’s Japanese employ-
ees. In response, Nomura in 2009 offered its employ-
ees in Japan higher pay and bonuses that would start 
to approach the level ex-Lehman employees were 
commanding, in exchange for less job security—in 
other words, they could be fired more easily if they 
underperformed. So far, about 2,000 Japanese em-
ployees have accepted the offer, which would link pay 
to individual and departmental performance rather 
than to the firm’s performance as a whole.
Another challenge was the personnel rotation 
system. Like many leading Japanese firms, Nomura 
periodically rotated managers to different positions. 
For example, Yoshihiro Fukuta, who served as head 
of Nomura International Hong Kong Ltd. in 2008, 
was rotated back to Tokyo as head of the Internal Au-
dit Division in 2009. While these practices produced 
well-rounded generalist managers, they generated a 
rigid hierarchy: a manager (always a male) in a later 
cohort year, no matter how superb his performance 
was, was unlikely to supervise a manager in an earlier 
cohort year. These Nomura practices directly clashed 
with Western norms: (1) work was increasingly done 
by specialists who developed deep expertise and 
(2) superstars were typically on a fast track rocketing 
ahead. Although the personnel rotation system largely 
did not apply to Nomura’s overseas employees, it re-
sulted in a top echelon that entirely consists of Japa-
nese executives who went through the rotations. In 
an effort to globalize, Nomura’s top echelon needed to 
attract diverse talents, especially those from Lehman. 
Could the rotation system accommodate the arrival 
of ex-Lehman employees who had neither experience 
nor interest?
Four years after the acquisition, the performance 
was disappointing. In 2009, Nomura moved its 
investment banking headquarters to London to dem-
onstrate its commitment to break into the top tier. In 
2011, in Europe Nomura was number 13 in underwrit-
ing equities and number 15 in advising on mergers. 
In Asia outside of Japan and in the United States, it 
was a distant number 24 and number 22, respectively, 
in underwriting equity offerings. Its dominance in 
Japan was indeed strengthened by the Lehman deal. 
Nomura’s market share in advising Japanese acquirers 
that made deals overseas shot up from 10% in 2007 
to 25% in 2011.
Integration continued to be Nomura’s number one 
headache. Outside Japan, the deal turned out to be a 
“reverse” takeover with gaijin (foreigners) running most 
of the show. Nomura undertook a campaign to expunge 
the long shadows of the Lehman hangover. Both sym-
bolically and comically, mentioning the “L” word (such 
as “This is how we did it at Lehman”) during senior ex-
ecutive meetings in London would cost executives £5 
every time—they had to toss the money into a box as 
a penalty. In 2012, Jesse Bhattal, who was the former 
Asia Pacific CEO of Lehman, the deputy president of 
the Nomura group, and the CEO of Nomura’s invest-
ment banking group (the highest-ranked non-Japanese 
executive at Nomura), resigned amid heavy losses. 
Bhattal failed to see eye to eye with the board and was 
frustrated by his inability to undertake much-needed 
cost cutting. His departure was regarded as “the culmi-
nation of a clash with Nomura’s old guard,” according to 
Bloomberg. The dark clouds over Nomura thickened. . . .
Case Discussion Questions:
	 1.	 What is the strategic fit between Nomura and 
Lehman?
	 2.	 Is there any organizational fit? How to bridge the 
gaps between the cultures of these two firms?
	 3.	 How does Nomura alleviate the concerns of mul-
tiple stakeholders?
	 4.	 How would you predict the effectiveness of 
Nomura’s transformation after this acquisition?
Sources: Based on (1) Bloomberg, 2012, Nomura reeling from Lehman hangover, February 28, www.bloomberg.com; (2) BusinessWeek, 2009, 
Nomura is starting to flex its Lehman muscles, September 28; (3) E. Choi, H. Leung, J. Chan, S. Tse, & W. Chu, 2009, How can Nomura be a true 
global financial company? case study, University of Hong Kong; (4) Economist, 2009, Numura’s integration of Lehman, July 11; (5) A. Huo, E. Liu, 
R. Gampa, R. Liew, 2009, Nomura’s bet on Lehman, case study, University of Hong Kong; (6) Reuters, 2012, Ex-Lehman’s Bhattal quits Nomura amid 
deep losses, January 10: www.reuters.com.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

392	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
[Journal acronyms] AME—Academy of Management Executive; AMJ—
Academy of Management Journal; AMP—Academy of Management Per-
spectives; AMR—Academy of Management Review; APJM—Asia Pacific 
Journal of Management; BW—BusinessWeek (prior to 2010) or Bloomberg 
Businessweek (since 2010); FT—Financial Times; HBR—Harvard Busi-
ness Review; JEP—Journal of Economic Perspectives; JIBS—Journal of In-
ternational Business Studies; JIM—Journal of International Management; 
JM—Journal of Management; JMS—Journal of Management Studies; 
JWB—Journal of World Business; OSc—Organization Science; SMJ—
Strategic Management Journal; WSJ—Wall Street Journal
1 X. Yin & M. Shanley, 2008, Industry determinants of the “merger 
versus alliance” decision, AMR, 33: 473–491.
2 P. Beamish & N. Lupton, 2009, Managing JVs, AMP, May, 75–94; 
P.  Kale & H. Singh, 2009, Managing strategic alliances, AMP, 
August: 45–62.
3 D. Chen, Y. Paik, & S. Park, 2010, Host-country policies and MNE 
management control in IJVs, JIBS, 41: 526–537; W. Shi, S. Sun, & 
M. W. Peng, 2013, Sub-national institutional contingencies, network 
positions, and IJV partner selection, JMS (in press).
4 Federal Trade Commission, 2000, Antitrust Guidelines for Collabora-
tions among Competitors, Washington: FTC; T. Tong & J. Reuer, 2010, 
Competitive consequences of interfirm collaboration, JIBS, 41: 
1056–1073.
5 M. W. Peng, 2006, Making M&As fly in China, HBR, March: 26–27. 
See also H. K. Steensma, L. Tihanyi, M. Lyles, & C. Dhanaraj, 2005, 
The evolving value of foreign partnerships in transitioning econo-
mies, AMJ, 48: 213–235; J. Xia, J. Tan, & D. Tan, 2008, Mimetic entry 
and bandwagon effect, SMJ, 29: 195–217.
6 M. T. Dacin, C. Oliver, & J. Roy, 2007, The legitimacy of strategic 
alliances, SMJ, 28: 169–187.
7 J. Reuer & R. Ragozzino, 2006, Agency hazards and alliance port-
folios, SMJ, 27: 27–43.
8 L. Mesquita, J. Anand, & T. Brush, 2008, Comparing the resource-
based and relational views, SMJ, 29: 913–941; M. Schreiner, P. Kale, 
& D. Corsten, 2009, What really is alliance management capability 
and how does it impact alliance outcomes and success? SMJ, 30: 
1395–1419.
9 J. Adegbesan & M. Higgins, 2010, The intra-alliance division of 
value created through collaboration, SMJ, 32: 187–211; R. Agarwal, 
R. Croson, & J. Mahoney, 2010, The role of incentives and commu-
nication in strategic alliances, SMJ, 31: 413–437; R. Z. Ainuddin, 
P. Beamish, J. Hulland, & M. Rouse, 2007, Resource attributes and 
firm performance in IJVs, JWB, 42: 47–60; F. Castellucci & G. Ertug, 
2010, What’s in it for them? AMJ, 53: 149–166; E. Fang & S. Zou, 
2009, Antecedents and consequences of marketing dynamic capa-
bilities in IJVs, JIBS, 40: 742-761; A. Joshi & A. Nerkar, 2011, When do 
strategic alliances inhibit innovation by firms? SMJ, 32: 1139–1160; 
M. Srivastava & D. Gnyawali, 2011, When do relational resources 
matter? AMJ, 54: 797–810.
10 Economist, 2003, Open skies and flights of fancy (p. 67), October 4: 
65–67.
11 S. Ang, 2008, Competitive intensity and collaboration, SMJ, 29: 
1057–1075; R. Sampson, 2007, R&D alliances and firm performance, 
AMJ, 50: 364–386.
12 B. Bourdeau, J. Cronin, & C. Voorhees, 2007, Modeling service al-
liances, SMJ, 28: 609–622; H. Mitsuhashi & H. Greve, 2009, A match-
ing theory of alliance formation and organizational success, AMJ, 
52: 975–995; A. Tiwana & M. Keil, 2007, Does peripheral knowledge 
complement control? SMJ, 28: 623–634.
13 A. Chintakananda & D. McIntyre, 2012, Market entry in the pres-
ence of network effects, JM (in press); I. Cuypers & X. Martin, 2010, 
What makes and what does not make a real option? JIBS, 41: 47–69.
14 T. Tong, J. Reuer, & M. W. Peng, 2008, International joint ven-
tures and the value of growth options, AMJ, 51: 1014–1029.
15 M. McCarter, J. Mahoney, & G. Northcraft, 2011, Testing the 
waters, AMR, 36: 621–640.
16 L. Hsieh, S. Rodrigues, & J. Child, 2010, Risk perception and 
post-formation governance in IJVs in Taiwan, JIM, 16: 288–303; 
M. Meuleman, A. Lockett, S. Manigart, & M. Wright, 2010, Partner 
selection decisions in interfirm collaborations, JMS, 47: 995–1018.
17 M. Jensen & A. Roy, 2008, Staging exchange partner choices, AMJ, 
51: 495–516; D. Li, L. Eden, M. Hitt, & R.D. Ireland, 2008, Friends, 
acquaintances, or strangers? AMJ, 51: 315–334; X. Luo & L. Deng, 
2009, Do birds of a feather flock higher? JMS, 46: 1005-1030; 
F. Rothaermel & W. Boeker, 2008, Old technology meets new tech-
nology, SMJ, 29: 47–77; R. Shah & V. Swaminathan, 2008, Factors in-
fluencing partner selection in strategic alliances, SMJ, 29: 471–494.
18 A. Arino & P. Ring, 2010, The role of fairness in alliance forma-
tion, SMJ, 31: 1054–1087.
19 M. Fridman, 2008, BP has been treating Russians as subjects, FT, 
July 7: 11.
20 D. Zoogah & M. W. Peng, 2011, What determines the perfor-
mance of strategic alliance managers? APJM, 28: 483–508.
21 C. Jiang, R. Chua, M. Kotabe, & J, Murray, 2011, Effects of cul-
tural ethnicity, firm size, and firm age on senior executives’ trust 
in their overseas business partners, JIBS, 42: 1150–1173; Y. Luo, 
2009, Are we on the same page? JWB, 44: 383–396; L. Mesquita, 
2007, Starting over when the bickering never ends, AMR, 32: 72–91; 
F. Molina-Morales & M. Martinez-Fernandez, 2009, Too much love 
in the neighborhood can hurt, SMJ, 30: 1013–1023; A. Phene & 
S. Tallman, 2012, Complexity, context, and governance in biotech-
nology alliances, JIBS, 43: 61–83.
22 S. Gubbi, P. Aulakh, S. Ray, M. Sarkar, & R. Chittoor, 2010, Do 
international acquisitions by emerging-economy firms create share-
holder value? JIBS, 41: 397–418; C. Zhou & J. Li, 2008, Product in-
novation in emerging market-based IJVs, JIBS, 39: 1114–1132.
23 D. King, D. Dalton, C. Daily, & J. Covin, 2004, Meta-analyses of 
post-acquisition performance, SMJ, 25: 187–200.
24 C. Moschieri & J. Campa, 2009, The European M&A industry 
(p. 82), AMP, November: 71–87.
25 G. Andrade, M. Mitchell, & E. Stafford, 2001, New evidence and 
perspectives on mergers, JEP, 15: 103–120.
26 J. Kim & S. Finkelstein, 2009, The effects of strategic and market 
complementarity on acquisition performance, SMJ, 30: 617–646.
27 This section draws heavily from S. Tallman & O. Shenkar, 1994, 
A managerial decision model of international cooperative venture 
formation, JIBS, 25: 91–113.
28 G. Lee & M. Lieberman, 2010, Acquisition versus internal devel-
opment, SMJ, 31: 140–158.
29 S. Makino, C. Chan, T. Isobe, & P. Beamish, 2007, Intended and 
unintended termination of IJVs, SMJ, 28: 1113–1132; H. Ness, 2009, 
Governance, negotiations, and alliance dynamics, JMS, 46: 451–480; 
H. K. Steensma, J. Barden, C. Dhanaraj, M. Lyles, & L.  Tihanyi, 
2008, The evolution and internalization of IJVs in a transitioning 
economy, JIBS, 39: 491–507.
30 This section draws heavily from M. W. Peng & O. Shenkar, 2002, 
JV dissolution as corporate divorce, AME, 16: 92–105.
N O T E S
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 12   Making Alliances and Acquisitions Work	
393
31 D. Faems, M. Janssens, A. Madhok, & B. Looy, 2008, Toward an 
integrative perspective on alliance governance, AMJ, 51: 1053–1078; 
N. Pangarkar, 2009, Do firms learn from alliance terminations? JMS, 
46: 982–1004.
32 A. Arino & J. Reuer, 2002, Designing and renegotiating strategic 
alliance contracts (p. 44), AME, 18: 37–48.
33 R. Kaplan, D. Norton, & B. Rugelsjoen, 2010, Managing alliances 
with the balanced scorecard, HBR, January: 114–120; J. Li, C. Zhou, 
& E. Zajac, 2009, Control, collaboration, and productivity, SMJ, 30: 
865–884; J. Lu & D. Xu, 2006, Growth and survival of IJVs, JM, 32: 
426–448.
34 R. Aguilera, 2007, Translating theoretical logics across borders, 
JIBS, 38: 38–46; M. Cheung, M. Myers, & J. Mentzer, 2011, The value 
of relational learning in global buyer-supplier exchanges, SMJ, 32: 
1061–1082; F. Evangelista & L. Hau, 2009, Organizational context 
and knowledge acquisition in IJVs, JWB, 44: 63–73; E. Fang & S. Zou, 
2010, The effects of absorptive and joint learning on the instability of 
IJVs in emerging economies, JIBS, 41: 906-924; R. Gulati, D. Lavie, & 
H. Singh, 2009, The nature of partnering experience and the gains 
from alliances, SMJ, 30: 1213–1233; P. Kale & H. Singh, 2007, Build-
ing firm capabilities through learning, SMJ, 28: 981–1000; J.  Lai, 
S. Chang, & S. Chen, 2010, Is experience valuable in international 
strategic alliances? JIM, 16: 247–261; C. Liu, P. Ghauri, & R. Sinkovics, 
2010, Understanding the impact of relational capital and organiza-
tional learning on alliance outcomes, JWB, 45: 237–249; M. Lyles & 
J. Salk, 2007, Knowledge acquisition from foreign parents in IJVs, 
JIBS, 38: 3–18; K. Meyer, 2007, Contextualizing organizational learn-
ing, JIBS, 38: 27–37; B. Nielsen & S. Nielsen, 2009, Learning and 
innovation in international strategic alliances, JMS, 46: 1031–1058;  
S. Tallman & A. Chacar, 2011, Communities, alliances, networks, and 
knowledge in multinational firms, JIM, 17: 201–210; G. Vasudeva &  
J. Anand, 2011, Unpacking absorptive capacity, AMJ, 54: 611–623;  
M. Zollo & J. Reuer, 2010, Experience spillovers across corporate de-
velopment activities, OSc, 21: 1195–1212.
35 Y. Luo & M. W. Peng, 1999, Learning to compete in a transition 
economy, JIBS, 30: 269–296.
36 A. Gaur & J. Lu, 2007, Ownership strategies and survival of foreign 
subsidiaries, JM, 33: 84–110; A. Madhok, 2006, How much does own-
ership really matter? JIBS, 37: 4–11; J. Xia, 2011, Mutual dependence, 
partner substitutability, and repeated partnership, SMJ, 32: 229–253.
37 Z. Lin, M. W. Peng, H. Yang, & S. Sun, 2009, How do networks and 
learning drive M&As? SMJ, 30: 1113–1132; H. Yang, S. Sun, Z. Lin, 
& M. W. Peng, 2011, Behind M&As in China and the United States, 
APJM, 28: 239–255.
38 S. Chen, 2008, The motives for international acquisitions, JIBS, 
39: 454–471; P. Puranam & K. Srikanth, 2007, What they know vs. 
what they do, SMJ, 28: 805–825.
39 H. Yang, Z. Lin, & M. W. Peng, 2011, Behind acquisitions of alli-
ance partners, AMJ, 54: 1069–1080.
40 G. McNamara, J. Heleblian, & B. Dykes, 2008, The performance 
implications of participating in an acquisition wave, AMJ, 51: 
113–130.
41 T. Laamanen & T. Keil, 2008, Performance of serial acquirers, 
SMJ, 29: 663–672; D. Siegel & K. Simons, 2010, Assessing the effects 
of M&As on firm performance, SMJ, 31: 903–916; G. Valentini, 2012, 
Measuring the effect of M&A on patenting quantity and quality, 
SMJ, 33: 336–346; M. Zollo & D. Meier, 2008, What is M&A perfor-
mance? AMP, August: 55–77.
42 C. Meyer & E. Altenborg, 2008, Incompatible strategies in inter-
national mergers, JIBS, 39: 508–525.
43 WSJ, 2009, Bank of America-Merrill Lynch: A $50 billion deal 
from hell, January 22: blogs.wsj.com.
44 J. Allatta & H. Singh, 2011, Evolving communication patterns in 
response to an acquisition event, SMJ, 32: 1099–1118. M. Brannen & 
M. Peterson, 2009, Merging without alienating, JIBS, 40: 468–489; 
R. Chakrabarti, S. Gupta-Mukherjee, & N. Jayaraman, 2009, Mars-
Venus marriages, JIBS, 40: 216–236; G. Stahl & A. Voigt, 2008, Do 
cultural differences matter in M&As? OSc, 19: 160–176.
45 T. Reus & B. Lamont, 2009, The double-edged sword of cultural 
distance in international acquisitions, JIBS, 40: 1298–1316; R. Sarala 
& E. Vaara, 2010, Cultural differences, convergence, and crossver-
gence as explanations of knowledge transfer in international acqui-
sitions, JIBS, 41: 1365–1390.
46 BW, 2011, Hi-yah! Alcatel-Lucent chops away at years of failure 
(p. 29), May 2: 29–31.
47 M. Cording, P. Christmann, & D. King, 2010, Reducing causal 
ambiguity in acquisition integration, AMJ, 51: 744–767.
48 L. Wang & E. Zajac, 2007, Alliance or acquisition? SMJ, 28: 
1291–1317.
49 C. Choi & P. Beamish, 2004, Split management control and IJV 
performance, JIBS, 35: 201–215; H. K. Steensma & M. Lyles, 2000, 
Explaining IJV survival in a transition economy, SMJ, 21: 831–851.
50 T. Chi, 2000, Option to acquire or divest a JV, SMJ (p. 671), 21: 
665–687.
51 O. Hope, W. Thomas, & D. Vyas, 2011, The cost of pride, JIBS, 
42: 128–151.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 
13 
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
	 13-1	 describe the relationship between 
multinational strategy and structure.
	13-2	 explain how institutions and resources 
affect strategy, structure, and learning.
	13-3	 outline the challenges associated with 
learning, innovation, and knowledge 
management.
	13-4	 participate in three leading debates 
concerning multinational strategy, structure, 
and learning.
	13-5	 draw implications for action.
Ren Long/Xinhua/Photoshot/Newscom
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Strategizing, Structuring, 
and Learning around  
the World
There were signs aplenty that the April 8, 2011, 
groundbreaking for the $4.4 billion Shanghai Disney 
Resort was not aimed at the typical Orlando vaca-
tioner. Shanghai school children sang “When You Wish 
Upon a Star”—in Mandarin. Mickey Mouse showed 
up clad not in his signature duds but in traditional red 
Chinese garb to symbolize good fortune. Everything 
was customized to suit the tastes of the world’s most 
populous nation.
Walt Disney has good reason to sweat the de-
tails at its first theme park on the mainland. When it 
opened Hong Kong Disneyland in 2005, it underes-
timated how many visitors would show up and how 
long they would linger. The result: too few rides, inad-
equate seating and food supplies at restaurants, and 
angry crowds that had to be turned away. Although 
the 47% Disney-owned Hong Kong park is expand-
ing, it still lost $92.3 million in the year ended October 
2010, while attendance rose 13%. “We learned a lot 
from Hong Kong,” says Disney Chief Executive Officer 
Robert A. Iger. “In Shanghai, we’re within a three 
hours’ drive of 300 million people. That’s a huge oppor-
tunity, and we have to be careful about how many will 
come and their visitation patterns.”
For Disney, which will own a 43% stake in the 
963-acre resort (three state-owned companies own 
the rest), Shanghai is a $1.9 billion wager on a growing 
Chinese middle class who the company projects will 
spend $200 billion annually on leisure travel by 2015. 
It is also a bet that Disney’s characters and 55-year 
history of running theme parks can be adapted to 
a culture it may not fully understand. “Disney has 
too much riding on China to let either Hong Kong or 
Shanghai fail,” says John Gerner, managing director of 
Leisure Business Advisors, which assessed the poten-
tial for theme parks in China for Village Roadshow, an 
Australian theater and park operator. “Hong Kong was 
an experiment to see if a smaller park would work, and 
it didn’t. Now they’re fixing it.”
Shanghai’s Disneyland will be almost 85 acres, 
about 50% larger than the Hong Kong park at its 
opening, says one executive. There will be traditional 
Disney rides and others based on Chinese culture, 
says Iger. The company is adding Chinese nation-
als to its “Imagineering” team to help develop the 
park. One staple that will change: Main Street USA, 
the turn-of-the-century collection of storefronts and 
horse-drawn street cars that welcome visitors to 
most Disney parks. Explains Iger: “We simply be-
lieve Main Street USA might not be that interesting 
to people here.”
Disney is not likely to repeat the cultural faux pas it 
made when it opened Disneyland Resort Paris in 1992, 
where food sales suffered because the park initially 
O p e n i n g  C a s e
EMERGING MARKETS: Mickey Goes to Shanghai
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

396	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
did not serve wine with meals. In Hong Kong, Disney  
has cut the number of hot dogs in restaurants in order 
to serve more dim sum and noodle dishes, says a 
Disney executive, and there is likely to be plenty of 
local fare in Shanghai. “Disney is paying a lot of at-
tention now to cultural differences,” says Evercore 
Partners analyst Alan Gould. One motivation: The 
Shanghai park will generate $70 million in manage-
ment fees for Disney in its first year and $200 million 
within a decade, Gould estimates.
Source: Bloomberg Businessweek, 2011, Disney gets a second chance 
in China, April 18: 21–22.
How can multinational enterprises (MNEs) such as Disney appropriately blend global 
and local flavors so that they can succeed internationally? How can they learn national 
tastes, global trends, and market transitions that require structural changes? How can 
they improve the odds for better innovation? These are some of the key questions we 
address in this chapter. Our focus here is on relatively large MNEs with significant inter-
nationalization. We start by discussing the crucial relationship between four strategies 
and four structures. Next, we consider how the institution-based and resource-based 
views shed light on these issues. Then, we discuss worldwide learning, innovation, 
and knowledge management and look at three leading debates. Finally, we go over 
some tips for making MNEs successful.
13-1 Multinational Strategies and Structures
This section first introduces an integration-responsiveness framework centered on 
the pressures for cost reductions and local responsiveness. We then outline the 
four strategic choices and the four corresponding organizational structures that 
MNEs typically adopt.
13-1a Pressures for Cost Reduction and Local Responsiveness
MNEs confront primarily two sets of pressures: cost reduction and local respon-
siveness. These two sets of pressures are captured in the integration-responsiveness 
framework, which allows managers to deal with the pressures for both global integra-
tion and local responsiveness. Cost pressures often call for global integration, while 
local responsiveness pushes MNEs to adapt locally. In both domestic and interna-
tional competition, pressures to reduce costs are almost universal. What is unique in 
international competition is the pressure for local responsiveness, which means react-
ing to different consumer preferences and host-country demands (see the Opening 
Case). Consumer preferences vary tremendously around the world. For example, 
McDonald’s beef-based hamburgers would obviously find few customers in India, a 
land where cows are held sacred by the Hindu majority. Thus, changing its menu is a 
must in India. Host-country demands and expectations add to the pressures for local 
responsiveness. Throughout Europe, Canadian firm Bombardier manufactures an 
Austrian version of railcars in Austria and a Belgian version in Belgium. Bombar-
dier believes that such local responsiveness, although not required, is essential for 
making sales to railway operators in Europe, which tend to be state-owned.
Taken together, being locally responsive certainly makes local customers and 
governments happy but unfortunately increases costs. Given the universal interest 
in lowering cost, one natural tendency is to downplay or ignore the different needs 
and wants of various local markets and instead market a global version of products 
Learning Objective
Describe the relationship 
between multinational strategy 
and structure.
13-1
Integration-responsiveness 
framework
A framework of MNE manage-
ment on how to simultaneously 
deal with the pressures for both 
global integration and local 
responsiveness.
Local responsiveness
The necessity to be responsive 
to different customer prefer-
ences around the world.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 13   Strategizing, Structuring, and Learning around the World	
397
and services. The movement to globalize offerings can be traced to a 1983 article 
by Theodore Levitt: “The Globalization of Markets.”1 Levitt argued that world-
wide consumer tastes are converging. As evidence, Levitt pointed to the worldwide 
success of Coca-Cola, Levi Strauss jeans, and Sony color TVs. Levitt predicted that 
such convergence would characterize most product markets in the future.
Levitt’s idea has often been the intellectual force propelling many MNEs to 
integrate their offerings globally while minimizing local adaptation. Ford experi-
mented with “world car” designs. MTV pushed ahead with the belief that viewers 
would flock to global (essentially American) programming. Unfortunately, most 
of these experiments are not successful. Ford found that consumer tastes ranged 
widely around the globe. MTV eventually realized that there is no “global song.” 
In a nutshell, one size does not fit all.2 This leads us to look at how MNEs can pay 
attention to both dimensions: cost reduction and local responsiveness.
13-1b Four Strategic Choices
Based on the integration-responsiveness framework, Figure 13.1 plots the four stra-
tegic choices: (1) home replication, (2) localization, (3) global standardization, and 
(4) transnational. Each strategy has a set of pros and cons outlined in Table 13.1. 
(Their corresponding structures are discussed in the next section.)
Home replication strategy, often known as “international (or export) strategy,” 
duplicates home-country-based competencies in foreign countries. Such compe-
tencies include production scales, distribution efficiencies, and brand power. In 
manufacturing, this is usually manifested in an export strategy. In services, this 
is often done through licensing and franchising. This strategy is relatively easy to 
implement and usually the first one adopted when firms venture abroad.
Home replication strategy
A strategy that emphasizes the 
duplication of home country-
based competencies in foreign 
countries.
Note: In some other textbooks, “home replication” may be referred to as “international” or “export” strategy, 
“localization” as “multidomestic” strategy, and “global standardization” as “global” strategy. Some of these labels 
are confusing, because one can argue that all four strategies here are “international” or “global,” thus resulting in 
some confusion if we label one of these strategies as “international” and another as “global.” The present set of 
labels is more descriptive and less confusing.
Figure 13.1
Multinational Strategies and Structures:  
The Integration-Responsiveness Framework
Pressures for local responsiveness
Pressures for cost reduction
Low
High
High
Global
standardization strategy
Global product division
Home
replication strategy
International division
Transnational strategy
Global matrix
Localization strategy
Geographic area
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

398	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
At the International Trade Fair in Chicago in 1959, visi-
tors were delighted by the salty-savory taste of roast 
beef marinated in a novel condiment called soy sauce: 
slices were being given away by young Japanese men. 
What the nibblers did not know was that the foreign-
ers were not merely demonstration staff but workers 
at the sauce maker’s new American unit, who wanted 
to see firsthand how American consumers responded 
to their product. Among them was Yazaburo Mogi, 
a 24-year-old student at Columbia Business School 
and the scion of one of the founding families behind 
Kikkoman, a soy-sauce maker that traces its origins to 
the 17th century.
By the time he reached the top of the firm in 1995, 
Mr. Mogi was well on his way to transforming it into 
an international food business and turning an obscure 
Asian seasoning into a mainstream global product. 
“We tried to appeal to the non-Japanese, general-
market consumer,” says Mr. Mogi, who speaks fluent 
English—a rarity among Japanese bosses. Kikkoman 
is now the world’s largest maker of naturally brewed 
soy sauce. Foreign sales of its sauce have grown by 
nearly 10% a year for 25 years. Its distinctive curvy 
bottle has become commonplace in restaurants and 
kitchens the world over, alongside other condiments 
such as Italian olive oil or French mustard. Interbrand, 
Kikkoman’s Sauce of Success
IN Focus 13.1
Table 13.1
Four Strategic Choices for Multinational Enterprises
Advantages
Disadvantages
Home replication
  	 Leverages home country-based advantages
  	 Relatively easy to implement
  	 Lacks local responsiveness
  	 May result in foreign customer alienation
Localization
  	 Maximizes local responsiveness
  	 High costs due to duplication of efforts in 
multiple countries
  	 Too much local autonomy
Global standardization
  	 Leverages low-cost advantages
  	 Lacks local responsiveness
  	 Too much centralized control
Transnational
  	 Cost efficient while being locally responsive
  	 Engages in global learning and diffusion of 
innovations
  	 Organizationally complex
  	 Difficult to implement
On the disadvantage side, home replication strategy often lacks local respon-
siveness because it focuses on the home country. This strategy makes sense when 
the majority of a firm’s customers are domestic. However, when a firm aspires to 
broaden its international scope, failing to be mindful of foreign customers’ needs 
and wants may alienate them. For example, when Wal-Mart entered Brazil, the 
stores had exactly the same inventory as the US stores, including a large number 
of American footballs. Considering that Brazil is the land of soccer and has won 
the World Cup five times, more wins than any other country, nobody (except a 
few homesick American expatriates in their spare time) plays American football 
there.
Localization strategy is an extension of the home replication strategy.3 
Localization (multidomestic) strategy focuses on a number of foreign countries/
regions, each of which is regarded as a standalone local (domestic) market worthy 
of significant attention and adaptation (see In Focus 13.1). While sacrificing global 
Localization (multidomestic) 
strategy
A strategy that focuses on a 
number of foreign countries/
regions, each of which is 
regarded as a standalone local 
(domestic) market worthy 
of significant attention and 
adaptation.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 13   Strategizing, Structuring, and Learning around the World	
399
a brand consultancy, ranks Kikkoman among the most 
recognizable Japanese names in a list otherwise 
dominated by carmakers and electronics firms.
Indeed, this family-owned Japanese firm is 
unusual in several ways. In 1973, it became the first 
Japanese food company to open a factory in America; 
Mr. Mogi was running the American division by this 
time. Whereas many Japanese firms eschew mergers 
and acquisitions, Kikkoman has been actively buying 
American and Japanese companies in the course of 
its expansion. (In January 2009, Kikkoman adopted 
a holding-company structure that will make acquisi-
tions easier, among other things.) Mr. Mogi speaks 
with pride about corporate governance reforms he 
has instituted, including succession planning. Since 
2004, the firm’s presidents have come from outside 
the founding families. And rather than being centrally 
run from Tokyo, Kikkoman is known for devolving 
power to the bosses of its foreign subsidiaries.
Under Mr. Mogi’s leadership, Kikkoman’s sales 
have grown to more than $4 billion a year, of which soy 
sauce accounts for 20%. Most of the firm’s revenue 
now comes from selling other food products in Japan 
and abroad. Kikkoman is the biggest wholesaler of 
Asian foodstuffs in America, with similar operations in 
Europe, China, and Australia. It sells canned fruit and 
vegetables in Asia under the Del Monte brand, and 
one of its subsidiaries is Coca-Cola’s bottling affiliates 
in Japan. Foreign sales account for 30% of revenue 
but 55% of operating profit, three-quarters of which 
comes from North America. By some measures 
Kikkoman is the Japanese firm most dependent on the 
American market. The recession has hit Kikkoman’s 
profits, but it is relatively well protected. “In a reces-
sion, demands shifts from restaurants to household 
consumption,” Mr. Mogi explains, so what his com-
pany loses in one market, it makes up in the other.
Kikkoman’s move into America in the 1950s set the 
template for the company’s foreign expansion. America 
was the perfect place to venture abroad, says Mr. Mogi. 
It is open to new things and is willing to incorporate 
novel ingredients into its cuisine. During his time at busi-
ness school, Mr. Mogi travelled across America, visiting 
Asian restaurants. There were very few: in New York 
he found only eight Japanese eateries. Kikkoman, he 
realized, had to adapt its sauce to the local cuisine if it 
was going to succeed. Kikkoman promoted soy sauce 
in America by hiring chefs to concoct recipes that in-
corporated the sauce into classic American dishes. The 
firm then sent the recipes to local newspapers, prompt-
ing housewives to cut them out and shop for the ingre-
dients. In the process, it started to position soy sauce 
not as a Japanese product, but as an “all-purpose sea-
soning,” as a housewife puts it in Kikkoman’s 1950s 
television advertisements. The same words can still be 
seen emblazoned on its bottles.
In 1961, the company picked up many new 
customers by introducing teriyaki sauce—a mixture 
of soy sauce and other ingredients devised spe-
cifically for the American market as a barbecue 
glaze. Kikkoman is now devising products for South 
American and European tastes, such as a soy sauce 
that can be sprinkled on rice—something that is not 
done in Japan. In Europe and Australia, where con-
sumers are suspicious of biotechnology, Kikkoman’s 
sauce is made without genetically modified ingre-
dients. Mr.  Mogi is also taking Kikkoman into a for-
eign market rather close to home: China. It is a more 
difficult market to enter than America or Europe, 
because soy sauce is already part of Chinese cuisine 
and cheap products abound, often chemically synthe-
sized rather than naturally brewed. Mr. Mogi hopes 
to establish Kikkoman’s sauce as a premium product 
aimed at wealthier buyers. His early recognition of the 
importance of adapting his firm’s product for foreign 
markets is Kikkoman’s real special sauce.
Source: Economist, 2009, Sauce of success, April 11: 68. © Economist 
Group. Reprinted by permission.
efficiencies, this strategy is effective when differences among national and regional 
markets are clear, and pressures for cost reductions are low. For example, Disney 
has attempted to localize some of its offerings in its five theme parks in Anaheim, 
California; Orlando, Florida; Hong Kong; Paris; and Tokyo. Shown in the Opening 
Case, its newest park in Shanghai will feature traditional Disney rides and those 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

400	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
based on Chinese culture. It will drop a standard feature common in Disney parks: 
Main Street USA.
In terms of disadvantages, the localization strategy has high costs due to 
duplication of efforts in multiple countries. The costs of producing such a variety 
of programming for MTV are obviously greater than the costs of producing one set 
of programming. As a result, this strategy is only appropriate in industries where 
the pressures for cost reductions are not significant. Another potential drawback is 
too much local autonomy, which happens when each subsidiary regards its country 
as so unique that it is difficult to introduce corporate-wide changes. In the 1980s, 
Unilever had 17 country subsidiaries in Europe. It took four years to persuade all 
17 subsidiaries to introduce a single new detergent across Europe.
As the opposite of the localization strategy, global standardization strategy 
is sometimes referred to simply as “global strategy.” Its hallmark is the devel-
opment and distribution of standardized products worldwide in order to reap 
the maximum benefits from low-cost advantages. While both the home replica-
tion and global standardization strategies minimize local responsiveness, one 
crucial difference is that an MNE pursuing a global standardization strategy is 
not limited to its major operations at home. In a number of countries, the MNE 
may designate centers of excellence, defined as subsidiaries explicitly recognized 
as a source of important capabilities, with the intention that these capabilities 
be leveraged by and/or disseminated to other subsidiaries. Centers of excellence 
are often given a worldwide (or global) mandate—a charter to be responsible for 
one MNE function throughout the world. For example, HP’s Singapore subsidiary 
has a worldwide mandate to develop, produce, and market all of HP’s handheld 
products.
In terms of disadvantages, a global standardization strategy obviously sacrifices 
local responsiveness. This strategy makes great sense in industries where pressures 
for cost reductions are paramount and pressures for local responsiveness are rela-
tively minor (particularly in commodity industries such as tires). However, as noted 
earlier, in industries ranging from automobiles to consumer products, a one-size-
fits-all strategy may be inappropriate. Consequently, arguments such as “all indus-
tries are becoming global” and “all firms need to pursue a global (standardization) 
strategy” are potentially misleading.
Transnational strategy aims to capture the best of both worlds by endeavor-
ing to be both cost efficient and locally responsive. In addition to cost efficiency 
and local responsiveness, a third hallmark of this strategy is global learning and 
diffusion of innovations. Traditionally, the diffusion of innovations in MNEs 
is a one-way flow from the home country to various host countries—the label 
“home replication” says it all (!). Underpinning the traditional one-way flow is 
the assumption that the home country is the best location for generating in-
novations. However, given that innovations are inherently risky and uncertain, 
there is no guarantee that the home country will generate the highest-quality 
innovations.
MNEs that engage in a transnational strategy promote global learning and 
diffusion of innovations in multiple ways. Innovations not only flow from the home 
country to host countries (which is the traditional flow), but also flow from host 
countries to the home country and flow among subsidiaries in multiple host coun-
tries. Kia Motors, for example, designs cars not only in Seoul, Korea, but also in Los 
Angeles and Frankfurt, tapping into automotive innovations generated in North 
America and Europe, respectively.
Global standardization 
strategy
A strategy that focuses on 
development and distribution of 
standardized products worldwide 
in order to reap the maximum 
benefits from low-cost 
advantages.
Center of excellence
An MNE subsidiary explicitly 
recognized as a source of 
important capabilities, with 
the intention that these 
capabilities be leveraged by, 
and/or disseminated to, other 
subsidiaries.
Worldwide (global) mandate
A charter to be responsible for 
one MNE function throughout 
the world.
Transnational strategy
A strategy that endeavors to be 
simultaneously cost efficient, 
locally responsive, and learning-
driven around the world.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 13   Strategizing, Structuring, and Learning around the World	
401
On the disadvantage side, a transnational strategy is organizationally complex 
and difficult to implement. The large amount of knowledge sharing and coordi-
nation may slow down decision making. Trying to achieve cost efficiencies, local 
responsiveness, and global learning simultaneously places contradictory demands 
on MNEs (to be discussed in the next section).
Overall, it is important to note that given the various pros and cons, there is 
no optimal strategy. The new trend in favor of a transnational strategy needs to be 
qualified with an understanding of its significant organizational challenges. This 
point leads to our next topic.
13-1c Four Organizational Structures
Figure 13.1 also shows four organizational structures that are appropriate for each 
of the strategic choices: (1) international division, (2) geographic area, (3) global 
product division, and (4) global matrix.
International division is typically used when firms initially expand abroad, often 
engaging in a home replication strategy. Figure 13.2 shows Starbucks’ international 
division in addition to the four US-centric divisions. Although this structure is 
intuitively appealing, it often leads to two problems. First, foreign subsidiary man-
agers, whose input is channeled through the international division, are not given 
sufficient voice relative to the heads of domestic divisions. Second, by design, the 
international division serves as a silo whose activities are not coordinated with the 
rest of the firm, which is focusing on domestic activities. Consequently, many firms 
phase out this structure after their initial stage of overseas expansion.
Geographic area structure organizes the MNE according to different geographic 
areas (countries and regions). It is appropriate for a localization strategy. Figure 13.3 
illustrates such a structure for Avon. A geographic area can be a country or a region, 
led by a country (or regional) manager. Each area is largely standalone. In contrast 
to the limited voice of subsidiary managers in the international division structure, 
country (and regional) managers carry a great deal of weight in a geographic area 
structure. Interestingly and paradoxically, both the strengths and weaknesses of this 
structure lie in its local responsiveness. While being locally responsive can be a 
virtue, it also encourages the fragmentation of the MNE into fiefdoms.
Global product division structure, which is the opposite of the geographic 
area structure, supports the global standardization strategy by assigning global 
International division
An organizational structure that 
is typically set up when firms 
initially expand abroad, often 
engaging in a home replication 
strategy.
Geographic structure
An organizational structure that 
organizes the MNE according to 
different geographic areas (coun-
tries and regions).
Country (regional) manager
Manager of a geographic area, 
either a country or a region.
Global product division
An organizational structure that 
assigns global responsibilities to 
each product division.
Figure 13.2
International Division Structure at Starbucks
Supply Chain 
and Coffee
Operations
Division
Consumer
Products
Division
Partner
Resources
Division
Headquarters
Starbucks
Coffee
US Division
Starbucks
Coffee
International
Division
Sources: Adapted from (1) www.cogmap.com and (2) www.starbucks.com. Headquartered in Seattle, Starbucks is a leading international coffee and 
coffeehouse company.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

402	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
responsibilities to each product division. Figure 13.4 shows an example from the 
European Aeronautic Defence and Space Company (EADS), whose most famous 
unit is Airbus. This structure treats each product division as a stand-alone entity 
with full worldwide responsibilities. This structure is highly responsive to pressures 
for cost efficiencies, because it allows for consolidation on a worldwide (or at least 
regional) basis and reduces inefficient duplication in multiple countries. For ex-
ample, Unilever reduced the number of soap-producing factories in Europe from 
ten to two after adopting this structure. Recently, because of the popularity of the 
global standardization strategy (noted earlier), the global product division struc-
ture is on the rise. Its main drawback is that local responsiveness suffers, as Ford 
discovered when it phased out the geographic area structure.
A global matrix alleviates the disadvantages associated with both geographic area 
and global product division structures, especially for MNEs adopting a transnational 
strategy. Shown in Figure 13.5, its hallmark is the coordination of responsibilities 
between product divisions and geographic areas. In this hypothetical example, the 
country manager in charge of Japan—in short, the Japan manager—reports to 
Product Division 1 and Asia Division, both of which have equal power.
In theory, this structure supports the goals of the transnational strategy, but in 
practice it is often difficult to deliver. The reason is simple: While managers (such as 
Global matrix
An organizational structure 
often used to alleviate the 
disadvantages associated with 
both geographic area and global 
product division structures, 
especially for MNEs adopting a 
transnational strategy.
Source: Adapted from www.avoncompany.com. Headquartered in New York, Avon is a leading global beauty products company.
Figure 13.3
Geographic Area Structure at Avon Products
North
America
South 
America
Europe, 
Middle East, 
and Africa (EMEA)
Headquarters
Asia
Paciﬁc
China
Source: Adapted from www.eads.com. Headquartered in Munich, Germany, and Paris, France, EADS is the largest commercial aircraft maker and the largest 
defense contractor in Europe.
Figure 13.4
Global Product Division Structure at European Aeronautic Defence and Space Company (EADS)
Airbus
Division
Military
Transport
Aircraft
Division
Aeronautics
(Helicopter)
Division
Headquarters
Space
Division
Defense and
Security
Systems
Division
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 13   Strategizing, Structuring, and Learning around the World	
403
the Japan manager in Figure 13.5) usually find dealing with one boss to be headache 
enough, they do not appreciate having two bosses who are often in conflict (!). For 
example, Product Division 1 may decide that Japan is too tough a nut to crack and 
that there are more promising markets elsewhere, thus ordering the Japan manager 
to curtail her investment and channel resources elsewhere. This makes sense because 
Product Division 1 cares about its global market position and is not wedded to any 
particular country. However, Asia Division, which is evaluated by how well it does 
in Asia, begs to differ. Asia Division argues that it cannot afford to be a laggard in 
Japan if it expects to be a leading player in Asia. Therefore, Asia Division demands 
that the Japan manager increase her investment in the country. Facing these conflict-
ing demands, the Japan manager, who prefers to be politically correct, does not 
want to make any move before consulting corporate headquarters. Eventually, head-
quarters may provide a resolution. But crucial time may be lost in the process, and 
important windows of opportunity for competitive actions may be missed.
Despite its merits on paper, the matrix structure may add layers of manage-
ment, slow down decision speed, and increase costs while not showing significant 
performance improvement. There is no conclusive evidence for the superiority of 
the matrix structure. The following quote from the CEO of Dow Chemical, an early 
adopter of the matrix structure, is sobering:
We were an organization that was matrixed and depended on teamwork, but there was 
no one in charge. When things went well, we didn’t know whom to reward; and when 
things went poorly, we didn’t know whom to blame. So we created a global product 
division structure, and cut out layers of management. There used to be 11 layers of 
management between me and the lowest level employees, now there are five.4
Overall, the positioning of the four structures in Figure 13.1 is not random. They 
develop from the relatively simple international division through either geographic 
area or global product division structures and may finally reach the more complex 
global matrix stage. Not every MNE experiences all of these structural stages, and the 
movement is not necessarily in one direction. For example, the matrix structure’s poster 
child, the Swedish–Swiss conglomerate ABB, recently withdrew from this structure.
Figure 13.5
A Hypothetical Global Matrix Structure
Asia
Japan manager here
belongs to Asia Division
and Product Division 1
Product Division 1
Europe
Product Division 2
Headquarters
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

404	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
13-1d The Reciprocal Relationship between Multinational 
Strategy and Structure
In one word, the relationship between strategy and structure is reciprocal. Three 
ideas stand out. First, Strategy usually drives structure.5 The fit between strategy 
and structure, as exemplified by the pairs in each of the four cells in Figure 13.1, 
is crucial.6 A misfit, such as combining a global standardization strategy with a 
geographic area structure, may have grave consequences.
Second, the relationship is not one-way. As much as strategy drives structure, 
structure also drives strategy. The withdrawal from the unworkable matrix struc-
ture at MNEs such as ABB has called into question the wisdom of the transnational 
strategy.
Finally, neither strategies nor structures are static. It is often necessary to change 
strategy, structure, or both. In an effort to move toward a global standardization 
strategy, many MNEs have adopted a global product division structure while de-
emphasizing the role of country headquarters. However, unique challenges in 
certain countries, especially China, have now pushed some MNEs to revive the 
country headquarters, such as the China headquarters, so that it can coordinate 
numerous activities within a large, complex, and important host country.7 A further 
experimentation is to have an emerging economies division, which is not dedi-
cated to any single country but dedicated to pursuing opportunities in a series of 
emerging economies ranging from Brazil to Saudi Arabia. Cisco pioneered this 
structure, which has been followed by rivals such as IBM.8
13-2 How Institutions and Resources Affect 
Multinational Strategies, Structures, and Learning
Having outlined the basic strategy/structure configurations, let us introduce how 
the institution-based and resource-based views shed light on these issues (see 
Figure 13.6).
Learning Objective
Explain how institutions and 
resources affect strategy, 
structure, and learning.
13-2
Figure 13.6
How Institutions and Resources Affect Multinational Strategy, Structure, and Learning
Institution-Based View
- External institutions governing
MNEs and home-/host- 
country environments
- Internal institutions governing
MNE management
Resource-Based View
- Value
- Rarity
- Imitability
- Organization
Multinational Strategy,
Structure, and 
Learning
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 13   Strategizing, Structuring, and Learning around the World	
405
13-2a Institution-Based Considerations
MNEs face two sets of the rules of the game: Formal and informal institutions 
governing (1) external relationships and (2) internal relationships. Each is discussed 
in turn.
Externally, MNEs are subject to the formal institutional frameworks erected 
by various home-country and host-country governments. In order to protect do-
mestic employment, the British government taxes the foreign earnings of British 
MNEs at a higher rate than their domestic earnings. In another example, home-
country governments may discourage or ban MNE operations abroad for politi-
cal reasons. After the Cold War ended, US defense firms such as Boeing and 
Lockheed Martin were eager to set up R&D subsidiaries in Russia, whose rocket 
scientists were some of the best (and certainly cheapest!) in the world. However, 
the US government warned these firms not to perform any mission-critical R&D 
there.
Host-country governments, on the other hand, often attract, encourage, or 
coerce MNEs into undertaking activities that they otherwise would not. For example, 
basic manufacturing generates low-paying jobs, does not provide sufficient tech-
nology spillovers, and carries little prestige. Advanced manufacturing, R&D, and 
regional headquarters, on the other hand, generate better and higher-paying jobs, 
provide more technology spillovers, and lead to better prestige. Therefore, host-
country governments (such as those in China, Hungary, and Singapore) often use 
a combination of carrots (such as tax incentives and free infrastructure upgrades) 
and sticks (such as threats to block market access) to attract MNE investments in 
higher value-added areas (see the Closing Case).
In addition to formal institutions, MNEs also confront a series of informal 
institutions governing their relationships with home countries (see the Closing Case). 
In the United States, few laws ban MNEs from aggressively setting up overseas sub-
sidiaries, although the issue is a hot button in public debate. Therefore, managers 
contemplating such moves must consider the informal but vocal backlash against 
such activities due to the associated losses in domestic jobs.
Dealing with host countries also involves numerous informal institutions. 
Airbus spends 40% of its procurement budget with US suppliers in 40 states. 
While there is no formal requirement for Airbus to farm out supply contracts, its 
sourcing is guided by the informal norm of reciprocity: If one country’s suppli-
ers are involved with Airbus, airlines based in that country are more likely to buy 
Airbus aircraft.
Institutional factors affecting MNEs are not only external. How MNEs are 
governed internally is also determined by various formal and informal rules of the 
game. Formally, organizational charts, such as those in Figures 13.2 to 13.5, specify 
the scope of responsibilities for various parties. Most MNEs have systems of evalua-
tion, reward, and punishment in place based on these formal rules.
What the formal organizational charts do not reveal are the informal rules of 
the game, such as organizational norms, values, and networks. The nationality of 
the head of foreign subsidiaries is an example. Given the lack of formal regula-
tions, MNEs essentially can have three choices:
  	 a home-country national as the head of a subsidiary (such as an American 
for a subsidiary of a US–headquartered MNE in India)
  	 a host-country national (such as an Indian for the same subsidiary)
  	 a third-country national (such as an Australian for the same subsidiary above).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

406	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
MNEs from different countries have different norms when making these 
appointments. Most Japanese MNEs follow an informal rule: Heads of foreign 
subsidiaries, at least initially, need to be Japanese nationals. In comparison, 
European MNEs are more likely to appoint host-country and third-country 
nationals to lead subsidiaries. As a group, US MNEs are somewhere between 
Japanese and European practices. These staffing approaches may reflect strategic 
differences. Home-country nationals, especially long-time employees of the same 
MNE at home, are more likely to have developed a better understanding of the 
informal workings of the firm and to be better socialized into its dominant norms 
and values. Consequently, the Japanese propensity to appoint home-country 
nationals is conducive to their preferred global standardization strategy, which 
values globally coordinated and controlled actions. Conversely, the European 
comfort in appointing host-country and third-country nationals is indicative of 
European MNEs’ (traditional) preference for a localization strategy.
Beyond the nationality of subsidiary heads, the nationality of top executives at 
the highest level (such as chairman, CEO, and board members) seems to follow 
another informal rule: They are almost always home-country nationals. To the 
extent that top executives are ambassadors of the firm and that the MNE’s coun-
try of origin is a source of differentiation (for example, a German MNE is often 
perceived to be different from an Italian MNE), home-country nationals would 
seem to be the most natural candidates for top positions.
In the eyes of stakeholders such as employees and governments around the world, 
however, a top echelon consisting of largely one nationality does not bode well for 
an MNE aspiring to globalize everything it does. Some critics even argue that this 
“glass ceiling” reflects “corporate imperialism.”9 Consequently, such leading MNEs 
as BP, Coca-Cola, Electrolux, GSK, Lenovo, Nissan, Nokia, PepsiCo, and Sony have 
appointed foreign-born executives to top posts (see In Focus 13.2). Such foreign-born 
BP. Citigroup. Coca-Cola. Electrolux. GSK. Lenovo. 
Nissan. Nokia. PepsiCo. Sony. The list of foreign-
born bosses running the show at some of the world’s 
largest and most visible MNEs keeps growing. Since 
1999, Nissan’s CEO has been Carlos Ghosn, who 
more recently (since 2005) has also become CEO of 
Renault. Born in Brazil to Lebanese immigrants, Ghosn 
was educated in France and rose through the ranks in 
French MNEs Michelin and Renault. Soon after Ghosn 
took over Nissan, he was receiving hate mail from 
Japanese employees slated to lose their jobs. Now he 
is revered in Japan, and considered a national hero for 
his successful efforts to turn Nissan around.
Because of Renault’s acquisition of a chunk of 
Nissan’s equity, Ghosn was appointed to Nissan. 
However, at many other MNEs, foreign-born CEOs 
were promoted from within. In 1993, the Scottish-
born Alex Trotman took over as Ford’s chairman and 
CEO, who then in 1999 promoted the Lebanese-born 
Australian Jacques Nasser as his successor. In 2005, 
Sony appointed the Welsh-born American Howard 
Stringer as its CEO. In 2006, Pepsi promoted the 
Indian-born Indra Nooyi to be its CEO.
Do foreign-born bosses deliver? The record is 
mixed. In addition to Ghosn’s successful turnaround 
of Nissan, inspiring stories include the Turkish-born 
Mehta Kent, who was appointed chairman and CEO 
of Coca-Cola in 2008. Coca-Cola’s performance 
improved under his leadership. In 2011, its stock ral-
lied 30% over the past year and reached $67 on 
Foreign-Born Bosses
IN Focus 13.2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 13   Strategizing, Structuring, and Learning around the World	
407
bosses bring substantial diversity to the firm, which may be a plus. However, 
such diversity puts an enormous burden on these non-native top executives to 
clearly articulate the values and exhibit behaviors expected of senior managers 
of an MNE associated with a particular country. In 2010, Hewlett-Packard (HP) 
appointed Léo Apotheker, a native of Germany, to be its CEO. Unfortunately, HP 
lost $30 billion in market capitalization during his short tenure (over ten months), 
thanks to his numerous change initiatives. He was quickly fired in 2011. Since 
then, the old rule is back: HP is again led by an American executive.
Overall, while formal internal rules on how the MNE is governed may reflect 
conscientious strategic choices, informal internal rules are often taken for granted 
and deeply embedded in administrative heritages, thus making them difficult to 
change.
13-2b Resource-Based Considerations
Shown in Figure 10.6, the resource-based view—exemplified by the value, rarity, imi-
tability, and organization (VRIO) framework—adds a number of insights. First, when 
looking at structural changes, it is critical to consider whether a new structure (such 
Sources: Based on (1) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2011, Sony needs a 
hit, November 21: 72–77; (2) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2010, Coke’s 
last round, November 1: 54–61; (3) BusinessWeek, 2006, Smoothest 
handover, December 18: 62; (4) BusinessWeek, 2009, The foreigners 
at the top of LG, December 22: 56–57; (5) Economist, 2005, Outside 
in, January 1: 42; (6) Economist, 2011, Stringer theory, May 28: 70.
Manish Swarup, file/AP Images
December  1—in sharp contrast to the $37 low in 
2003. On the other hand, uninspiring stories are 
also plenty. Sony under Stringer failed to impress—
while rivals such as Samsung and Apple rocketed 
ahead. Despite Stringer’s best efforts to return this 
giant to its former glory, Sony suffered a string of 
bad luck. Before the earthquake in March 2011 af-
fected ten Sony factories in Japan, Sony had been 
expected to become profitable for that year. Un-
fortunately, the earthquake wiped out any profits. 
But there was more to Sony’s problems than acts 
of God. Sony’s products simply became uninspir-
ing, unpopular, and expensive. In 2011, Sony’s 
share price hit a 24-year low—its $17 billion market 
capitalization was half of what it hade been when 
Stringer became CEO. In 2012, Stringer was re-
placed by a Japanese CEO.
Despite the hits and misses, appointing foreign-
born executives has become a trend for companies 
aspiring to globalize. After China’s Lenovo acquired 
IBM’s PC Division (PCD), Lenovo first appointed 
PCD’s former head, an American, to be its CEO. 
Then Lenovo replaced him with another American 
CEO recruited from Dell. As Korea’s LG generates 
four-fifths of its revenue from overseas, it has 
embarked on a drive to globalize its top echelon. 
While its chairman and CEO are still Korean, five 
of its key units—namely, marketing, procurement, 
supply chain, HRM, and retailer relations—are now 
headed by Western executives recruited from HP, 
Novartis, Pfizer, and Unilever. The once-stodgy 
Korean company is counting on these expats to boost 
its global image and, ultimately, its profits. Whether 
these expats can make it happen remains to be seen. 
When the global recession hit Lenovo in 2008, the 
American CEO left the firm and was replaced by a 
Chinese executive. So stay tuned. . . .
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

408	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
as a matrix) adds concrete value. The value of innovation must also be considered. A 
vast majority of innovations simply fail to reach market, and most new products that 
do reach market end up being financial failures. The difference between an innova-
tor and a profitable innovator is that the latter has not only plenty of good ideas, but 
also lots of complementary assets (such as appropriate organizational structures and 
marketing muscles) to add value to innovation. Philips, for example, is a great in-
novator. It invented rotary shavers, video cassettes, and CDs. Still, its ability to profit 
from these innovations lags behind that of Sony, Matsushita, and Samsung.
A second question is rarity. Certain strategies or structures may be in vogue at 
a given point in time. So, for example, when a company’s rivals all move toward a 
global standardization strategy, this strategy cannot be a source of differentiation. 
To improve global coordination, many MNEs spend millions of dollars to equip 
themselves with enterprise resource planning (ERP) packages provided by SAP 
and Oracle. However, such packages are designed to be implemented widely and 
appeal to a broad range of firms, thus providing no firm-specific advantage for any 
adopting firm.
Even when capabilities are valuable and rare, they have to pass a third hurdle—
imitability. Formal structures are easier to observe and imitate than informal 
structures. This is one of the reasons why the informal, flexible matrix is in vogue 
now. The informal, flexible matrix “is less a structural classification than a broad 
organizational concept or philosophy, manifested in organizational capability and 
management mentality.”10 Obviously, imitating an intangible mentality is much 
harder than imitating a tangible structure.
The last hurdle is organization—namely, how MNEs are organized, both 
formally and informally, around the world.11 One elusive, but important, concept is 
organizational culture. Recall from Chapter 3 that culture is defined by Hofstede 
as “the collective programming of the mind which distinguishes the members 
of one group or category of people from another.” We can extend this concept 
to define organizational culture as the collective programming of the mind that 
distinguishes members of one organization from another. Huawei, for example, is 
known to have a distinctive “wolf” culture, which centers on “continuous hunting” 
and “relentless pursuit” with highly motivated employees who routinely work over-
time and sleep in their offices. Although rivals can imitate everything Huawei does 
technologically, their biggest hurdle lies in their lack of ability to wrap their arms 
around Huawei’s “wolf” culture.
13-3 Worldwide Learning, Innovation,  
and Knowledge Management
Having outlined how institutions and resources affect multinationals, next let us 
devote our attention to the crucial issue of learning, innovation, and knowledge 
management.
13-3a Knowledge Management
Underpinning the recent emphasis on worldwide learning and innovation is the 
emerging interest in knowledge management.12 Knowledge management can be 
defined as the structures, processes, and systems that actively develop, leverage, and 
transfer knowledge.
Organizational culture
The collective programming of 
the mind that distinguishes the 
members of one organization 
from another.
Learning Objective
Outline the challenges 
associated with learning, 
innovation, and knowledge 
management.
13-3
Knowledge management
The structures, processes, and 
systems that actively develop, 
leverage, and transfer knowledge.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 13   Strategizing, Structuring, and Learning around the World	
409
Many managers regard knowledge management as simply information manage-
ment. Taken to an extreme, “such a perspective can result in a profoundly mistaken 
belief that the installation of sophisticated information technology (IT) infrastruc-
ture is the be-all and end-all of knowledge management.”13 Knowledge management 
depends not only on IT but also on informal social relationships within the MNE.14 
This is because there are two categories of knowledge: (1) explicit knowledge and 
(2) tacit knowledge. Explicit knowledge is codifiable—it can be written down and 
transferred with little loss of richness. Virtually all of the knowledge captured, stored, 
and transmitted by IT is explicit. Tacit knowledge is non-codifiable, and its acquisition 
and transfer require hands-on practice. For example, reading a driver’s manual (a ton 
of explicit knowledge) without any road practice does not make you a good driver. 
Tacit knowledge is evidently more important and harder to transfer and learn; it can 
only be acquired through learning by doing (driving in this case). Consequently, from 
a resource-based view, explicit knowledge captured by IT may be strategically less im-
portant. What counts is the hard-to-codify and hard-to-transfer tacit knowledge.15
13-3b Knowledge Management in Four Types  
of Multinational Enterprises
Differences in knowledge management among four types of MNEs in Figure 13.1 
fundamentally stem from the interdependence (1) between the headquarters and 
subsidiaries, and (2) among various subsidiaries, as outlined in Table 13.2.16 In 
MNEs pursuing a home replication strategy, such interdependence is moderate, 
and the role of subsidiaries is largely to adapt and leverage parent-company 
competencies. Thus, knowledge on new products and technologies is mostly devel-
oped at the center and flown to subsidiaries, representing the traditional one-way 
flow. Starbucks, for example, insists on replicating its US coffee shop concept 
around the world, down to the elusive “atmosphere.”
When MNEs adopt a localization strategy, the interdependence is low. Knowl-
edge management centers on developing insights that can best serve local markets. 
Explicit knowledge
Knowledge that is codifiable (can 
be written down and transferred 
with little loss of richness).
Tacit knowledge
Knowledge that is non-
codifiable, whose acquisition 
and transfer require hands-on 
practice.
Table 13.2
Knowledge Management in Four Types of Multinational Enterprises
Strategy
Home 
replication
Localization
Global  
standardization
Transnational
Interdependence
Moderate 
Low
Moderate
High
Role of foreign  
subsidiaries
Adapting and leveraging 
parent company 
competencies
Sensing and exploiting 
local opportunities
Implementing parent 
company initiatives
Differentiated 
contributions by 
subsidiaries to integrate 
worldwide operations
Development  
and diffusion  
of knowledge
Knowledge developed 
at the center and 
transferred to 
subsidiaries
Knowledge developed 
and retained within 
each subsidiary
Knowledge mostly 
developed and retained 
at the center and key 
locations
Knowledge developed 
jointly and shared 
worldwide
Flow of  
knowledge
Extensive flow of 
knowledge and people 
from headquarters to 
subsidiaries
Limited flow of 
knowledge and people 
in both directions (to 
and from the center)
Extensive flow of 
knowledge and people 
from center and key 
locations to subsidiaries
Extensive flow of 
knowledge and people 
in multiple directions
Sources: Adapted from (1) C. Bartlett & S. Ghoshal, 1989, Managing Across Borders: The Transnational Solution (p. 65), Boston: Harvard Business School 
Press; (2) T. Kostova & K. Roth, 2003, Social capital in multinational corporations and a micro-macro model of its formation (p. 299), Academy of Management 
Review, 28(2): 297–317.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

410	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
Ford of Europe used to develop cars for Europe, with a limited flow of knowledge 
to and from headquarters. In MNEs pursuing a global standardization strategy, 
on the other hand, the interdependence is increased. Knowledge is developed 
and retained at the headquarters and a few centers of excellence. Consequently, 
knowledge and people typically flow from headquarters and these centers to other 
subsidiaries. For example, Yokogawa Hewlett-Packard, HP’s subsidiary in Japan, 
won a coveted Japanese Deming Award for quality. The subsidiary was then charged 
with transferring such knowledge to the rest of HP, which resulted in a tenfold 
improvement in corporate-wide quality in ten years.
A hallmark of transnational MNEs is a high degree of interdependence with 
extensive and bi-directional flows of knowledge. For example, Kikkoman first 
developed teriyaki sauce specifically for the US market as a barbecue glaze. It was 
then marketed to Japan and the rest of the world (see In Focus 13.1). Similarly, 
Häagen-Dazs developed a popular ice cream in Argentina that was based on a 
locally popular caramelized milk dessert. The company then took the new flavor 
and sold it as Dulce De Leche throughout the United States and Europe. Within 
one year, it became the second most popular Häagen-Dazs ice cream (next only 
to vanilla). Particularly fundamental to transnational MNEs is knowledge flows 
among dispersed subsidiaries. Instead of a top-down hierarchy, the MNE thus can 
be conceptualized as an integrated network of subsidiaries. Each subsidiary not 
only develops locally relevant knowledge but also aspires to contribute knowledge 
to benefit the MNE as a whole.
13-3c Globalizing Research and Development (R&D)
R&D represents a crucial arena for knowledge management. Relative to produc-
tion and marketing, only more recently has R&D emerged as an important func-
tion to be internationalized—often known as innovation-seeking investment.17 The 
intensification of competition for innovation drives the globalization of R&D. Such 
R&D provides a vehicle to access a foreign country’s local talents and expertise.18 
Recall earlier discussions in Chapters 6 and 10 on the importance of agglomeration 
of high-caliber innovative firms within a country. For foreign firms, a most effec-
tive way to access such a cluster is to be there through foreign direct investment 
(FDI)—as Shiseido did in France by setting up a perfume lab there.
From a resource-based standpoint, a fundamental basis for competitive advan-
tage is innovation-based firm heterogeneity (being different).19 Decentralized R&D 
performed by different locations and teams around the world virtually guarantees 
that there will be persistent heterogeneity in the solutions generated.20 GSK, for ex-
ample, has aggressively spun off R&D units, because it realizes that adding more 
researchers in centralized R&D units does not necessarily enhance global learning 
and innovation.21 GE’s China units have developed low-cost, portable ultrasound 
machines at a fraction of the cost of existing machines developed in the United 
States. GE has not only been selling the developed-in-China machines throughout 
emerging economies, but has also brought them back to the United States and other 
developed economies, which also benefit tremendously from such low-cost machines.
13-3d Problems and Solutions in Knowledge Management
Institutionally, how MNEs employ the formal and informal rules of the game has 
a significant bearing behind the success or failure of knowledge management.22 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 13   Strategizing, Structuring, and Learning around the World	
411
Shown in Table 13.3, a number of informal “rules” can become problems in knowl-
edge management. In knowledge acquisition, many MNEs prefer to invent every-
thing internally. However, for large firms, R&D actually offers diminishing returns.23 
Consequently, a new model, open innovation, is emerging.24 Open innovation is 
“the use of purposive inflows and outflows of knowledge to accelerate internal 
innovation and expand the markets for external use of innovation.”25 It relies on 
more collaborative research, among various internal units, external firms, and 
university labs. Evidence shows that firms that skillfully share research outperform 
those that fail to do so.26
In knowledge retention, the usual problems of employee turnover are com-
pounded when such employees are key R&D personnel, whose departure will lead 
to knowledge leakage.27 In knowledge outflow, there is the “How does it help me?” 
syndrome. Specifically, managers of the source subsidiary may view the outbound 
sharing of knowledge as a diversion of scarce time and resources. Further, some 
managers may believe that “knowledge is power”—monopolizing certain knowl-
edge may be viewed as the currency to acquire and retain power within the MNE.28
Even when certain subsidiaries are willing to share knowledge, inappropriate 
transmission channels may still torpedo effective sharing.29 It is tempting to 
establish global virtual teams, which do not meet face to face, to transfer knowledge. 
Unfortunately, such teams often have to confront tremendous communication  
and relationship barriers.30 Videoconferences can 
hardly show body language, and Skype often breaks 
down. Thus, face-to-face meetings are often still 
necessary. Finally, recipient subsidiaries may block 
successful knowledge inflows. First, the “not invented 
here” syndrome creates resistance to ideas from other 
units. Second, recipients may have limited absorptive 
capacity—the “ability to recognize the value of new 
information, assimilate it, and apply it.”31
As solutions to combat these problems, headquar-
ters can manipulate the formal rules of the game, 
such as (1) tying bonuses to measurable knowledge 
outflows and inflows,32 (2) using high-powered cor-
porate-based or unit-based incentives (as opposed 
to individual-based and single-subsidiary-based in-
centives), and (3) investing in codifying tacit knowl-
edge (such as the codification of the Toyota Way).  
Open innovation 
The use of purposive inflows 
and outflows of knowledge to 
accelerate internal innovation 
and expand the markets for 
external use of innovation.
Global virtual team
A team whose members are 
physically dispersed in multiple 
locations in the world and often 
operate on a virtual basis.
Absorptive capacity
The ability to recognize the value 
of new information, assimilate it, 
and apply it.
Table 13.3
Problems in Knowledge Management
Elements of knowledge management
Common problems
Knowledge acquisition
Failure to share and integrate external knowledge
Knowledge retention
Employee turnover and knowledge leakage
Knowledge outflow
“How does it help me?” syndrome and “knowledge is power” mentality
Knowledge transmission
Inappropriate channels
Knowledge inflow
“Not invented here” syndrome and absorptive capacity
Source: Adapted from A. Gupta & V. Govindarajan, 2004, Global Strategy and Organization (p. 109), New York: Wiley.
Triangle Images/Digital Vision/Getty Images
What are some of the ways that global virtual team 
members can effectively communicate knowledge 
among themselves?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

412	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
However, these formal policies fundamentally boil down to the very challenging 
(if not impossible) task of how to accurately measure inflows and outflows of tacit 
knowledge. The nature of tacit knowledge simply resists such formal bureaucratic 
practices. Consequently, MNEs often have to rely on a great deal of informal in-
tegrating mechanisms, such as (1) facilitating management and R&D personnel 
networks among various subsidiaries through joint teamwork, training, and 
conferences, and (2) promoting strong organizational (that is, MNE-specific) cul-
tures and shared values and norms for cooperation among subsidiaries.
Instead of using traditional formal command-and-control structures that are 
often ineffective, knowledge management is best facilitated by informal social 
capital, which refers to the informal benefits that individuals and organizations 
derive from their social structures and networks.33 Because of the existence of 
social capital, individuals are more likely to go out of their way to help friends and 
acquaintances. Consequently, managers of the China subsidiary are more likely 
to help managers of the Chile subsidiary with needed knowledge if they know 
each other and have some social relationship. Otherwise, managers of the China 
subsidiary may not be as enthusiastic to provide such help if the call for help comes 
from managers of the Canada subsidiary, with whom there is no social relation-
ship. Overall, the micro informal interpersonal relationships among managers 
of various units may greatly facilitate macro intersubsidiary cooperation among 
various units—in short, a micro-macro link.34
13-4 Debates and Extensions
The question of how to manage complex MNEs has led to numerous debates, some 
of which have been discussed earlier (such as the debate on the matrix structure). 
Here we outline three of the leading debates not previously discussed: (1) one 
multinational versus many national companies, (2) corporate controls versus sub-
sidiary initiatives, and (3) customer-focused dimensions versus integration, respon-
siveness, and learning.
13-4a One Multinational versus Many National Companies
We often treat each MNE as one firm. However, from an institution-based view, 
one can argue that a multinational enterprise may be a total fiction that does not 
exist. This is because, legally, incorporation is only possible under national law. 
In other words, every so-called MNE is essentially a bunch of national companies 
(subsidiaries) registered in various countries. A generation ago, such firms were 
often labeled “multi-national companies” with a hyphen. Although some pundits 
argue that globalization is undermining the power of national governments, little 
evidence suggests that the modern nation-state system, in existence since the 1648 
Treaty of Westphalia, is retreating.
This debate is not just academic hair-splitting over a hyphen. It is very relevant 
and stakes are high. One case in point concerns taxation. Google Ireland is not a 
branch of the US-based Google Corporation. Google Ireland is a separate, legally 
independent corporation registered in Ireland. Although Google Corporation 
intentionally lets Google Ireland earn a lot of profits, the US Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) cannot tax a dime Google Ireland makes unless it sends back (repa-
triates) the profits to Google Corporation. Google Corporation does not have just 
Social capital
The informal benefits individuals 
and organizations derive from 
their social structures and 
networks.
Micro-macro link
The micro, informal interpersonal 
relationships among managers 
of various units may greatly 
facilitate macro, intersubsidiary 
cooperation among these units.
Learning Objective
 Participate in three 
leading debates concerning 
multinational strategy, 
structure, and learning.
13-4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 13   Strategizing, Structuring, and Learning around the World	
413
one subsidiary. It has lots around the world. Overall, 54% of Google’s profits are 
parked overseas and are not taxable by the IRS. Google is not alone. The list of 
leading US firms that have left a majority of their profits overseas includes Chevron, 
Cisco, Citigroup, ExxonMobil, GE, HP, IBM, Johnson & Johnson, Microsoft, P&G, 
PepsiCo, and Pfizer.35 These firms claim that they are willing to bring the profits 
back home to invest and create jobs as long as Congress grants them a tax holiday. 
Running huge budget deficits, Congress is understandably reluctant.
Another case in point is brought by the Indian firm Satyam’s scandal. Satyam 
was listed on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), and PricewaterhouseCooper 
(PwC) endorsed Satyam’s books even though $1 billion cash did not exist at all. 
While such sloppy auditing was done by PwC India, some Satyam shareholders 
sued PwC International Limited, headquartered in New York. But PwC Interna-
tional’s spokesman argued in interviews that “there is no such a thing as a global 
firm because we are a membership organization.”36 That is to say: PwC India, regis-
tered in India, is a legally independent firm whose conduct has nothing to do with 
other nationally registered firms, such as PwC International or PwC Hong Kong. 
In court battles, whether the argument that PwC International is not responsible 
for PwC India’s misconduct can repel the allegations remains to be seen.
13-4b Corporate Controls versus Subsidiary Initiatives
One of the leading debates on how to manage large firms is centralization versus 
decentralization. Within an MNE, the debate boils down to central controls versus 
subsidiary initiatives. A starting point is that subsidiaries are not necessarily at the 
receiving end of commands from headquarters. When headquarters promote cer-
tain practices (such as ethics training), some subsidiaries may be in full compli-
ance, others may pay lip service to them, and still others may simply refuse to adopt 
them, citing local differences.37
In addition to reacting to headquarters’ demands differently, some subsidiar-
ies may actively pursue their own subsidiary-level strategies and agendas.38 These 
activities are known as subsidiary initiatives, defined as the proactive and deliberate 
pursuit of new opportunities by a subsidiary (see In Focus 13.3). Many authors 
Subsidiary initiative
The proactive and deliberate 
pursuit of new opportunities by 
a subsidiary.
Bayer Group is a $50 billion chemical and health 
care giant based in Germany. Its three main product 
divisions are Bayer MaterialScience (BMS), Beyer Crop-
Science, and Bayer HealthCare. In this matrix organi­
zation, each of these product divisions has country/ 
regional subsidiaries in major markets. Between 
2004 and 2011, the CEO for Bayer MaterialScience 
North America (BMS NA) was Greg Babe. Contrib-
uting 25% of BMS’ global revenues, BMS NA de-
livered highly respected performance. It had strong 
sales growth in 2005 ($3.5 billion, increasing from 
$2.7 billion in 2004) and suffered a modest flattening 
in 2006 ($3.3 billion). However, in early 2007, BMS 
made a radical decision: to dismantle BMS NA—in 
other words, to shut down the North America region-
al headquarters in Pittsburgh. Allegedly undermin-
ing cost competitiveness, the regional structure was 
viewed as too bloated.
Shocked, Babe asked for time to propose another 
solution. In his own words: “The stakes couldn’t have 
A Subsidiary Initiative at Bayer MaterialScience North America
IN Focus 13.3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

414	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
argue that such initiatives may inject a much-needed spirit of entrepreneurship 
throughout the larger bureaucratic MNE.
However, from the perspective of corporate headquarters, it is hard to 
distinguish between good-faith subsidiary initiative and opportunistic “empire 
building.”39 A lot is at stake when determining which subsidiary initiatives are 
supported.40 Subsidiaries whose initiatives fail to receive support may see their roles 
marginalized and, in the worst case, their facilities closed. Subsidiary managers 
are often host-country nationals, who would naturally prefer to strengthen their 
subsidiary. However, these tendencies, although very understandable, are not 
necessarily consistent with the MNE’s corporate-wide goals. These tendencies, if 
not checked and controlled, can surely lead to chaos. According to the title of an 
influential article authored by Andy Grove, former chairman and CEO of Intel, the 
challenge for corporate management is:
Let chaos reign, then rein in chaos—repeatedly.41
been higher: not only the future of my position but the 
credibility of the entire regional operation was in ques-
tion.” Cost cutting was nothing unusual in this cyclical 
industry, and the norm was usually to shave off a cer-
tain percentage of overhead (such as 10%). A month 
into the analysis, Babe and his team had an “aha” 
moment. The cost structure, they realized, should be 
dictated by how they grew the business, not by an 
arbitrary target. With that insight, they looked at the 
overall picture through a strategic growth lens rather 
than a tactical cost-reduction lens. They set two spe-
cific goals: (1) to grow at 1% to 2% above GDP and 
(2) to save 25% on selling, general, and administrative 
(SG&A) costs. To deliver that, Babe needed to com-
pletely reshape his unit but also needed additional in-
vestment of $70 million.
In late 2007, when Babe presented to BMS’s 
global leadership team, everyone expected him to 
come up with a cost-cutting exercise. Instead, he 
presented a subsidiary growth initiative. BMS’s global 
leadership team challenged key concepts of the pro-
posal, many of which deviated from Bayer’s global 
norms. For example, transportation was historically 
deemed by Bayer as a core competence. Babe pro-
posed to outsource it, which would allow customers 
to give 12 (rather than 72) hours’ notice for shipping. 
Overall, Babe promised to turn BMS NA into a lean 
growth engine. In the end, the bold proposal paid off. 
Babe left the meeting with $70 million in hand. In his 
own words:
I was excited, but also scared to death, because 
delivering on it was by no means going to be 
easy. It would require laying off hundreds of em-
ployees and retraining more than 1,000 others, 
outsourcing many operations, rolling out new 
IT systems, and modifying our product offer-
ings, all within 18 months—not much time for a 
project of that scale.
To make matters worse, the chemical industry 
soon entered a severe downturn worldwide, and 
BMS suffered eight consecutive quarters of declining 
sales starting in 2008. In such a bleak environment, 
BMS NA’s efforts became more strategically impor-
tant. By early 2009, BMS NA delivered on everything 
Babe had promised: it reduced SG&A costs by 25% 
($100 million) and head count by 30%. It actually over-
delivered: only $60 million of the $70 million allotted for 
growth was spent. By 2010, BMS NA’s sales turned 
around and enjoyed double-digit quarterly growth 
(2010 sales went up to $2.7 billion from the bottom 
of $2.1 billion in 2009). What was more valuable was 
that some of the reorganized processes (such as 
outsourcing transportation), so foreign at the time to 
BMS, now became implemented by BMS around the 
world. Overall, by endorsing the regional subsidiary’s 
initiative, BMS’ global leadership team took some sig-
nificant risk. But in the end, the payoff was handsome.
Sources: Based on (1) Bayer AG, 2012, www.bayerus.com; (2) G. Babe, 
2011, The CEO of Bayer Corp. on creating a lean growth engine, Harvard 
Business Review, July: 41–45.
IN Focus 13.3 (continued)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 13   Strategizing, Structuring, and Learning around the World	
415
13-4c Customer-Focused Dimensions  
versus Integration, Responsiveness, and Learning
As discussed earlier, juggling the three dimensions of integration, responsive-
ness, and learning has often made the global matrix structure so complex it is 
unworkable. However, instead of simplifying, many MNEs have added new dimen-
sions. Often, new customer-focused dimensions of structure are placed on top of 
an existing structure, resulting in a four- or five-dimension matrix.42
Of the two primary customer-focused dimensions, the first is a global account 
structure to supply customers (often other MNEs) in a coordinated and consistent 
way across various countries.43 Most original equipment manufacturers (OEMs)—
namely, contract manufacturers that produce goods not carrying their own brands 
(such as the makers of Nike shoes and Microsoft Xbox)—use this structure. For 
example, Singapore’s Flextronics, one of the world’s largest OEMs, has dedicated 
global accounts for Dell, Palm, and Sony Ericsson. The second customer-focused 
dimension is the oft-used solutions-based structure. For instance, as a “customer so-
lution” provider, IBM will sell whatever combination of hardware, software, and ser-
vices customers prefer, whether that means selling IBM products or rivals’ offerings.
The typical starting point is to put in place temporary solutions rather than cre-
ate new layers or units. However, this ad hoc approach can quickly get out of control, 
resulting in subsidiary managers’ additional duties of reporting to three or four 
“informal bosses” (acting as global account managers) on top of their “day jobs.” 
Eventually, new formal structures may be called for, resulting in more bureaucracy.
So, what is the solution when confronting the value-added potential of customer-
focused dimensions and their associated complexity and cost? One solution is to 
simplify. For instance, ABB, when facing performance problems, transformed its 
sprawling “Byzantine” matrix structure to a mere two product divisions.
13-5 Management Savvy
MNEs are the ultimate large, complex, and geographically dispersed business 
organizations. What determines the success or failure of multinational strate-
gies, structures, and learning? The answer boils down to the institution-based and 
resource-based dimensions. The institution-based view calls for thorough under-
standing and skillful manipulation of the rules of the game, both at home and 
abroad. The resource-based view focuses on the development of firm-specific 
capabilities to enhance the odds for success.
Consequently, three clear implications emerge for savvy managers, listed in 
Table 13.4. First, understanding and mastering the external rules of the game 
Global account structure
A customer-focused dimension 
that supplies customers (often 
other MNEs) in a coordinated 
and consistent way across 
various countries.
Solutions-based structure
A customer-focused solution 
in which a provider sells what-
ever combination of goods and 
services that customers prefer, 
including rivals’ offerings.
Learning Objective
Draw implications for action.
13-5
Table 13.4
Implications for Action
  	 Understand and master the external rules of the game governing MNEs and home-/host- 
country environments
  	 Understand and be prepared to change the internal rules of the game governing MNE 
management
  	 Develop learning and innovation capabilities to leverage multinational presence as an 
asset—“think global, act local”
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

416	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
governing MNEs and home-/host-country environments become a must. In 2000, 
Philips took advantage of home-country antidumping rules (see Chapter 11) by 
suing Chinese firms for dumping in the EU. However, after Philips upset the host-
country government, its sales in China, its second largest market after the United 
States, immediately dropped by 10% (from $5.5 billion in 2000 to $5 billion in 
2001). Getting the message, Philips tried to repair the damage. In 2003, Philips’ 
board held its first meeting outside of Amsterdam in Beijing and visited Chinese 
officials. It also moved its Asia headquarters from Hong Kong to Shanghai and set 
up R&D units in Xian.
Second, managers need to understand and be prepared to change the in-
ternal rules of the game governing MNE management. Different strategies and 
structures call for different internal rules. Some facilitate, and others constrain 
MNE actions. A firm using a home replication strategy should not look to hire 
a foreign-born executive as its CEO. Yet, as an MNE becomes more global in 
its operations, its managerial outlook needs to be broadened as well (see In 
Focus 13.2).
Finally, managers need to actively develop learning and innovation capabili-
ties to leverage multinational presence.44 One winning formula is “think global, act 
local.”45 Failing to do so may be costly. Between 1999 and 2000, many Ford Explorer 
SUVs accidentally rolled over and killed many people in the United States. Most 
of these accidents were caused by faulty tires made by Japan’s Bridgestone and 
its US subsidiary Firestone. Before the number of US accidents skyrocketed, an 
alarming number of accidents had already taken place in warmer-weather coun-
tries, such as Brazil and Saudi Arabia, and local managers dutifully reported 
them to headquarters in Japan and the United States. Unfortunately, these re-
ported accidents were dismissed by higher-ups as having been caused by “driver 
error” or “road conditions.” Bridgestone (and Firestone) thus failed to leverage 
its multinational presence as an asset—it should have learned from these reports 
and proactively probed into the potential for similar accidents in cooler-weather 
countries. (Tires wear out faster in warmer weather.) In the end, lives were lost 
unnecessarily, and informed car buyers abandoned the Bridgestone/Firestone 
brand.
C h a p t e r  S u m m a r y
	13.1	 Describe the relationship between multinational strategy and structure.
  	 Governing multinational strategy and structure is an integration-
responsiveness framework.
  	 There are four strategy/structure pairs: (1) home replication strategy/
international division structure, (2) localization strategy/geographic area 
structure, (3) global standardization strategy/global product division struc-
ture, and (4) transnational strategy/global matrix structure.
	13.2	 Explain how institutions and resources affect strategy, structure, and 
learning.
  	 MNEs are governed by external and internal rules of the game around the 
world.
  	 Management of MNE structure, learning, and innovation needs to take 
into account of VRIO.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 13   Strategizing, Structuring, and Learning around the World	
417
	13.3	 Outline the challenges associated with learning, innovation, and knowledge 
management.
  	 Knowledge management primarily focuses on tacit knowledge.
  	 Globalization of R&D calls for capabilities to combat a number of problems 
associated with knowledge creation, retention, outflow, transmission, and 
inflow.
	13.4	 Participate in three leading debates on multinational strategy, structure, 
and learning.
  	 (1) One multinational versus many national companies, (2) corporate 
controls versus subsidiary initiatives, and (3) customer-focused dimensions 
versus integration, responsiveness, and learning.
	13.5	 Draw implications for action.
  	 Understand and master the external rules of the game from home-/
host-country environments.
  	 Understand and be prepared to change the internal rules of the game 
governing MNEs.
  	 Develop learning and innovation capabilities around the world—“think 
global, act local.”
K e y  T e r m s
Absorptive capacity 411
Center of excellence 400
Country (regional) 
manager 401
Explicit knowledge 409
Geographic  
structure 401
Global account  
structure 415
Global matrix 402
Global product  
division 401
Global standardization 
strategy 400
Global virtual team 411
Home replication 
strategy 397
Integration-
responsiveness 
framework 396
International  
division 401
Knowledge  
management 408
Local responsiveness 396
Localization (multi-
domestic) strategy 398
Micro-macro link 412
Open innovation 411
Organizational  
culture 408
Social capital 412
Solutions-based  
structure 415
Subsidiary initiative 413
Tacit knowledge 409
Transnational  
strategy 400
Worldwide (global)
mandate 400
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 ON CULTURE: The pressure to reduce costs is common to both domes-
tic and international competition, but what additional kind of pressure is 
unique to international competition?
	 2.	 Referring to Figure 13.1, describe the four strategic choices and the four 
corresponding organizational structures in the integration-responsiveness 
framework.
	 3.	 List three examples of how formal and informal external institutions affect 
MNEs.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

418	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
	 4.	 Describe some of the informal rules of the game that govern what type of 
individual an MNE can appoint to be the head of a foreign subsidiary.
	 5.	 Summarize the insights revealed by using a VRIO framework to analyze a 
potential structural change.
	 6.	 In your opinion, what type of knowledge is more important to an MNE—
explicit or tacit? Why?
	 7.	 How is knowledge developed and disseminated in each of the four types of 
MNEs?
	 8.	 Name one problem with a global virtual team and how you would solve the 
problem?
	 9.	 What are some of the actions that MNEs can take to combat common prob-
lems in knowledge management?
	 10.	 Which do you think would be more integral to a firm’s success: corporate 
controls or subsidiary-level strategies and agendas?
	 11.	 Describe the two primary customer-focused dimensions that many MNEs 
add to their global matrix structures.
	 12.	 From time to time, a manager may be faced with the need to change the 
internal rules of the game within his or her MNE. What skills and capabili-
ties may be useful in achieving this?
	 13.	 What is your interpretation of the phrase “Think global, act local”?
	 14.	 After reviewing PengAtlas Map 2.1, in your opinion, how do you explain 
why most of the top 10 exporters are also among the top ten importers?
	 15.	 After comparing PengAtlas Map 2.1 and 2.2, in your opinion, why are most 
of the top 10 on 2.1 also on 2.2? 
C r i t i c a l  D i s c u s s i o n  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 In this age of globalization, some gurus argue that all industries are 
becoming global and that all firms need to adopt a global standardization 
strategy. Do you agree? Why or why not?
	 2.	 ON ETHICS: You are the head of the best-performing subsidiary in an MNE. 
Because bonuses are tied to subsidiary performance, your bonus is the 
highest among managers of all subsidiaries. Now headquarters is organiz-
ing managers from other subsidiaries to visit and learn from your subsid-
iary. You are worried that if performance at other subsidiaries improves, 
then your subsidiary will no longer be a star unit and your bonus will go 
down. What are you going to do?
	 3.	 ON ETHICS: You are a corporate R&D manager at Boeing and are consider-
ing transferring some R&D work to China, India, and Russia, where the 
work performed by a US engineer making $70,000 a year can be done by an 
equally capable engineer making less than $7,000 per year. However, US 
engineers at Boeing have staged protests against such moves. US politicians 
are similarly vocal concerning job losses and national security hazards. 
What are you going to do?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 13   Strategizing, Structuring, and Learning around the World	
419
G l o b a l  A c t i o n
	 1.	 Currently, considerable growth has been documented in Latin American 
and Caribbean economies. Based on the specific regulations in each coun-
try, part of your company’s strategy in the Western Hemisphere is to ensure 
that contracts made by the firm are agreed to and abided by in all busi-
ness dealings. Since your company has sales offices in every Latin American 
and Caribbean economy, where should your company focus first? Provide 
detailed justification for your choices.
	 2.	 To remain competitive, a steel company needs to reconfigure its operations 
to align with worldwide production. As a consultant on world steel produc-
tion, provide a report that indicates appropriate personnel and resource 
allocation to each region of the world. As a part of your analysis, be sure 
to include your analysis for specific countries in which your client should 
maintain regional headquarters.
V i d e o  C a s e
After watching the video on snack foods in China, discuss the following:
	 1.	 What strategy are American companies employing in China?
	 2.	 How does Frito Lay’s approach impact their business?
	 3.	 Based upon your answer to question #1, what organizational structure is 
appropriate?
	 4.	 What will determine the American snack companies’ success in China?
	 5.	 Will a localization strategy provide a sustainable competitive advantage for 
American companies?
A number of MNEs have moved headquarters (HQ) 
overseas. In general, there are two levels of HQ: 
business unit HQ and corporate HQ. At the busi-
ness unit level, examples are numerous. In 2004, 
Nokia moved its corporate finance HQ from Helsinki, 
Finland, to New York. In 2006, IBM’s global procure-
ment office moved from New York to Shenzhen, 
China. In 2009, Nomura transferred its investment 
banking HQ from Tokyo to London. Examples of cor-
porate HQ relocations are fewer, but they tend to 
be of higher profile. In 1992, HSBC moved corpo-
rate HQ from Hong Kong to London. Similarly, Anglo 
American, Old Mutual, and SAB (later to become 
SABMiller after acquiring Miller Brewing Company) 
moved from South Africa to London. In 2004, News 
Corporation moved corporate HQ from Melbourne, 
Australia, to New York. In 2005, Lenovo set up cor-
porate HQ in Raleigh, North Carolina, home of IBM’s 
former PC division that Lenovo acquired. The ques-
tion is: Why?
Moving Headquarters Overseas
Ethical 
Dilemma
C l o s i n g  C a s e
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

420	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
If you have moved from one house to another in the 
same city, you can easily appreciate the logistical chal-
lenges (and nightmares!) associated with relocating 
HQ overseas. One simple answer is that the benefits 
must significantly outweigh the drawbacks. At the 
business unit level, the answer is straightforward: the 
“center of gravity” of the activities of a business unit 
may pull its HQ toward a host country. See the follow-
ing letter to suppliers from IBM’s chief procurement 
officer informing them of the move to China:
IBM Global Procurement is taking a major step 
toward developing a more geographically distrib-
uted executive structure. . . . By anchoring the 
organization in this location, we will be better posi-
tioned to continue developing the skills and talents 
of our internal organization in the region, . . . Clearly, 
this places us closer to the core of the technology 
supply chain which is important, not only for IBM’s 
own internal needs, but increasingly for the needs 
of external clients whose supply chains we are 
managing via our Procurement Services offerings. 
As IBM’s business offerings continue to grow, we 
must develop a deeper supply chain in the region 
to provide services and human resource skills to 
clients both within Asia and around the world.
At the corporate level, there are at least five stra-
tegic rationales. First, a leading symbolic value is an 
unambiguous statement to various stakeholders that 
the firm is a global player. News Corporation’s new 
corporate HQ in New York is indicative of its global 
status, as opposed to being a relatively parochial firm 
from “down under.” Lenovo’s coming of age is, no 
doubt, underpinned by the establishment of its world-
wide HQ in the United States.
Second, there may be significant efficiency gains. 
If the new corporate HQ is in a major financial center 
such as New York or London, the MNE can have more 
efficient and more frequent communication with in-
stitutional shareholders, financial analysts, and invest-
ment banks. The MNE also increases its visibility in 
a financial market, resulting in a broader shareholder 
base and greater market capitalization. Three leading 
(former) South African firms, Anglo American, Old 
Mutual, and SABMiller, have now joined the FTSE 
100—the top 100 UK firms by capitalization.
Third, firms may benefit from their visible com-
mitment to the laws of the new host country. They 
can also benefit from the higher-quality legal and 
regulatory regime they now operate under. These 
benefits are especially crucial for firms from emerging 
economies where local rules are not world-class. 
A lack of confidence about South Africa’s political 
stability drove Anglo American, Old Mutual, and SAB-
Miller to London. By moving to London, HSBC like-
wise deviated from its Hong Kong roots at a time 
when the political future of Hong Kong was uncertain.
Fourth, moving corporate HQ to a new country 
clearly indicates a commitment to that country. In ad-
dition to political motivation, HSBC’s move to London 
signaled its determination to become a more global 
player, instead of being a regional player centered on 
Asia. HSBC indeed carried out this more global strat-
egy since the 1990s. However, in an interesting twist 
of events, HSBC’s CEO relocated back to Hong Kong 
in 2010. Technically, HSBC’s corporate HQ is still in 
London, and its chairman remains in London. However, 
the symbolism of the CEO’s return to Hong Kong is 
clear. As China becomes more economically powerful, 
HSBC is interested in demonstrating its commitment 
Sang Tan/AP Images
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 13   Strategizing, Structuring, and Learning around the World	
421
to that important part of the world, which was where 
HSBC started. (HSBC was set up in Hong Kong in 1865 
as Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation.)
Finally, by moving (or threatening to move) HQ, 
firms enhance their bargaining power vis-à-vis that of 
their (original) home-country governments. Tetra Pak’s 
1981 move of its corporate HQ to Switzerland was 
driven primarily by the owners’ tax disputes with the 
Swedish government. A few years ago, Seagate Tech-
nology, formerly registered in Silicon Valley, changed 
its incorporation to the Cayman Islands in search of 
lower taxes. More US firms may follow such a move. 
Having already paid overseas taxes, US MNEs natu-
rally resented the Obama administration’s proposal 
to extract from them $109 billion in additional US 
taxes. “Doesn’t the Obama administration recognize 
that most big US companies are multinationals that 
happen to be headquartered in the United States?” 
asked Duncan Niederauer, CEO of NYSE Euronext 
in a BusinessWeek interview. Likewise, as three of 
Britain’s large banks—Barclays, HSBC, and Standard 
Chartered, the three best-run ones that did not need 
bailouts—now face higher taxes and more government 
intervention, they, too, have threatened to move their 
HQ out of London. The message is clear: If the home-
country government treats us harshly, we will pack 
our bags.
The last point, of course, is where the ethical and 
social responsibility controversies erupt. According 
to the Economist, Italy “regularly goes into hysteria 
over whether Fiat will stay.” After Fiat’s acquisition 
of Chrysler in 2009, whether the combined group’s 
HQ would be in Turin or Detroit became an emotion-
ally charged debate. (Fiat’s HQ eventually stayed in 
Turin.) Although the absolute number of jobs lost is 
not great, these are high-quality (and high-paying) jobs 
that every government would prefer to see. For that 
reason, different cities in China, such as Beijing and 
Shanghai, offered very lucrative packages to attract 
regional HQ. For MNEs’ home countries, if a suffi-
cient number of HQ move overseas, there is a serious 
ramification that other high-quality service providers, 
such as lawyers, bankers, and accountants, will follow 
them. In response, proposals are floating to offer tax 
incentives for these “foot-loose” MNEs to keep HQ at 
home. However, critics question why these wealthy 
MNEs (and executives) need to be subsidized (or 
bribed), while many other sectors and individuals are 
struggling.
Case Discussion Questions:
	 1.	 What are the drawbacks and benefits associated 
with moving business unit and corporate HQ to 
another country?
	 2.	 If you were a CEO or a business unit head, under 
what conditions would you consider moving HQ?
	 3.	 If you were a government official in the MNE’s 
home country, what can you do to discourage 
such moves of multinational HQ out of the 
country?
[Journal acronyms] AME—Academy of Management Executive; AMJ—
Academy of Management Journal; AMP—Academy of Management Per-
spectives; APJM—Asia Pacific Journal of Management; AMR—Academy 
of Management Review; ASQ—Administrative Science Quarterly; BW—
BusinessWeek (before 2010) or Bloomberg Businessweek (since 2010); 
HBR—Harvard Business Review; JIBS—Journal of International Busi-
ness Studies; JIM—Journal of International Management; JMS—Journal 
of Management Studies; JWB—Journal of World Business; MIR—Man-
agement International Review; OSc—Organization Science; SMJ—Strate-
gic Management Journal
1 T. Levitt, 1983, The globalization of markets, HBR, May: 92–102.
2 A. Rugman, 2001, The End of Globalization, New York: AMACOM.
3 J. Arregle, P. Beamish, & L. Hebert, 2009, The regional dimen-
sion of MNEs’ foreign subsidiary localization, JIBS, 40: 86–107; 
C. Asmussen, 2009, Local, regional, or global? JIBS, 40: 1192–1205; 
B. Greenwald & J. Kahn, 2005, All strategy is local, HBR, September: 
95–104.
4 R. Hodgetts, 1999, Dow Chemical CEO William Stavropoulos on 
structure, AME, 13: 30.
N O T E S
Sources: Based on (1) G. Benito, R. Lunnan, & S. Tomassen, 2011, Distant encounters of the third kind: Multinational companies locating divisional 
headquarters abroad, Journal of Management Studies, 48: 373–394; (2) J. Birkinshaw, P. Braunerhjelm, U. Holm, & S. Terjesen, 2006, Why do 
some multinational corporations relocate their headquarters overseas? Strategic Management Journal, 27: 681–700; (3) BusinessWeek, 2009, NYSE 
chief Duncan Niederauer on Obama and business, 8 June: 15–16; (4) China Business Review, 2009, The race for regional headquarters takes off, 
November: 56–59; (5) Economist, 2010, Las Vegas leaving, December 4: 71; (6) Economist, 2011, HSBC: Gulliver’s travels, April 16: 75–77; (7) IBM, 
2006, IBM Procurement headquarters moves to Shenzhen, China, May 22, www-03.ibm.com; (8) T. Laamanen, T. Simula, & S. Torstila, 2012, 
Cross-border relocations of headquarters in Europe, Journal of International Business Studies, 43: 187–210; (9) Wall Street Journal, 2009, HSBC 
re-emphasizes its “H,” September 26, www.wsj.com.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

422	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe
5 A. Chandler, 1962, Strategy and Structure, Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press. See also W. C. Kim & R. Mauborgne, 2009, How strategy 
shapes structure, HBR, September: 73–80; J. Galan & M. Sanchez-
Bueno, 2009, The continuing validity of the strategy-structure 
nexus, SMJ, 30: 1234–1243.
6 J. Garbe & N. Richter, 2009, Causal analysis of the internation-
alization and performance relationship based on neural networks, 
JIM, 15: 413–431; J. Wolf & W. Egelhoff, 2002, A reexamination 
and extension of international strategy-structure theory, SMJ, 23: 
181–189.
7 X. Ma & A. Delios, 2010, Home-country headquarters and an 
MNE’s subsequent within-country diversification, JIBS, 41: 517–525.
8 BW, 2008, Cisco’s brave new world, November 24: 56–66.
9 C. K. Prahalad & K. Lieberthal, 1998, The end of corporate impe-
rialism, HBR, August: 68–79.
10 C. Bartlett & S. Ghoshal, 1989, Managing Across Borders (p. 209), 
Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
11 L. Nachum & S. Song, 2011, The MNE as a portfolio, JIBS, 42: 
381–405.
12  Y. Lu, E. Tsang, & M. W. Peng, 2008, Knowledge management and 
innovation strategy in the Asia Pacific, APJM, 25361–374. See also 
N. Driffield, J. Love, & S. Menghinello, 2010, The MNE as a source of 
international knowledge flows, JIBS, 41: 350–359; N. Foss, K. Husted,  
& S. Michailova, 2010, Governing knowledge sharing in organiza-
tions, JMS, 47: 455–482; A. Fransson, L. Hakanson, & P. Liesch, 
2011, The underdetermined knowledge-based theory of the MNC, 
JIBS, 42: 427–435; J. Martin & K. Eisenhardt, 2010, Rewiring, AMJ, 
53: 265–301; H. Yang, C. Phelps, & H. K. Steensma, 2010, Learning 
from what others have learned from you, AMJ, 53: 371–389; J. Zhang 
& C. Baden-Fuller, 2010, The influence of technological knowledge 
base and organizational structure on technology collaboration, 
JMS, 47: 679–704.
13 A. Gupta & V. Govindarajan, 2004, Global Strategy and Organization 
(p. 104), New York: Wiley.
14 P. Gooderham, D. Minbaeva, & T. Pedersen, 2011, Governance 
mechanisms for the promotion of social capital for knowledge trans-
fer in MNCs, JMS, 48: 123–150; T. Kostova & K. Roth, 2003, Social 
capital in MNCs and a micro-macro model of its formation, AMR, 
28: 297–317.
15 S. Berman, J. Down, & C. Hill, 2002, Tacit knowledge as a source 
of competitive advantage, AMJ, 45: 13–31.
16 M. Kotabe, D. Dunlap-Hinkler, R. Parente, & H. Mishra, 2007, 
Determinants of cross-national knowledge transfer and its effect on 
firm innovation, JIBS, 38: 259–282.
17 K. Asakawa & A. Som, 2008, Internationalizing R&D in China 
and India, APJM, 25: 375–394; P. Criscuolo & R. Narula, 2007, Using 
multi-hub structures for international R&D, MIR, 47: 639–660; 
N. Lahiri, 2010, Geographic distribution of R&D activity, AMJ, 53: 
1194–1209; A, Minin & M. Bianchi, 2011, Safe nests in global nets, 
JIBS, 42: 910–934; M. Nieto & A. Rodriguez, 2011, Offshoring of 
R&D, JIBS, 42: 345–361.
18 M. W. Peng & D. Wang, 2000, Innovation capability and foreign 
direct investment, MIR, 40: 79–83; J. Penner-Hahn & J. M. Shaver, 
2005, Does international R&D increase patent output?, SMJ, 26: 
121–140.
19 G. Vegt, E. Vliert, & X. Huang, 2005, Location-level links between 
diversity and innovative climate depend on national power distance, 
AMJ, 48: 1171–1182.
20 F. Sanna-Randaccio & R. Veugelers, 2007, Multinational knowl-
edge spillovers with decentralized R&D, JIBS, 38: 47–63; T. Schmidt 
& W. Sofka, 2009, Liability of foreignness as a barrier to knowledge 
spillovers, JIM, 15: 460–474.
21 A. Witty, 2011, Research and develop (p. 140), The World in 2011, 
London: The Economist Group. Witty is CEO of GSK.
22 This section draws heavily from Gupta & Govindarajan, 2004, 
Global Strategy and Organization.
23 H. Greve, 2003, A behavioral theory of R&D expenditures and 
innovations, AMJ, 46: 685–702.
24 P. Bierly, F. Damanpour, & M. Santoro, 2009, The application of 
external knowledge, JMS, 46: 481–508; H. Hoang & F. Rothaermel, 
2010, Leveraging internal and external experience, SMJ, 31: 734–758; 
U. Lichtenthaler, 2011, Open innovation, AMP, February: 75–92.
25 H. Chesbrough, W. Vanhaverbeke, & J. West (eds.), 2006, Open 
Innovation (p. 1), Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
26 J. Spencer, 2003, Firms’ knowledge-sharing strategies in the glob-
al innovation system, SMJ, 24: 217–233; K. Laursen & A. Salter, 2006. 
Open for innovation, SMJ, 27: 131–150.
27 Q. Yang & C. Jiang, 2007, Location advantages and subsidiaries’ 
R&D activities, APJM, 24: 341–358.
28 R. Mudambi & P. Navarra, 2004, Is knowledge power?, JIBS, 35: 
385–406; R. Teigland & M. Wasko, 2009, Knowledge transfer in 
MNCs, JIM, 15: 15–31.
29  T. Ambos & B. Ambos, 2009, The impact of distance on knowl-
edge transfer effectiveness in MNCs, JIM, 15: 1–14; A. Dinur, 
R. Hamilton, & A. Inkpen, 2009, Critical context and international 
intrafirm best-practice transfers, JIM, 15: 432–446; M. Esterby-Smith, 
M. Lyles, & E. Tsang, 2008, Inter-organizational knowledge transfer, 
JMS, 45: 677–690; D. Gnyawali, M. Singal, & S. Mu, 2009, Knowl-
edge ties among subsidiaries in MNCs, JIM, 15: 387–400; J. Hong & 
T. Nguyen, 2009, Knowledge embeddedness and the transfer mech-
anisms in MNCs, JWB, 44: 347–356; L. F. Monteiro, N. Arvidsson, & 
J. Birkinshaw, 2008, Knowledge flows within MNCs, OSc, 19: 90–107; 
G. Szulanski & R. Jensen, 2006, Presumptive adaptation and the 
effectiveness of knowledge transfer, SMJ, 27: 937–957.
30 M. Haas, 2010, The double-edged swords of autonomy and 
external knowledge, AMJ, 53: 989–1008; Z. Sharp, 2010, From 
unilateral transfer to bilateral transition, JIM, 16: 304–313; 
M. Zellmer-Bruhn & C. Gibson, 2006, Multinational organization 
context, AMJ, 49: 501–518.
31 W. Cohen & D. Levinthal, 1990, Absorptive capacity, ASQ, 35: 
128–152. See also A. Cuervo-Cazurra & C. A. Un, 2010, Why some 
firms never invest in formal R&D, SMJ, 31: 759–779; J. Hong, R. Snell, 
& M. Easterby-Smith, 2006, Cross-cultural influences on organi-
zational learning in MNCs, JIM, 12: 408–429; J. Jansen, F. Bosch, 
& H. Volberda, 2005, Managing potential and realized absorptive 
capacity, AMJ, 48: 999–1015; P. Lane, B. Koka, & S. Pathak, 
2006, The reification of absorptive capacity, AMR, 31: 833–863; 
L. Perez-Nordtvedt, E. Babakus, & B. Kedia, 2010, Learning from 
international business affiliates, JIM, 16: 262–274; G. Todorova & 
B. Durisin, 2007, Absorptive capacity, AMR, 32: 774–786.
32 C. Fey & P. Furu, 2008, Top management incentive compensation 
and knowledge sharing in MNEs, SMJ, 29: 1301–1323.
33 A. Inkpen & E. Tsang, 2005, Social capital, networks, and knowl-
edge transfer, AMR, 30: 146–165; N. Noorderhaven & A. Harzing, 
2009, Knowledge-sharing and social interaction within MNEs, JIBS, 
40: 719–741.
34 M. W. Peng & Y. Luo, 2000, Managerial ties and firm perfor-
mance in a transition economy, AMJ, 43: 486–501. See also M. Mors, 
2010, Innovation in a global consulting firm, SMJ, 31: 841–872; 
M. Reinholt, T. Pedersen, & N. Foss, 2011, Why a central network 
position isn’t enough, AMJ, 54: 1277–1297.
35 BW, 2011, Profits on overseas holiday, March 21: 64–69.
36 BW, 2009, For accounting giants, nowhere to hide? February 16: 
56–57.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 13   Strategizing, Structuring, and Learning around the World	
423
37 F. Ciabuschi, M. Forsgren, & O. Martin, 2011, Rationality versus 
ignorance, JIBS, 42: 958–970.
38 A. Bjorkman & R. Piekkari, 2009, Language and foreign 
subsidiary control, JIM, 15: 105–117; C. Garcia-Pont, I. Canales, & 
F. Noboa, 2009, Subsidiary strategy, JMS, 46: 182–214.
39 T. Ambos, U. Andersson, & J. Birkinshaw, 2010, What are the 
consequences of initiative-taking in multinational subsidiaries? 
JIBS, 41: 1099–1118; C. Bouquet & J. Birkinshaw, 2008, Weight versus 
voice, AMJ, 51: 577–601; F. Ciabuschi, H. Dellestrand, & O. Martin, 
2011, Internal embeddedness, headquarters involvement, and in-
novation importance in MNEs, JMS, 48: 1612–1638; A. Delios, 
D. Xu, & P. Beamish, 2008, Within-country product diversification 
and foreign subsidiary performance, JIBS, 39: 706–724; D. Vora, 
T. Kostova, & K. Roth, 2007, Roles of subsidiary managers in MNCs, 
MIR, 47: 595–620.
40 J. Balogun, P. Jarzabkowski, & E. Vaara, 2011, Selling, resis-
tence, and reconciliation, JIBS, 42: 765–786; H. Dellestrand, 
2011, Subsidiary embeddedness as a determinat of divisional 
headquarters involvement in innovation transfer processes, 
JIM, 17: 229–242; C. Dorrenbacher & J. Gammelgaard, 2010, MNCs, 
inter-organizational networks, and subsidiary charter removals, 
JWB, 45: 206–216; A. Phene & P. Almeida, 2008, Innovation in 
multinational subsidiaries, JIBS, 39: 901–919; P. Scott, P. Gibbons, 
& J. Coughlan, 2010, Developing subsidiary contribution to the 
MNC-subsidiary entrepreneurship and strategy creativity, JIM, 16: 
328–339; A. Schotter & P. Beamish, 2011, Performance effects of 
MNC headquarters-subsidiary conflict and the role of boundary 
spanners, JIM, 17: 243–259; C. Williams, 2009, Subsidiary-level de-
terminants of global initiatives in MNCs, JIM, 15: 92–104.
41 R. Burgelman & A. Grove, 2007, Let chaos reign, then rein in 
chaos—repeatedly, SMJ, 28: 965–979.
42 S. Segal-Horn & A. Dean, 2009, Delivering “effortless” experi-
ence across borders, JWB, 44: 41–50.
43 L. Shi, C. White, S. Zou, & S.T. Cavusgil, 2010, Global account 
management strategies, JIBS, 41: 620–638.
44 P. Ghemawat, 2011, The cosmopolitan corporation, HBR, May: 
92–99.
45 S. Gould & A. Grein, 2009, Think glocally, act glocally, JIBS, 40: 
237–254.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

424	
 
part 3
atlas
Map 3.1
Ease of Doing Business 
Source: Data extracted from World Bank, 2011, Doing Business 2011. 
Singapore
1
Timor-Leste
174
New Zealand
3
Australia
10
Hong Kong, China
2
Norway
8
Denmark
6
United Kingdom
4
Ireland
9
Canada
7
United States
5
Sao Tome and 
Principe
178
Central African
Republic
182
Guinea-Bissau
176
Guinea
179
Democratic
Republic of Congo
175
Burundi
181
Chad
183
Republic of Congo
177
Eritrea
180
Top ten countries
Bottom ten countries
All other countries
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part 3   Atlas	
425
Part 3   Atlas	
425
Map 3.2
Top Reformers in Doing Business 
Source: Data extracted from World Bank, 2011, Doing Business 2011. 
Democratic Republic
of Congo:
Dealing with
construction permits
Swaziland:
Protecting
investors
Czech Republic:
Closing a business
Tunisia:
Paying taxes
Malawi:
Enforcing
contracts
Samoa:
Registering
property
ARCTIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
INDIAN
OCEAN
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
Ghana:
Getting credit
Peru:
Starting a
business
and trading
across borders
Map 3.3
Rotterdam—Centrally Located in the EU 
Italy
Malta
Greece
Hungary
Turkey
Portugal
Switzerland
Belgium
Rotterdam
France
Luxembourg
Spain
Iceland
Finland
Estonia
Latvia
Lithuania
Czech
Republic
Slovenia
Slovakia
Croatia
Romania
Moldova
Denmark
Germany
Poland
Ukraine
Serbia
Bulgaria
Macedonia
United Kingdom
Andorra
Sw
e
d
e
n
Netherlands
Bosnia and
Herzegovina
ARCTIC
OCEAN
Africa
2
 
H
o
u
r 
 
Fl
i
g
h
t
3 
H
ou
r  
Fl
ig
ht
1
 
H
o
u
r
 
 
F
l
i
g
h
t
Austria
Norway
Ireland
© Cengage Learning
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

426	
Part 3   Atlas 
Map 3.4
Top Twenty Countries by GDP 
ARCTIC
OCEAN
INDIAN
OCEAN
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
United Kingdom
$2,250
United States
$15,040
Mexico
$1,657
Canada
$1,389
China
$11,290
Japan
$4,389
Taiwan
$885
South Korea
$1,549
Turkey
$1,026
Iran
$929
Indonesia
$1,121
Australia
$918
Germany
$3,085
Poland
$766
France
$2,214
Spain
$1,411
Italy
$1,822
Russia
$2,380
Brazil
$2,282
India
$4,463
Source: Adapted from Country Comparison: GDP, World Factbook, 2011. Amounts in billion dollars.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part 3   Atlas	
427
Map 3.5
Top Ten and Bottom Ten Countries by Per Capita Income 
Singapore
$59,900
Hong Kong
$49,300
Luxembourg
$84,700
Jersey
$57,000
Norway
$53,300
ARCTIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
INDIAN
OCEAN
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
Top ten countries
Bottom ten countries
Bermuda
$69,900
Falkland Islands
(Islas Malvinas)
$55,400
Central African Republic
$800
Liberia
$400
Sierra Leone
$800
Democratic
Republic of the
Congo
$300
Burundi
$400
Niger
$800
Somalia
$600
Madagascar 
$900
Zimbabwe
$500
Brunei
$49,400
Qatar
$102,700
Eritrea
$700
Liechtenstein
$141,100
Source: Adapted from Country Comparison: GDP – Per Capita, World Factbook, 2011.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

428	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
Wikimart: Building a Russian Version of Amazon1
Daniel J. McCarthy (Northeastern University)
Sheila M. Puffer (Northeastern University)
I n t e g r a t i v e  C a s e  3 . 1
How does a Russian Internet start-up grow? How does it line 
up financing? How promising are its prospects?
Wikimart was founded in 2008 by Stanford MBA stu-
dents Maxim Faldin and Kamil Kurmakayev as an 
online marketplace for Russia and Russian-speaking 
countries. Its focus was a B2C platform for Russian re-
tailers who listed goods at no charge but initially paid a 
minimum 3% fee to Wikimart on each transaction, lat-
er reduced to 1.5%. Wikimart also provided services to 
these retailers, including order fulfillment, accounting 
and legal support, and e-commerce marketing tools. 
The company’s objective was to become a dominant  
e-commerce marketplace in Russia and other countries 
of the former Soviet Union.
Time Line of Financing and Growth
In the first half of 2009, financing of $700,000 was 
secured from a number of sophisticated angel investors, 
including Michael van Swaaij who had invested in Skype 
and eBay Europe; Mark Zaleski and Robert Dighero 
who had invested in QXL ricardo; Alec Oxenford, 
founder of OLX, DineroMail.com, and DeRemate; 
Jose Marin, founder of DeRemate; and Kerim Baran, 
founder of Yonja.com. By mid 2009, Wikimart’s website 
was attracting 5,000 daily visitors and had more than 
1,000 online merchants offering over 370,000 products.
In early 2010, Series A financing was secured 
from Tiger Global Management, a successful US-
based private equity investor specializing in technol-
ogy start-ups, often in emerging economies. The deal 
raised $5 million for Wikimart, and resulted in 50% 
ownership for Tiger, according to a filing with the US 
Securities and Exchange Commission. In August 2010, 
Wikimart secured Series B financing of $7 million, 
again from Tiger Global.
By mid 2010, the company website had 2,000 online 
merchants generating $1.5 million in monthly revenues 
for Wikimart. By 2011, it had increased to 2,500 mer-
chants and $3 million in monthly revenues. Of course, 
online sales were a significant order of magnitude 
larger. Company revenues would have been greater if 
the order completion rates could be improved beyond 
the 68% level prevailing in 2011. Achieving such an in-
crease, however, would remain a major challenge to im-
plementing the company’s strategy since retailers often 
had insufficient inventories to fulfill customer orders. 
By March 2011 the company had signed up 2,200 re-
tailers that listed more than 528,000 products through 
Wikimart’s website. The company reported that the site 
was attracting 2 million visitors per month, although 
one of the founders stated that the number could be as 
large as 3 million. Among the products prominent on 
its website were home goods and appliances, consumer 
electronics, wine and tobacco, and virtually any prod-
uct that could be found on Amazon’s website, with the 
best-selling categories being clothing, sporting goods, 
and children’s products. The vast majority of the prod-
ucts were familiar, internationally known brands.
Why Tiger?
One of Wikimart’s founders, Kurmakayev, explained in 
2011 why the company had chosen Tiger Global from 
among various potential core investors: “We chose 
Tiger because they did not impose their views and did 
not seek to participate in the business management, but 
are ready for the long-term partnership.” Other poten-
tial core investors included Accel Partners, a firm based 
primarily in the United States, with offices in Palo Alto, 
California, and New York, which had invested in com-
panies like Groupon and Veritas. Accel also had offices 
in London, China, and India. Another potential core 
investor was Index Ventures, a US investor with success-
ful investments in technology start-ups such as Skype 
and Dropbox. It seemed that all of these investment 
firms might have been looking for the next Google, the  
1) This case was written by Daniel J. McCarthy (McKim d’Amore Distin-
guished Professor of Global Management and Innovation, Northeastern 
University) and Sheila M. Puffer (University Distinguished Professor and 
Cherry Family Senior Fellow of International Business, Northeastern Uni-
versity). The authors would like to acknowledge the excellent research as-
sistance provided by Northeastern University College of Business student, 
Maxim Russkikh. © Daniel J. McCarthy and Sheila M. Puffer. Reprinted with  
permission.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Three   Integrative Cases	
429
hugely successful Internet giant cofounded a decade 
earlier by Russian-born University of Maryland and 
Stanford University graduate Sergei Brin. 
Business Model
Wikimart’s business model centered around creating 
an Amazon-like online retail platform in the Russian-
speaking countries of the former Soviet Union. Similar 
models had been developed in Korea by Gmarket and 
in Japan by Rakuten Ichiba. The company’s business 
model offered free space online to merchants while col-
lecting a minimum of 1.5% of each transaction once 
sales began. 
Company Strategy and Organization
The company’s strategy included reaching a young-
er, tech-savvy segment of customers in the Russian-
speaking world. The company was headquartered in 
Moscow, and merchants selling on its site delivered 
goods only within Russia as of early 2011. One of the 
partners stressed that Wikimart’s objective was to con-
tinue developing the Russian market even after they 
moved to new markets. The company planned to ex-
pand overall services to other Russian-speaking coun-
tries of the former Soviet Union such as Ukraine and 
Kazakhstan. The partner reasoned that Russia was the 
tenth largest European country in terms of GDP but 
had even greater promise in terms of Internet users. 
Although Wikimart seemed to have vast potential, 
the company had not turned a profit by early 2012. 
However, the cofounders believed that 2013 could be a 
profitable year. With an objective of eventually attain-
ing 20% to 30% share of the fast-growing online retail 
market, company executives saw the possibility of an-
nual revenues reaching as high as $15 billion by 2018.
The two founders initially assumed separate re-
sponsibilities, with Kurmakayev being in charge of 
maintaining relations with retailers and developing 
the company’s technology, while Faldin was responsi-
ble for sales, marketing, and business development. As 
the company grew, the founders recognized early that 
they had to change to a more corporate-like structure. 
Faldin became CEO responsible for the operational as-
pects of the business, such as developing metrics and 
achieving goals. Kurmakayev took on a strategic role 
incorporating forecasting and budgeting, as well as de-
veloping the company’s competitive strategy. 
One of the founders claimed that a significant per-
centage of company costs stemmed from intensive de-
velopment efforts. Wikimart, although an online retail 
business, was basically a technology company. The vast 
majority of the 260 employees in 2011 were program-
mers who wrote software code to support the company’s 
online business. They were guided in their development 
work with Silicon Valley expertise provided by their in-
vestors and consultants.
Russia’s Internet Industry and Wikimart’s 
Competition
The overall Russian e-commerce market was estimated 
at $7 billion to $9 billion in 2011, a substantial increase 
over the $6 billion in 2010, growth that attracted many 
competitors. Exponential future growth, with forecasts  
of 40% annually, saw estimates of up to a $50 billion 
market by 2018. Such forecasts added luster to the al-
ready attractive Russian online retail market. Wikimart’s 
largest competitor was Ozon.ru, the oldest e-commerce 
giant of the Russian Internet. Sites like Groupon and 
KupiVip offering group discounts on products and ser-
vices were also substantial competitors, and both had 
attracted relatively large investments from US firms. 
The order fulfillment challenge for Wikimart noted 
earlier was due to retailers relying on relatively poor IT 
technologies. One of Wikimart’s founders noted that 
the online retail industry in Russia required huge in-
vestments in IT and supply chain. In 2012, only 1.5% 
of all Russian retail purchases took place online, but 
the cofounders believed that the number would grow 
to 10% to 20% within five to ten years. 
Some Russian companies, such as mail.ru, had al-
ready become powerful Internet players within Rus-
sia. That firm’s parent, the mail.ru Group, was for-
merly known as Digital Sky Technologies and was an 
early-stage investor in Facebook, owning between 5% 
and 10% of that company by 2011 according to vari-
ous reports. It had invested $200 million in 2009 and 
an additional $500 million in 2011. This is another 
example of the globalization of private investments. 
This time, however, the participants were a Russian in-
vestment group taking a stake in a US online venture. 
Mail.ru itself was an extremely successful publicly traded 
Internet company. Other successful Russian online com-
panies included Vkontakte and Rambler. Vkontakte 
was a private company that offered social network ser-
vices and was notable for design and functionality that 
mimicked Facebook. As of February 2012, Vkontakte 
reportedly had 116.6 million user accounts and was the 
fourth most popular Russian Internet website. Rambler 
was a search engine that offered Web 2.0 services such 
as e-mail aggregation and e-commerce, with its main  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

430	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
competitors being mail.ru and Yandex. Yandex had 
a reported 64% market share of the Russian search 
provider space and was the fifth largest search engine 
worldwide with 1.7% of global searches as of September 
2011. The company had enjoyed a decade of success be-
fore going public in 2011 on NASDAQ in the United 
States. Its IPO raised $1.3 billion and its stock price 
soon traded up by 55%. The price of $1.3 billion valued 
the company at about $8 billion.
Wikimart’s Future
Analysts noted that start-ups like Wikimart had be-
come attractive for strategic investors as the Internet 
expansion in Russia accelerated. In 2012, the number 
of Internet users in Russia was not large but was expect-
ed to grow by approximately 10% per year. Some ana-
lysts expected that if Wikimart continued to increase 
revenues and profits, it could soon be targeted by 
strategic investors such as Amazon or eBay. Having US 
investors like Tiger Global that were very familiar with 
the Russian Internet market could be very positive in 
attracting other investors, including strategic investors 
who might invest funds with the intention of acquir-
ing Wikimart at some point. Wikimart’s founders and 
other major shareholders, such as Tiger Global, might 
eventually have to decide between selling the company 
to a strategic investor or continuing to maintain con-
trol while growing the company to its full potential. 
And as is typical in such cases, timing would be a key 
factor.
Case Discussion Questions
	 1.	 Given the fragmented, rapidly growing nature 
of online retail space in the Russian-speaking 
world, how would you characterize the competi-
tion in this industry?
	 2.	 Why was Wikimart able to secure financing dur-
ing its early stages of growth? Put it differently: 
If you were an angel investor or private equity in-
vestor, what special qualities of Wikimart would 
attract you? 
	 3.	 While Wikimart’s objective is to become a domi-
nant e-commerce marketplace in Russia and 
other countries of the former Soviet Union, given 
the existing competition (such as Ozon.ru), is 
such ambition realistic?
	 4.	 What are some of the viable exit strategies for 
the two founders?
Sources: Based on (1) DST smenila nazvanie (DST changes its name), 2010, 
http://www.vedomosti.ru/companies/news/1103680/dst_smenila_nazvanie; 
(2) A. Hesseldahl, 2012. Zuckerberg is the billion-share man: Who owns 
what, who makes what in the Facebook IPO, AllThingsD, February 1, http://
allthingsd.com/20120201/facebooks-ipo-filing-who-owns-what-who-makes-
what/; (3) Forbes, 2011, My stroim Amazon in Russia (We are building 
Amazon in Russia), July 20, http://www.forbes.ru/tehno-opinion/internet-i-
telekommunikatsii/70954-my-stroim-amazon-v-rossii; (4) RT, 2011, Tiger Global 
ups the ante on Wikimart, March 2, http://rt.com/business; (5) http://bloomberg. 
com/news/2011-05-24/yandex-jumps-after-raising-1-3-billion-in-biggest- 
technology-ipo-of-the-year.html; (6) http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yandex.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Three   Integrative Cases	
431
Private Military Companies1
Mike W. Peng (University of Texas at Dallas)
I n t e g r a t i v e  C a s e  3 . 2
Are entrepreneurial private military companies dogs of war or 
pussycats of peace? 
This industry dates back to thousands of years ago, is 
visible in TV news, is global in nature, and has annual 
sales of $100 billion. Yet, participants do not even agree 
on how to label it, and most outsiders are clueless about 
its entrepreneurial nature and ethical dilemma. So, 
what industry is this? Many journalists and scholars 
call it the “private military industry.” Others label it the 
“private security industry”—a leading British indus-
try association, formed in 2006, calls itself the British 
Association of Private Security Companies (BAPSC). 
A leading American industry association, founded in 
2001, names itself the International Peace Operations 
Association (IPOA) and has coined post-modern la-
bels the “peace and stability industry” and the “peace 
operations industry.” For compositional simplicity, in 
this case, we call this industry the “private military 
industry” to emphasize its twin nature of private and 
military. Companies in this industry are thus called 
“private military companies” (PMCs).
From Rome to Iraq
The roots of this industry can be found in mercenar-
ies. In fact, the very word “soldier” derives from solidus, 
the Roman gold coin. In other words, a soldier, by clas-
sical definition, is one who fought for money. During 
the American Revolution, mercenaries from Germany 
fought on the British side. The stereotype of merce-
naries is the “dogs of war” who help win civil wars and 
topple governments (usually in resource-rich African 
countries). 
However, modern PMCs hate to be associated with 
mercenaries. Today’s PMCs are proud of their pro-
fessionalism and value added. Led by entrepreneurs 
who are often retired military officers, PMCs compete 
globally. There are three main types. First, closest to 
the battlefield are “military provider firms” that sup-
ply hired guns (often known as “private contractors”) 
who serve alongside national military forces. Blackwa-
ter is perhaps the best-known military provider firm. 
Second, “military consulting firms” offer assistance but 
do not directly engage in the battlefield. One example 
is Military Professional Resources, Inc. Third, “military 
support firms,” such as Halliburton, provide non-lethal 
support, such as intelligence, logistics, technical sup-
port, and transportation. One of the rare publicly list-
ed PMCs is DynCorp International, which went public 
in May 2006 (NYSE: DCP). It has more than 16,800 em-
ployees and generates over $2 billion revenue around 
the world.
Entrepreneurs thrive on chaos. To PMCs, the wars in 
Iraq and Afghanistan have been a pot of gold. While the 
United States and its allies have been withdrawing their 
forces, PMCs rush in. In Afghanistan, in 2009, PMCs  
were the largest military force (130,000 personnel), out-
numbering both the Afghan National Army (100,000 
personnel) and the US (national) forces (64,000 per-
sonnel). In Iraq, PMCs were the second largest military 
contingent (about 113,000 personnel) after the US 
(national) forces (130,000 personnel). Long after the 
official withdrawal of the US (national) military in 
Iraq in 2011, PMCs will remain active in the country. 
The Department of State alone will employ 5,000 PMC 
personnel in Iraq.
Private soldiers drive convoy trucks, build camps, 
guard dignitaries, and gather intelligence. The most 
lucrative job is not “guns on trucks” but rather the less 
glamorous, but more steady, work such as logistics. 
Well-muscled men with wrap-around sunglasses may 
steal headlines (especially after they allegedly shoot 
Iraqi civilians), but the real money is in other lines of 
work.
Long before Iraq, the use of PMCs alongside US 
troops had become an indispensable component of 
America’s “Total Force.” In an age of outsourcing, 
the Pentagon has followed suit, contracting dozens 
of PMCs to carry out essential military work that were 
once exclusively performed by uniformed soldiers.  
1) Preparation of this case was supported in part by the National Science Foun-
dation CAREER grant (SES 0552089) and the Jindal Chair at the Jindal School 
of Management, University of Texas at Dallas. This case is entirely based on 
published sources. The view expressed are those of the author and not those 
of the underwriters. © Mike W. Peng. Reprinted with permission.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

432	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
Not surprisingly, the driver behind such outsourcing 
is cost—both political and financial. Dead private sol-
diers mean fewer dead uniformed soldiers. Military 
casualties are carefully recorded and often provoke 
fierce antiwar protests. Neither the media nor the 
public seem to care about PMC casualties, although 
about 1,800 died and 40,000 were wounded in Iraq 
and Afghanistan. One study finds that PMCs absorbed 
over 25% of the killed in action in Iraq. Overall, given 
the scale and scope of PMC involvement (representing 
50% of the defense workforce deployed to the Balkans, 
Iraq, and Afghanistan shown in Exhibit 1), many ex-
perts now believe that the US (national) military is 
incapable of successfully carrying out large missions 
without PMCs.
Global Competition and Challenges 
While well-connected American PMCs often win big 
contracts handed out by the US government, the com-
petition is global. British PMCs, whose services repre-
sent Britain’s biggest export to Iraq and Afghanistan, 
grab more work from the private sector. Why are the 
British so competitive in this line of work? Three rea-
sons. First, many British PMCs are first movers, tracing 
their roots to the days when they were real mercenaries 
active in Africa when the British Empire collapsed in 
the 1950s and the 1960s. Second, British PMCs benefit 
from the clustering of many energy and mining compa-
nies in London, whose dangerous work often demands 
more security services. Third, British PMCs recruit 
from the British army, whose soldiers patrolled the 
mean streets of Northern Ireland without killing too 
many civilians. Such portable skills are highly sought 
after in Iraq and Afghanistan now.
There are two ethical challenges associated with 
PMCs. The first is the morality issue associated with 
their deployment. For regular soldiers, aid workers, and 
government officials, an instinctive reaction is: “Why 
should we respect these people who fight for money?” 
Nevertheless, privatization of government services is a 
global trend in general. In the military arena, the cost 
effectiveness of PMCs is compelling. Some argue that 
the UN Security Council should have contracted PMC 
services to limit the Rwanda genocide in the 1990s, as it 
was contemplating at the time but failed to do so. The 
more recent genocide in Sudan’s Darfur region and 
UN member countries’ hesitation to commit national 
troops as Blue Helmets again led to calls for PMCs, 
which, in theory, can be deployed more rapidly and at a 
lower cost than Blue Helmets. 
The second, and probably larger, challenge con-
fronting PMCs is accountability—or the apparent lack 
of it. For example, private contractors were involved 
in the torture scandal at the Abu Ghraib prison in 
Baghdad, but only military personnel were court-
martialed while private contractors were outside the 
scope of court-martial jurisdiction. Further, contracts 
are often impossible to monitor, particularly when 
private soldiers are deployed in dangerous situations. 
Where there is no accountability, “rogue” firms and in-
dividuals may enter, severely undermining the indus-
try’s reputation. 
The presence of PMCs in conflict and post-conflict 
environments creates a significant institutional chal-
lenge as to what and whose rules of the game should 
govern PMCs. During a traditional war, national mili-
taries are governed by the law of war or more specifical-
ly law of armed conflicts, whose most famous institution 
is the Geneva Convention. At all other times, the law 
of peace prevails, and civilian casualties are not ac-
ceptable. However, the distinction between “war” and 
“peace” has broken down. Technically, the US Congress 
has never issued a declaration of war against Iraq, but 
nobody can argue that there has been much “peace” in 
Iraq since 2003. Given such ambiguity of “neither war 
nor peace,” PMCs are essentially unregulated. 
In 2004, Paul Bremer, head of the Coalition Pro-
visional Authority (CPA) in charge of Iraq, signed 
CPA Order 17 stating that “[private military] contrac-
tors shall not be subject to Iraqi laws or regulations in 
Balkans
Afghanistan
Iraq
Three operations combined
50%
62%
47%
50%
Exhibit 1
Personnel of Private Military Companies as Percentage of Defense Workforce in Three Recent 
US Operations
Source: Based on Figure 1 in M. Schwartz, 2009, Department of Defense Contractors in Iraq and Afghanistan: Background and Analysis (p. 2), Washington, DC: 
Congressional Research Service. “Defense workforce” is defined as the combination of contractor (PMC) and uniformed (national military) workforce deployed 
to these theaters of operations. Civilian employees working for the Department of Defense (DOD) are excluded from these calculations. If they were included, 
the percentage would not change much, because the DOD civilian employees represented less than 1% of the total force deployed there.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Three   Integrative Cases	
433
matters relating to the terms and conditions of their 
contracts.” In other words, PMCs working for the CPA, 
or the US government, were granted immunity from 
Iraqi law.
In October 2007, Blackwater found itself in hot water. 
The Iraqi government alleged that on September 16, 
2007, Blackwater personnel opened fire indiscrimi-
nately at a Baghdad crossroads and killed 17 innocent 
civilians. Blackwater maintained that its men were un-
der fire. Because, thanks to Order 17, Blackwater (and 
other PMCs) were formally immune from Iraqi law, the 
best that the Iraqi government could do was to demand 
that Blackwater leave the country. US Congress was in 
uproar concerning such an embarrassing incident and 
in October 2007 held a hearing on Blackwater—and in 
fact on the entire private military industry. Naturally, 
Blackwater’s staunchest defenders were the US officials 
protected by its private soldiers. US officials preferred 
Blackwater and other PMCs because PMC personnel 
were regarded as more highly trained than (national) 
military guards. Blackwater’s founder, Erik Prince, told 
the Congressional committee that “no individual pro-
tected by Blackwater has ever been killed or seriously 
injured,” while 30 of its staff died on the job (up to that 
point). While measures for increased legal and regula-
tory oversight were called for by the highest levels of 
the US government, whether these measures would be 
implemented on the messy and dangerous ground in 
Iraq (and elsewhere) remains to be seen. 
Because Blackwater had immunity from Iraqi law at 
the time of the incident, the most severe punishment 
it received for its alleged misconduct was the US gov-
ernment’s decision not to renew its contract for Iraq 
in January 2009. However, the Iraqi government lever-
aged this incident and forced the US government to re-
pudiate all PMCs’ immunity from Iraqi law in a Status 
of Force Agreement signed in December 2008. In other 
words, PMCs no longer have the “get out of jail free 
card” in Iraq. In February 2009, Blackwater’s notoriety 
forced it to rename itself Xe Services LLC (pronounced 
“Zee”). 
In December 2009, President Obama announced 
the surge of 30,000 additional US (national) military 
personnel to be sent to Afghanistan. What he did not 
announce was that according to a study by the Congres-
sional Research Service (CRS), these 30,000 US (na-
tional) military personnel would be accompanied by 
another surge of 26,000–56,000 PMC personnel, bring-
ing the total number of PMC personnel in Afghanistan 
to more than 130,000. Prior to these two surges, the 
percentage of people working for the Pentagon who 
were PMC personnel already reached over 60%, which, 
according to the same CRS study, “apparently repre-
sented the highest recorded percentage of contractors 
used by the Defense Department in any conflict in the 
history of the United States.” Clearly, despite the noto-
riety of some PMCs such as Blackwater (now known as 
Xe), the private military industry has no problem in-
creasing their market share in the business of war. 
In Search of New Hot Spots
As land wars in Iraq and Afghanistan are scaled back, 
some PMCs have diversified. More recently, pirates 
in the Somali waters have generated tremendous 
new business for PMCs that offer maritime security 
services. As of 2012, PMC personnel patrolled the 
decks of 40% of the large vessels in the high-risk area 
in the Indian Ocean that stretches from the Somali 
coast to the Seychelles to the south and Maldives to 
the east. A four-man team can make $45,000 for safe 
passage through the high-risk area. While the price 
is high, PMCs have delivered value—no ship carrying 
PMC guards has been hijacked so far. Ship owners can 
offset some of these additional costs by savings on in-
surance. Basically, ships armed with PMC personnel 
can enjoy a lower insurance rate when plying the dan-
gerous waters. 
Another new hot spot is Libya. The turmoil has gen-
erated new opportunities. Some PMCs have rushed in 
“to facilitate the reentry of clients in Libya,” according 
to an executive at GardaWorld, a British firm. In the 
initial days, the chaos was considerable. For example, 
there was no one to apply to for a business license, as 
the National Transitional Council (NTC) was too busy 
fighting pro-Qaddafi forces. That did not prevent some 
PMCs from sniffing around. Who said entrepreneurs 
couldn’t handle chaos? 
Enlightened Self-Regulation?
As the industry aspires to become a “mature” one by 
diversifying into post-conflict reconstruction and risk 
management such as in post-Qaddafi Libya (after 
all, there are only so many shooting wars to fight), its 
current unregulated nature is not sustainable. In the 
absence of regulation, PMCs’ seemingly secretive nature 
prevents them from being recognized as legitimate 
players. In response, the PMC community has recently 
set up the IPOA and BAPSC in order to advocate self-
regulation. A very unmercenary Code of Conduct 
governing all IPOA members went into effect in 2001. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

434	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
Its 11th revision, publicized in 2006, promised that 
member PMCs only work for legitimate governments 
and organizations and that all rules of engagement 
must “emphasize appropriate restraint and caution 
to minimize casualties and damage.” In the long run, 
PMCs adhering to “aggressive self-regulation” hope to 
be perceived as reliable, professional, and high-quality 
service providers. Far from being the dogs of war, 
declared BAPSC’s director-general, “we are actually the 
pussycats of peace.” This thought-provoking statement 
is indicative of the ethical dilemma of PMCs: While they 
prefer to dispel any mercenary notion that they are dogs 
of war, they also thrive on the mean-and-tough warrior 
mystique. After all, wrote the Economist, “who would use 
a pussycat as a guard-dog?”
Case Discussion Questions
	 1.	 From an institution-based view, explain what is 
behind the rise of this industry. 
	 2.	 From a resource-based standpoint, explain (1) how  
PMCs can outperform national militaries, and 
(2) how certain PMCs outperform others. 
	 3.	 Why are industry associations such as the IPOA 
and BAPSC so interested in self-regulation?
	 4.	 ON ETHICS: As an investor, would you con-
sider buying stock in a PMC such as DynCorp? 
(Imagine a scenario where all other firms listed 
suffered from the financial meltdown, but Dyn-
Corp’s stock outperformed the market.) Why or 
why not? Do you have any ethical reservations?
	 5.	 ON ETHICS: As an oil company executive setting 
up operations in a politically unstable and dan-
gerous country, would you consider hiring secu-
rity personnel from Blackwater?
Sources: Based on (1) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2011, As war winds down 
in Libya, enter the consultants, September 26: 17–18; (2) Bloomberg Busi-
nessweek, 2011, For sale, cheap, December 19: 32–35; (3) BusinessWeek, 
2006, Tainted past? No problem, July 17; (4) Economist, 2007, Blackwater 
in hot water, October 13; (5) Economist, 2009, Splashing and clashing in 
murky waters, August 22; (6) Economist, 2012, Laws and guns, April 14: 69; 
(7) T. Hammes, 2010, Private contractors in conflict zones, Strategic Forum 
of National Defense University, 260: 1–15; (8) International Peace Opera-
tions Association, 2006, Code of conduct, ipoaonline.org; (9) Newsweek, 
2007, Blackwater is soaked, October 15; (10) C. Ortiz, 2007, Assessing the 
accountability of private security provision, Journal of International Peace 
Operations, January; (11) M. Schwartz, 2009, Department of Defense Con-
tractors in Iraq and Afghanistan: Background and Analysis, Washington, DC: 
Congressional Research Service.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Three   Integrative Cases	
435
How do Amazon (a foreign entrant) and Bookoff (a domestic 
entrant) rise in an industry dominated by incumbents?
The Japanese Bookselling Industry
The Japanese are voracious readers. With annual sales 
approaching $10 billion, the Japanese retail bookselling 
industry is larger than the $15 billion US bookselling 
industry on a per-capita basis.2 However, the competi-
tive environment in the Japanese retail bookselling in-
dustry differs in many respects from its US counterpart. 
This case introduces the competitive forces shaping 
the Japanese retail bookselling industry and highlights 
two new entrants, Bookoff and Amazon Japan, both of 
which successfully created unique strategies to succeed 
in an otherwise stagnant industry.
Book retailers usually buy their books from whole-
salers, and sometimes directly from publishers. Com-
petition in the area of wholesale book distribution is 
very low. Nippon Shuppan Hanbai and Tohan, both 
founded immediately after World War II, tradition-
ally control between 70% and 90% of the wholesale 
book market.3 Also, there is a system called the Itaku 
Hanbai Seido (“Consignment Sale System”) in place 
that allows retailers and wholesalers to return unsold 
books to the publisher free of charge, reducing risk 
and inventory levels for wholesalers and especially  
retailers.
The rise of the Internet has had a profound effect 
on the bookselling industry in Japan. Whereas the 
Japanese used to lag behind other developed economies 
in terms of Internet penetration, they have now closed 
the gap. The Internet as a substitute form of entertain-
ment has been cited as a cause for the overall drop in 
book sales in Japan.4 However, one advantage of the rise 
of the Internet has been the accompanying increase in 
online book sales. As of 2010, approximately 6%–7% of 
all book sales in Japan were conducted online.5
Rivalry in this industry is characterized by large 
numbers of relatively small booksellers. Whereas the 
American bookselling industry is dominated by two 
players—Amazon and Barnes & Noble—the Japanese 
market has no dominant booksellers that have cor-
nered the market (Exhibit 1). One of the key reasons 
that there is not a great deal of industry consolidation is 
the unique price-fixing system that makes it illegal for 
larger or more efficient booksellers to use price com-
petition to drive out competitors. Since 1980, laws have 
allowed publishers to legally fix the price of new books, 
music, and newspapers in the bookselling industry. If 
the publisher sets the price of a book at $10, all retail-
ers are obligated to sell that book to the consumer for 
exactly $10. These price-fixing laws are known as the 
Saihanbai Kakaku Iji Seido (“Resale Price Maintenance 
System,” commonly known as the “Saihan system”). Be-
cause of the Saihan system, which makes discounting 
illegal, it would appear that the already oversaturated 
Japanese retail bookselling industry would be an inhos-
pitable host for new entrants. Nevertheless, two recent 
entrants, Bookoff and Amazon, have revolutionized the 
Japanese bookselling industry in a surprisingly short 
time (Exhibit 2).
Bookoff 
Over the years, Bookoff has been accused of unfair 
competition, cheating authors out of royalties, rep-
resenting a threat to Japanese culture, single-hand-
edly destroying the nation’s book industry, and cor-
rupting Japanese youth.6 However, Bookoff is not a 
“foreign invader.” It is entirely Japanese-owned. The 
reason why competitors spit venom when they hear 
founder Takashi Sakamoto’s name, and the reason 
why Bookoff has grown from one store to over 900 
(as of 2012) to become one of Japan’s largest retailers 
in only a decade, is simple: Bookoff uses a loophole 
Amazon, Bookoff, and the Japanese Bookselling Industry1
Charles E. Stevens (University of Wyoming)
I n t e g r a t i v e  C a s e  3 . 3
1) © Charles E. Stevens. Reprinted with permission. Yen has been converted 
at a rate for the average exchange rate for that year (e.g. US$1 5 87.78 yen 
in 2010).
2) Japan Book Publishers Association, 2010; Foner Books, www.fonerbooks.
com/booksale.htm.
3) Hoover’s Online, http://hoovers.com/.
4) The Japan Times, 2008, Why have Japan’s bookworms turned? January 6.
5) Japan Book Publishers Association, 2010.
6) Time Asia Online, http://www.time.com/time/asia/magazine/article/0,13673, 
501030217-421071,00.html.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

436	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
in the Saihan system that enables it to be the only 
major bookseller that can lower the prices on its 
merchandise.
The reason Bookoff can lower prices is due entirely 
to the fact that it is a used book store. Used books are a 
key exemption to the Saihan system, as are books pub-
lished outside of Japan (such as English language texts 
imported from the United States). The same Saihan sys-
tem that supported the bookselling cartel for decades 
is the same system that is now handcuffing the industry 
leaders. Bookoff has taken advantage of the situation, 
seeing its sales soar to almost $500 million in the 2009 
fiscal year—nearly tripling its performance in just eight 
years.
Sources: Nikkei MJ, company web pages, and annual reports.
Exhibit 2
Sales Trends in Japan ($ millions)
Amazon Japan
Bookoff
Maruzen
Yurindo
Bunkyodo
Kinokuniya
$4,000
$3,500
$3,000
$2,500
$2,000
$1,500
$1,000
$500
$0
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
Exhibit 1
2009 Net Sales of  Top American and Japanese Bookstores ($ millions)
Sources: Nikkei MJ, company web pages, and annual reports.
$25,000
$20,000
$15,000
$10,000
$5,000
$0
Amazon
$24,510
Barnes and
Noble
$5,800
Amazon
Japan
$3,416
Kinokuniya
$1,222
Maruzen
$950
Yurindo
$570
Junkudo
$477
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Three   Integrative Cases	
437
Amazon Japan
When Amazon opened the “virtual doors” on its 
Japanese subsidiary on November 11, 2000, it appeared 
to be in a position to exploit a first-mover advantage 
through online sales and feast on a Japanese bookselling 
industry characterized by a large market but (relatively) 
smaller competitors. However, optimism soured quickly 
when Amazon Japan’s 2001 sales were a disappointing 
$150 million—a fraction of Amazon’s worldwide sales 
of $4 billion. Not surprisingly, the primary source of 
Amazon’s troubles lay with the unique Saihan system of 
Japan. For Amazon, whose primary competitive advan-
tage rested on its ability to offer the lowest prices, the 
Saihan system was a critical roadblock.
While this could have spelled doom for Amazon, 
by 2010 Amazon stood on top of its Japanese com-
petitors, raking in over $3 billion in sales—a 24-fold 
increase since 2001 (!). In 2001, Amazon’s sales in 
Japan made up only 4% of its total worldwide sales, 
yet by 2010 Amazon’s Japan operations accounted for 
over 10%.7
How did Amazon do this? First, even though 
Amazon was not the first online bookseller in Japan, 
it was the first to sell a wide variety of products be-
sides books (such as music, DVDs, computer soft-
ware, and video games). Second, Amazon adjusted 
to the unique cultural environment of Japan. A fear 
of fraud made the Japanese comparatively more hesi-
tant to make Internet credit card purchases. In re-
sponse, Amazon Japan started a service in 2006 that 
allowed its customers to make payments at any of  
over 70,000 convenience stores and ATMs through-
out the country, enabling customers to avoid the 
risk of online fraud. Finally, Amazon used clever 
methods to bypass the Saihan system to indirectly of-
fer products at lower prices. Late in 2003, Amazon 
Japan opened a Japanese version of its highly success-
ful “Amazon Marketplace,” where third-party users 
sell both new and used products to each other. This 
allowed Amazon to indirectly sell books and music at 
prices below Saihan-mandated prices as third-party 
users—who are not bound by Saihan laws—officially 
made the transaction, not Amazon. Also, Amazon 
started using a points system that allowed custom-
ers to accumulate points based on the price of items 
purchased that could be redeemed for a gift certifi-
cate. Even though Amazon could not discount the 
prices on each item directly, the one-to-one corre-
spondence between the price of items purchased and 
redeemable gift certificate created a nearly identical 
result. Despite a slow start, once Amazon adjusted 
its strategy to the unique institutional environment 
of Japan, its sales took off and allowed the company 
to enjoy the same success it had enjoyed in its home 
market.
Case Discussion Questions
	 1.	 What are Bookoff’s firm-specific resources and 
capabilities?
	 2.	 What are Amazon’s firm-specific resources and 
capabilities in the United States and Japan?
	 3.	 What institutional barriers prevented Amazon 
from flexing its muscle in Japan initially?
	 4.	 How does Amazon leverage its resources and ca-
pabilities to overcome institutional barriers in 
Japan?
7) Amazon does not separate its international sales by country, so sales figures 
here are from estimates by industry experts (e.g. CNET Japan, http://japan. 
cnet.com/news/media/story/0,2000056023,20089876,00.htm; Hitsuki Research 
& Consulting Co., http://en.j-cast.com/2009/06/10042891.html).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

438	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
Should Huawei adopt an alternative intellectual property 
(IP) strategy when facing a series of IPR hurdles in the United 
States?
It was a warm fall day as Yi Zhao entered his office 
in Plano, Texas (a Dallas suburb). Still reeling from 
the morning news of Google’s $12.5 billion bid for 
Motorola Mobility, Yi contemplated the implications 
of Google’s potential acquisition of Motorola Mobility 
and its expansive patent portfolio. Yi, Vice President 
of Strategy for Huawei USA, had been in the United 
States since Huawei’s entry into the US market in 2001 
and had dealt with the challenges of entering a new 
market. Over the last few months, intellectual proper-
ty rights (IPR) had been on Yi’s mind, as Huawei had 
entered negotiations with InterDigital (ID) for alleged 
2G and 3G patent infringements. ID, a non-practicing 
entity known in the marketplace as a “patent troll,” 
had filed infringement allegations against Huawei and 
many of its competitors, including Nokia, ZTE, and 
ITC. These unexpected lawsuits were rumored to have 
been gamesmanship on the part of ID, with ID’s true 
intent to increase the value of its patent portfolio in 
preparation of a potential sale.
Huawei, a Chinese multinational, has struggled 
since its entry in the United States with regard to patent 
and IPR issues. Yi had observed that as markets became 
more competitive, many firms in the industry increased 
their licensing fees and developed aggressive IPR strat-
egies, similar to those of ID. As Yi faced this challenge, 
he wondered if Huawei’s harmonious IPR approach 
made the company vulnerable to attacks. “Should 
Huawei consider changing its IP strategy?” Yi thought.
Brief History of Huawei
Founded in 1987 by Ren Zhengfei, Huawei is a pri-
vately held firm that has become a multinational in-
formation and communication technology (ICT) 
equipment and services company. Specifically, Huawei 
is involved in the development, production, and mar-
keting of ICT equipment through the provision of 
mobile networks, broadband networks, IP-based opti-
cal networks, telecom value-added services, and ter-
minals. Despite consolidation in the industry, Huawei 
has remained strong with a corporate compound 
annual growth rate (CAGR) of 29% since 2006 (see 
Exhibit 1). The company has grown into the largest 
China-based ICT equipment supplier and the world’s 
second-largest supplier of mobile telecommunications 
infrastructure equipment behind Ericsson. However, 
Huawei’s US division has not fared as well.
Huawei firmly believed in the natural selection of 
the marketplace. Embodying the competitive spirit 
of the lone wolf, Huawei “incorporated three com-
ponents of the wolf spirit as part of its indispensable 
corporate culture: (1) a sensitive nose to opportunity, 
(2) aggressiveness, and (3) persistence on attack.” How-
ever, Huawei’s strategy failed to consider the complex-
ity of the host nation’s formal institutions (i.e., the US 
patent system). In January 2003, Cisco sued Huawei for 
IPR infringement. The suit, which was later settled out 
of court, forced Huawei to remove the majority of its 
products and leave the US. 
Determined to build upon its previous experience 
and apply its knowledge of the patent process, Huawei 
returned in 2009. Focusing on linkage, leverage, and 
learning (LLL), Huawei emphasized cooperation and  
Huawei’s Intellectual Property War1
Simon Ebenezer (University of Texas at Dallas)
Matthew Lefever (University of Texas at Dallas)
Katie Metzler (University of Texas at Dallas)
Katie Ryan (University of Texas at Dallas)
Chris Spartz (University of Texas at Dallas)
I n t e g r a t i v e  C a s e  3 . 4
1)  This was written by Simon Ebenezer, Matthew Lefever, Katie Metzler, Katie 
Ryan, and Chris Spartz (University of Texas at Dallas MBA 2011) under the su-
pervision of Professor Mike Peng. The purpose of the case is to serve as a basis 
for class discussion rather than to illustrate the effective or ineffective handling 
of an administrative situation. The views expressed are those of the authors 
(in their private capacity) and do not necessarily reflect those of the individu-
als and organizations mentioned. © Simon Ebenezer, Matthew Lefever, Katie 
Metzler, Katie Ryan, and Chris Spartz. Reprinted with permission.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Three   Integrative Cases	
439
partnership with suppliers in the marketplace.2 This 
strategy was a success in general, yet was still ineffective 
in addressing the US IPR issue. Some of this gap appears 
to arise from cultural distance. Western culture main-
tains an “ownership of ideas” concept, whereas tradition-
al Chinese culture maintains a belief that knowledge and 
ideas are an artistic expression that should be shared, not 
owned and exploited. Therefore, Huawei must not only 
overcome the cumbersome US patent system, but it must 
also overcome the distance between the two cultures.
The US Patent System
Once a driving force of innovation because of its abil-
ity to properly protect an individual’s IP, the US patent 
system has more recently become a hindrance to the 
ICT industry. Unlike other industries where one patent 
can protect an entire product line, the ICT industry is  
2)  The LLL strategy refers to a firm’s quest for linkage (identifying and bridging 
gaps), leverage (leveraging unique resources and capabilities), and learning 
(acquiring local knowledge) via foreign direct investment (FDI). See M. W. Peng, 
2011, Global Business, 2nd ed. (pp. 342–343), Cincinnati: South-Western Cengage 
Learning.
Exhibit 1
Huawei’s Consolidated Income Statement
CNY Million
  2010
  2009
  2008
  2007
  2006
Revenue
185,176
149,059
125,217
93,792
66,365
Operating profit
29,271
21,052
16,197
9,115
4,846
Operating margin
15.8%
14.1%
12.9%
9.7%
7.3%
Net profit
23,757
18,274
7,848
7,558
3,999
Cash flow from operating activities
28,458
21,741
6,455
7,628
5,801
Cash and cash equivalents
38,062
29,232
21,017
13,822
8,241
Working capital
53,991
41,835
29,588
23,475
10,670
Total assets
160,841
139,653
118,240
81,059
58,501
Total borrowings
11,640
16,377
14,009
2,731
2,908
Owners’ equity
55,251
43,316
37,454
30,032
20,846
Liability ratio
65.6%
69.0%
68.3%
63.0%
64.4%
Source: Huawei Technologies Co. 2010.
0
66,365
93,792
125,217
149,059
185,176
CNY Million
CAGR: 29%
Revenue
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
20,000
40,000
60,000
80,000
100,000
120,000
140,000
160,000
180,000
200,000
Operating proﬁt
CNY Million
CAGR: 57%
2006
4,846
9,115
16,197
21,052
29,271
2007
2008
2009
2010
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
35,000
Cash ﬂow from
operating activities
CNY Million
CAGR: 49%
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
35,000
5,801
7,628
6,455
21,741
28,458
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

440	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
quite interconnected and interdependent. Each prod-
uct or service embodies many patents.3 The complex-
ity of modern telecommunications devices, along with 
many other issues, has resulted in a patent system that 
can no longer serve the needs of modern technology.
The problem originates from an outdated and un-
derfunded US patent system. The current system is 
laden with inadequate review procedures, gamesman-
ship, and a volume of applications that has increased 
the difficulty for users to properly navigate the system. 
Regulations and attempts at reform have struggled to 
address the issues that result from a young and fast-
paced sector. Furthermore, years of “first to invent” 
US patent procedures,4 key plaintiff-friendly rulings,5 
and the rise of plaintiff-friendly courts (especially the 
Eastern District of Texas6) have created two recent 
trends: (1) the rise of infringement litigation designed 
to damage a defendant (which we call stifling litigation) 
and (2) patent trolls.
Stifling Litigation
The original intent of IPR was to encourage innovation 
by allowing the inventor to profit from his or her la-
bors. However recently, many companies, particularly 
those in the ICT and software industries, have used 
patents as a way to curb a rival’s growth and stifle the 
overall innovation of the industry (even if this stagna-
tion is detrimental to the plaintiff firm). Furthermore, 
the patents these firms call into question represent a 
small part of the overall product. Two key examples of 
stifling litigation against Huawei have been the recent 
Motorola Solutions (MSI) infringement settlement in 
April 2011 and Microsoft’s allegations of Android pat-
ent infringements in September 2011.
After MSI’s courtship and intended merger with 
Nokia Siemens Networks (NSN), MSI filed suit against 
Huawei for patent infringement. The suit was seen as a 
way for NSN to divert Huawei’s resources, as it swooped 
in to acquire one of Huawei’s major customers. In a 
counterattack, Huawei sued MSI for illegally transfer-
ring Huawei’s IP to NSN. After Huawei won a prelimi-
nary injunction and the NSN deal fizzled, Huawei and 
MSI settled for an undisclosed amount and formed a 
cross-licensing agreement, enabling Huawei to main-
tain its roughly $880 million business partnership. 
More recently, Microsoft demanded a patent li-
censing agreement (with fees) for Huawei’s use of the 
open-sourced Android operating system (OS) within 
its mobile devices. Microsoft, which takes home an es-
timated $444 million annually from Android royalties 
and is currently struggling in the mobile market, has 
already navigated similar agreements with Samsung, 
HTC, ViewSonic, and other Android device vendors 
in order to generate revenue. Interestingly enough, 
these licensing fees may generate more revenue for  
Microsoft than its Windows 7 OS. According to a Bloom-
berg News report, “Microsoft generated approximately 
$21 million from its Windows OS phones, whereas it 
received over $60 million from merely one Android 
manufacturer (HTC) in patent licensing fees.”
Given Huawei’s strong reputation regarding IPR and 
its expansive patent portfolio, containing more than 
65,000 patents worldwide, critics view the allegations 
as a tactical move by Microsoft. The thinking in this 
case is that Microsoft wants either to destroy Android 
(and ease its stranglehold on the mobile OS market) or 
to make it more attractive for mobile phone hardware 
makers, such as Huawei, to switch its OS to Windows. If 
either scenario fails, the success of Android could still 
lead to Microsoft’s next billion-dollar revenue stream. 
Cross-licensing agreements are the most frequent 
and cost effective strategy used to combat infringe-
ment allegations. They typically occur between firms 
within the same value chain or product line. The pro-
cess consists of negotiating licensing fees based on 
the value of the patents used within the product. The 
firms swap away the bulk of licensing fees in negotia-
tions, leaving smaller amounts of actual costs to be rec-
ognized by each firm within the negotiation. However, 
some companies are changing their approach, with 
firms such as IBM, Texas Instruments, and AT&T le-
veraging their patent portfolios to simply generate ad-
ditional revenue.7 Additionally, many firms have found 
that generating revenue through licensing and patent  
3)  A single smartphone may contain as many as 250,000 patents (authors’ 
interview with Yi Zhao, 2011).
4) The Patent Act established a “first-to-invent” standard. It stated that the 
inventor who conceived of the invention first would acquire superior rights over 
all later inventors. As of September 16, 2011, this has been revised under the 
American Invents Act to “first-to-file.” Under this standard, an inventor must 
merely file to be awarded ownership. It should be noted that most of the rest 
of the developed world has used a “first-to-file” standard for quite some time.
5) According to a 2009 PricewaterhouseCoopers study, non-practicing firms’ 
win ratio of 67% for infringement cases is approximately the same as 
practicing entities litigating patent suits. However, in absolute terms these 
non-practicing entities recover about twice the average award as practicing 
entities.
6) In 2010, the Eastern District of Texas led the country in the absolute number 
of patent cases filed (299 cases).
7) In 2010, IBM reportedly received over $500 million in licensing royalties 
alone. Texas Instruments has reported over $3 billion in cumulative patent 
royalties since the 1980s.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Three   Integrative Cases	
441
litigation often produces a higher rate of return than 
its core business activities. As the ICT market contin-
ues to evolve, many firms are eschewing cross-licensing 
agreements in favor of revenue-generating strategies.
Patent Trolls
Patent trolls are a product of this evolution. Trolls typi-
cally are non-practicing entities consisting of lawyers, 
PhDs, and patent experts. Trolls are concerned with 
acquiring essential patents in industry standard tech-
nology (such as the 4G platform). They do not actually 
produce any products, but instead they hoard patents 
and wait for other companies to make the patents prof-
itable. Since no one in the industry can use the stan-
dard technology without using the troll’s patent, the 
troll stands to profit, either through the collection of 
licensing fees or by bringing an infringement lawsuit.8 
Further, because trolls do not produce anything, they 
have no need to cross-license, thus having a robust pat-
ent portfolio provides no solution to the companies tar-
geted by trolls.
ID is a known patent troll. According to its 2011 
annual report, ID generated 94% of its total revenue 
from patent licensing with approximately 26% and 
15% of total revenues from Samsung and LG, respec-
tively (see Exhibits 2, 3, and 4). Based on that ratio, 
ID is estimated to have generated $214.79 million, 
$279.55 million, and $370.83 million in revenue from 
licensing fees and litigation awards and settlements 
from 2008, 2009, and 2010, respectively. That means 
that such vendors as Samsung and LG are paying fees 
upwards of $96.4 million and $55.62 million, respec-
tively, to ID annually.
Huawei’s Patent Strategy
According to Yi Zhao, Huawei has embraced a har-
monious IP strategy in the United States and believes 
that patents should only be utilized as a defensive 
mechanism, not as an offensive one. As Yi stated in 
his softly spoken tone, “Huawei’s patents are free 
to use within the technology community, unless 
Huawei is attacked.” Under that condition, Huawei 
would revoke its agreements and retaliate with great  
force through either litigation or aggressive cross-
licensing negotiations. Additionally, Huawei takes 
patent trolls very seriously. According to Yi, “If Huawei 
is attacked [by a patent troll], we will not consider a  
settlement and we are prepared to take them to court 
. . . and win.”
Huawei has spent the last few years attempting to 
work closely with industry leaders to ensure compliance 
with licensing agreements and proper distribution of 
compensation. According to Yi, in every cross-licensing 
agreement so far, Huawei has made every effort to ne-
gotiate a fair price for licensing fees. To mitigate the 
growing trend of patent litigation, Yi and his staff have 
attempted to build a strong patent portfolio by leverag-
ing Huawei’s R&D and by acquiring other innovative 
companies.
Research and Development
Yi knows that many firms are increasing their R&D ex-
penditures in the hope of expanding their patent port-
folios. Huawei has been no exception. It has remained 
highly focused on R&D: 10% of the annual budget and 
43% of the company’s workforce is allocated to R&D. 
Huawei has effectively leveraged its highly skilled and 
inexpensive labor force to drive innovation cost con-
siderably lower than that of its Western competitors, 
namely, Ericsson and Nortel. With this approach, and 
in just a few short years, Huawei has been able to secure 
more than 65,000 patents worldwide. 
In addition, Huawei has focused on becoming a 
major player in setting international standards. By the 
end of 2010, Huawei was a member of 123 standards 
organizations and served in over 180 leadership posi-
tions. Huawei has accumulatively submitted more than 
23,000 proposals. Specifically in the LTE/EPC field, 
Huawei possesses about 8% of patents (see Exhibit 5). 
It has submitted more than 6,400 proposals to 3GPP. 
In 2010, the number of proposals submitted by Huawei 
on LTE Radio Communication Core Specification 
passed by 3GPP accounted for approximately 20% of 
the world’s overall accepted proposals.
Despite these achievements, Huawei has contin-
ued to struggle in the US market, leading Yi to wonder 
whether Huawei’s defensive IP approach was the right 
strategy for Huawei to fend off competitors and estab-
lish itself within the US market.
Acquisitions
Traditionally, acquisitions have been a quick and effec-
tive solution to acquire expertise and amass a patent 
portfolio (along with market share) that would have 
otherwise been unattainable in the short term. How-
ever, Huawei has been unable to use this approach suc-
cessfully. Due to the sensitivity of US national security  
8) One key plaintiff ruling that set this trend in motion was Research in Motion’s 
loss of $612 million to NTP, a non-practicing firm.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

442	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
Exhibit 2
InterDigital: Consolidated Balance Sheet
December 31,  
2010
December 31,  
2009
(In thousands, except per-share data)
ASSETS
CURRENT ASSETS:
Cash and cash equivalents
$215,451
$210,863
Short-term investments
326,218
198,943
Accounts receivable, less allowances of $1,750 and $1,500
33,632
212,905
Deferred tax assets
35,136
68,500
Prepaid and other current assets
9,119
11,111
Total current assets
619,556
702,322
PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT, NET
8,344
10,399
PATENTS, NET
130,305
119,170
DEFERRED TAX ASSETS
71,754
31,652
OTHER NON-CURRENT ASSETS, NET
44,684
44,942
255,087
206,163
TOTAL ASSETS
$874,643
$908,485
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
CURRENT LIABILITIES:
Current portion of long-term debt
$288
$584
Accounts payable
7,572
6,284
Accrued compensation and related expenses
22,933
10,592
Deferred revenue
134,804
193,409
Taxes payable
3,675
33,825
Dividend payable
4,526
—
Other accrued expenses
4,762
7,866
Total current liabilities
178,560
252,560
LONG-TERM DEBT
180
468
LONG-TERM DEFERRED REVENUE
332,174
474,844
OTHER LONG-TERM LIABILITIES
10,613
11,076
TOTAL LIABILITIES 
521,527
738,948
COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY:
Preferred Stock, $0.10 par value, 14,399 shares authorized,  
0 shares issued and outstanding
—
—
Common Stock, $0.01 par value, 100,000 shares authorized, 68,602  
and 66,831 shares issued and 45,032 and 43,261 shares outstanding
686
668
Additional paid-in capital
525,767
491,068
Retained earnings
395,799
246,771
Accumulated other comprehensive income
111
277
922,363
738,784
Treasury stock, 23,570 shares of common held at cost
569,247
569,247
Total shareholders’ equity
353,116
169,537
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
$874,643
$908,485
Source: InterDigital 2010.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Three   Integrative Cases	
443
concerns, Huawei has been blocked from potential pur-
chases of 3Com, 3Leaf, and, most recently, Motorola. 
This inability to purchase US-based companies, and 
IPR for that matter, has become a major stumbling 
block for Huawei.
Exhibit 3
InterDigital: Consolidated Income Statement
For The Year Ended December 31
2010
2009
2008
(In thousands, except per-share data)
REVENUES
$394,545
$297,404
$228,469
OPERATING EXPENSES:
Selling, general and administrative
28,301
24,777
33,452
Patent administration and licensing
58,907
56,127
63,492
Development
71,464
64,007
98,932
Repositioning
—
38,604
—
Arbitration and litigation contingencies
—
—
(3,940)
158,672
183,515
191,936
Income from operations
235,873
113,889
36,533
OTHER INCOME (LOSS):
Interest and investment income (loss), net
2,574
(1,186)
3,429
Income before income taxes
238,447
112,703
39,962
INCOME TAX PROVISION
(84,831)
(25,447)
(13,755)
NET INCOME
$153,616
$87,256
$26,207
NET INCOME PER COMMON SHARE—BASIC
$3.48
$2.02
$0.58
WEIGHTED AVERAGE NUMBER OF COMMON  
SHARES OUTSTANDING—BASIC
44,084
43,295
44,928
NET INCOME PER COMMON SHARE—DILUTED
$3.43
$1.97
$0.57
WEIGHTED AVERAGE NUMBER OF COMMON SHARES  
OUTSTANDING—DILUTED
44,824
44,327
45,964
Source: InterDigital 2010.
Exhibit 4
Major Sources of InterDigital Revenue
During 2010, 2009 and 2008, the following customers accounted for 10% or more of total revenues:
2010
2009
2008
Samsung Electronics Company Ltd. 
26%
33%
< 10%
LG Electronics
15%
19%
25%
Sharp Corporation
< 10%
10%
16%
NEC Corporation
< 10%
< 10%
12%
Source: InterDigital 2010.
The situation has been so disconcerting that in 
February 2011, Huawei requested that the US govern-
ment launch a formal investigation of the company in 
order to expunge any national security concerns that 
the US might have regarding the company’s activities 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

444	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
and affiliations. The US government has yet to pro-
vide a positive response. Moreover, William Plummer, 
Huawei’s government-relations point man, has been 
meeting with anyone in Washington willing to listen 
to Huawei’s side of the story. As Plummer has pointed 
out often (including after the unraveling of the 3Leaf 
acquisition), “Huawei is Huawei, not the Chinese 
government.” 
However, the US government’s skepticism continues 
to run deep as Huawei has balked at any suggestions 
to create a publicly owned US subsidiary. According 
to Huawei (which remains private and is not listed in 
China), this is not possible because Chinese law pre-
vents companies with large employee ownership from 
going public. Additionally, if an IPO were issued, 
Huawei was concerned that it would generate billions 
of dollars for top management, giving many of them, 
along with their decades of experience and expertise, 
an incentive to leave the organization.
Conclusion
ID presented a growing problem for Huawei. As 
Huawei continued to battle in the US IP war—with 
competitors that were becoming more aggressive in 
their licensing fees and litigation attacks—Yi con-
sidered if Huawei should revise its IP strategy in the 
United States. He knew that R&D is necessary for long-
term success, but it provided little short-term relief. He 
knew that acquisitions would fix the short-terms prob-
lems, but a successful acquisition was unlikely without 
a change in attitude from the US government. He 
also knew that part of the rules of the game in the US 
meant having a lobbying presence in Washington, but 
Huawei’s lobbying efforts had proven ineffective. Fac-
ing failure at every turn, Yi wondered if Huawei should 
embrace a Western attitude toward IPR and begin ag-
gressively capitalizing on its robust patent portfolio in 
a similar manner as ID. The alternative was to embrace 
Washington’s stance on transparency and form a pub-
licly traded US subsidiary. Finally, Yi considered the 
worst-case scenario: Huawei would once again have to 
retreat to China and dwell upon its failures in the US.
Case Discussion Questions
	 1.	 From a resource-based view, does Huawei have 
the necessary resources to change its IP strategy? 
	 2.	 From an institution-based view, what are Hua-
wei’s hurdles? What should Huawei do to over-
come those hurdles?
	 3.	 From an institution-based view, what informal 
rules and norms would an alternative IP strategy 
violate? What are the cultural implications of 
those violations?
Sources: Based on (1) O. Alexy, P. Criscuolo, & A. Salter, 2009, Does IP 
strategy have to cripple open innovation? Sloan Management Review, 2009: 
71–77; (2) A. Bessinger, 2011, Industry Surveys: Communication Equit-
ment, New York: Standard and Poor’s; (3) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2011, 
Huawei climbs “food chain” in Cisco enterprise challenge, May 9, www.
businessweek.com/news/2011-05-09/huawei-climbs-food-chain-in-cisco-
enterprise-challenge.html (accessed November 26, 2011); (4) T. Buley,  
2010, Android lawsuit is really just Oracle flirting with Google, Forbes, 
August 
13, 
www.forbes.com/sites/taylorbuley/2010/08/13/android-law-
suit-is-really-just-oracle-flirting-with-google/ (accessed October 16, 2011); 
(5) S. Carew & A. Grenon, 2011, Huawei calls on US government to inves-
tigate it, February 24, www.reuters.com/article/2011/02/24/us-huawei-
us-idUSTRE71N7EL20110224?feedType=RSS&feedName=technology 
News&utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign 
Exhibit 5
Top LTE Patent Holders
InterDigital
Technology
11%
Qualcomm
13%
InterDigital
Patent Holdings
13%
Nokia
9%
Samsung
9%
Huawei
8%
Ericsson
8%
ZTE
7%
LG Electronics
6%
NTT Docomo
5%
Others
11%
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Three   Integrative Cases	
445
=Feed%3A+reuters%2FtechnologyNews+%28News+%2F+US+%2F+Tec
hnology%29 (accessed November 26, 2011); (6) A. Chachkes, 2007, Per-
spective: Fixing a broken patent system, CNET.com, October 10, news.cnet 
.com/Fixing-a-broken-patent-system/2010-1014_3-6212615.html (accessed 
October 1, 2011); (7) S. Cornwell, 2011, Lawmakers probe Chinese telecoms 
firms in US, November 17, www.reuters.com/article/2011/11/18/china-
usa-telecoms-idUSN1E7AG25K20111118 (accessed November 26, 2011);  
(8) L. G. Crovitz, 2011, Google, Motorola, and the patent wars, Wall Street 
Journal, August 22: A11; (9) Datamonitor, 2010, Huawei Technologies Co., 
Ltd. Company Profile, London: Datamonitor; (10) L. Davis, 2008, Licensing 
strategies of the new “intellectual property vendors,” California Management 
Review, 50(2): 6–30; (11) G. Dess, G.T. Lumpkin, & A. Eisner, 2010, Strategic 
Management. New York: McGraw-Hill/Irwin; (12) K. Eaton, 2011, What the 
new Patent Reform Act means for innovation, Fast Company, September 9,  
www.fastcompany.com/1779071/first-to-file-a-patently-obvious-reform 
(accessed October 11, 2011); (13) Economist, 2011, The long march of the 
invisible Mr Ren, June 2, www.economist.com/node/18771640 (accessed 
November 26, 2011); (14) Z. Epstein, 2011, Motorola and Huawei settle all  
pending lawsuits, April 13, www.bgr.com/2011/04/13/motorola-and-huawei-
settle-all-pending-lawsuits/ (accessed November 26, 2011); (15)  Huawei 
Technologies Co., Ltd., 2010, Research & Development, December  31, 
www.huawei.com/en/about-huawei/corporate-info/research-development/ 
index.htm (accessed November 26, 2011); (16) Huawei Technologies Co., 
Ltd., 2010, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd. 2010 Annual Report, Shenzhen; 
(17) Inc., 2001, Patent licensing: Another way to enhance return on invest-
ment, August 9, www.inc.com/articles/2001/08/23293.html (accessed 
November 26, 2011); (18) InterDigital, 2010, InterDigital 2010 Annual Report, 
King of Prussia; (19) J. Shen & L. Chen, 2011, Chinese telecom firms fight 
for rights, China Daily, May 11, usa.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2011-05/11/
content_12486416.htm (accessed November 26, 2011); (20)  D. Kucera, 
Z.  Tracer, & R. Nazareth, 2011, InterDigital gains 50% with Apple-Google 
patent rush, July 26, www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-07-26/InterDigital-
appreciates-50-with-apple-google-rush-for-patents-real-m-a.html (accessed 
November  26, 2011); (21) M. Kurman, 2011, What universities can learn 
from IBM’s IP licensing strategies, July 3 (accessed November 26, 2011); 
(22)  J.  Lehman, 2006, Intellectual property rights and Chinese tradition 
section: Philosophical foundations, Journal of Business Ethics, 69(1): 1–9; 
(23) M. W. Peng, 2011, Global Business, 2nd ed., Cincinnati: South-Western 
Cengage Learning; (24) S. Prasso, 2011, What makes China telecom 
Huawei so scary? Fortune, July 28, tech.fortune.cnn.com/2011/07/28/what-
makes-china-telecom-huawei-so-scary/ (accessed November  26, 2011); 
(25) G. Quinn, 2011, InterDigital vs. Nokia, Huawei and ZTE at ITC in patent dis-
pute, IP Watchdog, July 27, ipwatchdog.com/2011/07/27/InterDigital-vs-nokia-
huawei-and-zte-at-itc-in-patent-dispute/id=18418/ (accessed November  26,  
2011); (26) S. Raice, 2011, Huawei wins preliminary injunction against 
Motorola, Wall Street Journal, February 22, online.wsj.com/article/SB1000 
1424052748703775704576161084094304092.html (accessed November 26, 
2011); (27) E. Ramstad, 2011, Microsoft-Samsung deal strikes a blow at 
Google, Wall Street Journal, September 29; (28) A. Schatz, 2011, Patent over-
haul bill passes in Senate, Wall Street Journal, September 9; (29) C. Shapiro, 
2007, Patent reform: Aligning reward and contribution, Innovation Policy and 
the Economy, 8: 111–156; (30) D. Somaya, D. Teece, & S. Wakeman, 2011, 
Innovation in multi-invention contexts: Maping solutions to technological and 
intellectual property complexity, California Management Review, 53(4): 
47–79; (31) T. Team, 2011, Oracles goes after Google in Android suit, shares 
should see $37, Forbes, July 8; (32) US-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, 2011, The National Security Implications of Investments  
and Products From the People’s Republic of China in the Telecommunica-
tions Sector, staff report, 2011; (33) K. Walker, 2011, Patents and innova-
tion, The Official Google Blog, April 4, googleblog.blogspot.com/2011/04/
patents-and-innovation.html (accessed October 27, 2011); (34) Y. Zhao, Vice 
President of Strategy for Huawei USA, interview by S. Ebenezer, M. Lefever, 
K. Metzler, K. Ryan, and C. Spartz, 2011, A discussion on Huawei’s future IP 
Strategy, Plano, TX, October 13 and November 11; (35) R. Ziedonis, 2008, 
On the apparent failure of patents, Academy of Management Perspectives, 
20: 21–29.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

446	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
South Africa’s De Beers successfully managed the global 
diamond cartel throughout the 20th century. However, it is 
encountering major challenges in the 21st century.
The longest running and probably the most success-
ful cartel in the modern world is the international 
diamond cartel headed by De Beers of South Africa. 
The cartel system underpinning the $80 billion a year 
industry is, according to the Economist, “curious and 
anomalous—no other market exists, nor would any-
thing similar be tolerated in a serious industry.” While 
De Beers successfully managed this cartel throughout 
the 20th century, it is now confronting major challenges 
in the 21st century. How did the cartel start? What are 
its driving forces? What are its current challenges? This 
case addresses these questions.
The Cartel
Although historically diamonds were rare, the discov-
ery of South African diamond mines by the end of the 
19th century brought an avalanche of stones to the 
global market. A key reason diamond prices were so 
expensive was because of the deeply ingrained percep-
tion of scarcity. Consequently, if there was an oversup-
ply, prices could plummet. Cecil Rhodes, an English 
tycoon who founded the De Beers Mines in South 
Africa in 1875, sought to solve this problem by focus-
ing on two areas. First, Rhodes realized that supply 
from South Africa, the only significant producer in 
the world at that time, should be limited. Second, be-
cause producers (diggers) had little control over the 
quality and quantity of their output, they preferred to 
deal with an indiscriminate buyer willing to purchase 
both spectacular and mediocre stones. Since most out-
put would be mediocre stones, producers preferred 
to remove any uncertainty and to be able to sell all of 
their output. On the other hand, buyers (merchants) 
needed to secure a steady supply of stones (both high 
and low ends) in order to generate sufficient volume to 
polish and then retail. Rhodes’s solution was to create 
an ongoing agreement between a single producer and 
a single buyer in which supply was kept low and prices 
high.
Putting his idea in action, Rhodes bought out 
all the major South African mines in the 1890s and 
formed a diamond merchants’ association in the coun-
try, called the “Diamond Syndicate,” to which he would 
sell his output. In such “single-channel marketing,” all 
members of the Syndicate pledged to buy diamonds 
from Rhodes and sell them in specific quantities and 
prices. With such an explicit scheme of quantity-fixing 
and price-fixing, the diamond cartel was born. After 
Rhodes’s death in 1902, the De Beers empire was 
strengthened by Ernest Oppenheimer, a German dia-
mond merchant who had founded his own company, 
Anglo-American, in South Africa. Through cross 
shareholdings, members of the Oppenheimer family 
controlled both De Beers and Anglo-American (until 
the end of 2011—see below).
Industry Attributes
Most cartels collapse due to organizational and incen-
tive problems. The longevity of the De Beers cartel, 
now running for more than 100 years, thus is an amaz-
ing case study of how to effectively run a cartel. At least 
three industry attributes contribute to the cartel’s lon-
gevity. First, the industry has an extraordinarily high 
concentration. In Rhodes’s day, De Beers not only con-
trolled all of South African (and hence virtually world-
wide) production, but also controlled all sales through 
its wholly owned subsidiary, Central Selling Organiza-
tion (CSO), in London. In more recent times, the CSO 
evolved to be rebranded as the Diamond Trading Com-
pany (DTC), which continues its function as the distri-
bution arm of De Beers.
Second, De Beers is the undisputed price leader. 
Sales of rough diamonds (called “sights”) are managed 
by the DTC (previously the CSO) to an exclusive group 
of “cherry picked” merchants (known as “sightholders”) 
from cities such as Antwerp, Johannesburg, Mumbai, New 
York, and Tel Aviv. Sightholders would inform the DTC  
Is A Diamond (Cartel) Forever?1
Mike W. Peng (University of Texas at Dallas)
I n t e g r a t i v e  C a s e  3 . 5
1) Preparation of this case was supported in part by the National Science Foun-
dation CAREER grant (SES 0552089) and the Jindal Chair at the Jindal School 
of Management, University of Texas at Dallas. This case is entirely based on 
published sources. The views expressed are those of the author and not those 
of the underwriters. © Mike W. Peng. Reprinted with permission.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Three   Integrative Cases	
447
of their preferences for quantity and quality. The DTC 
then matched them with inventory. During each sight, 
the DTC offered each sightholder a preselected parcel. 
The buyer either took it with cash or left it—no bargain-
ing was permitted. Buyers usually took the parcel. If 
buyers did not like the system, they would not be invited 
again. This tactic allowed De Beers to control, down to 
the carat, exactly what and how many stones entered the 
market and at what price. To maintain the exclusivity 
of the sightholders, their number was reduced from ap-
proximately 350 in the 1970s to less than 100 sightholders 
in the 2000s. In 2011, only 79 sightholders were invited. 
Of these, approximately 30% came from Belgium, 
25% from Israel, 20% from India, and 15% from the 
United States with the balance based in Britain, China, 
Japan, Latin America, South Africa, and Thailand.
Third, the friendly social relationships among par-
ticipants of the cartel—for the most part—facilitate 
its long-term viability. “It’s a personal business, face to 
face,” said De Beers’s chairman Nicky Oppenheimer 
(Ernest’s grandson). “In uranium, everybody brings 
their lawyers. In diamonds, there are no lawyers sitting 
around. It’s a handshake business.”
Firm Capabilities
At least three firm-specific attributes are also behind the 
longevity of De Beers’s cartel. First, De Beers has a very 
clear strategy: Expand demand, limit supply, and maxi-
mize long-term profit. In the postwar decades, thanks 
to De Beers advertising, diamond engagement rings 
have become almost compulsory in North America, 
Western Europe, and Japan. Increasingly anniversary 
rings are made of diamonds as well. In 1947, De Beers 
unleashed the clever “A diamond is forever” campaign, 
which in 2000 was voted by Advertising Age magazine as 
the best advertising slogan of the 20th century. The ini-
tial purpose was is simply to prevent the emergence of 
a market for second-hand diamonds, which would have 
significantly increased supply. Consequently, De Beers 
historically has able to take advantage of very inelastic 
demand to set prices, largely constrained only by the 
number of engagements and to a lesser extent major 
anniversaries in any given year.
Second, De Beers exhibits a high level of flexibility 
to adapt to new challenges. By the 1950s, South Africa 
was no longer the leading producer. Today, only 12% 
of the worldwide production is from South Africa, and 
Botswana and Russia outperform South Africa in rough 
diamond production by a wide margin (Exhibit 1). 
Out of necessity, De Beers had to reach out to other 
producers. De Beers offered its capital and expertise 
to African producers in Botswana, Angola, and Na-
mibia. As a result, De Beers still controls approximately 
35% of the worldwide production—it is still the biggest 
diamond miner but no longer that dominant. If pro-
ducers declined offers for joint production, De Beers 
would urge them to sell to De Beers. Appreciating the 
benefits of cooperation and the hazards of oversup-
ply, many producers agreed. Even during the heyday 
of the former Soviet Union, which for political rea-
sons did not acknowledge any business dealings with 
the then Apartheid-era South Africa, the Soviet gov-
ernment entered secret agreements with De Beers to 
participate in such collusion. The producers typically 
agreed to sell rough diamonds only to De Beers, which 
dictated prices. De Beers promised to purchase all of 
the output, rain or shine (prices might fluctuate due to 
changing demand), resulting in its huge stockpiles of 
diamonds. In exchange, the producers reaped the tra-
ditional benefits of a cartel: stable prices, guaranteed 
purchases, and little competition. At present, De Beers 
still controls approximately 45% of the rough diamond 
sales worldwide (Exhibit 2).
Perhaps most strikingly, De Beers possesses both 
the unique will and capability to enforce cartel ar-
rangements. As in all cartels, the incentives to cheat 
are tremendous: Both producers and buyers are in-
terested in cutting De Beers out of the process. As a 
price leader with a significant capacity to punish, De 
Percentage of  
world total
Botswana
26.0%
Russia
17.8%
South Africa
11.8%
Canada
11.4%
Angola
8.1%
Democratic Republic of Congo
8.0%
Australia
4.5%
Namibia
5.7%
Others
6.7%
Total Value
$13 billion
Exhibit 1
Rough Diamond Production by Value
Source: Based on figure in Economist, 2007, Changing facets (p. 76), 
February 24: 75–76. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

448	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
Beers’s reactions are typically swift and powerful. In 
1981, President Mobutu Seko of Zaire (now known as 
the Democratic Republic of Congo) announced that 
his country, the world’s leading producer of industrial 
diamonds, broke away from De Beers by directly mar-
keting its diamonds. Although only 3% of De Beers’s 
sales were lost, its “world order” would be at stake if 
such actions were unpunished. Consequently, De Beers 
drew on its stockpiles to flood the market, driving the 
price of Zairian industrial diamonds from $3 per carat 
to $1.80 and wiping out any financial gains the Zairians 
hoped to grab. While incurring disproportional losses, 
De Beers made its point. In 1983, Zaire crawled back on 
its knees and De Beers agreed, but only at terms much 
less favorable than those offered before.
In another example, many sightholders in Tel Aviv, 
a major diamond cutting and trading center, began 
to hoard diamonds purchased from the CSO in the 
late 1970s, hoping to combat Israel’s rampant infla-
tion. The disappearance of a substantial amount of 
diamonds from global circulation tightened supply, 
leading to skyrocketing prices and encouraging mer-
chants elsewhere also to hoard and profit. While De 
Beers actually benefited from such higher prices in 
the short run, it realized that in the long run such 
an uncontrolled speculative bubble would burst. In 
response, in 1978, De Beers purged one third of CSO 
sightholders and kicked out the most aggressive Israeli 
speculators and some non-Israeli merchants who had 
done business with the Israelis. Cut off from their 
CSO supplies, speculative merchants were forced to 
draw down their stockpiles, thus restoring prices to 
normal levels and leading to a “soft landing” from the 
speculative fever.
Institutional Constraints and Maneuvers
De Beers is also a skillful player in understanding and 
manipulating the rules of the game. In South Africa, 
half of the stock market is composed of the stocks of 
De Beers (until its 2001 delisting), Anglo-American, 
and their vast empire of related firms. They control 
the pillar of South Africa’s economy, namely, strategic 
minerals. For obvious reasons, the South African gov-
ernment—both during and after the Apartheid—is on 
friendly terms with De Beers, whose cartel has no fear 
of being prosecuted. To prevent further scrutiny, De 
Beers delisted itself in 2001 and has remained a private 
company since then.
De Beers also maintains friendly relationships with 
most governments of diamond producing countries. Its 
secret deals with the former Soviet government were in-
dicative of its superb persuasive power, driving home 
the point that economics was more important than ide-
ology (even during the heyday of the Cold War).
While De Beers historically has entered a number 
of joint production arrangements with host country 
governments in Botswana, Angola, Namibia, and the 
Democratic Republic of Congo, it would ship all its 
rough diamond output mined from Africa to Lon-
don, where the diamonds would be sorted and then 
sold (first by the CSO and more recently by the DTC 
as noted earlier). However, the rules of the game are 
now changing. African governments are increasingly 
interested in cutting and polishing diamonds mined 
from their countries, which would add about 50% to 
the value of rough diamonds. This process is known as 
“beneficiation”—locating diamond processing activi-
ties in countries where the stones are extracted. “I am 
not going to say that beneficiation is something every-
one in the [De Beers] business desires,” acknowledged 
Gareth Penny, De Beers’s managing director in a 2007 
interview, “but in the end, diamond resources are na-
tional resources. . . Beneficiation is not about altruism 
but about good business; it creates much closer rela-
tionships with our partners.”
In 2004, when the licenses for De Beers’ two most 
profitable mines in Botswana came up for renewal, 
the Botswana government negotiated a beneficiation 
agreement with De Beers. In case De Beers disagreed, 
Botswana threatened to impose an export levy on 
rough diamond exports. In the end, De Beers agreed 
to sort in Botswana all the diamonds from its numerous 
sources around the world in a new $83 million facil-
ity entirely funded by De Beers. Botswana further de-
manded that De Beers’s sightholders must also cut the 
diamonds in Botswana. Since Botswana is the current 
leader producing 26% of rough diamonds in the world, 
De Beers and its sightholders had little choice but to 
Percentage of world 
total
1990
2007
2011
De Beers production of 
rough diamonds
45%
40%
35%
De Beers sales of rough 
diamonds
80%
50%
45%
Exhibit 2
De Beers Diamond Production and Sales
Source: Based on text in (1) Economist, 2007, Changing facets (p. 75), 
February 24: 75–76 and (2) Economist, 2011, Betting on De Beers (p. 73), 
November 12: 73.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Three   Integrative Cases	
449
agree. These operations in Botswana commenced in 
2009. Not surprisingly, governments in Angola and the 
Democratic Republic of Congo are also salivating for a 
piece of the action beyond mere diamond mining.
 Finally, De Beers faces one major institutional head-
ache: the US government argued that De Beers and its 
cartel were in clear violation of US antitrust laws, and 
unsuccessfully tried to prosecute it in 1945, 1974, and 
1994. De Beers managed to stay beyond the extraterri-
torial reach of US laws until recently since it had no le-
gal presence and no (direct) sales in the United States. 
All its diamonds are sold in London, and then sight-
holders can export them to the United States, which is 
legal. Technically, the imported diamonds are no lon-
ger De Beers’s—they belong to independent sighthold-
ers. However, with 50% of the retail diamond buyers 
in the United States (in the 1990s),2 these legal actions 
prevented De Beers executives from being able to visit 
their buyers and retailers in the United States in fear of 
being arrested. Clearly, a solution was necessary.
Current Challenges
Overall, the De Beers group, which is now widely di-
versified despite its center of gravity in diamonds, has 
been highly successful. In over 100 years of history, it 
only lost money in 1915, 1932, and 2007. At present, De 
Beers employs approximately 23,000 people in more 
than 25 countries, including 20 mines currently in pro-
duction in Africa and joint ventures and partnerships 
in Canada, Russia, and Australia.
Looking ahead, De Beers’s three main challenges 
lie in (1) adapting to the changing industry structure, 
(2) dealing with pressures for corporate social respon-
sibility, and (3) overcoming formal institutional barri-
ers preventing it from directly operating in its largest 
market, the United States.
First, in terms of industry structure, De Beers is ob-
viously no longer a monopolist. It is a leading player in 
an oligopoly that increasingly has to accommodate new 
players. Today, the cartel is less of a cartel than what 
it used to be. The rise of Siberian mines, which now 
produce 18% of the global output, poses sufficient mar-
ket power to threaten De Beers’s standing. The lead-
ing Russian producer, Alrossa, has collaborated with 
Lev Leviev Group, a leading Israeli diamond merchant 
headed by a Russian-speaking, Uzbeki-born, Israeli 
citizen. They have reduced sales of rough diamonds to 
De Beers, polished more diamonds in Russia, and mar-
keted them directly. Outraged, De Beers, which invited 
Lev Leviev to become a sightholder in 1987, removed 
its privileges of a sightholder in 1995. But the tide is 
difficult for De Beers to turn back. However, on the 
bright side, with the increasingly difficult-to-control 
cartel, De Beers no longer needs to focus exclusively on 
defending the cartel and the industry at large. Instead, 
it has more freedom to make decisions to maximize its 
own profits, such as buying fewer stones at uneconomic 
prices.
Second, De Beers has been facing mounting pres-
sures for corporate social responsibility (CSR), on at 
least three fronts. The first was the $1.2 billion worth of 
“conflict diamonds” that floated to the global market as 
a result of the civil war in Angola and Sierra Leone in 
the 1990s. In its traditional role of a buyer of the last re-
sort, De Beers felt compelled to purchase the new sup-
ply; otherwise, it risked losing its tight grip on global 
supply. However, with “blood on its hands,” De Beers 
encountered a public relations disaster, especially af-
ter the UN imposed sanctions on “conflict diamonds.” 
Eventually, under tremendous pressure of consumer 
boycotts and activist campaigns, De Beers in 2000 initi-
ated a “Kimberly Process” which, together with almost 
70 governments and all the big industry players, com-
mitted the industry to a strict certification process for 
the legitimate origin of diamonds. The “Kimberly Pro-
cess” has been in effect since 2003 and has reduced 
the number of conflict diamonds to 0.2% of global 
production. In 2006–2007, the Hollywood movie Blood 
Diamond again renewed public interest in conflict dia-
monds, yet De Beers reported that the movie did not 
dent diamond sales.
A second CSR area is the HIV/AIDS disaster, report-
edly affecting 25% of the adult population in southern 
Africa. In 2003, De Beers became the first mining com-
pany to extend health insurance free of charge to HIV 
positive employees and their spouses and partners in 
South Africa, Botswana, and Namibia. This insurance 
coverage would remain in effect to employees after re-
tirement or retrenchment.
A third CSR area is environmental protection. Di-
amond mining, if not properly managed, can easily 
cause environmental problems. De Beers thus has to 
pay careful attention to the environmental footprint 
of its operations. All its major operations have been 
ISO14001 certified.
2) While diamond sales in the United States kept growing rapidly, diamond 
sales in China, India, and the Gulf grew even more rapidly. As a result, the 
United States now accounts for approximately 40% of global demand, and 
China, India, and the Gulf are predicted to be purchasing as many diamonds as 
the United States by 2015.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

450	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
Finally, facing rising competition, De Beers has 
sought to flex its muscle by developing a De Beers brand 
of diamonds and other luxury goods. It developed “For-
evermark” diamonds, which are natural, untreated, 
and responsibly sourced. Forevermark diamonds have 
an icon and identification number inscribed on the 
table facet of the diamond. The inscription is about 
0.05  µm deep and applied using an undisclosed De 
Beers inscription technology. De Beers also formed a 
joint venture with a leading luxury goods firm, LVMH, 
and opened a De Beers LV store in London and three 
stores-within-stores in Tokyo.
However, its plan to open a flagship store in New 
York was frustrated because of the US government ban 
on its business due to its alleged antitrust violations. 
Nicky Oppenheimer, De Beers’s chairman, openly 
wrote in his “chairman’s statement” in the 2003 Annual 
Report that De Beers’s core strategy was “to bend all our 
efforts to increasing worldwide demand for our prod-
uct and ensure that diamond jewelry would henceforth 
outperform the rest of the luxury goods market”—in 
other words, increase demand, limit supply, and jack 
up price, exactly the “criminal” acts as charged by the 
US government. Essentially acknowledging “guilty as 
charged,” Oppenheimer’s 1999 speech to alumni of 
the Harvard Business School contained the following 
statements:
 	 “We set out, as a matter of policy, to break the 
commandments of Mr. Sherman [principal law-
maker for the Sherman Act of 1890]. We make no 
pretence that we are not seeking to manage the 
diamond market, to control supply, to manage 
prices, and to act collusively with our partners in 
the business.”
 	 “This form of single channel marketing has exer-
cised an extraordinary beneficial influence upon 
the whole of the diamond industry and particu-
larly to many of the economies of Africa.”
 	 “It is no accident that diamond prices have been 
more stable when compared with other commodi-
ties. The positive trend in rough diamond prices 
is due to De Beers’s marketing efforts. And this is 
an effort which is in the interest of both the pro-
ducer and the consumer, a strange and illogical 
coming together of opposites.”
 	 “I believe that the attitude of the [US] Justice 
Department is at odds with American foreign 
policy, which seeks to support the reconstruc-
tion and development of Africa . . . It is always 
hard to argue that you are the exception to the 
rule but in the case of De Beers and the ultimate 
luxury—diamonds—I believe a review of US an-
titrust laws should form part of a new framework 
for engagement with Africa. Indeed, it would be 
in line with the spirit of the African Growth and 
Opportunity Act.”
Is the Cartel Forever?
In the beginning of the 2000s, some changes were in 
the air. De Beers seemed to have decided to loosen its 
grip. More viable competitors, which not only included 
the few other big mining giants such as Alrosa, BHP 
Billiton, and Rio Tinto, but also smaller players such as 
Kimberly Diamond Group, Trans Hex, and Gem Dia-
monds, turned up the heat on De Beers. The industry 
started to look a bit more like many other competitive 
industries.
In July 2004, De Beers agreed to pay a $10 million 
fine to the US government, thus ending a 60-year-long 
impasse—it was first charged by the US government in 
1945 and this recently settled case was initiated in 1994. 
De Beers eventually agreed to settle the charges with a 
total payment of $295 million in the United States. The 
following is the entire excerpt from the DeBeers web-
site under “Ethics: Resolution of Actions in the United 
States” (accessed February 14, 2008):
In July 2004, De Beers entered a plea agreement with 
the US Department of Justice to resolve criminal 
charges against the company for an alleged conspiracy 
to fix the price of industrial diamonds. On the basis 
of payment of a US$10 million fine, the United States 
agreed it would not bring further criminal charges 
against De Beers, related companies, or any current 
or former directors, officers, employees, and agents 
for any act related to those price-fixing allegations as 
set out in the indictment. This marked the first impor-
tant step in resolving US litigation issues outstanding 
against the company.
In November 2005, De Beers announced that 
agreement had been reached, and a preliminary ap-
proval order issued, to settle the majority of civil class 
action suits filed against the company in the United 
States. Since then, in March 2006, the three remain-
ing civil class action suits were added to the Novem-
ber settlement agreement, resulting in an overriding 
global settlement agreement totaling US$295 million 
which has received preliminary court approval.
This settlement does not involve any admission of 
liability on the part of De Beers but will bring an end 
to all outstanding class actions. This represents an im-
portant step to improving our reputation in the larg-
est diamond consumer market in the world and stands 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Three   Integrative Cases	
451
as clear evidence of our commitment to competition 
law compliance. De Beers continues to cooperate with 
the Court of the District of New Jersey to seek resolu-
tion of this litigation.
As part of the class action settlement, De Beers 
agreed to offer injunctive relief, which includes a gen-
eral commitment to comply with antitrust laws of the 
United States, and specific prohibited conduct with 
third party producers and sightholders. Injunctive re-
lief is a typical component of class action settlements 
in the United States. The injunctive relief further 
demonstrates our clear commitment to operating in 
accordance with competition laws around the world.
The $295 million De Beers agreed to pay would be 
divided roughly in half between diamond merchants 
and consumers. Anyone who bought retail diamonds 
in the United States between 1994 and 2006 could po-
tentially get a refund, regardless of whether these dia-
monds came from De Beers or not, because diamonds 
prices were allegedly fixed and controlled by De Beers. 
The exact amount that each consumer would get de-
pends on the number of eligible buyers who claimed 
a refund. At a maximum of 32% of a purchase price, 
a consumer could get up to $640 back on a $2,000 
ring. However, here was a catch, if everyone claimed 
a refund, only $2 would come back on a $2,000 ring. 
The upshot? “Definitely don’t show this story to your 
friends,” according to a Chicago Tribune article pub-
lished on January 21, 2008.3
As captured by the title of the Chicago Tribune ar-
ticle, “diamond refunds are a consumer’s best friend,” 
consumers who unexpectedly received refunds would 
naturally be happy. De Beers’s executives were also 
pleased because they could now travel to the United 
States without fear of arrest and the firm could now op-
erate a flagship De Beers jewelry shop (in a joint ven-
ture with LV) on Fifth Avenue in New York.
In November 2011, the Oppenheimer family sold the 
entirety of their 40% stake in De Beers to Anglo Ameri-
can, thereby increasing Anglo American’s ownership  
of De Beers from 45% to 85%. (The other 15% of De 
Beers’ shares are owned by the government of Botswa-
na.) The transaction was worth $5.1 billion in cash and 
ended the Oppenheimer dynasty’s eighty-year owner-
ship in the world’s largest diamond miner. 
With so much change in the air, a question looming 
large on the horizon for De Beers executives and anti-
trust officials is: has the longest-running cartel really 
come to an end? This truly is a billion-dollar question.
Case Discussion Questions
	 1.	 Most cartels fail within a short period of time 
due to organizational and incentive problems. 
Why is the diamond cartel so long-lasting (span-
ning the entire 20th century, despite some recent 
loss of power)?
	 2.	 Drawing on the resource-based and institution-
based views, explain why De Beers has been phe-
nomenally successful.
	 3.	 Given the multidimensional current challenges, 
what are the opportunities for De Beers? What 
are the threats? What kinds of strengths and 
weaknesses does De Beers have when dealing 
with these challenges?
	 4.	 Discuss the future of the rivalry between De 
Beers and Lev Leviev, especially in the new arena 
of retail competition with branded jewelry. What 
does the future hold for both firms?
Sources: Based on (1) J. Burns & D. Spa, 2000, Forever: De Beers and US 
Antitrust Law, Harvard Business School case study 9-700-082; (2) Chicago 
Tribune, 2008, Diamond refunds are a consumer’s best friend, January 21 
(www.chicagotribune.com); (3) A. Cockburn, 2002, Diamonds: The real 
story, National Geographic, March: 2–35; (4) Economist, 2004, Rumors 
are forever, February 28: 62; (5) Economist, 2004, The cartel isn’t forever, 
July 17: 60–62; (6) Economist, 2005, Rough and tumble, October 29: 66; 
(7) Economist, 2007, Changing facets, February 24: 75-76; (8) Economist, 
2011, Betting on De Beers, November 12: 73; (9) Financial Times, 2007, 
De Beers cedes diamond grip to African states, November 29; (10) Finan-
cial Times, 2008, De Beers hit by $1bn charge, February 8; (11) Forbes, 
2003, The billionaire who cracked De Beers, September 15: 108–115; 
(12) M. Porter, S. Marciano, & A. Warhurst, 2009, De Beers: Addressing 
the New Competitiveness Challenges, Harvard Business School case study 
9-706-501; (13) Reuters, 2008, De Beers sees “challenging” 2008 for dia-
mond sector, February 11 (www.reuters.com); (14) D. Spa, 1994, The Coop-
erative Edge: The Internal Politics of International Cartels, Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press; (15) J. Wang, 2010, The world’s diamond supply chain, 
CEO class presentation, Shanghai: China Europe International Business 
School; (16) www.debeersgroup.com; (17) www.diamondclassaction.com.
3) Since you are reading this case after May 19, 2008, you can forget about 
the refund, which ended after that date. See www.diamondclassaction.com.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

452	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
The Tnk-Bp Joint Venture1
Mike W. Peng (University of Texas at Dallas)
I n t e g r a t i v e  C a s e  3 . 6
Why does this 50-50 joint venture between three major Russian 
business groups and a Western Oil Major turn out to be an 
unending saga of headaches, conflicts, and intrigue?
TNK-BP is a joint venture (JV) company that is 50% 
owned by BP and 50% owned by the AAR consor-
tium, which represents three major Russian business 
groups: Alfa, Access, and Renova. Founded in 2003, 
TNK-BP is a major oil company in its own right. It is 
Russia’s third largest oil producer and among the ten 
largest private oil companies in the world. Produc-
ing about 1.9 million barrels of oil per day, TNK-BP 
provides about 25% of BP’s oil production and 40% 
of its reserves. It pays about $2 billion dividends each 
year to BP. Such a cash cow with huge reserves would 
seem to be—in the words of Bloomberg Businessweek—
a “godsend.” Unfortunately, TNK-BP has turned out 
to be an unending saga of headaches, conflicts, and 
intrigue between BP and its three Russian oligarch 
partners: Mikhail Fridman (founder of Alfa Group 
and chairman of the board of TNK-BP), Len Blavat-
nik (founder of Access Industries), and Viktor Vek-
selberg (founder of Renova Group). Two episodes 
stand out.
Episode I
In 2008, the Russian partners publicly aired two griev-
ances. First, TNK-BP relied on too many of BP’s expa-
triate (expat) consultants, whose fees were a “rip off”—
extra dividends to BP but excessive costs to TNK-BP. 
Second, and more importantly, the Russians wanted 
TNK-BP to pursue opportunities outside of Russia and 
Ukraine, but BP insisted on fencing TNK-BP within 
Russia and Ukraine to prevent TNK-BP from becom-
ing a global competitor. A memo from the American 
CEO of TNK-BP at that time, Bob Dudley, barred man-
agers from entertaining deals in countries blacklisted 
by the US State Department, such as Cuba, Iran, and 
Syria. “TNK-BP is an independent Russian company,” 
noted Fridman, “and should be subject to Russian 
laws,” which would bless deals in these countries. In 
fact, given its Russian background, TNK-BP might 
be particularly well-suited to exploit opportunities in 
these countries labeled “rogue” by the US government. 
The board room dispute quickly spilled out to grab 
media headlines. The Russian partners claimed that 
TNK-BP should be free to grow into an independent, 
global oil company (at least the JV agreement did not 
ban this).
Rapid-fire developments took place in 2008. In 
January, the visas of BP’s 148 expats working at TNK-
BP were declared invalid. In March, the Moscow of-
fices of both BP and TNK-BP were raided by police. 
Shortly after, a TNK-BP manager was arrested for 
alleged espionage. In April, a little-known minority 
shareholder filed a court case blocking BP’s expats 
from working at TNK-BP. In June, the high drama on 
who was in charge in this 50-50 JV reached a bizarre 
climax. In a Moscow hearing with Russian immigra-
tion officials regarding the proper number of visas 
for TNK-BP’s foreign workers, two delegations showed 
up, both claiming to represent TNK-BP (!). Tim Sum-
mers, TNK-BP’s chief operating officer and a BP rep-
resentative, claimed that visas for 150 foreign workers 
would be needed. But Vekselberg, a director and one 
of the three Russian owners (who had 12.5% of TNK-
BP’s shares), said that only 71 visas would be neces-
sary. Officials supported Vekselberg’s case, and thus 
forced some employees to leave Russia almost imme-
diately for good.
BP framed the dispute as oligarchs’ time-honored 
practice to grab control of companies by political pres-
sures, and argued that the outcome would be a test 
of the rule of law in Russia. BP also implied that the 
Russian government might be behind the oligarchs’ 
aggressive moves. In an article published in Financial 
Times on July 7, 2008, Fridman dismissed political moti-
vations and characterized the dispute as “a traditional, 
commercial dispute about different ambitions of the 
strategic development of the business” (see Exhibit 1). 
Alleging BP to be opportunistic, Fridman accused BP 
of treating TNK-BP as if it had been a wholly owned  
1) This research was supported by the O. P. Jindal Chair at the Jindal School of 
Management, University of Texas at Dallas. All views and errors are those of 
the author. © Mike W. Peng. Reprinted with permission. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Three   Integrative Cases	
453
subsidiary instead of a JV. BP allegedly treated Russians 
as “subjects,” as opposed to shareholders with equal 
rights. The article noted that BP cared more about its 
oil reserves than costs or profits. The punch line? Dud-
ley’s ouster as TNK-BP’s CEO. Under such tremendous 
pressures, Dudley had to quickly flee the country. A 
Russian court even barred him from performing his 
job for two years for allegedly violating local labor laws. 
In September 2008, Fridman, in addition to his posi-
tion as chairman of the board, became interim CEO 
of TNK-BP.
In the end, while the Russians needed BP’s exper-
tise, BP also needed to access TNK-BP’s crude in Siberia, 
which was far easier and safer to get at than the compli-
cated and unsafe deep water drilling in places such as 
the Gulf of Mexico. In April 2010, the devastating oil spill 
took place in the Gulf of Mexico. In July 2010, Dudley, 
although disgraced in Russia, was promoted to become 
the new BP CEO. Dudley, as the new BP CEO, quickly 
flew to Moscow and became more accommodating to 
the Russian partners. With a changed attitude, BP now 
agreed that TNK-BP could expand abroad. In October 
2010, BP sold assets worth $1.8 billion in Venezuela and 
Vietnam to TNK-BP—a milestone for TNK-BP that 
finally broke out of Russia and Ukraine. As a Russian 
company, TNK-BP might indeed be better positioned 
to do well in “tricky” countries such as Venezuela and 
Vietnam. To BP, these sales raised immediate cash to 
help defray the cleanup and compensation costs in the 
Gulf of Mexico, and it did not have to sell to competitors. 
Overall, Episode I seemed to have a happy ending.
Episode II
Only a couple of months after the ending of Episode I, 
Episode II erupted. In January 2011, BP announced a 
new $16 billion strategic alliance with Russia’s state-
owned Rosneft. Creating the first cross-shareholding 
alliance between international and Russian oil compa-
nies, the deal would enable BP to own 9.5% of Rosneft’s 
shares and Rosneft to own 5% of BP’s shares. Both 
sides would jointly explore a new offshore oil field on 
the Russian Arctic continental shelf in the Kara Sea. 
Rosneft is Russia’s second largest oil company, which 
produces 2.4 million barrels of oil a day (behind 
Gazprom but ahead of TNK-BP). This new alliance had 
the full support of the Russian government—after all, 
Rosneft’s chairman of the board Igor Sechin was the 
sitting Deputy Prime Minister.
All seemed well . . . but here is the catch: The Russian 
partners at TNK-BP jumped out and sought to block 
the deal. Their argument was that, per the TNK-BP JV 
agreement, BP could only pursue further business in 
Russia through the JV. In other words, AAR’s rights of 
first refusal were violated. In simple terms, “if you want 
to marry a new wife,” a furious Fridman argued, “you 
have to divorce the old one first.” The Russian govern-
ment was mad about BP, too. “I met with BP’s head, 
and he did not say a word about it,” said (then) Prime 
Minister Vladmir Putin. Basically, BP had lied to Ros-
neft that it had no third-party obligations. According 
to the Economist:
At the least, it seems a woeful misjudgment on BP’s 
part. The company says it had no idea that its deal 
with Rosneft would result in such a legal tussle, so it 
felt no need to mention the terms of its shareholder 
agreement with TNK-BP to its new Russian partners. 
Perhaps Mr. Dudley gambled that getting into bed 
with Rosneft would silence TNK-BP.
Such a gamble backfired badly. AAR initiated legal 
challenges with arbitration proceedings to block BP’s 
deal with Rosneft.2 In March 2011 a Swedish arbitra-
tion tribunal supported AAR and dealt a blow to the 
Rosneft deal, which became known as “Ros-nyet.” In 
May 2011, BP admitted failure and reaffirmed that it 
remained fully committed to TNK-BP as its “primary 
business vehicle in Russia”—which, in human marriage 
terms, sounded like acknowledging AAR as its legally  
Exhibit 1
”BP Has Been Treating Russians as Subjects“
The following are excerpts from an article published in London’s Financial Times on July 7, 2008, by Mikhail Fridman, chairman 
of the board of TNK-BP and founder of Alfa Group, which owns 25% of TNK-BP:
  	 We see a long-term future for the joint venture . . .
  	 We want to build TNK-BP into a great international oil business . . .
  	 But, we can only do this if BP treats us as its partners, not its subjects.
2) Arbitration is a private form of dispute resolution that bypasses the court sys­
tems of the host country and the home country. In this case, parties to the TNK-BP 
JV agreed when they signed the contract that neither Russian law nor British law 
would govern the contractual relationship. Instead they agreed to use arbitration 
done in a third, neutral country (Sweden in this case) to resolve their disputes.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

454	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
married spouse after being caught indulging in an ex-
tramarital affair.
However, BP’s headache did not end. In September 
2011, a frustrated Rosneft struck a new strategic alliance 
deal with Exxon Mobil. They would jointly explore the 
same icy blocks of the Arctic Kara Sea that slipped from 
BP’s hand. Things then got worse. The very next day, 
BP’s Moscow offices were raided by police again. Having 
managed to alienate both the Russian government and 
Rosneft on the one hand—just imagine the Kremlin’s 
fury after the collapse of the deal—and AAR on the 
other hand, “BP appears to have little protection against 
being pushed around in Russia,” noted the Economist. 
In October 2011, a severely weakened BP agreed to let 
Fridman formally serve as CEO, thus enabling him and 
AAR partners to essentially run the show at TNK-BP.
Despite the ordeals, challenges, and hard feelings, 
both BP and AAR remained committed to the success 
of TNK-BP. One has to be totally naïve to believe that 
they would “live happily ever after.” So stay tuned for 
Episode III . . .
Case Discussion Questions
	 1.	 Why are alliances a frequent mode of entry for 
the oil industry in Russia?
	 2.	 From a resource-based view, what are the com-
plementary resources and capabilities both sides 
brought to TNK-BP?
	 3.	 From an institution-based view, what are the for-
mal and informal rules of the game governing 
this industry in Russia? 
	 4.	 ON ETHICS: As an ethics consultant to BP, how 
would you advise it during both episodes of the 
conflicts with AAR?
	 5.	 ON ETHICS: If you were an arbitrator in Stock-
holm, Sweden, which side would you support in 
both episodes? 
Sources: Based on (1) BusinessWeek, 2008, BP: Roughed up in Russia, 
June  16: 69; (2) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2010, How BP learned to 
dance with the Russian bear, September 27: 19-20; (3) BP, 2010, BP to sell 
Venezuela and Vietnam businesses to TNK-BP, October 18, www.bp.com; 
(4) BP, 2011, BP and AAR agree on new management structure for TNK-
BP, October  21, www.bp.com; (5) BP, 2011, BP and AAR reaffirm com-
mitment to growth and success of TNK-BP, May 17, www.bp.com; (6) BP, 
2011, BP remains committed to partner with Russia, March 24, www.
bp.com; (7) BP, 2011, Rosneft and BP form global and Arctic strategic alli-
ance, January 14, www.bp.com; (8) Economist, 2008, At war with itself, 
July 5: 74; (9) Economist, 2008, Crude tactics, June 7: 74-75; (10) Econo-
mist, 2011, Dudley do-wrong, April 2: 60; (11) Economist, 2011, Exxonerated,  
September 3: 64; (12) M. Fridman, 2008, BP has been treating Russians as 
subjects, Financial Times, July 7: 11; (13) B. Pinkham & M. W. Peng, 2012, 
Arbitration and cross-border transaction costs, working paper, University of 
Texas at Dallas.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Three   Integrative Cases	
455
Geely’s Acquisition of Volvo1
Michael N. Young (Hong Kong Baptist University)
Yuan Yi Chen (Hong Kong Baptist University)
I n t e g r a t i v e  C a s e  3 . 7
The largest privately owned Chinese automaker acquired an 
iconic Swedish car company. What motivated this acquisition? 
Would this acquisition work?
In 2011, Geely Automotive was still a relatively unknown 
Chinese automaker. Geely had started off manufacturing 
home appliances in 1986 and it had only been manufac-
turing automobiles since 1993. But Geely’s founder and 
chairman, Mr. Shufu Li, had ambitious plans for Geely. 
In a relatively short period of time, he had steered Geely 
into becoming the largest privately owned carmaker in 
China and he hoped to bring Geely up to world-class 
standards. He wanted Geely to be able to compete with 
Daimler, Ford, and Toyota. He knew this would be diffi-
cult as independent Chinese automakers were known to 
have problems in operations, design, safety, quality, and 
branding. As part of this plan, Geely’s parent company, 
Zhejiang Geely Holdings, acquired the iconic Swedish 
automaker Volvo from Ford Motor Company in 2010. 
Could this former refrigerator company from China 
absorb one of world’s most sophisticated automobile 
brands, or was it doomed for failure like the majority of 
cross-national mergers and acquisitions (M&As)?
Geely’s History
Geely Motors was founded by Mr. Shufu Li in 1986. By 
2011, Geely was among the top ten Chinese automakers 
with production capacity of approximately 300,000 cars 
per year. Geely had 12,000 employees, including more 
than 1,600 engineers and technical personnel with 
plans to greatly increase capacity and employment over 
the next few years.2
Geely produced automobiles under five key brand 
groups: Geely, Maple, Gleagle, Emgrand, and Englon. 
It was the only Chinese car manufacturer to have de-
veloped its own range of engines. By 2010, Geely was 
ranked as one of the country’s top 500 firms. It was a 
fully integrated independent auto firm with complete 
control over design, R&D, production, distribution, 
and service. Geely began to attract attention as the 
company experienced rapid growth. Through a broad 
distribution network consisting of 500 dealers and 
nearly 600 service stations all over China, Geely sold 
over 330,000 vehicles in 2009.
The Global Automobile Industry
After suffering from the downturn, US auto sales were 
sputtering back to life. Analysts were projecting sales 
to continue increasing into 2011. With sales of around 
11.5 million new cars and trucks, 2010 was still the 
second-worst year in almost three decades (only be-
hind 2009). This was quite a drop from the heights of 
the early 2000s, when credit was cheap, incentives were 
rampant, and US sales topped 17 million. In 2010, Ford 
sold 1.9 million vehicles (a 15% increase over 2009), 
GM sold 2.2 million (a 6.3% increase), and Chrysler 
sold 1.1 million (a 17% increase).
For foreign automakers, winners included South 
Korea’s Hyundai, whose sales rose 24% for the year 
to 538,000 vehicles. Nissan reported an 18% increase 
for 2010 to nearly 909,000 vehicles. Honda sold over 
1.2 million vehicles in 2010, a 7.6% increase. However, 
Toyota continued to struggle. Its sales were flat in 2010, 
a casualty of the company’s tarnished safety record and 
supply problems from the massive earthquake and tsu-
nami of March 2011. Virtually all car companies had 
downsized, so they did not have to resort to costly in-
centives in order to clear out inventory. But in general, 
the economy was slowly improving, and car companies 
were cautiously optimistic about prospects in 2011.
The Rise of China’s Auto Market
In China, automobile sales increased by an explosive 
32% in 2010. China had already overtaken the US as the 
largest car market in 2009, and it was also the largest 
market for GM.3 China’s middle class was expanding  
1) This case is meant to serve as a basis for class discussion rather than to 
illustrate either effective or ineffective handling of an administrative or business 
situation. © Michael N. Young and Yuan Yi Chen. Reprinted with permission.
2) Financial Times Information, 2006, Geely on fast lane for expansion, 
October 18.
3) A. Jackson, 2010, China overtakes US as world’s largest auto market, China 
Daily, January 11.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

456	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
and its large land mass and infrastructure could sup-
port a huge car fleet. To get an idea of the growth, note 
that China produced only two million cars in 2000. 
But between 2002 and 2007, China’s auto market grew 
by an average 21% per year. By 2009 China surpassed 
Japan as the world’s largest auto producer. In 2010, China 
produced a staggering 18.06 million vehicles. Total 
revenue was RMB 512.81 billion (US$76.67 billion), 
and profits were RMB 117.28 billion (US$17.53 billion).
Of the automobiles produced, 44% were local 
brands, such as BYD, Chery, Chang’an, Geely, Great 
Wall, Hafei, Jianghuai (JAC), Lifan, and Roewe. The 
rest were produced by joint ventures with foreign auto-
makers, such as Ford, GM, Honda, Hyundai, Mitsubishi, 
Nissan, Toyota, and Volkswagen. Most of the cars man-
ufactured in China were sold within China, with only 
369,600 cars being exported in 2009.
Independent Chinese car companies had to fight the 
perception that they lacked innovative designs. Market 
observers at the Detroit Auto Show in 2006 were unim-
pressed by the simple curves of mainland cars. They 
also commented on the shoddy finish and the tinny 
sounds of the doors.4 Furthermore, Chinese products 
had a reputation for allegedly infringing upon other 
firms’ intellectual property rights. For instance, Chery 
and Geely were both accused of copying technology 
from GM and Toyota, respectively. In 2011, Geely was 
sued by Land Rover over a trademark dispute.5
Geely’s Research and Development and Product 
Positioning in the China Market
Geely had been ploughing more than 10% of annual 
revenue into R&D and had established the Geely 
Automobile and Engine Research School. Geely had 
begun cooperating with foreign automakers from 
countries such as South Korea, Germany, and Italy. 
Furthermore, Geely’s employees went abroad to receive 
training.
Initially, Geely competed in the low-end segment 
by providing models from RMB 30,000 (US$4,485) to 
RMB 80,000 (US$11,960). These prices put an automo-
bile within reach of average consumers. Geely had de-
veloped an effective cost control system, and cost-saving 
was also achieved through vertical integration.
In 2004, Geely introduced its first mid-level model, 
the Beauty Leopard, which ranged from RMB 80,000 
(US$11,960) to RMB 120,000 (US$17,940). Twenty-
three new models were introduced at China’s automotive 
expo in 2008. Geely introduced Emgrandec 8, a limou-
sine model with distinct Chinese elements at the Auto 
China Show 2010. This was a sign that the independent 
Chinese auto makers had arrived on the scene. “We are 
not the Geely of five or six years ago,” chief executive 
Gui Shengyue said. Geely planned to produce a luxury 
SUV with annual capacity of 50,000 units and it was also 
in the process of developing eight new higher-end mod-
els.6 By 2010, there were more than eight million Geely 
cars on the road and the company’s trademark was rec-
ognized throughout China. Geely also became the first 
Chinese auto company to have a 24-hour call center, 
and it was the first to sell cars on Taobao (www.taobao.
com.cn), China’s largest online shop.7
Overseas Market Development and Acquisitions
The import/export unit of Geely Holding Group was 
founded in 2002. Offices were established in strategic 
markets: the Middle East, Africa, Southeast Asia, and 
Central and South America. In 2009, Geely exported 
about 19,000 vehicles, making it the second-largest au-
tomobile exporter from China. In 2005, Geely began to 
design and build a car model just for export to Western 
countries.8 The company had set up production plants 
in Indonesia and Russia, each with the capacity to pro-
duce 50,000 cars. It was reported that Geely was in dis-
cussions to set up assembly plants in Africa, Europe, 
and the United States.
In 2006, Geely purchased a controlling share in Man-
ganese Bronze Holdings, which manufactured London’s 
iconic black taxis. In mid-2008, a plant was established 
in Shanghai that shipped car kits to the Coventry, UK, 
plant for assembly. This was to save nearly US $5,000 per 
car. In 2009, Geely acquired Drive Train Systems Inter-
national, a leading Australian transmission developer. 
In March 2011, the Geely MK became the first Chinese 
passenger car to enter the Australian market with retail 
prices beginning at A$11,990. Geely saw Australia as an 
ideal test market for the savvy Western consumers.
To support its global ambitions, Geely had devel-
oped a network of more than 500 retail distributors 
in 45 countries across five continents and planned to 
4) B. Simon, 2007, Eastern carmakers fine-tune their strategies to ensure a 
slice of the lucrative Western market, Financial Times, January 4.
5) China Daily, 2010, Short critique, November 15.
6) N. Gough, 2011, Geely’s new SUVs to boost profits, South China Morning 
Post, March 24.
7) T. Shimoharaguchi, 2011, Young China execs challenge world, The Nikkei 
Weekly, January 17.
8) A. Webb, 2006, Despite obstacles, Chinese carmakers are keen to come to 
Europe, Crain Communications, December 11.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Three   Integrative Cases	
457
DDCoral/Shutterstock.com
expand this global footprint with additional manufac-
turing facilities and dealer networks.
Questions about Quality and Safety
Questions remained concerning the safety of Chinese 
cars. For example, the Landwind, a Chinese SUV, 
was crash-tested by German Allgemeiner Deutscher 
Automobil-Club and received a zero out of five.9 The 
passenger cabin completely collapsed upon collision.10 
In 2006 the body responsible for Chinese car safety car-
ried out a crash test on a small sedan from Geely. The 
pillar between the driver door and rear left hand side 
door was extremely weak.11 Similarly, a Geely sedan also 
took part in a Russian crash test in 2008, conducted 
by the Russian magazine Automotive Review. Although 
this test was conducted two years after the first test, the 
car still scored zero stars. The editors of the magazine 
began calling the car the “death vessel”12 (see YouTube 
videos: search “Geely Crash Test”).
Since safety was an important factor in consumers’ 
decision to buy, this eroded Western consumers’ confi-
dence in Chinese car safety. For this reason, Geely was 
determined to improve safety and quality control, and 
it believed the Volvo acquisition could help in these areas.
The Volvo Acquisition
In 2009, Geely’s parent company announced that it 
was acquiring Volvo Car Corporation from Ford. At 
the time, this US$1.8 billion acquisition was the largest 
cross-border acquisition by a Chinese privately-owned 
enterprise. Volvo was known as a leader in automobile 
safety. This appealed to Geely, which was stinging from 
being labelled a “death vessel” in overseas crash tests. 
Volvo thought that it could benefit by the infusion of 
new resources and greater access to the burgeoning 
China market. Geely hoped to preserve Volvo’s existing 
manufacturing facilities in Sweden and Belgium. The 
collaborative relationships that Volvo had built with em-
ployees, unions, suppliers, dealers, and customers were 
also valuable for Geely. On completion, Volvo would be 
a separate company based in Gothenburg, Sweden. The 
management would have a mandate to develop Volvo’s 
leadership in safety and environmental technologies, 
with a presence in more than 100 markets and ambi-
tious plans for the fast-growing China market. Shufu 
Li would be Chairman of Volvo and Hans-Olov Olsson, 
former President and CEO of Volvo, would become Vice-
Chairman. On February 2011, Volvo announced that it 
would open a new Volvo plant in Southwest China in 
2013 with an annual capacity of 100,000 units.
Geely hoped to capture market share from Audi to 
boost Volvo’s China sales to over 200,000 units annually 
by 2015. Geely wanted to sell Volvos to wealthy Chinese 
consumers and especially government officials in China, 
at prices ranging from US$40,000 to US$100,000. It 
was hoped that patriotic Chinese consumers might 
prefer buying a car from a Chinese-owned company. 
It was the same strategy that Chinese computer maker 
Lenovo used when it bought IBM’s PC business and be-
came a world-class player. However, this strategy could 
harm the Volvo brand in foreign markets, where the as-
sociation with Chinese-made automobiles might signify 
lower perceptions of quality or safety.
Turnaround, Branding Disagreements, and Potential 
Culture Clash
Volvo posted revenue of US$12.4 billion in 2009 by 
selling 334,000 cars, but it recorded a pre-tax loss of 
US$653 million.13 Geely planned to double Volvo’s sales 
in Europe and North America and gave primary impor-
tance to building the brand’s market share in China 
and other emerging markets. Yet the auto industry was 
ferociously competitive. In mature markets such as the 
United States and Europe, entrenched incumbents 
would fight to the death and mobilize politicians to 
defend their turf. Geely had little experience outside 
of China. Many industry analysts predicted that the 
13-year-old Geely, barely known abroad, would have a 
difficult time turning around Volvo. 
9) China Business Infocentre, 2005, Can Chinese products survive a crash 
test? http://www.afroshanghai.com/forums/index.php?topic=130.0. 
10) The Cars Guide, 2010, Moving forward in the motoring world, August 20.
11) China Car Times, 2006, Geely crash test, December 13.
12) China Car Times, 2008, Geely “Death Vessel,” February 4.
13) The Gazette (Montreal), 2010, China’s Geely hopes turn around Volvo, 
August 3.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

458	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
Geely also faced challenges regarding brand man-
agement. An important reason for the Volvo acquisi-
tion was the value of the Volvo brand. In China, Volvo 
was considered as luxurious and safe as Mercedes-Benz 
and BMW. Geely wanted to improve its brand name 
by acquiring Volvo, so as to move to the higher end 
of the market. However, the ability to buy was not the 
same as the ability to manage. Geely was known as a 
manufacturer of cheap cars with a short history that in-
cluded poor safety and questionable quality, while Volvo 
was a premier European luxury brand. If Geely began 
to use more Chinese-made components in Volvo cars, it 
could tarnish Volvo’s high-end and high-safety reputa-
tion. Geely’s basic cars were sold for US$6,000 each and 
the company was still viewed as a low-end car maker.
Three months after the merger, differences began 
to surface. Mr. Li disagreed with the product and brand 
strategy of company executives in Sweden. He wanted 
Volvo to develop larger, more ostentatious luxury cars 
for China, while Volvo wanted to keep with their con-
servative, yet quality, image for safety and environmen-
tal protection.
As Doug Speck, acting senior VP for marketing and 
sales put it: “We all need to understand what we are 
doing with the brand and what activities it will take to 
deliver the brand aspirations that we have . . . and we 
all need to be heading in the same direction.”14 Later 
on, they decided to reconcile their visions and chart a 
course for Volvo’s revival. Volvo’s latest concept car was 
a compromise between Volvo’s tradition of understate-
ment and Li’s intention to plant Volvo more firmly in 
the luxury segment.15
Post-acquisition integration is always a challenge, 
even when the involved companies come from the 
same country. This challenge is compounded in cross-
border acquisitions, where there are differing national 
cultures on top of differing corporate cultures. While 
Geely had some international experience, the company 
had limited experience in cross-cultural management. 
In this case, the acquirer was smaller and less 
experienced than the acquired. Volvo had a long and 
proud tradition and a deeply entrenched corporate 
culture that reflected its proud Scandinavian heritage. 
This situation had the potential for wounded pride on 
the Swedish side and/or loss of face on the Chinese 
side.
Conclusion
A year after the merger, Volvo managed to make a 
profit in 2010—a first since 2005. Volvo sold nearly 
374,000 units globally, up 11.2% from the previous 
years. Sales in China increased 36% to 30,522 cars. 
But given the potential challenges, it was not clear if 
this was a trend or simply an aberration. To succeed, 
Geely would need to successfully integrate its new ac-
quisition, which still faced many challenges. “Volvo 
cannot fail,” said David Zhao, auto industry analyst of 
Frost & Sullivan, noting that the government that sup-
ported Geely’s move would lose face if Geely’s acquisi-
tion proved unprofitable.16
Case Discussion Questions
	 1.	 What is the source of Geely’s competitive 
advantage?
	 2.	 How did Geely shift its focus to the higher end of 
the market?
	 3.	 What is the importance of R&D for Geely’s 
market expansion?
	 4.	 What is the strategy for Geely’s global market 
expansion?
	 5.	 What potential obstacles might Geely encounter 
as it attempts to enter Western markets? How can 
it overcome these obstacles?
	 6.	 What can Geely do to successfully integrate Volvo?
14) V. Chan, 2011, Volvo’s speck: We want to be a luxury competitor in the US, 
Automotive News, May 9.
15) N. Shirouzu, 2011, Chinese begin Volvo overhaul, Wall Street Journal 
Abstracts, June 7.
16) M. Nagano, 2010, Geely’s Volvo management challenge: Selling made-in-
China Volvos, Investor’s Business Daily, July 16.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Three   Integrative Cases	
459
Hilton Welcomes Chinese Travelers at Home and Abroad1
Chinese Business Review
I n t e g r a t i v e  C a s e  3 . 8
As China’s tourism market—for domestic and international 
travel—grows, how does Hilton cater to the needs and wants 
of Chinese travelers at home and abroad?
One of the world’s largest hotel companies, Hilton 
Worldwide operates more than 3,700 hotels around the 
globe. The company’s flagship brand, Hilton Hotels & 
Resorts, has more than 540 properties in 78 countries 
across six continents. In addition to Hilton Hotels & 
Resorts, Hilton Worldwide operates Waldorf Astoria, 
Conrad Hotels & Resorts, and Double Tree by Hilton 
properties in China.
With China’s tourism market—for domestic and 
international travel—expected to grow to triple the size 
of Japan’s by 2020, hotel companies such as Hilton are 
tailoring their service to Chinese travelers. This year, 
Hilton launched the Hilton Huanying (“Welcome”) 
program to address the unique needs of Chinese 
travelers abroad. The program operates in 61 of Hilton 
Worldwide’s properties, 48 of which are in the Hilton 
Hotels & Resorts portfolio.
Dave Horton, global head of Hilton Hotel & Resorts, 
recently discussed China’s hotel and travel market with 
China Business Review’s editor Christina Nelson. Horton 
oversees all aspects of Hilton Hotels & Resorts, includ-
ing product development, marketing guest experience, 
and global development strategies.
When and where did Hilton enter China? How many 
hotels does Hilton have in China and in which cities?
Hilton Worldwide first entered China in 1988 with the 
opening of Hilton Shanghai. Today, Hilton Worldwide 
has 27 hotels operating in China and 85 hotels in its 
pipeline. The company plans to have 100 properties 
in China within five years. Our brand, Hilton Hotels 
& Resorts, has 15 properties open today in China in 
Beijing; Chongqing; Dalian, Liaoning; Guangzhou, 
Guangdong; Hefei, Anhui; Nanjing, Jiangsu; Qiandao 
Lake, Zhejiang; Sanya, Hainan; Shanghai; and Xi’an, 
Shaanxi.
How would you characterize Hilton Hotels & Resorts 
properties in China? For example, are they business 
or luxury hotels?
The Hilton Hotels & Resorts portfolio in China con-
tains a mix of hotels and resorts catering to busi-
ness and leisure travelers alike. For example, Hilton 
Shanghai, our first hotel in China, is located in the 
heart of Shanghai’s business district and caters to busi-
ness travelers by offering 18 meeting rooms, a premium 
executive lounge, and incredible restaurants. Though a 
hotel may cater heavily to business travelers, our hotels 
in the region also offer much of what local leisure trav-
elers and tourists from around the world look for when 
choosing a hotel. Hilton Guangzhou Tianhe, one of 
two hotels we opened in Guangzhou this August, has 
everything a business traveler would need, but is also 
opening out first “eforea: spa at Hilton” in China in 
January 2012. Through our spa offerings, restaurants, 
bars, event space, and amenities, we help travelers find 
the right balance between business and leisure.
Our resort properties in China cater more to the 
leisure traveler, but they also offer outstanding busi-
ness amenities. Earlier this year we opened Hilton 
Hangzhou Qiandao Lake Resort, which is set on the 
shore of Zhejiang’s breathtaking Qiandao Lake. In 
addition to the signature amenities at other hotels in 
China, this resort offers extensive leisure amenities 
such as four pools, a beach volleyball court, and several 
restaurants. Many of the guest rooms have a balcony 
to showcase the lake or mountain views. The resort is 
located in a popular destination for weekend leisure 
travelers, but it also has several function rooms and a 
grand ballroom for meetings and events.
What is the brand’s ownership structure in China?
All of our hotels in China are managed by Hilton 
Worldwide. Out hotels in China are wholly owned by 
investors other than Hilton, the majority of which are 
China-based.
1) This case was first published in China Business Review, January-February 
2012, pp. 16–19. © US-China Business Council. Reprinted with permission.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

460	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
What are the top challengers Hilton has faced 
while opening and operating hotels in China? 
What has the company done to overcome these 
challenges?
Today, a key challenge for our brand is the rapid pace 
of expansion. The rapid expansion means we must 
hire and train more employees and ensure standards 
throughout more hotels. We focus on our culture and 
training programs so that our team members, many of 
whom may be new to our brand and even our industry, 
can deliver the hospitality guests expect from us. We 
ensure that our brand standards are solidly in place at 
every hotel so that we deliver a consistent experience. 
These standard brand elements refer to the overall 
experience for our guests, including the check-in pro-
cess, overall design, in-room amenities, culinary offer-
ings and service, among other items. These elements 
are important because many local customers may be 
staying with us for the first time and this can be an op-
portunity to educate travelers in China about what we 
stand for.
What changes did Hilton make to adapt its hotels 
to the China market? How has the brand’s China 
strategy changed over time?
We believe in providing a consistent set of standards 
around the world and experiences that are locally rel-
evant. Guest room design, services, and amenities in 
China follow our brand standards. At the same time, 
embracing local culture has helped out properties in 
China evolve over time.
For example, we have focused great energy and 
passion on food and beverage at our China and Asia 
properties. Our customers in China expect great food 
and beverage offerings from us, and we saw a need for 
multiple dining options. Our work in China is driv-
ing innovation that benefits hotels across our portfo-
lio. As a global brand we benefit from being able to 
learn from each of our regions. We use recipes for 
traditional Chinese breakfast items from chefs in our 
China hotels, as well as in hotels across the globe as 
part of our Hilton Huanying program. Our restaurant 
concepts team is able to pull elements from restau-
rants serving traditional Chinese fare at out hotels in 
China to create authentic experiences for our guests 
in other parts of the world. Many interior and exte-
rior design elements at our hotels in China are shap-
ing our approach to design and construction around 
the world.
How does the brand’s China strategy differ from 
its strategies in other countries (for example, in the 
United States or Japan)?
In each region of the world we adapt to cultural norms 
and nuances, but we hold true to our standards and best 
practices that benefit our owners, team members, and 
guests. This impacts our approach to every aspect of our 
business—from the ways we train and engage our team 
members to our customer marketing campaigns and 
service delivery. Our strategic perspective is that a brand 
is a promise consistently delivered. Equally important, 
we strive to be culturally relevant. Cultural differences 
largely come to life in food and beverage and leisure 
amenities, such as spa offerings. For example, our eforea: 
spa at Hilton treatment menus are designed so that each 
hotel offers core elements that our guests expect, but the 
menus also give our owners in China flexibility to add 
treatments specific to their local market. Hilton Guang-
zhou Tianhe will feature spa treatments such as a foot 
massage and a variety of full-body massages inspired by 
traditional Chinese aromatherapy oils.
As a global brand with hotels in 78 countries, we in-
vest a great deal of time and research into understand-
ing the needs and expectations of travelers today, and 
we are prepared to meet these needs as they evolve over 
time. Research tells us that travelers have a great deal 
of trust for Hilton, particularly when traveling abroad. 
Because traveling abroad is a new experience for many 
of our guests from mainland China, our brand gives 
them confidence that the hotel experience will meet 
their needs so that they can focus on exploring a new 
destination.
From our more than two decades of experience 
operating in mainland China, we see two trends that 
differentiate the Chinese traveler. These trends are 
similar to the trends we have historically experienced 
with other rapidly expanding customer segments. First, 
we must provide our guests with familiar comforts, and 
make it a point to have team members fluent in Man-
darin on staff at out hotels outside China. The recent 
global launch of the Hilton Huanying program is help-
ing us achieve this goal.
Second, we recognize that most travelers from 
China are booking through government-approved 
travel agents and tour operators, rather than booking 
directly with a hotel or online. This affects how we com-
municate with our customer when they are considering 
lodging options. With more than 20 years of experi-
ence serving the China market, we have developed 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Three   Integrative Cases	
461
longstanding relationships with government travel 
agencies and tour operators. Hilton Worldwide opened 
its first international sales offices in Beijing and Shang-
hai in 2005, so we have teams in the market who really 
understand the travelers and communicate regularly 
with government travel agencies and tour operators. 
With Hilton Huanying, for example, we invited many of 
the tour operators to participate in the global launch 
events in San Francisco, Beijing, and Shanghai.
Our brand also has an aggressive marketing cam-
paign in China, offers a Chinese version of our con-
sumer site (www.hilton.com.cn), and recently launched 
a Chinese version of our global press site (www. 
hiltonglobalmediacenter.com.cn) as a resource for 
Chinese media.
Please tell us more about the Hilton Huanying service 
launched in 2011.
Hilton Huanying is a consistent set of amenity and service 
standards at Hilton properties around the world that 
meet the Chinese traveler’s unique needs and expecta-
tion when traveling abroad. All of the 10 hotel brands 
within the Hilton Worldwide portfolio can choose to 
participate in the program. Currently 61 hotels are en-
rolled in Hilton Huanying.
China has emerged as a key source market for us 
and we are expanding at a record pace. We also recog-
nize the opportunity to build brand loyalty. As more 
Chinese guests stay with us in mainland China, we want 
them to choose Hilton when traveling abroad.
Huanying is the Chinese word for “welcome” and 
the program offers amenities and services that extend 
an authentic welcome to Chinese travelers. Guests are 
greeted at the front desk by a Chinese-speaking team 
member, the guest rooms are outfitted with amenities 
such as tea kettles and slippers, and breakfast includes 
traditional Chinese items such as dim sum, congee, 
hard-boiled eggs, fried rice, fried noodles, and dough 
fritters.
We were inspired to create Hilton Huanying be-
cause of our core brand promise, which is to ensure 
every guest feels cared for, valued, and respected.
Please describe the typical Hilton customer in China. 
What types of travelers do you hope to attract to 
Hilton hotels in China?
We attract both inbound and local guests at hotels—
whether they are traveling for business or leisure. The 
various Hilton Worldwide brands and hotels within 
China give our company the ability to attract travelers 
across multiple segments such as business travelers, 
families, and leisure guests. Chinese travelers visiting 
regions outside of China are most likely to be young 
to middle aged, relatively wealthy, middle class, urban 
with higher than average education, and from major 
cities or coastal provinces. For Hilton Hotels & Resorts 
specifically, we have a number of active initiatives fo-
cused on sharing our story with travelers across China.
In addition, much of our business may come from 
locals who are not staying with us. We are a destination 
for people in China to find a rejuvenating spa, enjoy 
fine dining, and host an event.
Hilton Huanying is a key program for us because 
it provides familiar services and amenities to any of 
our Chinese guests—whether they are traveling from 
Beijing, London, or San Francisco. As outbound tour-
ism from China increases, this program puts us in a 
position to best serve the needs of these travelers.
What trends do you currently see with domestic and 
international Chinese travelers?
In October 2011 we issued a Hilton Blue Paper study 
about Chinese travelers, which was written by Kevin 
Latham, senior lecturer in social anthropology at the 
School of Oriental and African Studies at the University 
of London. The report indicated that we may soon see 
a shift from Chinese travelers booking group tours 
to traveling abroad independently. The report shows 
China is now the largest outbound tourist source-
country in Asia. This growth is expected to continue 
as China’s middle class expands and relaxed visa pro-
cedures make foreign travel more accessible. Within 
China, we see a need for brands like ours to expand 
into new markets such as Nanjing, Xi’an, and others to 
accommodate local tourism needs.
How has the travel and hotel market in China changed 
since Hilton entered China?
The greatest change is the rise in outbound tourism 
from China. This growth has a direct impact on the in-
dustry within China because more guests are experienc-
ing hotels and brands in other parts of the world. The 
total number of Chinese outbound tourists reached 
roughly 57.4 million in 2010, an increase of more than 
20% over 2009. The numbers were predicted to rise to 
65 million in 2011.
International hotel brands may have once heav-
ily relied on international visitors to China. Today we 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

462	
Part Three   Strategizing around the Globe 
are building brand loyalty within the China market as 
more Chinese travelers experience our hotels.
What are the brand’s plans for future expansion 
in China?
China is one of our most important source markets 
today, and we are expanding at record pace in main-
land China. We see noticeable growth not only in the 
number of outbound travelers from China, but also the 
number of travelers of Chinese origin living in other 
parts of the world.
Hilton Hotels & Resorts has the largest development 
pipeline in the brand’s history with more than 45 new 
properties in development in China. Currently, 11 of 
these hotels are set to open by the end of 2012. Hilton 
Worldwide will expand its presence in China to more 
than 100 hotels during the next five years. This will 
add roughly 25,000 rooms in more than 35 cities—
many of which are provincial capitals or second- or 
lower-tier cities.
What are your predictions for China’s hospitality 
market in the future?
China has emerged as the world’s fastest-growing 
economy, and independent reports show the growth in 
Chinese tourism can be expected to continue. The on-
line travel booking environment continues to grow in im-
portance. More travelers are searching for information 
about hotels and destinations on their own and turning 
to social media and travel review sites to inform their 
booking decisions. Our portfolio of hotels is expand-
ing to new markets across China—such as Guangzhou 
and Nanjing—as travelers within China and those visit-
ing China from abroad are moving beyond Beijing and 
Shanghai and exploring other regions of the country. 
We also see increased interest in leisure travel and are 
opening several resort properties to meet this demand.
Case Discussion Questions
	 1.	 How do Hilton’s China operations differ from its 
operations elsewhere?
	 2.	 What are the key lessons Hilton has learned 
from its experience in China?
	 3.	 Why is Hilton interested in leveraging its learn-
ing from China to its hotels outside of China?
	 4.	 What are the components of the Hilton Huanying 
(Welcome) program outside of China? (HINT: 
Beyond the description in the interview tran-
script, try to do a little online research or, if you 
can, do a little field research by visiting a Hilton 
hotel that has such a program.) 
	 5.	 What strategies in the integration-responsiveness 
framework would you characterize Hilton’s ap-
proaches? (HINT: Hilton does not necessarily 
have to fit only one particular strategy.)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

cisale/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

cisale/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Building Functional Excellence
Chapters
	 14	 Competing on Marketing and Supply Chain 
Management
	 15	 Managing Human Resources Globally
	 16	 Financing and Governing the Corporation 
Globally
	 17	 Managing Corporate Social Responsibility 
Globally
p a r t
4
Digital Art/Spirit/Corbis
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Jeff Roberson/AP Images
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
	 14-1	 articulate three of the four Ps in marketing 
(product, price, and promotion) in a global 
context.
	14-2	 explain how the fourth P in marketing (place) 
has evolved to be labeled supply chain 
management.
	14-3	 outline the triple As in supply chain 
management (agility, adaptability, and 
alignment).
	14-4	 discuss how institutions and resources affect 
marketing and supply chain management.
	14-5	 participate in two leading debates concerning 
marketing and supply chain management.
	14-6	 draw implications for action.
Chapter 
14 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Competing on Marketing 
and Supply Chain 
Management
Anheuser-Busch InBev’s flagship Budweiser brand has 
long been closely linked to America’s heartland. Born 
in 1876, it is the brew that turned the Clydesdales into 
an icon. Now the world’s largest brewer is intent on 
giving Brazilian drinkers their own taste of America. 
It is betting that the world’s third-largest beer market 
by volume—and the birthplace of the majority of the 
parent company’s board—can help turn Bud into a truly 
global brand. The plan is to sell “the American Dream 
in a bottle,” says Chris Burggraeve, AB InBev’s chief 
marketing officer.
Whether consumers in Brazil—and emerging mar-
kets worldwide—will buy into the dream is yet to be 
seen. AB InBev introduced Bud as a premium brand in 
Latin America’s largest nation on August 31, 2011, with 
flashy promotions including Budweiser-branded con-
certs featuring artists such as Rihanna and Pearl Jam. 
Influential Brazilians, including UFC middleweight 
champ Anderson Silva, were enlisted to serve as 
brand ambassadors and raise local awareness of Bud. 
Budweiser is the official sponsor of the World Cup 
soccer finals, which Brazil will host in 2014.
Anheuser-Busch was bought in 2008 by Belgium-
based InBev for $52 billion, the beer industry’s largest 
takeover of the decade. InBev had previously bought a 
leading Brazilian beer company. Today, AB InBev’s beer 
beats competitors SABMiller and Heineken in both 
revenue and volume worldwide. Budweiser accounts 
for 7% to 8% of AB InBev’s beer production, estimates 
Nomura, with about three-quarters of Budweiser’s 
sales in the US. Taking Budweiser global was “the 
cherry on the cake—a nice cherry, but never part of our 
valuations” in the 2008 purchase, Burggraeve says.
The brewer has already rolled out Budweiser in 
China, the world’s largest beer market by volume. A 
bottle of Bud sells there for about $1.75, versus many 
local brews that cost about $1. The premium market 
accounts for about 3% of China’s beer sales, with Bud 
accounting for a third of that. Last year, Bud debuted in 
Russia, where it has grabbed a 1% market share.
AB InBev, which already controls about 70% of the 
Brazilian market, plans to sell Budweiser at prices about 
15% higher than its Skol and Brahma brands there. It is 
a bid to expand the county’s under-developed premium 
beer market. More expensive drinks such as Budweiser 
represent just 5% of that market, compared with about 
20% in the US and 40% in Britain, Burggraeve says.
Although Bud has been slowly losing share in 
the US in recent years, Ian Shackleton, an analyst 
at Nomura in London, says selling the US brand at a 
higher price in another country won’t work against 
it. “It’s not unusual you’d end up with a brand in its 
home market that’s seen as standard but sold as pre-
mium in export markets,” he says, citing Heineken and 
O p e n i n g  C a s e
EMERGING MARKETS: This Bud’s for You, Emerging Markets
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

468	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
How can firms such as AB InBev market themselves to attract customers around 
the world? Having attracted customers, how can firms ensure a steady supply of 
products and services? This chapter deals with these and other important ques-
tions associated with marketing and supply chain management. Marketing refers 
to efforts to create, develop, and defend markets that satisfy the needs and wants 
of individual and business customers. Supply chain is the flow of products, services, 
finances, and information that passes through a set of entities from a source to 
the customer.1 Supply chain management refers to activities to plan, organize, lead, 
and control the supply chain.2 In this chapter, instead of viewing marketing and 
supply chain as two stand-alone, separate functions, we view them as one crucial, 
integrated function.
We first outline major marketing and supply chain activities in global business. 
Then we discuss how the institution-based and resource-based views enhance our 
understanding of the drivers behind marketing and supply chain management suc-
cess. Finally, debates and implications follow.
14-1 Three of the Four Ps in Marketing
Figure 14.1 shows the four Ps that collectively consist of the marketing mix: 
(1) product, (2) price, (3) promotion, and (4) place.3 We start with the first three Ps. 
The last P—place (where the product is sourced, produced, and distributed)—will 
be discussed in the next section.
Marketing
Efforts to create, develop, and 
defend markets that satisfy the 
needs and wants of individual 
and business customers.
Supply chain
Flow of products, services, 
finances, and information that 
passes through a set of entities 
from a source to the customer.
Supply chain management
Activities to plan, organize, lead, 
and control the supply chain.
Marketing mix
The four underlying components 
of marketing: (1) product, (2) price, 
(3) promotion, and (4) place.
Learning Objective
Articulate three of the four Ps in 
marketing (product, price, and 
promotion) in a global context.
14-1
Guinness, popular-priced drinks that are sold at a pre-
mium outside the Netherlands and Ireland.
Shackleton says Brazilian drinkers may warm to 
the taste of Budweiser, which is similar to local light 
beers. Successfully selling Bud in Latin America’s 
largest nation could also help launch the beer in other 
countries, he says. It “makes it a lot easier to work in 
the next market.” It could also help AB InBev reverse 
recent sales declines in the region, which it attributes 
to slower increases in wages and a pullback from the 
strong sales during the 2010 World Cup.
Although Burggraeve says Budweiser has the 
potential to become a powerhouse global brand like 
Coca-Cola, analysts say it could be tougher for a beer 
to gain the same global traction as soft drink brands 
since beer drinkers have historically been loyal to local 
brews. That is the theory espoused by rival SABMiller, 
which owns a stable of strong local beers, including 
South Africa’s Castle Lager and Colombia’s Aguila. 
Budweiser could also be hindered by the fact that it 
is not from Europe, the home of beer. “However, in 
markets where beer has developed more recently, it’s 
less of a problem,” Shackleton says.
Burggraeve even cites the Budweiser brand’s US 
roots as one reason it could make it big. “Many Brazilians 
have never been abroad,” he says. “We’re bringing 
abroad to them. They’re hungry for the world.” There is 
also a difference, according to him, between American 
politics and American values, which he believes resonate 
globally. “It doesn’t stand for America. It stands for deep 
American values that are extremely relevant worldwide,” 
such as camaraderie and a “can-do” attitude, he says.
Going global comes at a price. AB InBev said in 
August that it will spend about $3.1 billion in 2011 to 
build capacity to meet demand in growth markets in-
cluding China and Brazil. Still, with no presence in most 
of Asia and Africa, AB InBev could find itself at a dis-
advantage to Heineken or SABMiller, which have been 
building business there for years. And Heineken, which 
purchased Fomento Economico Mexicano’s beer unit 
in 2010, is also pushing its flagship brand as a premium 
brew in Latin America. None of that, however, is stopping 
Burggraeve, who says he has embraced the marketing 
slogan Bud uses in Brazil: “Great times are waiting.”
Source: Bloomberg Businessweek, 2011, This Bud’s for you, emerging 
markets, October 3: 26–28.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 14   Competing on Marketing and Supply Chain Management	
469
14-1a Product
Product refers to offerings that customers purchase. Although the word “product” 
originally referred to a physical product, its modern use has included services. To 
avoid confusion, we will use “products and services” in this chapter. This makes 
sense because in a broad sense, when a customer purchases a product, this product 
also embodies service elements (such as maintenance and upgrades).4
Even for a single category (such as women’s dress or sports car), product at-
tributes vary tremendously. For multinational enterprises (MNEs) doing business 
around the world, a leading concern is standardization versus localization.5 
Localization is natural. McDonald’s, for example, sells wine in France, beer in 
Germany, mutton pot pies in Australia, and Maharaja Mac and McCurry Pan in 
India. In China, Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC) featured menu items that would 
not be recognizable to its customers in the United States. Alongside the Colonel’s 
“secret recipe” fried chicken, KFC in China also markets congee, a chicken wrap in 
a Peking duck-type sauce, and spicy tofu chicken rice. In Japan, Wendy’s sells a $16 
Foie Gras Rossini (goose-liver pâté) hamburger.6
What is interesting is the rise of standardization, which is often attributed to 
Theodore Levitt’s 1983 article, “The Globalization of Markets”7 (first discussed in 
Chapter 13). This article advocated globally standardized products and services, as 
evidenced by Hollywood movies and Coke Classic. However, numerous subsequent 
experiments such as Ford’s “world” car and MTV’s “global” (essentially American) 
programming backfired. Marketers thus face a dilemma: while one size does not fit 
all, most firms cannot afford to create products and services for just one group of 
customers. Thus, how much to standardize and how much to localize remain chal-
lenges (see In Focus 14.1).8
As first noted in Chapter 13, localization is appealing (in the eyes of local con-
sumers and governments) but expensive. One sensible solution is to have a product 
that appears to be locally adapted while deriving as much synergy (commonality) 
as possible in ways that customers cannot easily recognize. Consider the two global 
business weekly magazines, the US-based Bloomberg Businessweek and the UK-based 
Economist. In addition to its US edition, Bloomberg Businessweek publishes two English 
(language) editions for Asia and Europe and a Chinese edition for China. While 
these four editions share certain content, there is a lot of local edition–only mate-
rial that is expensive to produce. In comparison, each issue of the Economist has the 
Product
Offerings that customers  
purchase.
Figure 14.1
The Four Ps of Marketing Mix
Price
Product
Place
Promotion
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

470	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
following regional sections (in alphabetical order): (1) the Americas (excluding 
the United States), (2) Asia, (3) Britain, (4) China, (5) Europe (excluding Britain), 
(6) the Middle East and Africa, and (7) the United States. While the content for 
each issue is identical, the order of appearance of the regional sections is different. 
For US subscribers, their Economist would start with the United States section; for 
According to the US Census Bureau definition, 
Hispanics are individuals of Latin American descent 
living in the United States who may be of any race or 
ethnic group (such as white or black). Numbering ap-
proximately 45 million people (15% of the US popula-
tion), Hispanics represent the largest minority group 
in the United States. To put things in perspective, the 
US Hispanic population is larger than the populations of 
Australia, Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden com-
bined. The print media advertising revenues for the US 
Hispanic market, $1.5 billion, have now surpassed the 
advertising revenues for the entire UK magazine market.
How to effectively market products and services to 
this sizable group of customers is a leading challenge 
among many marketers. Although most US Hispanics 
speak some English, Spanish is likely to remain their 
language of preference. Approximately 38% of His-
panics surveyed report English-language ads to be 
less effective than Spanish-language ads in terms 
of recall. Approximately half of US Hispanics who 
watch TV during prime time watch Spanish-language 
programming. The Spanish-language TV network, 
Univision, is now the fifth largest TV network in the 
United States, behind ABC, CBS, Fox, and NBC.
The typical debate in international marketing, 
standardization versus localization, is relevant here 
within a country. Direct translation of English-language 
campaigns is often ineffective because it often misses 
the emotional and culturally relevant elements. Savvy 
marketers thus call for “transcreation.” For instance, 
Taco Bell’s tagline “Think outside the bun” evolved into 
a Hispanic adaption: “No solo de pan vive el hombre” 
(“A man does not live by bread alone”). Volkswagen 
completely changed its “Drivers Wanted” English 
slogan and marketed to US Hispanics with a new slogan, 
“Agarra Calle” (“Hit the Road”), with a specific, Spanish-
language website, agarracalle.com. When marketing its 
minivans on TV, Chrysler showed a grandfather figure 
engaged in a puppet show at a child’s birthday party—a 
traditional way for Hispanics to entertain children.
Interestingly, although about 60% of the US 
Hispanic population can trace their roots to Mexican 
heritage, direct importation of ads used in Mexico will 
not necessarily be successful either. The reasons are 
twofold. First, the US Hispanic culture, with influences 
from numerous other Latin American countries, is 
much more diverse than the Mexican culture. Second, 
mainstream (Anglo) media in the United States have as-
serted substantial influence on US Hispanics. One case 
in point is that 40% of Spanish-dominant Hispanics reg-
ularly watch English-language TV programming.
Overall, US Hispanics possess a distinctive cultural 
identity that is neither mainstream (Anglo) American 
nor pure Mexican. One size does not fit all. Any firm 
interested in marketing products and services to the 
“US market” needs to use both caution and creativity 
when marketing to Hispanics.
Sources: Based on (1) N. Singh & B. Bartikowski, 2009, A cross-cultural 
analysis of print advertising targeted to Hispanic and non-Hispanic 
American consumers, Thunderbird International Business Review, 51: 
151–164; (2) Advertising and Marketing Review, 2009, Hispanic mar-
keting, www.admarketreview.com; (3) US Census Bureau, 2012, 
Hispanics in the United States, www.census.gov.
Marketing to Hispanics in the United States
IN Focus 14.1 
Jeff Greenberg/Alamy
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 14   Competing on Marketing and Supply Chain Management	
471
Chinese subscribers, their magazine would start with the China section; and so 
forth. By doing that, the Economist appears to be responsive to readers with different 
regional interests without incurring the costs of running multiple editions for dif-
ferent regions, as Bloomberg Businessweek does. Therefore, how many editions does 
one issue of the Economist have? We can say one—or seven if we count the seven 
different ways of stapling regional sections together.
One of the major concerns for MNEs is to decide whether to market global 
brands or local brands in their portfolio.9 The key is market segmentation—
identifying segments of consumers who differ from others in purchasing behavior.10 
There are limitless ways of segmenting the market (males versus females, urban 
dwellers versus rural residents, Africans versus Latin Americans).
For international marketers, the million dollar question is: How does one 
generalize from a wide variety of market segmentation in different countries to 
generate products that can cater to a few of these segments around the world? One 
globally useful way of segmentation is to divide consumers in four categories:11
 	 Global citizens (who are in favor of buying global brands that signal prestige 
and cachet)
 	 Global dreamers (who may not be able to afford, but nevertheless admire, 
global brands)
 	 Antiglobals (who are skeptical about whether global brands deliver higher-
quality goods)
 	 Global agnostics (who are most likely to lead anti-globalization demonstra-
tions smashing McDonald’s windows)
The implications are clear. For the first two categories of global citizens and 
global dreamers (who add to approximately 78% of the consumers surveyed), firms 
are advised to leverage the global brands and their relatively more standardized 
products and services. “Global brands make us feel like citizens of the world,” an 
Argentine consumer observed. However, MNEs do not necessarily have to write 
off the antiglobals and global agnostics as lost customers, because they can market 
localized products and services under local brands. Nestlé, for example, owns 
8,000 (!) brands around the world, most of which are local, country-specific (or 
region-specific) brands not marketed elsewhere.
Overall, Levitt may be both right and wrong. A large percentage of consumers 
around the world indeed have converging interests and preferences centered on 
global brands. However, a substantial percentage of them also resist globally stan-
dardized brands, products, and services. Armed with this knowledge, firms—both 
MNEs and locals—can better craft their products and services.
14-1b Price
Price refers to the expenditures that customers are willing to pay for a product. 
Most consumers are “price sensitive.” The jargon is price elasticity—how demand 
changes when price changes. Basic economic theory of supply and demand suggests 
that when price drops, consumers will buy more and generate stronger demand, 
which in turn will motivate firms to expand production to meet this demand. This 
theory, of course, underpins numerous firms’ relentless drive around the world 
to cut costs and then prices. The question is how “price sensitive” consumers are. 
Holding the product (such as shampoo) constant, in general the lower income the 
consumers are, the more price sensitive they are. While American, European, and 
Market segmentation
Identifying segments of  
consumers who differ from 
others in purchasing behavior.
Price
The expenditures that customers 
are willing to pay for a product.
Price elasticity
How demand changes when 
price changes.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

472	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
Japanese consumers take it for granted that shampoo is sold by the bottle, in India 
shampoo is often sold in single-use sachets, each costing about one to ten cents. 
Many consumers there find the cost for a bottle of shampoo to be prohibitive. Some 
African telecommunications operators charge customers by the second—a big deal 
for those making pennies a day.12
In addition to the price at the point of purchase, another dimension of price is 
the total cost of ownership. One example in consumer products is the ubiquitous 
HP laser printer. Owners typically spend two to three times more on HP print 
cartridges than on the printer itself. While many individual consumers (such as 
buyers of HP printers) do not pay explicit attention to the total cost of ownership, 
it is obviously more important in business-to-business marketing and is often ex-
plicitly evaluated prior to purchase decisions. Aircraft makers (such as Airbus) can 
reap additional revenues for as long as 20 to 30 years after the initial sale. More im-
portantly, after-sales (spare) products and services are less price sensitive and thus 
have higher margins.13 Consequently, many firms compete on winning the initial 
sale with a lower price, with the aim of capturing more revenue through after-sales 
products and services.
Finally, in international marketing, it is important to note that aggressively low 
prices abroad may be accused of dumping, thus triggering protectionist measures. 
Because Chapter 11 has already discussed the antidumping issue at length, we will 
not repeat it here other than stressing its importance.
14-1c Promotion
Promotion refers to all the communications that marketers insert into the mar-
ketplace. Promotion includes TV, radio, print, and online advertising, as well as 
coupons, direct mail, billboards, direct marketing (personal selling), and public 
relations. Marketers face a strategic choice of whether to standardize or localize 
promotional efforts. Standardized promotion not only projects a globally consis-
tent message (crucial for global brands), but can also save a lot of money. One large 
campaign may be more cost-effective than 100 smaller campaigns.
However, there is a limit to the effectiveness of standardized promotion.14 
In the 1990s, Coca-Cola ran a worldwide campaign featuring a cute polar bear 
cartoon character. Research later showed that viewers in warmer-weather coun-
tries had a hard time relating to this ice-bound animal with which they had no 
direct experience. In response, Coca-Cola switched to more costly, but more 
effective, country-specific advertisements. For instance, the Indian subsidiary 
launched a campaign that equated Coke with “thanda,” the Hindi word for 
“cold.” The German subsidiary developed commercials that showed a “hidden” 
kind of eroticism (!). While this is merely one example, it does suggest that even 
some of the most global brands (such as Coca-Cola) can benefit from localized 
promotion.
Many firms promote products and services overseas without doing their home-
work and end up with blunders. GM marketed its Chevrolet Nova in Latin America 
without realizing that “no va” means “no go” in Spanish. Coors Beer translated its 
successful slogan “Turn it loose” from English to Spanish as “Drink Coors, get diar-
rhea.”15 Table 14.1 outlines some blunders that are hilarious to readers but painful 
to marketers, some of whom were fired because of these blunders.
In international marketing, there is a country-of-origin effect, which refers to 
the positive or negative perception of firms and products from a certain country.16 
Total cost of ownership
Total cost needed to own a  
product, consisting of initial 
purchase cost and follow-up 
maintenance/service cost.
Promotion
Communications that marketers 
insert into the marketplace.
Country-of-origin effect
The positive or negative percep-
tion of firms and products from a 
certain country.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 14   Competing on Marketing and Supply Chain Management	
473
Both the Opening and Closing Cases highlight the importance of country of 
origin. Marketers have to decide whether to enhance or downplay such an effect. 
This can be very tricky. Disneyland Tokyo became popular in Japan because it 
played up its American image. But Disneyland Paris received relentless negative 
press coverage in France because it insisted on its “wholesome American look.” 
Singapore Airlines projects a “Singapore girl” image around the world. In con-
trast, Li Ning downplays its Chinese origin by using American NBA players in its 
commercials. What is the nationality of Häagen-Dazs ice cream? If you thought 
Häagen-Dazs was a German, Austrian, or Belgian brand and had been happily 
paying a premium price for “European” ice cream, you were fooled. Häagen-Dazs 
is a US brand. Sometimes, multiple countries of origin are disclosed. For example, 
Apple stamped on the back of every iPhone: “Designed by Apple in California. 
Assembled in China.” Some Toyota car dealers’ stickers disclose: “Made in the 
USA. Engine made in Japan.”
In addition to the traditional domestic versus international challenge, a new 
challenge lies in the pursuit of online versus offline (traditional) advertising.17 As 
the first cohort to grow up Internet savvy, today’s teens and twenty-somethings in 
many countries flock to social networks such as Facebook, Twitter, and their equiva-
lents around the world. These young people “do not buy stuff because they see a 
magazine ad,” according to one expert, “they buy stuff because other kids tell them 
to online.”18 What is challenging is how marketers can reach such youth. Firms such 
as Apple and P&G experiment with a variety of formats, including sponsorships 
and blogs, with some hits, some misses, and lots of uncertainty. The basic threat to 
Table 14.1
Some Blunders in International Marketing
  	 One US toymaker received numerous complaints from American mothers, because 
a talking doll told their children, “Kill mommy!” Made in Hong Kong, the dolls were 
shipped around the world. They carried messages in the language of the country of 
destination. A packing error sent some Spanish-speaking dolls to the United States. The 
message in Spanish “Quiero mommy!” means “I love mommy!” (This is also a supply 
chain blunder.)
  	 AT&T submitted a proposal to sell phone equipment in Thailand. Despite its excellent 
technology, the proposal was rejected out of hand by telecom authorities, because 
Thailand required a ten-year warranty but AT&T only offered a five-year warranty—thanks 
to standardization on warranty imposed by US headquarters.
  	 To better adapt its products to Egypt, one Chinese shoe manufacturer placed Arabic 
characters on the soles of the shoes. Unfortunately, the designers did not know Arabic 
and merely copied words from elsewhere. The words they chose meant “God.” China’s 
ambassador to Egypt had to apologize for this blunder.
  	 Japan’s Olympia tried to market a photocopier to Latin America under the name “Roto.” 
Sales were minimal. Why? “Roto” means “broken” in Spanish.
  	 In their eagerness to export to the English-speaking world, Chinese firms have marketed 
the following products: White Elephant brand batteries, Sea Cucumber brand shirts, 
and Maxipuke brand poker cards (the two Chinese characters, pu ke, means poker, 
and it should have been translated as Maxi brand poker cards—but its package said 
“Maxipuke”).
Sources: Based on text in (1) T. Dalgic & R. Heijblom, 1996, International marketing blunders revisited—some 
lessons for managers, Journal of International Marketing, 4 (1): 81–91; (2) D. Ricks, 1999, Blunders in International 
Business, 3rd ed., Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

474	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
such social networks is the whim of their users, whose interest in certain topics and 
networks themselves may change or even evaporate overnight.
Overall, marketers need to experiment with a variety of configurations of the 
three Ps (product, price, and promotion) around the world in order to optimize 
the marketing mix. What has not yet been discussed is the fourth P, place, to which 
we turn in the next section.
14-2 From Distribution Channel  
to Supply Chain Management
As the fourth P in the marketing mix, place refers to the location where products 
and services are provided (which now, of course, includes the online marketplace). 
Technically, place is also often referred to as the distribution channel—the set of 
firms that facilitates the movement of goods from producers to consumers. Until 
the 1980s, a majority of producers made most goods in-house and one of the key 
concerns was distribution. Since then, production outsourcing has grown signifi-
cantly. Many producers (such as Apple) do not physically produce their branded 
products at all; they rely on contract manufacturers (such as Foxconn) to get the 
job done. Other producers that still produce in-house (such as Dell) rely on their 
suppliers to provide an increasingly higher percentage of the value added. There-
fore, the new challenge is how to manage the longer distribution channel—more 
specifically, the distribution from suppliers (and contract manufacturers) all the 
way to consumers19 (see Figure 14.2).
Consequently, a new term, “supply chain,” has been coined, and it has now 
almost replaced the old-fashioned “distribution channel.” To be sure, the focal 
firm has always dealt with suppliers. Strategy guru Michael Porter labels this func-
tion as “inbound logistics” (and the traditional distribution channel as “outbound 
logistics”).20 In a broad sense, the new term “supply chain” is almost synonymous 
with “value chain,” encompassing both inbound and outbound logistics (see 
Chapter 4). In the military, logistics is widely acknowledged as a contributor to 
wartime success. But no army recruitment material would brag about a glamor-
ous career in logistics in the military to attract new soldiers. Similarly, business 
logistics tends to be tactical and lacks prestige. However, if supply chain is value 
chain, then supply chain management essentially handles the entire process of 
value creation, which is the core mission of the firm. Consequently, supply chain 
management has now taken on new strategic importance and gained tremendous 
prestige.
Learning Objective
Explain how the fourth P in 
marketing (place) has evolved 
to be labeled supply chain 
management.
14-2
Place
The location where products  
and services are provided.
Distribution channel
The set of firms that facilitates 
the movement of goods from 
producers to consumers.
Figure 14.2
Supply Chain Management
Supply
network
Producer/
manufacturer
Distribution
network
Customer
Customer
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 14   Competing on Marketing and Supply Chain Management	
475
One indication that supply chain management has gained traction is that instead 
of being obscure players, leading supply chain management firms, such as DHL, 
FedEx, and UPS, have now become household names. On any given day, 2% of the 
world’s GDP can be found in UPS trucks and planes. “FedEx” has become a verb, 
and even live whales have reportedly been “FedExed.”21 Modern supply chains aim 
to “get the right product to the right place at the right time—all the time.”22 Next, 
we discuss the triple As underpinning supply chains: (1) agility, (2) adaptability, 
and (3) alignment.23
14-3 The Triple As in Supply Chain Management
14-3a Agility
Agility refers to the ability to quickly react to unexpected shifts in supply and de-
mand. To reduce inventory, many firms now use the trucks, ships, and planes of 
their suppliers and carriers as their warehouse. In their quest for supply chain 
speed, cost, and efficiency, many firms fail to realize the cost they have to pay for 
disregarding agility. On the other hand, firms such as Zara thrive in large part 
because of the agility of their supply chain. Zara’s agility permeates throughout 
its entire operations, starting with design processes. As soon as designers spot 
certain trends, they create sketches and go ahead to order fabrics without finalizing 
designs. This speeds things up because fabric suppliers require a long lead time. 
Designs are finalized when reliable data from stores come. Production commences 
as soon as designs are complete. In addition, Zara’s factories only run one shift, 
easily allowing for overtime production if demand calls for it. Its distribution cen-
ters are also highly efficient, allowing it to handle demand fluctuation without 
creating bottlenecks.
Agility may become more important in the 21st century, because shocks to 
supply chains are now more frequent. In the last decade, notable disruptions 
have included terrorist attacks, Iraq, SARS, H1N1 swine flu, the Icelandic volcano 
eruption, the Arab Spring, and the Japanese earthquake (see In Focus 14.2). 
Under shocks, an agile supply chain can rise to the challenge, while a static one 
can pull a firm down.24 In 2000, Nokia and Ericsson fought in the mobile handset 
market. Consider how Nokia and Ericsson reacted differently to a fire induced by 
a thunderstorm at a New Mexico factory of their handset chip supplier, Philips. 
The damage was minor, and Philips expected to resume production within a 
week. However, Nokia took no chances, and it quickly carried out design changes 
so that two other suppliers, one in Japan and another in the United States, could 
manufacture similar chips for Nokia. (These were the only two suppliers in the 
world other than Philips that were capable of delivering similar chips.) Nokia 
then quickly placed orders from these two suppliers. In contrast, Ericsson’s supply 
chain had no such agility: It was set up to function exclusively with the damaged 
Philips plant in New Mexico—in other words, Ericsson had no Plan B. Unfortu-
nately, Philips later found out that the damage was larger than first reported, 
and production would be delayed for months. By the time Ericsson scrambled to 
contact the other two suppliers, Nokia had locked up all of their output for the 
next few months. The upshot? By 2001, Ericsson was driven out of the handset 
market as an independent player. (It re-entered the market with a joint venture 
with Sony called Sony Ericsson.)25
Learning Objective
Outline the triple As in supply 
chain management (agility, 
adaptability, and alignment).
14-3
Agility
The ability to react quickly to 
unexpected shifts in supply 
and demand.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

476	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
14-3b Adaptability
While agility focuses on flexibility that can overcome short-term fluctuation in the 
supply chain, adaptability refers to the ability to change supply chain configura-
tions in response to longer-term changes in the environment and technology. En-
hancing adaptability often entails making a series of make-or-buy decisions.26 This 
requires firms to continuously monitor major geopolitical, social, and technological 
trends in the world, make sense of them, and reconfigure the supply chain accord-
ingly.27 The damage for failing to do so may not be visible immediately or annually, 
but across a number of years firms failing to do so may be selected out of market.
Consider Lucent, the American telecommunications equipment giant. In the 
mid-1990s, in response to competitive pressures from its rivals Siemens and Alcatel 
that benefited from low-cost, Asia-based production in switching systems, Lucent 
successfully adapted its supply chain by phasing out more production in high-cost 
developed economies and setting up plants in China and Taiwan. However, Lucent 
then failed to adapt continuously. It concentrated its production in its own Asia-
based plants, whereas rivals outsourced such manufacturing to Asian suppliers that 
became more capable of taking on more complex work—in other words, Lucent 
Adaptability
The ability to change supply 
chain configurations in response 
to longer-term changes in the 
environment and technology.
Make-or-buy decision
The decision on whether to 
produce in-house (“make”) or 
to outsource (“buy”).
On March 11, 2011, Japan suffered from a triple 
disaster—a 9.0 earthquake (its worst in recorded his-
tory), followed by a 20-foot tsunami, followed by a 
nuclear power plant accident that emitted harmful 
radiation. From a global standpoint, a lot of non-
Japanese firms that relied on made-in-Japan products 
were ill-prepared for such a sudden and major break-
down of their supply chain. Despite the widely noted 
migration of manufacturing jobs to low-cost countries 
such as China and Malaysia, Japan has remained an 
export powerhouse. In 2010, it was the world’s fourth 
largest exporter (after China, Germany, and the United 
States) with $765 billion exports. For example, Japan 
produces approximately one-fifth of the world’s semi-
conductors and 40% of electronic components. While 
low-end products tend to be made overseas, “Japan 
has higher and higher market share of specialty mate-
rials as you go up the value chain,” noted one expert. 
For example, Boeing outsourced 35% of the work on 
its newest 787 Dreamliner to Japanese manufactur-
ers. Among them, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries built 
the 787’s wings, and no one else could do the job—
Boeing had no Plan B. On March 17, 2011, General 
Motors closed two US-based factories for a week 
due to a lack of components arriving from Japan. 
For planes, cars, and laptops assembled outside of 
Japan, the made-in-Japan components may repre-
sent a relatively small amount, but they tend to be 
mission-critical. “If the Japanese cannot supply,” not-
ed another expert, “then no one is going to get their 
iPad 2” because no smart factory can build an iPad 2 
with only 97% of parts.
Thanks to the “lean manufacturing” movement 
that also originated from Japan a generation ago, 
inventory levels at many factories around the world 
are only enough to last a few days or perhaps even 
hours. When “just-in-time” delivery fails, the supply 
chain can easily break down. Surprisingly, only about 
10% of firms have detailed contingency plans to deal 
with severe chain disruptions. From a supply chain 
management standpoint, one of the most crucial 
lessons from Japan’s earthquake is to always have a 
back-up plan.
Sources: Based on (1) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2011, Downsides 
of just-in-time inventory, March 28: 17–18; (2) Bloomberg Business-
week, 2011, Facing up to nuclear risk, March 21: 13–14; (3) Bloomberg 
Businessweek, 2011, Now, a weak link in the global supply chain, 
March 21: 18–19; (4) Bloomberg BusinessWeek, 2011, The cataclysm 
this time, March 21: 11–13.
Supply Chain Management Lessons from Japan’s Earthquake
IN Focus 14.2 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 14   Competing on Marketing and Supply Chain Management	
477
used foreign direct investment (FDI) to “make,” whereas rivals adopted outsourcing 
to “buy.” Ultimately, Lucent was stuck with its own relatively higher cost (although 
Asia-based) plants and was overwhelmed by rivals. By 2002, Lucent was forced to 
shut down its Taiwan factory and to create an outsourced supply chain. But it was too 
late. By 2006, Lucent lost its independence and was acquired by its archrival Alcatel.
14-3c Alignment
Alignment refers to the alignment of interests of various players involved in the 
supply chain. In a broad sense, every supply chain is a strategic alliance involving 
a variety of players, each of which is a profit-maximizing, stand-alone firm.28 As 
a result, conflicts are natural. However, players associated with one supply chain 
must effectively coordinate to achieve desirable outcomes. Therefore, this is a 
crucial dilemma. Supply chains that can better solve this dilemma may outperform 
other supply chains. For example, for Boeing’s 787 Dreamliner, some 40% of the 
$8 billion development cost is outsourced to suppliers: Mitsubishi makes the wings, 
Messier-Dowty provides the landing gear, and so forth.29 Many suppliers are respon-
sible for end-to-end design of whole subsections. Headed by a vice president for 
global partnerships, Boeing treats its suppliers as partners, has “partner councils” 
with regular meetings, and fosters long-term collaboration.
Conceptually, there are two key elements to achieve alignment: (1) power and 
(2) trust.30 Not all players in a supply chain are equal, and more powerful players 
such as Boeing naturally exercise greater bargaining power.31 Having a recognized 
leader exercising power, such as De Beers in diamonds, facilitates legitimacy and 
efficiency of the whole supply chain. Otherwise, excessive bargaining will have to 
be conducted among supply chain members of more or less equal standing.
Trust stems from perceived fairness and justice from all supply chain mem-
bers.32 While supply chains have become ever more complex and extended, modern 
practices, such as low (or zero) inventory, frequent just-in-time (JIT) deliveries, and 
more geographic dispersion of production, have made all parties more vulnerable 
if the weakest link breaks down (see In Focus 14.2). Therefore, it is in the best in-
terest of all parties to invest in trust-building mechanisms in order to foster more 
collaboration.
For instance, Seven-Eleven Japan exercised a great deal of power by dictating 
that vendors resupply its 9,000 stores at three specific times a day. If a truck is late by 
more than 30 minutes, the vendor has to pay a penalty equal to the gross margin 
of the products carried to the store. This may seem harsh, but is necessary. This 
is because Seven-Eleven Japan staff reconfigure store shelves three times a day to 
cater to different consumers at different hours, such as commuters in the morning 
and school kids in the afternoon—time, literally, means money. However, Seven-
Eleven Japan softens the blow by trusting its vendors. It does not verify the contents 
of deliveries. This allows vendors to save time and money because after deliveries, 
truck drivers do not have to wait for verification and can immediately move on 
to make other trips. The alignment of interest of such a supply chain is legend-
ary. Hours after the earthquake in March 2011, when relief trucks moved at two 
miles per hour (if they moved at all) on the damaged roads, Seven-Eleven Japan’s 
vendors went the extra mile by deploying helicopters and motorcycles to deliver 
much-needed food and supplies to the devastated region.
Sometimes, introducing a neutral intermediary (middleman)—more specifi-
cally, third-party logistics (3PL) providers—may more effectively align the interests 
Alignment 
Alignment of interests of 
various players.
Third-party logistics (3PL)
A neutral, third-party intermediary 
in the supply chain that provides 
logistics and other support 
services.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

478	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
in the supply chain. In the case of outsourcing in Asia, buyers (importers) tend 
to be large Western MNEs such as Gap, Nike, and Marks & Spencer, and suppli-
ers (exporters) are often smaller Asian manufacturers. Despite the best intentions, 
both sides may still distrust each other. MNE buyers are not sure of the quality and 
timeliness of delivery. Further, MNE buyers are unable to control labor practices in 
supplier factories, some of which may be dubious (such as running “sweatshops”). 
In the 1990s, Nike’s reputation took a severe hit due to alleged questionable labor 
practices at its supplier factories. However, suppliers may also be suspicious. Since 
most contracts for shoes, clothing, toys, and electronics are written several months 
ahead, suppliers are not confident about MNE buyers’ ability to forecast demand 
correctly. Suppliers thus worry that in case of lower-than-anticipated demand, 
buyers may reject shipments to reduce excess inventory, by citing excuses such as 
labor practices or quality issues.33 One solution lies in the involvement of 3PL inter-
mediaries, such as the Hong Kong–based Li & Fung. Overall, 3PL firms may add 
value by aligning the interests of all parties.
From humble roots of low-profile “logistics,” supply chain management has now 
come of age. A huge logistics industry has grown, moving goods around the globe on 
a 24/7 basis. In Focus 14.3 shows how Rotterdam, a logistics hub, connects the world.
14-4 How Institutions and Resources Affect  
Marketing and Supply Chain Management
Having outlined the basic features of marketing and supply chain management, let 
us now use the institution-based and resource-based views to shed additional light 
on these topics (Figure 14.3).
14-4a Institutions, Marketing, and Supply Chain Management
As an important form of institutions, formal rules of the game obviously have a 
significant impact. Most countries impose restrictions, ranging from taboos in 
Learning Objective
Discuss how institutions and 
resources affect marketing and 
supply chain management.
14-4
Figure 14.3
Institutions, Resources, Marketing, and Supply Chain Management
Institution-Based View
- Formal rules of the game
(such as taboos in advertising
and equity limits in retail and 3PL sectors)
- Informal cultures, values, and norms
(such as localization in promotion)
Resource-Based View
- Value
- Rarity
- Imitability
- Organization
Marketing and
Supply Chain 
Management
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 14   Competing on Marketing and Supply Chain Management	
479
The Netherlands has long been a nation of trad-
ers. The hub of trade is the Port of Rotterdam, 
Europe’s largest (see PengAtlas Map 3.3). It stretch-
es over 40  kilometers (25 miles) and covers over 
10,000 hectares (24,000 acres) of land. Over one 
million tons of goods are loaded, unloaded, and dis-
tributed in Rotterdam every day—more than twice the 
turnover of the next largest European ports, Antwerp, 
Belgium, 
and 
Hamburg, 
Germany. 
Worldwide, 
Rotterdam ranks fourth behind the East Asian hubs of 
Shanghai, Ningbo, and Singapore. Shipments cover all 
types of cargo, including chemicals, ores, liquid bulk, 
dry bulk, vehicles, and refrigerated cargo such as fruit. 
Every year, 33,000 ocean-going ships call in the port, 
6.5 million containers pass through, and 120 million 
m3 of crude oil arrive to be refined and distributed 
throughout Europe. The transportation businesses in 
the port add €6.6 billion to Dutch GDP, while other 
industries located in the vicinity add another €5 billion.
The Port of Rotterdam serves as the main logis-
tics hub for sea-bound transportation into and out of 
Europe, a market of over 500 million consumers. Con-
tainers arrive from Asia on mega ships that are too 
large even for other large ports such as Hamburg or  
Copenhagen. Thus, containers are transferred in Rotter-
dam to smaller ships sailing to ports along the Atlantic 
coast, into the North and Baltic Seas, up the Rhine River, 
and across to the UK. More than 500 liner services con-
nect Rotterdam with over 1,000 ports worldwide.
Huge investments have gone into the port. 
Essential is the Nieuwe Waterweg (New Channel), 
which opened in 1870 and connects the city of 
Rotterdam directly to the North Sea. It has been con-
tinuously widened and deepened, while far out in the 
North Sea, a man-made channel allows easy access 
even for the largest ships of the world, including mam-
moth tankers, ore carriers, and container vessels. 
With a depth of 20 meters the port is accessible for 
container ships that are unable to berth in other Euro-
pean ports. Maasvlakte 1, which contains the largest 
container terminals, was reclaimed from the estuary 
30  years ago. A new expansion of the port, called 
Maasvlakte 2, is to extend the port further into the 
North Sea, creating 1,000 hectares of industrial land.
Rotterdam is connected to its hinterland by an 
integrated transportation and logistics infrastruc-
ture, including regional shipping lines, inland water-
ways (especially the Rhine connecting to Germany, 
France, and Switzerland), oil pipelines, roads, and 
railways—along with suitably located trans-shipment 
points between different transport modes. Many 
goods from the German industrial heartlands of the 
Ruhr region are loaded on riverboats or direct trains 
in Duisburg, Germany, and then shipped downstream 
to Rotterdam, and from there out to the world. Yet, 
traffic jams hold up trucks, and the regional and na-
tional authorities are under pressure to invest in 
upgrading the infrastructure connecting Rotterdam 
with Duisburg and other secondary hubs.
Rotterdam has attracted many businesses rely-
ing on imported goods, especially petroleum refinery 
and chemicals processing plants. Many Japanese and 
American MNEs set up their European distribution 
centers in the Rotterdam area, using the South-West 
of the Netherlands as a logistics hub.
Sources: This case was written by Professor Klaus Meyer (China 
Europe International Business School). It was based on (1) R. Wrights, 
2007, Rotterdam struggles to contain its enthusiasm as demand surges 
ahead, Financial Times, December 5; (2) A. Granzow & R. Reichstein, 
2008, Alle Wege führen über Duisburg, Handelsblatt, April 11; (3) Port of 
Rotterdam, 2009, Port Statistics, mimeo, (4) www.portofrotterdam.com 
(accessed October 2009).
Rotterdam: A Logistics Hub
IN Focus 14.3 
advertising to constraints on the equity level held by foreign retailers and 3PL 
providers. Germany bans advertising that portrays another product as inferior. 
Goodyear Tire exported a successful ad used in the United States to Germany, 
showing that its tire cord could break a steel chain. Because the ad was viewed 
as insulting the German steel chain manufacturers, the German government 
banned it. In India, FDI had not been allowed in the mass retail sector. Likewise, 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

480	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
China forbids foreign retailers from operating wholly owned stores and only 
approves joint-venture stores. In China, France’s Carrefour is the most aggressive 
foreign retailer with sales ahead of Wal-Mart. In some cities, Carrefour struck 
sweetheart deals with officials and operated wholly owned stores, which provoked 
Beijing’s wrath. The upshot? Carrefour was forced to sell a portion of its equity 
to Chinese partners and convert its wholly owned stores to joint-venture stores to 
comply with regulations.
Informal rules also place significant constraints on marketing and supply chain 
management. In marketing, most of the blunders documented in Table 14.1 happen 
due to firms’ failure to appreciate the deep underlying differences in cultures, lan-
guages, and norms—all part of the informal institutions. In supply chains, leading 
firms headquartered in developed economies may be able to diffuse leading-
edge practices. In the 1990s, as a new norm, large numbers of European firms 
adopted the ISO 9000 series of quality management systems. They then imposed 
the standard on their suppliers and partners throughout the world. Over time, 
these suppliers and partners spread ISO 9000 to other domestic firms. At present, 
over 560,000 sites in over 150 countries have been ISO 9000 certified. In other 
words, due to the normative influence, suppliers and partners that export goods 
and services to a particular country in a supply chain may be simultaneously import-
ing that country’s norms and practices.34
In supply chain management, the norm is to source from Asia. One new trend 
is that procurement executives are trickling toward Asia to be closer to where the 
action is. IBM’s chief procurement officer and the global procurement office recently 
moved to Shenzhen, China. This is the first time IBM has based a corporate-wide 
function outside the United States. Asia accounts for a lion’s share of IBM’s supply 
base, so it makes sense for key supply chain managers to be located in the region.
14-4b Resources, Marketing, and Supply Chain Management
As before, we can evaluate marketing and supply chain management activities 
based on the VRIO criteria (see Figure 14.3). First, managers need to ask: Do these 
activities add value?35 Marketers now increasingly scratch their heads, as tradition-
al media are losing viewers, readers, and thus effectiveness, but marketers do not 
have a good handle on how advertising in the new 
online media adds value. Firms combating the reces-
sion have tried hard to add value to their increas-
ingly frugal customers.36 One interesting idea is to 
focus on the disloyal, not loyal, customers.37 For ex-
ample, Starbucks already has 90% of the coffee dol-
lars of its most loyal customers, leaving little room 
for further growth for that group. However, it is the 
sizable group of “switchers”—those who go to both 
Starbucks and other coffee houses—that may repre-
sent the largest potential for growth. The challenge 
is: How can Starbucks add value to these “switchers,” 
who are loyal to neither Starbucks nor competitors?
Second, managers need to assess the rarity of 
marketing and supply chain activities. If all rival 
firms advertise in the Economist and use FedEx to 
manage logistics (both of which do add value), these  
In a VRIO analysis of a manufacturer’s supply 
chain, how might this activity give the firm a 
competitive advantage?
REUTERS/Aly Song/Landov
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 14   Competing on Marketing and Supply Chain Management	
481
activities, in themselves, are not rare. In supply chain management, first movers in 
radio frequency identification (RFID) tags may derive benefits because they are 
rare. Wal-Mart has been experimenting with RFID in 150 stores in the Dallas area 
and reaped some benefits (such as 16% reduction in out-of-stock items).38 However, 
as RFID becomes more available, its rarity (novelty value) will drop.
Third, having identified valuable and rare capabilities, managers need to assess 
how likely it is for rivals and partners to imitate. While there is no need to waste more 
ink on the necessity to watch out for rivals, firms also need to be careful about part-
ners in the supply chain. As more Western MNEs outsource production to suppliers 
(or, using new jargon, contract manufacturers), it is always possible that some of the 
aggressive contract manufacturers may bite the hand that feeds them by directly im-
itating and competing with Western MNEs. This is not necessarily “opportunism.” It 
is natural for ambitious contract manufacturers to flex their muscle. Such muscle is 
often directly strengthened by the Western MNEs themselves that willingly transfer 
technology and share know-how—this is often known as supplier (or vendor) devel-
opment.39 China’s Haier (household appliances), TCL (televisions), and Galanz (mi-
crowaves) have become global leaders in just that way. While it is possible to imitate 
and acquire world-class manufacturing capabilities, marketing prowess and brand 
power are more intangible and thus harder-to-imitate. Thus, Western MNEs often 
cope by (1) being careful about what they outsource and (2) strengthening cus-
tomer loyalty to their brands (such as Apple) to fend off contract manufacturers.40
Finally, managers need to ask: Is our firm organizationally ready to accom-
plish our objectives?41 Oddly, in many firms, Marketing and Sales functions do 
not get along well. (To avoid confusion, here we use the two terms with capital 
letters, “Marketing” and “Sales,” to refer to these functions.) When revenues are 
disappointing, the blame game begins: Marketing blames Sales for failing to exe-
cute a brilliant plan, and Sales blames Marketing for setting the price too high and 
burning too much of the budget in high-flying but useless promotion. Marketing 
staff tend to be better educated, more analytical, and disappointed when certain 
initiatives fail. In contrast, Sales people are often “street smart,” persuasive, and 
used to rejections all the time. It is not surprising that Marketing and Sales have 
a hard time working together.42 Yet, work together they must. Some leading firms 
have disbanded Marketing and Sales as separate functions and have created an 
integrated function—called Channel Enablement at IBM. Clearly, an organization 
with warring functions will be dysfunctional.
14-5 Debates and Extensions
There are some long-standing debates in this field, such as the standardization-
versus-localization debate discussed earlier. Here, we focus on two important 
debates that are not previously discussed: (1) manufacturing versus services and 
(2) market orientation versus relationship orientation.
14-5a Manufacturing versus Services
This debate deals with the nature of certain economic activities. Consider con-
tract manufacturing service. Is it manufacturing? Service? Both? Does it matter? 
Our vocabulary evolves with—and is also trapped by—the history of economic 
development. As the first sector for organized economic activities, agriculture was 
Learning Objective
Participate in two leading 
debates concerning marketing 
and supply chain management.
14-5
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

482	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
usually seen as primary. Emerging in the Industrial Revolution in the 18th and 19th 
centuries, manufacturing was often the secondary sector (after agriculture). Conse-
quently, the residual service activities were typically viewed as tertiary (third sector).
Throughout the first half of the 20th century, agriculture declined in impor-
tance, and “economic development” often meant industrialization centered on 
manufacturing. However, in the second half of the 20th century, it was services 
that occupied the commanding height.43 In 2006, services accounted for 83% of US 
employment, whereas manufacturing accounted for only 10% of jobs.44 The 2008–
2009 recession has slashed the number of US manufacturing jobs even further.
Despite the recent prominence of the service sector, it historically lacks pres-
tige. Service has a much longer history than manufacturing. The word “service” 
originated from the Latin word servus, which means slave or servant. Nothing could 
be lower than that. To “add insult to injury,” Adam Smith in The Wealth of Nations 
(1776) labeled service “non-productive activities.” Believing that “real man makes 
stuff,” the Soviet Union and China during the heyday of socialism had highly devel-
oped heavy manufacturing industries but a severely underdeveloped service sector. 
Thus, they were able to launch rockets to outer space but did not have enough 
decent mechanics to fix toilets (!).
Towards the end of the 20th century, as Russia and China “woke up” and looked 
at developed economies for inspiration, they found a highly developed service 
sector. In fact, it is innovations in services that drive much of economic growth now. 
Consider McDonald’s. In the 1950s, McDonald’s drew on the principle of the as-
sembly line, a core manufacturing principle dating back to Henry Ford in the 1910s, 
to develop high-volume, fast, and standardized services—and the rest is history.
While marketing and supply chain management would be regarded as services 
historically, this classification may not matter that much. Half-jokingly, we can ask: 
Does McDonald’s manufacture hamburgers? Seriously, how much difference is 
there between McDonald’s and Airbus? Both market new products, both make-to-
order (finalize a product based on an order), and both extensively rely on powerful 
supply chain management systems around the world. As alluded to earlier, in the 
“black-and-white” world separating manufacturing and services, “contract manu-
facturing service” would be an oxymoron. Yet today, integrating manufacturing and 
services is both a reality and a necessity.
14-5b Market Orientation versus Relationship Orientation
Market orientation refers to a philosophy or way of thinking that places the highest 
priority on the creation of superior customer value in the marketplace.45 A market-
oriented firm genuinely listens to customer feedback and allocates resources ac-
cordingly to meet customer expectation. For example, Boeing used to be an engi-
neering-driven firm that believed its engineers would do airlines a favor by sharing 
technological wonders with them. Since the development of the 777 in the 1990s, 
Boeing has transformed itself by involving not only its customers (airlines), but also 
its suppliers in the conceptualization and design processes. Thus, after a period of 
being outfoxed by Airbus, Boeing is now again “king of the hill” in its domain. The 
Boeing experience is not isolated. Many firms around the world have enjoyed bet-
ter performance by being more market-oriented. The debate centers on how firms 
benefit from market orientation differently around the world.
Another concept is relationship orientation, defined as a focus to establish, 
maintain, and enhance relationships with customers.46 Like market orientation, 
Market orientation
A philosophy or way of thinking 
that places the highest priority 
on the creation of superior cus-
tomer value in the marketplace.
Relationship orientation
A focus to establish, maintain, 
and enhance relationships with 
customers.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 14   Competing on Marketing and Supply Chain Management	
483
relationship orientation has more recently been expanded to touch many functions 
beyond marketing. Given the necessity for building trust and coordinating opera-
tions, supply chains certainly can benefit from a relationship orientation. Instead 
of selling engines and then waiting for customers to order spare parts, Rolls-Royce 
now builds deeper relationships with airlines. Specifically, Rolls-Royce rents engines 
to airlines, provides 24/7 monitoring on every engine, carries out full maintenance, 
and gets paid for every hour the engine is in flight.47 Thus, Rolls-Royce can fix prob-
lems before they create damage, thereby offering superior value for airlines.
Marketers have heavily debated whether a market orientation or a relationship 
orientation is more effective in global markets. Key to the debate is how firms ben-
efit from market or relationship orientation differently around the world. Consider 
competition in China, where guanxi (relationship) reportedly is crucial.48 Firms have 
to allocate resources between building market-oriented capabilities (such as quality, 
pricing, and delivery) and relationship-oriented assets (such as wining and dining). 
China thus offers a strong test for the debate between market and relationship orien-
tation. Researchers find two interesting results. First, relationship-oriented assets do 
add value. Second, for truly outstanding performance, relationships are necessary 
but not sufficient. Market-oriented capabilities contribute more toward performance.49 
These results make sense, in light of China’s increasingly market-driven competition 
that gradually reduces (but does not eliminate) the importance of guanxi.
Viewed globally, the strongest effect of market orientation on performance has 
been found in US firms, which operate in arguably the most developed market 
economy.50 In weak market economies such as Russia and Ukraine, the returns 
from being market-oriented are very limited. In other words, firms there can “get 
away” from a minimal amount of market orientation. Viewed collectively, these 
findings support the institution-based view: By definition, market orientation func-
tions more effectively in a market economy.51
While it is always the combination of market and relationship orientation that 
differentiates winning firms from losers, the debate boils down to the relative dis-
tribution between the two. There is reason to believe that as China, Russia, and 
other emerging economies develop further and follow more global “rules of the 
game,” market orientation may play an increasingly important role.
14-6 Management Savvy
What determines the success and failure in marketing and supply chain manage-
ment? The institution-based view points out the impact of formal and informal 
rules of the game. In a non-market economy (think of North Korea), marketing 
would be irrelevant. In a world with high trade and investment barriers, globe-
trotting FedEx jets would be unimaginable. The resource-based view argues that 
holding institutions constant, firms such as AB InBev and LVMH that develop 
the best capabilities in marketing and supply chain management will emerge as 
winners (see the Opening and Closing Cases).
Consequently, three implications for action emerge (Table 14.2). First, mar-
keters and supply chain managers need to know the rules of the game inside 
and out in order to craft savvy responses. For instance, given the limitations of 
formal regulatory frameworks in prosecuting cross-border credit card crimes, 
some US e-commerce firms refuse to ship to overseas addresses. Legitimate over-
seas purchasers are, in turn, denied business. As online shopping became a more 
Learning Objective
Draw implications for action.
14-6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

484	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
widespread informal norm, FedEx acquired Kinkos (which was turned into FedEx 
Office stores), and UPS took over Mail Boxes Etc. (which was turned into UPS 
Stores). E-commerce firms can now ship to the US addresses of FedEx Offices and 
UPS Stores, and FedEx and UPS can then forward products to the overseas pur-
chasers from these stores. This is but one example of superb problem-solving in the 
face of cumbersome formal rules and changing informal norms.
Second, in marketing, focus on the four Ps. This obviously is a cliché that you 
can get from every marketing textbook. However, in international marketing, 
managers need to do all it takes to avoid costly and embarrassing blunders (see 
Table 14.3). Remember: despite their magnitude, blunders are avoidable mistakes. 
At the very least, international marketers should try very hard to avoid being 
written up as blunders in a new edition of this textbook.
Finally, in supply chain management, focus on the triple As. This is not a 
cliché, as the idea was just published a few years ago, and few other textbooks share 
it. Not aware of the importance of the triple As, many firms would only deliver 
containerloads to minimize the number of deliveries and freight costs. When 
demand for a particular product suddenly rises, these firms often fail to react 
quickly—they have to wait until the container (or sometimes even the whole con-
tainer ship) is full. Such a “best” practice typically delays shipment by a week or 
more, forcing stock-outs in stores that disappoint consumers. When firms eventu-
ally ship containerloads, they often result in excess inventory, because most buyers 
Table 14.2
Implications for Action
  	 Know the formal and informal rules of the game on marketing and supply chain 
management inside and out.
  	 In marketing, focus on product, price, promotion, and place (the four Ps) and do all it 
takes to avoid blunders.
  	 In supply chain management, focus on agility, adaptability, and alignment (the triple As).
Table 14.3
Do’s and Don’ts to Avoid Blunders in International Marketing
Do’s
Don’ts
  	 Avoid ethnocentrism. Be sensitive to 
nationalistic feelings of local consumers, 
employees, and governments.
  	 Don’t be overconfident about the 
potential of your products or services—
firms will be better off by continuously 
testing the “water” and experimenting.
  	 Do your homework about the new 
market. Pay attention to details and 
nuances, especially those related to 
cultures, values, and norms.
  	 Don’t cut corners and save back-
translation cost—always back-translate 
(after translating from English to Russian, 
get someone else to translate it from 
Russian to English to check accuracy).
  	 Avoid the pushy salesman approach. The 
pace of business may seem too slow in 
some countries, but impatience does not 
bring sales.
  	 Don’t use jokes in international 
advertising. Humor is usually impossible 
to translate. What some may view as 
funny may be offensive to others.
  	 Act like a diplomat—build relationships.
Sources: Based on text in (1) T. Dalgic & R. Heijblom, 1996, International marketing blunders revisited—some 
lessons for managers, Journal of International Marketing, 4 (1): 81–91; (2) D. Ricks, 1999, Blunders in International 
Business, 3rd ed., Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 14   Competing on Marketing and Supply Chain Management	
485
do not need a full containerload. To get rid of such inventory, as much as a third 
of the merchandise carried by department stores ends up in sales. Such discounts 
not only destroy profits for every firm in the supply chain but also undermine 
brand equity by upsetting consumers who recently bought the discounted items at 
full price. In contrast, the triple As urge savvy supply chain managers to focus on 
agility, adaptability, and alignment of interests of the entire chain.
C h a p t e r  S u m m a r y
	14.1	 Articulate three of the four Ps in marketing (product, price, and promotion) 
in a global context.
 	 In international marketing, the leading concern about product is standard-
ization versus localization.
 	 Marketers care about price elasticity—how responsive purchasing behavior 
is when prices change.
 	 In promotion, marketers need to decide whether to enhance or downplay 
the country-of-origin effect.
	14.2	 Explain how the fourth P (place) has evolved to be labeled supply chain 
management.
 	 Technically, “place” used to refer to distribution channel—the location 
where products are provided.
 	 More recently, the term “distribution channel” has been replaced by “supply 
chain management,” in response to more outsourcing to suppliers, contract 
manufacturers, and 3PL providers.
	14.3	 Outline the triple As in supply chain management (agility, adaptability, and 
alignment).
 	 Agility involves the ability to react quickly to unexpected shifts in supply 
and demand.
 	 Adaptability refers to the ability to reconfigure supply chain in response to 
longer-term external changes.
 	 Alignment focuses on the alignment of interests of various players in the 
supply chain.
	14.4	 Discuss how institutions and resources affect marketing and supply chain 
management.
 	 Formal and informal rules of the game around the world significantly 
impact these two areas.
 	 Managers need to assess marketing and supply chain management based 
on the VRIO criteria.
	14.5	 Participate in two leading debates concerning marketing and supply chain 
management.
 	 (1) Manufacturing versus service and (2) market orientation versus rela-
tionship orientation.
	14.6	 Draw implications for action.
 	 Know the formal and informal rules of the game inside and out.
 	 In marketing, focus on product, price, promotion, and place (the four Ps).
 	 In supply chain management, focus on agility, adaptability, and alignment 
(the triple As).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

486	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
K e y  T e r m s
Adaptability 476
Agility 475
Alignment 477
Country-of-origin  
effect 472
Distribution channel 474
Make-or-buy  
decision 476
Market orientation 482
Market  
segmentation 471
Marketing 468
Marketing mix 468
Place 474
Price 471
Price elasticity 471
Product 469
Promotion 472
Relationship  
orientation 482
Supply chain 468
Supply chain  
management 468
Third-party logistics 
(3PL) 477
Total cost of  
ownership 472
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 ON CULTURE: What cultural issue could be involved product decisions in 
terms of localization versus standardization?
	 2.	 Refer to PengAtlas Map 4.1 (World Shipping and Transportation Routes). 
If global warming persists, how would it affect shipping and transportation 
routes? You can probably list some of the dangers of global warming but 
how may it actually benefit the economies of some countries or regions?
	 3.	 Refer to PengAtlas Map 4.3 (World Labor Force) and to Maps 2.1 and 2.2 
(Top Exporters and Importers). To what extent is the size of the labor force 
an indicator of the size of markets, and to what extent is it not? Why?
	 4.	 If marketing efforts could help produce an inelastic demand for a product, 
a firm would have much more upward pricing flexibility. Explain why that is 
true.
	 5.	 Which of the four P’s has come to be known by a new term? Why the change?
	 6.	 What marketing risks are associated with outsourcing? How would you mini-
mize those risks?
	 7.	 In supply chain management, what are the differences between agility and 
adaptability?
	 8.	 In aligning the interests of various players in the supply chain, what is the 
role of power and trust?
	 9.	 What are examples of how formal institutions affect marketing and sup-
ply chain management—i.e., examples of government-imposed rules of the 
game?
	 10.	 How is the issue of the “value” of some traditional marketing resources 
being affected by changes in technology?
	 11.	 In your opinion, are manufacturing and service separate issues, and can 
one of the two be considered more important than the other? Explain.
	 12.	 What is the difference between market orientation and relationship 
orientation?
	 13.	 Select one of the four Ps, and make the case that it is more important than 
the other three. Then make the case that all are equally important.
	 14.	 Select one of the Triple As, and make the case that it is more important than 
the other two. Then make the case that all are equally important.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 14   Competing on Marketing and Supply Chain Management	
487
C r i t i c a l  D i s c u s s i o n  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 ON CULTURE: Canada has an official animal: the beaver. In 2007, the 
Canadian prime minister suggested replacing it with the wolverine, and 
stirred up a national debate. Does your country have an official animal? If 
you were hired as a marketing expert by the government of Canada (or of 
whatever country), how would you best market the country using an animal?
	 2.	 ON ETHICS: In Hollywood movies, it is common to have product place-
ment (having products from sponsored companies, such as cars, appear in 
movies without telling viewers that these are commercials). As a marketer, 
you are concerned about the ethical implications of product placement 
via Hollywood, yet you know the effectiveness of traditional advertising is 
declining. How do you proceed?
	 3.	 ON ETHICS: You are a supply chain manager at a UK firm. In 2009, the 
H1N1 swine flu broke out in Mexico and the United States, potentially 
affecting your suppliers in the region. On the one hand, you are considering 
switching to a new supplier in Central Europe. On the other hand, you feel 
bad about abandoning your Mexican and US suppliers, with whom you have 
built a pleasant personal and business relationship, at this difficult moment. 
Yet, your tightly coordinated production cannot afford to miss one supply 
shipment. How do you proceed?
G l o b a l  A c t i o n 
	 1.	 Your company has developed a dominant global supply network that has 
contact with nearly every country in the world. However, recent internal 
initiatives have encouraged managers to reconfigure your company’s supply 
network to increase efficiency. As a part of this process, you must use 
established logistics performance metrics to identify the country that has 
the highest logistics competence on each continent (Africa, Asia, Europe, 
North America, and South America). Prepare a report that indicates your 
recommendations and rationale for each continent. What can explain the 
results of your analysis?
	 2.	 You are conducting an international survey concerning possible acceptance 
of a new leisure activity: space tourism. One issue that can influence whether 
individuals in a country find this new concept interesting is culture. Based 
on a data source that assesses culture around the world, identify the cultural 
trait that could measure general acceptance of space tourism by country. 
Then, determine which countries are ideal to target for commercialization. 
Be sure to support your position thoroughly in the report provided.
V i d e o  C a s e
After watching the video on outsourcing, discuss the following:
	 1.	 What role does the sourcing agent play in the 4Ps of marketing?
	 2.	 How does the outsourcing approach challenge the requirements of supply 
chain management?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

488	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
	 3.	 How can outsourced companies overcome supply chain demands from 
globalization?
	 4.	 Does outsourcing the 4Ps and using sourcing agents to do so create  
value?
	 5.	 Which is more important in today’s globalization: a market orientation or a 
relationship orientation?
Pumping out fancy clothing, handbags, jewelry, per-
fumes, and watches, the luxury goods industry had 
a challenging time in the Great Recession. In 2008, 
banks were falling left and right, unemployment rates 
were sky high, and consumer confidence was at an 
all time low. In 2009, total luxury goods industry sales 
fell by 20% globally. How did the industry cope?
Marketing to Chinese emerged as one of the lead-
ing coping strategies for the luxury goods industry. 
Since 2008, Chinese consumption (both at home and 
traveling) had been growing between 20% and 30% 
annually. In 2009, China surpassed the United States 
to become the world’s second largest market. In 
2011, China rocketed ahead of Japan for the first time 
as the world’s champion consumer of luxury goods—
splashing $12.6 billion to command a 28% global 
market share. Everybody who was somebody in 
luxury goods had been elbowing their way into China, 
which appears like the New World to old European 
brands.
The luxury goods industry was dominated by 
the Big Three: LVMH (with more than 50 brands, 
such as Louis Vuitton handbags, Moët Hennessy 
liquor, Christian Dior cosmetics, TAG Heuer watches, 
and Bulgari jewlery), Gucci Group (with nine brands 
such as Gucci handbags, Yves Saint Laurent cloth-
ing, and Sergio Rossi shoes), and Burberry (famous 
for raincoats and handbags). Next were a number of 
more specialized players, such as king of menswear 
Ermenegildo Zegna. By definition, high fashion means 
high prices.
Before Chinese consumers became a force to be 
reckoned with, the luxury goods industry had long en-
deavored to manage the fickle and capricious custom-
ers. Although the seriously rich were not affected by 
the Great Recession, their number remained small. 
Most luxury goods firms had been relying on the “as-
pirational” customers to fund their growth. As the 
recession became worse, many middle-class custom-
ers in economically depressed, developed economies 
began to hunt for value instead of triviality and showing 
off. Japan had been the number-one market for luxury 
goods for years, and most Japanese women report-
edly owned at least one Louis Vuitton product. But 
sales were falling since 2005, and dropped sharply 
since 2008. Young Japanese women seemed more 
individualistic than their mothers, and often hauled 
home lesser-known (and cheaper) brands.
Emerging Markets: Marketing Luxury Goods to Chinese
Ethical 
Dilemma
C l o s i n g  C a s e
Johann Rousselot/laif/Redux
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 14   Competing on Marketing and Supply Chain Management	
489
As Chinese consumers charged ahead, their con-
sumption patterns quickly revealed some interesting 
surprises. First, Chinese purchased more luxury goods 
outside of China, often on vacations abroad, than in 
China. Although practically all luxury goods producers 
now had opened retail outlets in major Chinese cities, 
they suffered from high prices—thanks to import 
duties. Retail outlets in China also suffered from the 
perception (although never proven) that some coun-
terfeit products might slip into their supply chain. Be-
cause luxury products purchased abroad were less 
likely to be fakes, many Chinese vacationers in Europe 
were actually shoppers. They also enjoyed the lower 
prices abroad. Instead of buying one or two pieces, 
some Chinese shoppers bought five Rolex watches 
or ten Louis Vuitton bags on one trip. To cater to such 
demand, almost all luxury shop operators in Europe 
now employed some Chinese-speaking staff. Many 
China-based travel agencies organized “European 
vacation” itineraries with only two hours in the Louvre 
or the British Museum but six hours in Paris’ Galeries 
Lafayette or London’s Harrods.
Second, both inside and outside of China, Chinese 
shoppers discriminated against made-in-China luxury 
goods, which were viewed as inferior in quality. Since 
a luxury item should carry all the mystique associated 
with a high-prestige country, many Chinese consum-
ers argued, why bother to spend that much money to 
buy something made in China (never mind the bona-
fide Western luxury brands of these products)?
Third, interestingly, several years ago, it was the 
Japanese ladies who did the heavy lifting for the top 
line of luxury goods firms. Now it is the Chinese 
dudes (more likely than the Chinese women) who 
were eager to open their wallets to indulge them-
selves with luxurious trappings. As a result, mens-
wear brands such as Ermenegildo Zegna and Dunhill 
did very well.
Such conspicuous consumption generated hot de-
bates in China. It attracted two criticisms. First, luxury 
goods were some of the most visible signs of rising 
income inequality. Second, luxury goods and cor-
ruption were allegedly twins. Not every luxury item 
bought from Galeries Lafayette or Harrods was for the 
personal consumption of the purchaser and his or her 
family members. An untold number was reportedly 
used as bribes. Therefore, critics argued that luxury 
goods fostered corruption.
For all their proclaimed interest in corporate so-
cial responsibility, no luxury goods firm bothered to 
confront the Chinese debates concerning the ethical 
responsibility of their products. However, the indus-
try was concerned about the sustainability of cur-
rent growth. Over time, as the pent-up demand for 
the first generation of Chinese who were wealthy 
enough to travel abroad and buy luxury goods gradu-
ally recedes, such a shopping pattern (buying five to 
ten pieces of luxury item on one trip abroad) may not 
repeat itself. But then, given the population base, a 
lot more Chinese consumers from second- and third-
tier cities may want to imitate what their fellow coun-
trymen and countrywomen in first-tier cities did by 
indulging themselves with such products. So, there 
is still plenty of room for growth in China. Of course, 
the luxury goods industry was also eagerly chasing 
consumers in other emerging economies, such as 
Brazil, India, Poland, Russia, and Saudi Arabia. Where 
did LVMH open one of its newest stores? Ulan Bator, 
Mongolia.
Case Discussion Questions:
	 1.	 Using the four Ps of marketing, explain how 
luxury goods makers can enhance their effec-
tiveness in marketing to Chinese consumers.
	 2.	 From an institution-based view, explain why 
Chinese luxury goods consumers emerged to 
become a major group of consumers of such 
fancy items.
	 3.	 From a VRIO standpoint, explain how luxury 
goods makers were able to capture the hearts, 
minds, and wallets of Chinese consumers.
	 4.	 ON ETHICS: If you were CEO of a Western 
luxury goods firm, how would you respond to 
a Chinese reporter who asked you to comment 
on the two main criticisms of luxury goods con-
sumption in China?
Sources: Based on (1) BusinessWeek, 2009, Coach’s new bag, June 29: 41–43; (2) Economist, 2009, LVMH in the recession, September 19: 79–81; 
(3) Economist, 2010, Fashionably alive, November 13: 76; (4) Economist, 2011, The glossy posse, October 1: 67; (5) J. Li, 2010, Luxury Brands 
Management, Beijing: Peking University Press.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

490	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
N O T E S
[Journal acronyms] AMJ—Academy of Management Journal; AMR—
Academy of Management Review; BW—BusinessWeek (before 2010) or 
Bloomberg Businessweek (since 2010); HBR—Harvard Business Review; 
JIBS—Journal of International Business Studies; JIMktg—Journal of In-
ternational Marketing; JMktg—Journal of Marketing; JMS—Journal of 
Management Studies; JOM—Journal of Operations Management; JSCM—
Journal of Supply Chain Management; JWB—Journal of World Business; 
MBR—Multinational Business Review; MSOM—Manufacturing and 
Service Operations Management; SMJ—Strategic Management Journal
1 M. Lejeune & N. Yakova, 2005, On characterizing the 4 C’s in 
supply chain management, JOM, 23: 81–100.
2 T. Choi & D. Krause, 2006, The supply base and its complexity, 
JOM, 24: 637–652; G. T. Hult, D. Ketchen, & M. Arrfelt, 2007, Strate-
gic supply chain management, SMJ, 28: 1035–1052.
3 P. Kotler & K. Keller, 2005, Marketing Management, 12th ed., Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall; R. Rust, C. Moorman, & G. Bhalla, 
2010, Rethinking marketing, HBR, January: 94–101.
4 V. Shankar, L. Berry, & T. Dotzel, 2009, A practical guide to com-
bining products and services, HBR, November: 95–99.
5 D. Dow, 2006, Adaptation and performance in foreign markets, 
JIBS, 37: 212–226; C. Katsikeas, S. Samiee, & M. Theodosiou, 2006, 
Strategy fit and performance consequences of international market-
ing standardization, SMJ, 27: 867–890.
6 BW, 2012, Wendy’s goes beyond the dollar menu in Japan, 
January 9: 25–26.
7 T. Levitt, 1983, The globalization of markets, HBR, May-June: 
92–102.
8 D. Rigby & V. Vishwanath, 2006, Localization, HBR, April: 82–92; 
A. Schuh, 2000, Global standardization as a success formula for mar-
keting in Central and Eastern Europe? JWB, 35: 133–148.
9 J. Townsend, S. Yeniyurt, & M. Talay, 2009, Getting to global, JIBS, 
40: 539–558.
10 A. Broderick, G. Geenley, & R. Mueller, 2007, The behavioral 
homogeneity evaluation framework, JIBS, 38: 746–763; D. Griffith, 
2010, Understanding multi-institutional convergence effects on in-
ternational market segments and global marketing strategy, JWB, 
45: 59–67; K. Hung, F. Gu, & C. Yim, 2007, A social institutional 
approach to identifying generation cohorts in China with a com-
parison with American consumers, JIBS, 38: 836–853.
11 D. Holt, J. Quelch, & E. Taylor, 2004, How global brands compete, 
HBR, September: 68–75.
12 Economist, 2008, Africa calling, June 7: 78.
13 M. Cohen, N. Agrawal, & V. Agrawal, 2006, Winning in the after-
market, HBR, May: 129–138.
14 C. Nye, M. Roth, & T. Shimp, 2008, Comparative advertising in 
markets where brands and comparative advertising are novel, JIBS, 
39: 851–863; A. Navarro, F. Losada, E. Ruzo, & J. Diez, 2010, Implica-
tions of perceived competitive advantages, adaptation of marketing 
tactics, and export commitment on export performance, JWB, 45: 
49–58; S. Speck & A. Roy, 2008, The interrelationships between tele-
vision viewing, values, and perceived well-being, JIBS, 39: 1197–1219.
15 D. Ricks, 1999, Blunders in International Business, 3rd ed. (p. 88), 
Oxford: Blackwell.
16 L. Brouthers, E. O’Connell, & J. Hadjimarcou, 2005, Generic 
product strategies for emerging market exports into Triad na-
tion markets, JMS, 42: 225–245; C. Funk, J. Arthurs, L. Trevino, & 
J. Joireman, 2010, Consumer animosity in the global value chain, 
JIBS, 41: 439–651; J. Knight, D. Holdsworth, & D. Mather, 2007, 
Country-of-origin and choice of food imports, JIBS, 38: 107–125; 
R. Pappu, P. Quester, & R. Cooksey, 2007, Country image and con-
sumer-based brand equity, JIBS, 38: 726–745; S. Samiee, T. Shimps, 
& S. Sharma, 2005, Brand origin recognition accuracy, JIBS, 36: 
379–397; P. Sharma, 2011, Country of origin effects in developed 
and emerging markets, JIBS, 42: 285–306; P. Verlegh, 2007, Home 
country bias in product evaluation, JIBS, 38: 361–373.
17 S. Fournier & L. Lee, 2009, Getting brand communities right, 
HBR, April: 105–111.
18 BW, 2005, The MySpace generation (p. 92), December 12: 86–96.
19 A. Alam & P. Bagchi, 2011, Supply chain capability as a determi-
nant of FDI, MBR, 9: 229–249; E. Rabinovich, A. M. Knemeyer, &  
C. Mayer, 2007, Why do Internet commerce firms incorporate lo-
gistics service providers in their distribution channels? JOM, 25: 
661–681.
20 M. Porter, 1985, Competitive Advantage, New York: Free Press.
21 Economist, 2006, The physical Internet, June 17: 3–4.
22 R. Slone, 2004, Leading a supply chain turnaround (p. 116), 
HBR, October: 114–121.
23 The following discussion draws heavily from H. Lee, 2004, The 
triple-A supply chain, HBR, October: 102–112.
24 B. Avittathur & P. Swamidass, 2007, Matching plant flexibil-
ity and supplier flexibility, JOM, 25: 717–735; C. Bode, S. Wagner, 
K. Petersen, & L. Ellram, 2011, Understanding responses to supply 
chain disruptions, AMJ, 54: 833–856.
25 Economist, 2006, When the chain breaks, June 17: 18–19.
26 M. W. Peng, Y. Zhou, & A. York, 2006, Behind make or buy deci-
sions in export strategy, JWB, 41: 289–300.
27 F. Rothaermel, M. Hitt, & L. Jobe, 2006, Balancing vertical inte-
gration and strategic outsourcing, SMJ, 27: 1033–56.
28 L. Mesquita & T. Brush, 2008, Untangling safeguard and pro-
duction coordination effects in long-term buyer-supplier relation-
ships, AMJ, 51: 785–807; M. Ju, J. Murray, M. Kotabe, & G. Gao, 2011, 
Reducing distributor opportunism in the export market, JWB, 46: 
487–496.
29 C. Niezen & W. Weller, 2006, Procurement as strategy, HBR, 
September: 22–23.
30 Y. Li, E. Xie, H. Teo, & M. W. Peng, 2010, Formal control and 
social control in domestic and international buyer-supplier relation-
ships, JOM, 28: 333–344.
31 W. C. Benton & M. Maloni, 2005, The influence of power driven 
buyer/supplier relationships on supply chain satisfaction, JOM, 23: 
1–22; T. R. Crook & J. Combs, 2007, Sources and consequences of 
bargaining power in supply chains, JOM, 25: 546–555.
32 D. Krause, R. Handfield, & B. Tyler, 2007, The relationships be-
tween supplier development, commitment, social capital accumula-
tion, and performance improvement, JOM, 25: 528–545.
33 N. Morgan, A. Kaleka, & R. Gooner, 2007, Focal supplier op-
portunism in supermarket retailer category management, JOM, 25: 
512–527.
34 C. Corbett, 2006, Global diffusion of ISO 9000 certification 
through supply chains, MSOM, 8: 330–350.
35 M. Dixon, K. Freeman, & N. Toman, 2010, Stop trying to delight 
your customers, HBR, July: 116–122; T. Eng & J. Spickett-Jones, 
2009, An investigation of marketing capabilities and upgrading 
performance of manufacturers in mainland China and Hong Kong, 
JWB, 44: 463–475; D. Griffith, G. Yalcinkaya, & R. Calatone, 2010, 
Do marketing capabilities consistently mediate effects of firm in-
tangible capital on performance across institutional environments? 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 14   Competing on Marketing and Supply Chain Management	
491
JWB, 45: 217–227; A. Krasnikov & S. Jayachandran, 2008, The rela-
tive impact of marketing, R&D, and operations capabilities on firm 
performance, JMktg, 72: 1–11; A. Meckelprang & A. Nair, 2010, 
Relationship between just-in-time manufacturing practices and per-
formance, JOM, 28: 283–302; R. Priem, 2007, A consumer perspec-
tive on value creation, AMR, 32: 219–235; D. Vorhies, R. Morgan, &  
C. Autry, 2009, Product-market strategy and the marketing 
capabilities of the firm, SMJ, 30: 1310–1334.
36 K. Dooley, T. Yan, S. Mohan, & M. Gopalakrishnan, 2010, Inven-
tory management and the bullwhip effect during the 2007–2009 
recession, JSCM, 46: 12–18; L. Sprague & T. Callarman, 2010, Supply 
management is not a beer game, JSCM, 46: 9–11.
37 K. Favaro, T. Romberger, & D. Meer, 2009, Five rules for retailing 
in a recession, HBR, April: 64–72; J. Quelch & K. Jocz, 2009, How to 
market in a downturn, HBR, April: 52–59.
38 Economist, 2006, Chain reactions, June 17: 14–18.
39 S. Modi & V. Mabert, 2007, Supplier development, JOM, 25: 
42–64.
40 S. Fournier & L. Lee, 2009, Getting brand communities right, 
HBR, April: 105–111.
41 M. Kotabe, R. Parente, & J. Murray, 2007, Antecedents and out-
comes of modular production in the Brazilian automobile industry, 
JIBS, 38: 84–106.
42 P. Kotler, N. Rackham, & S. Krishnaswamy, 2006, Ending the war 
between sales and marketing, HBR, July: 68–78.
43 J. Heineke & M. Davis, 2007, The emergence of service operations 
management as an academic discipline, JOM, 25: 364–374.
44 R. Chase & U. Apte, 2007, A history of research in service opera-
tions, JOM, 25: 375–386.
45 N. Morgan, D. Vorhies, & C. Mason, 2009, Market orientation, 
marketing capabilities, and firm performance, SMJ, 30: 909–920; 
J. Murray, G. Gao, M. Kotabe, & N. Zhou, 2007, Assessing measure-
ment invariance of export market orientation, JIMktg, 15: 41–62.
46 W. Dou, H. Li, N. Zhou, & C. Su, 2010, Exploring relationship 
satisfaction between global professional service firms and local 
clients in emerging markets, JIBS, 41: 1198–1217; G. Hoetker, 2005, 
How much do you know versus how well I know you, SMJ, 26: 75–96; 
R. Jean, R. Sinkovics, & S. T. Cavusgil, 2010, Enhancing interna-
tional customer–supplier relationships through IT resources, JIBS, 
41: 1218–1239; J. Singh, P. Lentz, & E. Nijssen, 2011, First- and second-
order effects of consumers’ institutional logics on firm-consumer re-
lationships, JIBS, 42: 307–333; C. Su, Z. Yang, G. Zhuang, N. Zhou, & 
W. Dou, 2009, Interpersonal influence as an alternative channel 
communication behavior in emerging markets, JIBS, 40: 668–689.
47 BW, 2005, Rolls-Royce, at your service, November 14: 92–93.
48 F. Gu, K. Hung, & D. Tse, 2008, When does guanxi matter? JMktg, 
72: 12–28.
49  M. W. Peng & Y. Luo, 2000, Managerial ties and firm perfor-
mance in a transition economy, AMJ, 43: 486–501.
50 P. Ellis, 2006, Market orientation and performance, JMS, 43: 
1089–1107.
51 K. Zhou, J. Brown, C. Dev, & S. Agarwal, 2007, The effects of 
customer and competitor orientations on performance in global 
markets, JIBS, 38: 303–319.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Ruffer/Caro/Alamy Limited
Chapter 
15 
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
	 15-1	 explain staffing decisions with a focus on 
expatriates.
	15-2	 identify training and development needs for 
expatriates and host-country nationals.
	15-3	 discuss compensation and performance 
appraisal issues.
	15-4	 understand labor relations in both home and 
host countries.
	15-5	 discuss how the institution-based and 
resource-based views shed additional light 
on HRM.
	15-6	 participate in three leading debates 
concerning HRM.
	 15-7	 draw implications for action.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Managing Human 
Resources Globally
In 2000, European Aeronautic Defence and Space 
Company (EADS) was created by a merger of the 
French Aerospatiale-Matra, the German DASA, and 
the Spanish CASA. It aimed to join the strengths of 
three European nations with strong engineering tra-
ditions, to achieve market leadership, and to compete 
with world leaders such as Boeing and Lockheed 
Martin. However, merging firms from three different 
countries also meant bringing together three different 
organizational cultures that, in turn, were based on 
different national cultures. Human resource manage-
ment teams faced important challenges, in particular 
due to cross-country mobility and cultural diversity.
Individuals from the three companies were se-
lected to work on project teams outside their home 
country. These expatriates served important roles in 
facilitating the integration process. As cultural “inter-
face,” they were to mediate between different systems 
of meaning and action in order to achieve mutual ad-
aptation. English was adopted as an official language, 
which enables expatriates to communicate better 
with others in their team. However, expatriates also 
faced the challenge of integrating into another culture. 
Even though it was one company, the national culture 
where they worked was quite different. EADS consid-
ers this cultural diversity as an advantage, because it 
stimulates creativity and favors the dynamics of the 
group. In fact, expatriates had the opportunity to learn 
about different values that led to ideas and solutions 
that varied according to the problems they faced.
However, cultural diversity created personal chal-
lenges for team members as they were confronted 
with different ways of communicating and collabo-
rating. Certain concepts of management such as 
cooperation or leadership have different meanings 
and interpretations in France and in Germany, which 
often led to misunderstandings. For instance, for 
French engineers, the notion of “cooperation” im-
plies that the goal should be achieved through work 
on an individual basis, whereas for German engi-
neers, the term “cooperation” means teamwork 
with the objective to obtain a common goal. Conse-
quently, when working in German teams, the French 
sometimes felt frustrated by their lack of freedom 
and the necessity to reach a consensus. In the same 
way, when working in France, Germans attempted to 
find a consensus and had the impression that their 
French partners were individualists and difficult to 
predict. In the same way, expatriates learned about 
different conceptions of leadership. For example, 
German expatriates discovered that French author-
ity was oriented towards paternalistic elements 
and personal power, favored by centralized man-
agement structures. In contrast, French expatriates 
O p e n i n g  C a s e
EADS: Managing Human Resources in a European Context
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

494	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
How can firms such as EADS select, retain, reward, and motivate the best em-
ployees that they can attract? How can they link the management of people from 
diverse cultural and professional backgrounds with firm performance? These are 
some of the crucial questions driving this chapter. This chapter is devoted to human 
resource management (HRM)—activities that attract, select, and manage employ-
ees.1 As a function, HRM used to be called “personnel” and before that “records 
management.” Few of you are HRM experts, but everyone can appreciate HRM’s 
rising importance just by looking at the evolution of the terminology. The term 
“HRM” clearly indicates that people are key resources of the firm to be actively 
managed and developed (see PengAtlas Map 4.3). In the last two decades, HRM 
has become more important, and it often sports the word “strategic” to make it 
“strategic HRM.” From a lowly administrative support function, HRM is increasingly 
recognized as a strategic function that, together with other crucial functions such as 
finance and marketing, helps accomplish organizational effectiveness and financial 
performance.2
Human resource management 
(HRM)
Activities that attract, select, and 
manage employees.
were surprised that German authority was mainly 
oriented towards function and professional compe-
tence and that German managers and engineers of-
ten graduated from public universities (in contrast to 
France, where most managers and engineers gradu-
ated from highly selective and prestigious French 
“Grandes Écoles” such as École Polytechnique and 
École Centrale).
Two metaphors highlight these different culturally 
embedded characteristics and conceptions of coop-
eration and leadership. The German organization has 
been described as a “well-oiled machine.” There is a 
clear technical structure to the regulation of functions 
in terms of tasks and responsibilities, and of process-
es in terms of sequential flow. The organization is un-
derstood as a heterarchical structure, the functions 
and goals of which are achieved—detached from 
personalized authority—according to its own agreed 
rules. In contrast, the French organization is like a 
“pyramid of people.” Management holds a position of 
authority at the top of the pyramid, with subordinate 
participants below. The organization is understood as 
a hierarchical structure, in which interpersonal rela-
tions develop and personalized authority figures are 
needed to regulate power relations. As power is con-
centrated at the top of the pyramid, the persons be-
low have to defend themselves by acting individually.
The human resource managers of EADS were 
aware that it was important to explain such cultural 
characteristics and differences to expatriates sys-
tematically in order to avoid conflicts. The company, 
therefore, created its own corporate university 
for executive education, called Corporate Business 
Academy (CBA), which offered intercultural training 
seminars and helped to prepare expatriates for their 
work experience abroad. EADS also developed spe-
cific processes to build a new organizational culture 
based on teamwork. Several integration projects 
were conducted, and more than 80 employees 
worked on the harmonization and integration of hu-
man resources. The experiences of the expatriates 
and the initiatives taken to build a new corporate 
culture allowed EADS to successfully manage its 
human resources during the integration process, 
which is a crucial success factor in international 
mergers.
Sources: This case was written by Professors Christoph Barmeyer 
(Passau University) and Ulrike Mayrhofer (University Lyon 3). It was 
based on (1) C. Barmeyer & U. Mayrhofer, 2002, Le management in-
tercultural: Facteur de reussite des fusion-acquisitions internationals? 
Gerer et Comprendre, 70: 24–33; (2) C. Barmeyer & U. Mayrhofer, 2007, 
Culture et relations de pouvoir: Une analyse longitudinal du groupe 
EADS, Gerer et Compredre, 88: 4–12; (3) C. Barmeyer & U. Mayrhofer, 
2008. The contribution of intercultural management to the successes of 
international mergers and acquisitions: An analysis of the EADS Group, 
International Business Review, 17(1): 28–38.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 15   Managing Human Resources Globally	
495
This chapter first reviews the four main areas of HRM: (1) staffing, (2) training 
and development, (3) compensation and performance appraisal, and (4) labor relations. 
Then, we use the institution-based and resource-based views to shed light on these 
issues. Debates and extensions follow.
15-1 Staffing
Staffing refers to HRM activities associated with hiring employees and filling po-
sitions.3 In multinational enterprises (MNEs), there are two types of employees: 
host-country nationals (HCNs, often known as “locals”) and expatriates (expats for 
short—non-native employees who work in a foreign country). Among expatriates, 
there are two types: (1) Parent-country nationals (PCNs) come from the parent 
country of the MNE and work at its local subsidiary. (2) Third-country nationals 
(TCNs) come from neither the parent country nor the host country.
The majority of an MNE’s employees would be HCNs. For example, of Siemens’s 
400,000 employees worldwide, only about 300 executives are expatriates, and an-
other 2,000 executives are short-term assignees abroad. Of these 2,300 executives, 
about 60% are PCNs (Germans) and 40% are TCNs (from countries other than 
Germany and the host country). In international HRM, one leading concern is 
how to staff the top executive positions abroad, such as the subsidiary CEO, country 
manager, and key functional heads (such as CFO and CIO). Of the three choices 
for top positions, PCNs, TCNs, and HCNs all have their pros and cons (Table 15.1). 
The staffing choices are not random and are often a reflection of the strategic pos-
ture of the MNE—as discussed next.
15-1a Ethnocentric, Polycentric, and Geocentric 
Approaches in Staffing
There are three primary staffing approaches when making staffing decisions for 
top positions at subsidiaries. An ethnocentric approach emphasizes the norms and 
Learning Objective
Explain staffing decisions with 
a focus on expatriates.
15-1
Host-country national (HCN)
An individual from the host 
country who works for an MNE.
Expatriation
The process of selecting, 
managing, and motivating 
expatriates to work abroad.
Parent-country national (PCN)
An individual who comes from 
the parent country of the MNE 
and works at its local subsidiary.
Third-country national (TCN)
An individual who is from neither 
the parent country nor the host 
country of the MNE.
Ethnocentric approach
An emphasis on the norms and 
practices of the parent company 
(and the parent country of the 
MNE) by relying on PCNs.
Staffing
HRM activities associated with 
hiring employees and filling 
positions.
Table 15.1
Parent-, Third-, and Host-Country Nationals
Advantages
Disadvantages
Parent-country nationals 
(PCNs)
  	 Control by headquarters is facilitated
  	 PCNs may be the most qualified people
  	 Managers are given international experience
  	 Opportunities for HCNs are limited
  	 Adaptation may take a long time
  	 PCNs are usually very expensive
Third-country nationals 
(TCNs)
  	 TCNs may bridge the gap between 
headquarters and the subsidiary (and 
between PCNs and HCNs)
  	 TCNs may be less expensive than PCNs
  	 Host government and employees may 
resent TCNs
  	 Similar to disadvantages for PCNs
Host-country nationals 
(HCNs)
  	 Language and cultural barriers are eliminated
  	 Continuity of management improves, since 
HCNs stay longer in positions
  	 Usually cheaper 
  	 Control and coordination by headquarters  
may be impeded
  	 HCNs may have limited career opportunity
  	 International experience for PCNs are 
limited
Source: Adapted from P. Dowling & D. Welch, 2005, International Human Resource Management, 4th ed. (p. 63), Cincinnati: South-Western Cengage Learning.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

496	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
practices of the parent company (and the parent country of the MNE) by relying on 
PCNs. PCNs can not only ensure and facilitate control and coordination by head-
quarters, they may also be the best qualified people for the job because of special 
skills and experience. A perceived lack of talent and skills of HCNs often neces-
sitates an ethnocentric approach. In addition, a cadre of internationally mobile 
and experienced managers, who are often PCNs, can emerge to spearhead further 
expansion around the world.
A polycentric approach is the opposite of an ethnocentric approach. A polycen-
tric approach focuses on the norms and practices of the host country. In short, 
“when in Rome, do as the Romans do.” Who will be the best managers if we have an 
operation in Rome? Naturally Roman (or Italian) managers—technically, HCNs. 
HCNs have no language and cultural barriers. Unlike PCNs who often pack their 
bags and move after several years, HCNs stay in their positions longer, thus pro-
viding more continuity of management. Further, placing HCNs in top subsidiary 
positions sends a morale-boosting signal to other HCNs who may feel that they can 
reach the top too (at least in that subsidiary).
Disregarding nationality, a geocentric approach focuses on finding the most 
suitable managers, who can be PCNs, HCNs, or TCNs. In other words, a geocentric 
approach is “color blind”—the color of a manager’s passport does not matter. For 
a geographically dispersed MNE, a geocentric approach can facilitate the emer-
gence of a corporate-wide culture and identity. This can reduce the typical “us ver-
sus them” feeling in firms that use either ethnocentric or polycentric approaches. 
On the other hand, molding managers from a variety of nationalities is a lot more 
complex than integrating individuals from two (parent and host) countries (see 
the Opening Case).
Overall, there is a systematic link between MNEs’ strategic postures (see 
Chapter 13) and staffing approaches (Table 15.2). MNEs pursuing a home rep-
lication strategy usually pursue an ethnocentric approach, staffing subsidiaries 
with PCNs. MNEs interested in a localization strategy are typically polycentric 
in nature, placing HCNs to head subsidiaries. Global standardization or trans-
national strategies often necessitate a geocentric approach, resulting in a mix 
of HCNs, PCNs, and TCNs.4 As more firms, such as Samsung, become more 
global in their operations, they increasingly have to look beyond the pool of 
their PCNs to attract and nurture talented HCNs and TCNs (see Emerging 
Markets 15.1).
Polycentric approach
An emphasis on the norms and 
practices of the host country.
Geocentric approach
A focus on finding the most 
suitable managers, who can be 
PCNs, HCNs, or TCNs.
Table 15.2
Multinational Strategies and Staffing Approaches
MNE strategies
Typical staffing 
approaches
Typical top managers  
at local subsidiaries
Home replication
Ethnocentric
Parent-country nationals
Localization
Polycentric
Host-country nationals
Global 
standardization
Geocentric
A mix of parent-, host-, and  
third-country nationals
Transnational
Geocentric
A mix of parent-, host-, and  
third-country nationals
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 15   Managing Human Resources Globally	
497
Founded in 1938, Samsung Group is South Korea’s 
leading conglomerate. It has 270,000 employees in 
470 units in 67 countries, with $227 billion in annual 
revenues. The flagship company within Samsung 
Group is Samsung Electronics Corporation (SEC). 
With $136 billion revenues in 2010 (more than Apple 
and Sony combined), SEC is the largest electron-
ics firm in the world. In addition to SEC, other ma-
jor Samsung Group companies include Samsung 
Life Insurance (the 13th largest life insurer in the 
world), Samsung C&T Corporation (one of the 
world’s largest developers of skyscrapers and solar/
wind power plants), and Samsung Heavy Industries 
(the world’s largest shipbuilder). Samsung’s perfor-
mance has been impressive. Despite the Great Re-
cession, SEC’s profits have been higher than those 
of its five largest Japanese rivals (Sony, Panasonic, 
Toshiba, Hitachi, and Sharp) combined. In 2010, SEC 
achieved record profits of $14 billion, compared with 
$12 billion in profits for Intel and less than $1 billion in 
profits for Panasonic as well as $3.2 billion in losses  
for Sony.
Clearly, Samsung has done something right. How-
ever, it has not been easy. To increasingly compete 
outside Korea, Samsung needs to attract more non-
Korean talents. But given its traditionally rigid hierarchi-
cal structure and the language barrier, its initial efforts 
to attract and retain non-Korean talents were disap-
pointing. In response, Samsung Group headquarters 
in 1997 set up a unique internal consulting unit, the 
Global Strategy Group, which reports directly to the 
CEO. Members of the Global Strategy Group are non-
Korean MBA graduates from top Western business 
schools who have worked for leading multinationals 
such as Goldman Sachs, Intel, and McKinsey. They 
are required to spend two years in Seoul and study 
basic Korean. The group’s mission, according to its 
website, is to “(1) develop a pool of global managers, 
(2) enhance Samsung’s business performance, and 
(3) globalize Samsung.”
Global Strategy teams work on various internal 
strategy projects for different Samsung companies. 
Each team has a project leader, which gives the in-
dividual an opportunity to take on a leadership role 
in a high-level consulting project much earlier than 
a typical consulting career provides. Each team has 
one to two global strategists. It also has a project 
coordinator, who is a senior Korean manager acting 
as a liaison between the team and the management 
of the (internal) client company. On average, proj-
ects last three months and typically involve some 
overseas travel. Starting with 20 global strategists 
in the class of 1997, nearly 400 projects have been 
completed in 15 years. These projects help global 
strategists form informal ties and expose them to 
the organizational culture. After two years, global 
strategists would “graduate” and be assigned to 
Samsung subsidiaries, many of which are in their 
home countries.
Despite good-faith efforts by both Korean and 
non-Korean sides, the success of the Global Strategy 
Group is anything but assured. Overall, cultural inte-
gration is a tough nut to crack. Of the 208 non-Korean 
MBAs who joined the group since its inception, 135 
were still with Samsung as of 2011. The most success-
ful ones are those who have taken the greatest pains 
to fit into the Korean culture, such as eating kimchi 
and drinking Korean wine at dinner parties. Before 
the establishment of the Global Strategy Group, not a 
single non-Korean MBA lasted more than three years 
at SEC. With the Global Strategy Group as a cohort 
group, one third of the non-Korean MBAs in the first 
class of 1997 were still with SEC three years later 
(in 2000). Over the next decade, the retention rate 
went up to two thirds. Three experts noted how the 
non-Korean members of the Global Strategy Group 
Samsung’s Global Strategy Group 
E m e r g i n g  M a r k e t s  1 5 . 1
Danny Lehman/Corbis; Björn Meyer/sitox/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

498	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
have slowly, but surely, globalized Samsung’s corpo-
rate DNA:
The effects of these employees on the organiza-
tion have been something like that of a steady 
trickle of water on stone. As more people from the 
Global Strategy Group are assigned to SEC, their  
Korean colleagues have had to change their work 
styles and mindsets to accommodate Western-
ized practices, slowly and steadily making the 
environment more friendly to ideas from abroad. 
Today, SEC goes out of its way to ask the Global 
Strategy Group for more newly hired employees.
Sources: Based on (1) S. Chang, 2008, Sony vs. Samsung, Singapore: Wiley; (2) T. Khanna, J. Song, & K. Lee, 2011, The paradox of Samsung’s rise, 
Harvard Business Review, July: 142–147; (3) Samsung Global Strategy Group, 2012, gsg.samsung.com.  
15-1b The Role of Expatriates
Expatriation is the process of selecting, managing, and motivating expatriates to 
work abroad. Shown in Figure 15.1 and exemplified in the Opening and Closing 
Cases, expatriates play four important roles:
 	 Expatriates are strategists representing the interests of the MNE’s headquar-
ters.5 Expatriates, especially PCNs who have a long tenure with a particular 
MNE, may have internalized the parent firm’s values and norms. They may 
not only enable headquarters to control subsidiaries, but also facilitate the 
socialization process to bring subsidiaries into an MNE’s global “orbit.”
 	 Expatriates act as daily managers to run operations and to build local capabili-
ties. One of the reasons that they are sent in the first place is often due to a 
lack of local management talent.
 	 Expatriates are also ambassadors.6 Representing headquarters, they build rela-
tionships with local managers, employees, suppliers, customers, and officials. 
Importantly, expatriates also represent the interests of the subsidiaries when 
interacting with headquarters.
 	 Finally, expatriates are trainers for their replacements.7 Over time, some local-
ization in staffing is inevitable, calling for expatriates to train local employees.
15-1c Expatriate Failure and Selection	
Few expatriates can simultaneously play the challenging multidimensional roles 
effectively.8 It is not surprising that expatriate failure rates are high. “Expatriate 
failure” can be defined differently, such as (1) premature (earlier-than-expected) 
Expatriation
The process of selecting, man-
aging, and motivating expatriates 
to work abroad.
Figure 15.1
The Roles of Expatriates
MNE
headquarters in
parent country
Subsidiary in
host country
Strategist
Daily manager
Ambassador
Trainer
Expatriate roles
Sources: Adapted from P. Dowling & D. Welch, 2005, International Human Resource Management, 4th ed. (p. 98), 
Cincinnati: South-Western Cengage Learning.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 15   Managing Human Resources Globally	
499
return, (2) unmet business objectives, and (3) unfulfilled career-development ob-
jectives. Using the easiest-to-observe measure of “premature return,” studies in the 
1980s reported that 76% of US MNEs have more than 10% of expatriates failing, 
and that 41% and 24% of European and Japanese MNEs, respectively, have com-
parable numbers of failure cases.9 More recent studies find failure rates to have 
declined a little.10 However, given the much larger number of expatriates now (at 
present, over one million from the United States alone), expatriate failure rates are 
still high enough to justify attention.
A variety of reasons can cause expatriate failure. Surveys of US and European 
MNEs find that the inability of the spouse and the family to adjust is the leading 
cause. In the case of Japanese MNEs, the leading cause is the inability to cope 
with the larger scope of responsibilities overseas. It usually is a combination of work-
related and family-related problems that leads to expatriate failures.
Given the importance of expatriates and their reported high failure rates, how 
can firms enhance the odds for expatriate success? Figure 15.2 outlines a model 
for expatriate selection, with six underlying factors grouped along situational and 
individual dimensions. In terms of situational dimensions, both headquarters’ and 
subsidiary’s preferences are important (Table 15.2). In some Asian countries where 
seniority is highly respected,11 younger expatriates may be ineffective. Also, it is 
preferable for expatriates to have some command (or, better yet, mastery) of the 
local language.
In terms of individual dimensions, both technical ability and cross-cultural 
adaptability are a must. Desirable attributes include a positive attitude, emotional 
stability, and previous international experience.12 Last (but certainly not the least), 
spouse and family preferences must enter the equation.13 The accompanying 
spouse may have left behind a career and a social network. He or she has to find  
Sources: Adapted from P. Dowling & D. Welch, 2005, International Human Resource Management, 4th ed. (p. 98), 
Cincinnati: South-Western Cengage Learning.
Figure 15.2
Factors in Expatriate Selection
Corporate
headquarters
preferences
Language
Technical
ability and
expertise
Spouse
and family
preferences
Host country/
subsidiary
preferences
Cross-cultural
adaptability
Expatriate
selection
decision
Situational
Individual
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

500	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
meaningful endeavors abroad. (To protect local jobs, many countries do not per-
mit the spouse to work.) It is not surprising that frustration permeates many fami-
lies, thus leading to expatriate failure.
Expatriates are expensive, and failure rates are high in general. But middle-aged 
(forty-something) expatriates are the most expensive, because the employer often 
has to provide a heavy allowance for children’s education. High-quality schools are 
expensive—in places such as Manila, Mexico City, and Moscow, international or 
American schools cost $10,000 to $30,000 per year. Unfortunately, these expatri-
ates also have the highest percentage of failure rates in part because of their family 
baggage. In response, many MNEs choose to (1) select expatriates in their fifties, 
whose children may have left the home, and/or (2) promote younger expatriates in 
their late twenties and early thirties, who may not yet have a family (or children). 
The younger expatriates typically have no need for a large home and no school-
age kids. The second preference has strong implications for students studying this 
book now: these overseas opportunities may come sooner than you expect—are 
you ready?
15-2 Training and Development
Training is specific preparation to do a particular job. Development refers to longer-
term, broader preparation to improve managerial skills for a better career.14 Train-
ing and development programs focus on two groups: (1) expatriates and (2) HCNs. 
Each is discussed in turn.
15-2a Training for Expatriates
The importance and cost of expatriates and their reported high failure rates ne-
cessitate training (see the Opening Case). Yet, about one third of MNEs do not 
provide any pre-departure training for expatriates—other than wishing them 
“good luck.”15 Even for firms that provide training, many offer short, one-day-type 
programs that are inadequate. Not surprisingly, many MNEs and expatriates are 
“burned” for such underinvestment in prepa-
ration for arguably some of the most challeng-
ing managerial assignments.
Ideally, training length and rigor should 
vary according to the length of stay for expa-
triates. For a short stay, training can be short 
and less rigorous. Sometimes survival-level 
language training (such as “Where is the la-
dy’s room?” and “I’d like a beer”) would suf-
fice. However, for a long stay of several years, 
it is imperative that longer and more rigorous 
training be provided, especially for neophyte 
expatriates. This would entail more extensive 
language training and sensitivity training, 
preferably with an immersion approach (train-
ing conducted in a foreign language/culture 
environment). More enlightened firms now 
involve the spouse in expatriate training.
Learning Objective
Identify training and 
development needs for 
expatriates and host-country 
nationals.
15-2
Training
Specific preparation to do a 
particular job.
Development
Long-term, broader preparation 
to improve managerial skills for a 
better career.
What steps can expatriates take to prepare for an assign-
ment and improve their chances of success?
RIA Novosti/Alamy Limited
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 15   Managing Human Resources Globally	
501
15-2b Development for Returning Expatriates (Repatriates)
Many expatriate assignments are not “one shot” deals; instead, they are viewed as 
part of the accumulation of a manager’s experience and expertise for their long-
term career development in the firm.16 While in theory this idea sounds good, in 
practice, many MNEs do a lousy job managing repatriation—the process of facili-
tating the return of expatriates (see Table 15.3).
Chief among the problems is career anxiety experienced by repatriates (re-
turning expatriates). One leading concern is “What kind of position will I have 
when I return?” Prior to departure, many expatriates are encouraged by their boss: 
“You should take (or volunteer for) this overseas assignment. It’s a smart move for 
your career.” Theoretically, this is known as a psychological contract—an informal 
understanding of expected delivery of benefits in the future for current services. 
However, a psychological contract is easy to violate. Bosses may have changed their 
mind, or they may have been replaced by new bosses. Violated psychological con-
tracts naturally lead to disappointments.
Many returning expatriates experience painful adjustment in the workplace. 
Ethnocentrism continues to characterize many MNEs: knowledge transfer is typi-
cally one way—from headquarters to subsidiaries via expatriates. However, few (or 
none) at headquarters seem interested in learning from expatriates’ overseas ex-
perience and knowledge.17 Having been “big fish in a small pond” in subsidiaries, 
they often feel like “small fish in a big pond” at headquarters. Instead of being 
promoted, many end up taking a comparable (or lower-level) position.
Returning expatriates may also experience a loss of status. Overseas, they are 
“big shots,” rubbing shoulders with local politicians and visiting dignitaries. They 
often command lavish expatriate premiums, with chauffeured cars and maids. 
However, most of these perks disappear once they return.
Lastly, the spouse and the children may also find it difficult to adjust back home. 
The feeling of being a part of a relatively high-class, close-knit expatriate commu-
nity is gone. Instead, life at home may now seem lonely and dull. In the United 
States, some wives of Honda executives enjoy being Avon Ladies who are involved 
in direct selling. When the long-anticipated repatriation notice comes, they are 
excited about expanding their business back to Japan. However, prior to returning 
home, all husbands receive a letter from headquarters, demanding that their wives 
quit direct selling. This is because direct selling is viewed as a low-prestige occupa-
tion not worthy for the spouses of executives at a prestigious firm such as Honda—
doesn’t Honda pay executives enough? The letter ends with a warning that if their 
wives are found to continue to hawk Avon cosmetics in Japan, their husbands will 
be fired.18  Likewise, children, being out of touch with current slang, sports, and 
fashion, may struggle to regain acceptance into peer groups. Having been brought 
Repatriation
The process of facilitating the 
expatriate’s return.
Repatriate
Returning expatriate.
Psychological contract
An informal understanding of 
expected delivery of benefits in 
the future for current services.
Table 15.3
Problems Associated with Repatriation
  	 Career anxiety—what kind of position will I have when I return (if I will have a position)?
  	 Work adjustment—from a big fish in a small pond (at the subsidiary) to a small fish in a 
big pond (at headquarters)
  	 Loss of status and pay—expatriate premiums are gone, chauffeured cars and maids are 
probably unavailable
  	 Difficult for the spouse and children to adjust—“going home” is not that easy
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

502	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
up overseas, (re)adjusting back to the home country educational system may be es-
pecially problematic. Some of the returning Japanese teenagers committed suicide 
after failing to make the grade back home.
Repatriation, if not managed well, can be traumatic not only for expatriates 
and their families, but also for the firm. Unhappy returning expatriates do not 
last very long. Approximately one in four exits the firm within one year. Since a US 
MNE spends, on average, around one million dollars on each expatriate over the 
duration of a foreign assignment, losing that individual can wipe out any return on 
investment.19 Worse yet, the returnee may end up working for a rival firm.
The best way to reduce expatriate turnover is a career-development plan. A 
good plan also comes with a mentor (also known as a champion, sponsor, or god-
father).20 The mentor helps alleviate the “out-of-sight, out-of-mind” feeling by en-
suring that the expatriate is not forgotten at headquarters and by helping secure a 
challenging position for the expatriate upon return.
Overall, while there are numerous “horror stories,” bear in mind that there are 
many high-profile cases of expatriate success as well. For example, Carlos Ghosn, 
after successfully turning around Nissan as a PCN, went on to become CEO of the 
parent company, Renault. To reach the top at most MNEs today, international ex-
perience is a must. Therefore, despite the drawbacks, aspiring managers should not 
be deterred. Who said being a manager was easy?
15-2c Training and Development for Host-Country Nationals
While most international HRM practice and research focus on expatriates, it is 
important to note that HCNs deserve significant attention for their training and 
development needs. In the ongoing “war for talent” in Brazil, Russia, India, China 
(BRIC), and other emerging economies, whether employers can provide better 
training and development opportunities often becomes a key determining factor 
on whether top talent is retained or not. To stem the tide of turnover, many MNEs 
now have formal career-development plans and processes for hot-shot HCNs in 
these countries. GE, for example, has endeavored to make promising managers in 
China stimulated, energized, and recognized. This has resulted in a managerial 
turnover rate of “only” 7% per year, substantially lower than the nationwide aver-
age of 40% for HCNs at the managerial rank working at multinationals in China.
15-3 Compensation and Performance Appraisal
As an HRM area, compensation refers to the determination of salary and bene-
fits.21 Performance appraisal entails the evaluation of employee performance for 
promotion, retention, or termination purposes. Three related issues are discussed 
here: (1) compensation for expatriates, (2) compensation for HCNs, and (3) per-
formance appraisal.
15-3a Compensation for Expatriates
A leading issue in international HRM is how to properly compensate, motivate, 
and retain expatriates. There are two primary approaches: (1) going rate and 
(2) balance sheet (Table 15.4).
Learning Objective
Discuss compensation and 
performance appraisal issues.
15-3
Compensation
The determination of salary and 
benefits.
Performance appraisal
The evaluation of employee per-
formance for promotion, reten-
tion, or termination purposes.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 15   Managing Human Resources Globally	
503
The going rate approach pays expatriates the going rate for comparable posi-
tions in a host country. When Lenovo sends Chinese expatriates to New York, it 
pays them the going rate for comparable positions for HCNs and other expatriates 
in New York. This approach fosters equality among PCNs, TCNs, and HCNs in the 
same subsidiary. This would be attractive for PCNs and TCNs to work in a location 
where pay is higher than in their home countries. This approach excels in its sim-
plicity. Expatriates also develop strong identification with the host country.
However, the going rate for the same position differs around the world, with 
the United States leading in managerial compensation. For example, the typical 
US CEO commands a total compensation package of over $2 million, whereas the 
British CEO fetches less than $1 million, the Japanese CEO $500,000, and the 
Chinese CEO $200,000. According to the going-rate approach, returning Lenovo 
expatriates, having been used to New York–level high salaries, will have a hard 
time accepting relatively lower Beijing–level salaries, thus triggering repatriation 
problems.
A second approach is the balance sheet approach, which balances the cost-of-
living differences based on parent-country levels and adds a financial inducement 
to make the package attractive. This is the most widely used method in expatri-
ate compensation. There is a historical reason for this preference, because until 
recently, a majority of expatriates went from higher-pay developed economies to 
lower-pay locations. In this case, the going-rate approach would not work, because 
no expatriate from New York would accept the going rate in Beijing. The balance 
sheet approach essentially offers “New York Plus” for Beijing-bound expatriates. 
The “Plus” is nontrivial: additional financial inducement (premium), cost-of-living 
allowance (such as housing and children’s education), and hardship allowance. 
(Although fewer companies now pay a hardship allowance for Beijing, many MNEs 
used to.) Table 15.5 shows one hypothetical example. Adding housing and taxation 
that the MNE pays (not shown in the table), the total cost to the firm may reach 
$300,000.
The balance sheet approach has two advantages (see Table 15.4). First, there is 
equity between assignments for the same employee, whose compensation is always 
anchored to the going rate in the parent country. Second, it also facilitates repa-
triation, with relatively little fluctuation between overseas and parent country pay 
despite the cost-of-living differences around the world.
However, there are three disadvantages. The first is cost. Using the example in 
Table 15.5, the cost can add to $1 million for a three-year tour of duty. The second 
disadvantage is the great disparities in pay between expatriates (especially PCNs) 
and HCNs, causing resentment among HCNs.
Going rate approach
A compensation approach that 
pays expatriates the prevailing 
(going) rate for comparable posi-
tions in a host country.
Balance sheet approach
A compensation approach 
that balances the cost of living 
differences relative to parent 
country levels and adds a finan-
cial inducement to make the 
package attractive.
Table 15.4
Going Rate versus Balance Sheet Approach in Expatriate Compensation
Advantages
Disadvantages
Going rate
  	 Equality among parent-, third-, and host- 
country nationals in the same location
  	 Simplicity
  	 Identification with host country
  	 Variation between assignments in different 
locations for the same employee
  	 Re-entry problem if the going rate of parent 
country is less than that of host country
Balance sheet
  	 Equity between assignments for the  
same employee
  	 Facilitates expatriate re-entry
  	 Costly and complex to administer
  	 Great disparities between expatriates and  
host-country nationals
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

504	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
Lastly, the balance sheet approach is organizationally complex to administer. 
For a US firm operating in South Africa, both the American PCNs and Australian 
TCNs are likely to be compensated more than the South African HCNs. The situ-
ation becomes more complicated when the US firm recruits South African MBAs 
before they finish business school training in the United States. Should they be 
paid as locally hired HCNs in South Africa or as expatriates from the United 
States? What about TCNs from Kenya, Morocco, and Nigeria who also finish US 
MBA training and are interested in going to work for the US MNE in South Africa? 
Ideally, firms pay for positions regardless of colors of passports. However, the mar-
ket for expatriate compensation is not quite there yet.
15-3b Compensation for Host-Country Nationals
At the bottom end of the compensation scale, low-level HCNs, especially those in 
developing countries, have relatively little bargaining power. The very reason that 
they have a job at the MNE subsidiaries is often their low labor cost—that is, they 
are willing to accept wage levels substantially lower than those in developed coun-
tries (see Table 15.6). Low-level HCNs compare their pay to the farmhands sweat-
ing in the fields and making much less, or to the army of unemployed who make 
nothing but still have a family to feed (see PengAtlas Map 4.3 and 4.4). Despite 
some social activist groups’ accusations of “exploitation” by MNEs, MNEs typically 
pay higher wages relative to similar positions in developing countries.
On the other hand, HCNs in management and professional positions have in-
creasing bargaining power. MNEs are rushing into emerging economies, whereby lo-
cal supply of top talent is limited. This may be hard to believe, but the most populous 
Table 15.6
Compensation for Host-Country Nationals in Asia (Average Monthly Pay in US$)
Dhaka,
Bangladesh
Ho Chi 
Minh City, 
Vietnam
Jakarta,
Indonesia
Shenyang,
(north) 
China
Shenzhen,
(south) 
China
Taipei,
Taiwan
Seoul,
Korea
Yokohama,
Japan
$47
$100
$148
$197
$235
$888
$1,220
$3,099
Source: Extracted from data in Bloomberg Businessweek, 2011, Global inflation starts with Chinese workers, March 7: 10.
Table 15.5
A Hypothetical Expatriate Compensation Package Using the Balance 
Sheet Approach
Items for a hypothetical US expatriate
Amount (US$)
Base salary
$150,000
Cost-of-living allowance (25%)
$37,500
Overseas premium (20%)
$30,000
Hardship allowance (20%)
$30,000
Housing deduction (–7%)
2$10,500
TOTAL (pretax)
$237,000
Note: The host country has a cost-of-living index of 150 relative to the United States. Not shown here are (1) the full 
cost of housing, and (2) the cost to pay the difference between a higher income tax in a host country and a lower in-
come tax in the parent country. Adding housing and taxation, the net cost on the MNE can reach $300,000 in this case.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 15   Managing Human Resources Globally	
505
country in the world has a shortage of people—executives. To fuel their growth, 
Chinese and foreign firms need 75,000 globally competitive executives in China. At 
present, approximately 3,000 to 5,000 Chinese executives fit the profile. Some ex-
ecutives in China reportedly receive calls from headhunters every day.22 Likewise, in 
India—until the 2008–2009 recession—wage inflation in its hot IT sector was at 16% 
a year, with a 40% turnover.23 Although such increase has slowed down, the “war for 
talent” (specifically, the bidding war for top-notch HCNs) is real. It is not surprising 
that high-caliber HCNs, because of their scarcity, will fetch more pay. The question 
is: How much more? Most MNEs aim to eventually replace even top-level expatriates 
with HCNs, in part to save cost. However, if HCNs occupying the same top-level posi-
tions are paid the same as expatriates, then there will be no cost savings. However, 
MNEs unwilling to pay top local talent top dollar may end up losing such high-caliber 
HCNs to competitors that are willing to do so.24 Eventually, for qualified individuals 
in top positions, MNEs may have to pay international rates, regardless of nationality.
15-3c Performance Appraisal
Although initial compensation is determined upon entering a firm, follow-up 
compensation usually depends on performance appraisal. It focuses on decision 
making (to determine pay and promotion), development, documentation, and sub-
ordinate expression. In our case, performance appraisal entails (1) how expatriates 
provide performance appraisal to HCNs and (2) how expatriates are evaluated.
When expatriates evaluate HCNs, cultural differences may create problems.25 
Western MNEs emphasize an opportunity for subordinates to express themselves. 
However, high power distance countries in Asia and Latin America would not foster 
such an expression, which would potentially undermine the power and status of super-
visors. Employees themselves do not place a lot of importance on such an expression. 
Thus, Western expatriates pushing HCNs in these cultures to express themselves in 
performance appraisal meetings would be viewed as indecisive and lacking integrity.
Expatriates need to be evaluated by their own supervisors. However, in some 
cases, expatriates are the top manager in a subsidiary (such as country manager), 
and their supervisors are more senior executives based at headquarters. Some of 
these off-site managers have no experience as expatriates themselves. They often 
evaluate expatriates based on hard numbers, such as productivity and market 
growth, some of which are beyond the control of expatriates. (What about a cur-
rency crisis?) This is one of the reasons why many expatriates feel they are not 
evaluated fairly. The solution lies in (1) fostering more visits and exchange of views 
between on-site expatriates and off-site supervisors and (2) relying on former expa-
triates now based at headquarters to serve as off-site supervisors.
15-4 Labor Relations
Labor relations refer to firms’ relations with organized labor (unions) in both home 
and host countries. Each is discussed in turn.
15-4a Managing Labor Relations at Home
In developed economies, firms’ key concern is to cut cost and enhance competitive-
ness to fight off low-cost rivals from emerging economies. Labor unions’ declared 
Learning Objective
Understand labor relations in 
both home and host countries.
15-4
Labor relations
A firm’s relations with organized 
labor (unions) in both home and 
host countries.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

506	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
interest is to help workers earn higher wages and obtain more benefits through 
collective bargaining. In the United States, unionized employees earn 30% more 
than non-unionized employees. As a result, disagreements and conflicts between 
managers and unions are natural.
Labor unions’ bargaining chip is their credible threat to strike, slow down, re-
fuse to work overtime, or some other forms of disruption. Managers’ bargaining 
chip lies in their threat to shut down operations and move jobs overseas. It is clear 
which side is winning. In the United States, there has been a 25-year slide in union 
membership. Union membership has dropped from 20% of the US workforce in 
1983 to 12% now.26 In the private sector in the United States, only 7% employees 
are union members at present.27
In contrast to MNEs’ ability to move operations around the world, unions are 
organized on a country-by-country basis. Efforts to establish multinational labor 
organizations have not been effective. In the 1990s, in the face of US MNEs’ ag-
gressive efforts to move operations to Mexico to take advantage of NAFTA, the 
AFL-CIO, the leading US union, contacted the Mexican government, requesting 
that it be permitted to recruit members in Mexico. It was flatly rejected. In 2007, 
the House of Representatives passed a new Employee Free Choice Act, designed 
to make it easier to organize unions in the United States. It has provoked fierce 
debates and been criticized by GE’s former CEO Jack Welch as an “insidious” blow 
to American competitiveness.28
15-4b Managing Labor Relations Abroad
If given a choice, MNEs would prefer to employ non-unionized workforces. For ex-
ample, when Japanese and German automakers came to the United States, they 
avoided the Midwest, a union stronghold. Instead, 
these MNEs went to the rural South and set up non-
union plants in small towns in Alabama (Daimler-
Benz and Hyundai), Kentucky (Toyota), and South 
Carolina (BMW). When MNEs have to deal with 
unions abroad, they often rely on experienced HCNs, 
instead of locally inexperienced PCNs or TCNs.
Throughout many developing countries, govern-
ments welcome MNEs and at the same time silence 
unions. In China, the right to strike was removed from 
the constitution in 1982. Only 10% of the half-million 
foreign-invested firms in China have unions. One re-
cent high-profile case is Wal-Mart’s decision to allow its 
31,000-strong Chinese workforce to organize unions. 
The power of unions in developing countries certainly 
deserves some attention from MNE management.
15-5 Institutions, Resources,  
and Human Resource Management
Having outlined the four basic areas of HRM, let us now turn to the institution-based 
and resource-based views to see how they shed additional light (see Figure 15.3).
Learning Objective
Discuss how the institution-
based and resource-based views 
shed additional light on HRM.
15-5
How does the organization of a union affect 
both the domestic and foreign companies doing 
business in that industry and country?
Stephen Barnes/Public Protests/Alamy
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 15   Managing Human Resources Globally	
507
15-5a Institutions and Human Resource Management
HRM is significantly shaped by formal and informal rules of the game—both at 
home and abroad.29 Every country has formal rules, laws, and regulations govern-
ing the do’s and don’ts of HRM. Foreign firms ignoring such rules do so at their 
own peril. For instance, in Japan, firms routinely discriminate against women and 
minorities. However, when Japanese MNEs engage in such “usual” practices in the 
United States, they are often legally challenged. By the late 1980s, 60% of Japanese 
MNEs doing business in the United States faced possible equal employment op-
portunity (EEO) litigation.30
On the other hand, foreign firms well versed in local regulations may take 
advantage of them. In France, legal hurdles for firing full-time workers are 
legendary—HP got a phone call from president Jacques Chirac, who complained 
after HP had announced a plan to lay off 1,200 employees.31 Interestingly, France 
is a highly lucrative market for the US-based Manpower. Manpower’s expertise in 
providing part-time workers is highly valued by French firms unwilling to hire full-
time employees. France is now Manpower’s largest market ahead of the United 
States.
Informal rules of the game, embodied in cultures, norms, and values, also 
assert powerful influence (see Table 15.7). MNEs from different countries have 
different norms in staffing. Most Japanese MNEs follow an informal rule: Heads of 
foreign subsidiaries, at least initially, need to be PCNs.32 In comparison, European 
MNEs are more likely to appoint HCNs and TCNs to lead subsidiaries. There is 
a historical reason for such differences: Most European MNEs expanded glob-
ally before low-cost telephones, faxes, e-mails, and Skype were available. Thus, a 
localization strategy relying on HCNs and TCNs was necessary. Most Japanese 
MNEs went abroad in the 1980s, when modern communication technology en-
abled more centralized control from headquarters. In addition to technology, 
the Japanese cultural preference for low uncertainty also translated into a higher 
interest in headquarters’ control. Thus, Japanese MNEs often implemented a 
home replication strategy that relied on PCNs who constantly communicated with 
headquarters.33
Figure 15.3
Institutions, Resources, and Human Resource Management
Institution-Based View
- Formal rules governing HRM
- Informal norms and values
Resource-Based View
- Value
- Rarity
- Imitability
- Organization
Stafﬁng
Training and development
Compensation
Performance appraisal
Labor relations
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

508	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
While informal cultures, norms, and values are important, HR managers 
need to avoid stereotyping and consider changes. In the area of compensation, 
one study hypothesizes that the presumably collectivistic Chinese managers 
would prefer more equal compensation when compared with their individual-
istic US counterparts. The results turn out to be surprising: Chinese managers 
actually prefer more merit-based pay, whereas US managers behave exactly the 
opposite—in other words, the Chinese seem more “American” than Americans 
(!).34 Further digging reveals that these are not average Chinese. They are HCNs 
working for some of the most competitive Western MNEs in China. The upshot? 
Naïve adaptation to presumed local norms and values, often based on outdated 
stereotypes, may backfire. HR managers must do more “homework” to better 
understand their HCNs.
Consider expatriation, which has roots in colonialism. During the age of co-
lonialism, hardship allowance was paid not only as an inducement, but also as a 
path to riches. Before India’s independence, British officers in the Indian Admin-
istrative Service that ran the colonial government in India were the highest paid 
civil servants in the world. At that time, HCNs were unlikely to view themselves as 
equals of PCNs.35 In the 21st century, many well-educated Indians—often armed 
with degrees from Western universities—are as qualified as some Western expatri-
ates. Such HCNs naturally resent being treated as second-class citizens.
One norm that is changing is the necessity to pay extra compensation to attract 
higher-caliber and more senior expatriates. Since overseas experience, especially 
in major emerging economies such as China, is now viewed as a necessary step to 
Table 15.7
Some Blunders in International Human Resource Management
  	 A Spanish company sent to Saudi Arabia a team of expatriates, including a number of 
young, intelligent women dressed in the height of current style. Upon arrival, the Saudi 
immigration official took a look at their miniskirts and immediately sent the entire team 
on the next flight back to Spain. The expatriate team and the company belatedly learned 
that despite the heat, women in Saudi Arabia never show their bare legs.
  	 In Malaysia, an American expatriate was introduced to an important potential client he 
thought was named “Roger.” He proceeded to call this person “Roger.” Unfortunately, 
this person was a “Rajah,” which is an important title of nobility. In this case, the 
American tendency to liberally use another person’s first name appeared disrespectful 
and insensitive. The Rajah walked away from the deal.
  	 A Japanese subsidiary CEO in New York, at a staff meeting entirely consisting of 
Americans (except him), informed everybody of the firm’s grave financial losses and 
passed the request from headquarters in Japan that everybody redouble efforts. The 
staff immediately redoubled their efforts—by sending their resumes out to other 
employers.
  	 A female South Korean expatriate at a textile plant in Vietnam confronted a worker. 
She yelled in Korean, “Move!” The Vietnamese worker did not move, because he did 
not understand Korean. The South Korean expatriate then kicked and slapped him. 
According to the media, in South Korea, it is common for employers to scold or even 
beat employees if they make a big mistake. But in this case, ten Vietnamese colleagues 
retaliated by beating up the expatriate, who was wounded, hospitalized, and then 
deported. The workers went on to strike for four days and obtained 10% to 15% pay 
raises.
Source: Based on text in (1) P. Dowling & D. Welch, 2005, International Human Resource Management, 4th ed.  
(p. 59), Cincinnati: South-Western Cengage Learning; (2) D. Ricks, 1999, Blunders in International Business, 3rd ed. 
(pp. 95–105), Oxford, UK: Blackwell. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 15   Managing Human Resources Globally	
509
advance one’s career, demand is outstripping supply of such opportunities.36 There-
fore, many firms do not feel compelled to offer financial inducements, because, 
according to Siemens’ HRM chief, “We don’t want people to take the job merely for 
the money.”37 Many Western managers are willing to accept a “local plus” package 
instead of the traditional expatriate package full of perks. Further, more expatri-
ates are now younger. They may be sent abroad to gain experience—often with 
more down-to-earth titles such as “assignees” or “secondees.” In addition, more ex-
patriates are now sent on short-term, commuter-type assignments for which they do 
not need to uproot their family—a major source of stress for the family and a cost 
item for the firm. Overall, the norms and images associated with the stereotypical 
expatriate, a more senior executive leading a life of luxury to compensate for hard-
ship overseas, are changing rapidly.
15-5b Resources and Human Resource Management
From a resource-based view, employees, by definition, are crucial resources (see 
Emerging Markets 15.2 for a striking example). As HRM becomes more “strate-
gic,” the VRIO dimensions are increasingly at the center stage.38 To start, managers 
need to ask: Does a particular HR activity add value?39 Consider two examples. First, 
labor-intensive chores, such as administering payroll, benefits, and basic training, 
may not add value. They can often be outsourced. Second, training is expensive. 
Does it really add value? Results pooled from 397 studies find that, on average, 
training adds value by leading to approximately 20% performance improvement 
for that individual.40 Thus, training is often justified.
Next, are particular HR activities rare? The relentless drive to learn, share, and 
adopt “best practices” may reduce their rarity and thus usefulness. If every MNE 
provides training to high-caliber HCNs, such training, which is valuable, will be 
taken for granted but not viewed as rare.
Further, how imitable are certain HR activities? It is relatively easy to imitate 
a single practice, but it is much more difficult to imitate a complex HR system 
(or architecture) consisting of multiple, mutually reinforcing practices that work 
together.41 Consider the Portman Ritz-Carlton hotel in Shanghai, which has 
been repeatedly voted the Best Employer in Asia. Its expatriate general manager 
personally interviews every new hire. It selects HCNs genuinely interested in helping 
guests. It deeply cares about employee satisfaction, which has led to superb guest 
satisfaction. Each single practice here may be imitable, and the Portman Ritz-Carlton 
has been meticulously studied by all rivals (and numerous nonrivals) in China 
and around the world. Yet, none has been able to imitate its system successfully. 
On the surface, every firm says, “We care about our people.” But the reality at 
many firms is increasing underinvestment by both employers and employees with 
declining loyalty and commitment.42 Studies find that firm performance is the best 
with a mutual investment approach, as exemplified by the Portman Ritz-Carlton.43 
However, it is very difficult to imitate a mutual investment approach that comes 
together as a system (or architecture).
 Finally, do HR practices support organizational capabilities to help the firm ac-
complish its performance goals? Consider teamwork and diversity, especially mul-
tinational teams consisting of members from different subsidiaries.44 While most 
firms promote some sort of teamwork and diversity, it is challenging to organiza-
tionally leverage such teamwork and diversity to enhance performance.45 Too little 
or too much diversity may hurt performance.46 In teamwork, certain disagreements 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

510	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
On November 26, 2008, Unilever hosted a dinner at 
the Taj Mahal Palace Hotel in Mumbai. Unilever’s di-
rectors, senior executives, and their spouses were 
bidding farewell to a departing CEO and welcoming a 
new CEO. About 35 Taj employees, led by a 24-year-
old banquet manager, Mallika Jagad, were assigned 
to manage the event in a second-floor banquet room. 
Around 9:30 p.m., as they served the main course, 
they heard what they thought were fireworks at a 
nearby wedding. In reality, these were the first gun-
shots from terrorists who were storming the Taj.
The staff quickly realized something was wrong. 
Jagad had the doors locked and the lights turned off. 
She asked everyone to lie down quietly under tables 
and refrain from using cell phones. She insisted that 
husbands and wives separate to reduce the risk to 
families. The group stayed there all night, listening 
to the terrorists rampaging through the hotel, hurl-
ing grenades, firing automatic weapons, and tearing 
the palace apart. According to the guests, the Taj staff 
kept calm, and constantly went around offering water 
and asking people if they needed anything else. Early 
the next morning, a fire started in the hallway outside, 
forcing the group to try to climb out the windows. A 
fire crew spotted them and, with its ladders, helped 
the trapped people escape quickly. The staff evacu-
ated the guests first, and no casualties resulted.
Elsewhere in the hotel, the upscale Japanese res-
taurant Wasabi was busy by 9:30 p.m. A warning call 
from a hotel operator alerted the staff that terrorists 
had entered the building and were heading toward the 
restaurants. Thomas Varghese, the 48-year-old senior 
waiter, immediately instructed his 50-odd guests to 
crouch under tables, and he directed employees to 
form a human cordon around them. Four hours later, 
security forces asked Varghese if he could get the 
guests out of the hotel. He decided to use a spiral stair-
case near the restaurant to evacuate the customers 
first and then the staff. The 30-year Taj veteran insisted 
that he would be the last man to leave, but he never did 
get out. The terrorists gunned him down as he exited.
When Karambir Singh Kang, the Taj’s general man-
ager, heard about the attacks, he immediately left the 
conference he was attending off-site. He took charge 
at the Taj the moment he arrived, supervising the 
evacuation of guests and coordinating the efforts of 
firefighters amid the chaos. His wife and two young 
children were in a sixth-floor suite, where the general 
manager traditionally lives. When he realized that the 
terrorists were on the upper floors, he tried to get to 
his family. It was impossible. By midnight, the sixth 
floor was in flames, and there was no hope of anyone 
surviving there. Kang led the rescue efforts until noon 
the next day. Only then did he call his parents to tell 
them that the terrorists had killed his wife and chil-
dren. His father, a retired general, told him, “Son, do 
your duty, do not desert your post.” Kang replied, “If 
the hotel goes down, I will be the last man out.”
During the onslaught on the Taj, 31 people died and 
28 were hurt, but the hotel received only praise the 
day after. Its guests were overwhelmed by employees’ 
dedication to duty, their desire to protect guests with 
little regard to their own personal safety, and their quick 
thinking. As many as 11 Taj employees—a third of the 
hotel’s casualties—laid down their lives while helping 
between 1,200 and 1,500 guests escape.
At some level, that isn’t surprising. One of the 
world’s top hotels, the Taj is ranked number 20 by 
Condé Nast Traveler. The hotel is known for the highest 
levels of quality, its ability to go many extra miles to de-
light customers, and its staff of highly trained employ-
ees. It is a well-oiled machine, where every employee 
knows his or her job, has encyclopedic knowledge 
about regular guests, and is comfortable taking orders. 
Even so, the Taj employees gave customer service a 
whole new meaning during the terrorist strike.
The Ordinary Heroes of the Taj
E m e r g i n g  M a r k e t s  1 5 . 2
Source: Excerpted from R. Deshpandé & A. Raina, 2011, The ordinary heroes of the Taj, Harvard Business Review, December: 119–123. 
Danny Lehman/Corbis; Björn Meyer/sitox/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 15   Managing Human Resources Globally	
511
may be helpful to promote learning. But obviously, too many disagreements may 
be too much, lead to conflicts, and torpedo team effectiveness.47 However, few 
managers (and few firms) master the art of drawing the line before disagreements 
within a team get out of control.
15-6 Debates and Extensions
This chapter has already alluded to a number of HR debates, such as the value 
of expatriates. Here we focus on three previously untouched debates: (1) best fit 
versus best practice, (2) expatriation versus inpatriation, and (3) across-the-board 
pay cut versus reduction in force.
15-6a Best Fit versus Best Practice
The “best fit” school argues that a firm needs to search for the best external and 
internal fit. Externally, HRM is shaped by national and industry contexts. Inter-
nally, HRM is driven by firm strategy. On the product dimension, a firm pursuing 
a differentiation strategy needs to reinforce the passion for higher quality, better 
service, and more sustained learning. On the international dimension, a firm us-
ing a localization strategy needs to deploy more HCNs (Table 15.2). Moreover, the 
quest for the best fit is continuous. Even for the same MNE in the same country, a 
good fit now may not be good enough ten years later. In two words, the “best fit” 
school argues: it depends.48
The “best practice” school begs to differ. Proponents argue that firms should 
adopt “best practices” irrespective of context. Such “best practices” often include 
extensive training, high pay for high performance, and self-managed teams (em-
phasizing teamwork). While the list of “best practices” may vary, the underlying 
spirit seems to be the same around the world.49
Critics of the “best practice” school make two points. First, they point out that 
“there is overwhelming evidence against a universal set of HR practices based on 
national variations.”50 Second, they argue that from a resource-based view, if all 
firms adopt universal “best practices,” such practices lose their value. To reconcile 
the debate, experts note that “it is not a question of either/or but a question of the 
appropriate balance.”51 They argue that most firms may still benefit from adopting 
some “best practices” because most firms are not yet at that frontier.
15-6b Expatriation versus Inpatriation
Addressing the expatriation problem, one solution is inpatriation—relocating 
employees of a foreign subsidiary to the MNE’s headquarters for the purposes of 
(1) filling skill shortages at headquarters and (2) developing a global mindset for 
such inpatriates. The term “inpatriation,” of course, is derived from “expatriation,” 
and most inpatriates are expected to eventually return to their home country to re-
place expatriates. Examples would include IT inpatriates from India to work at IBM 
in the United States and telecom inpatriates from China to work at Alcatel-Lucent 
in France. Technically, these inpatriates are expatriates from India and China, who 
will experience some of the problems associated with expatriation discussed ear-
lier in this chapter.
In addition, some inpatriates, being paid by the going rate of their home (typi-
cally developing) countries, are upset after finding out that the compensation level 
Learning Objective
Participate in three leading 
debates concerning HRM.
15-6
Inpatriation
Relocating employees of a 
foreign subsidiary to the MNE’s 
headquarters for the purposes 
of filling skill shortages at head-
quarters and developing a global 
mind-set for such inpatriates.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

512	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
of colleagues at headquarters doing equivalent work is much higher—the cost of 
an Indian IT professional is approximately 10% to 12% of that of an American 
one. Some inpatriates thus refuse to go back and find work in their host countries. 
Other inpatriates go back to their home countries but quit their sponsoring MNE, 
jumping ship to rival MNEs willing to pay more.
Even for inpatriates who return to assume leadership positions in subsidiar-
ies in their home countries (as planned), unfortunately, many are ineffective. In 
China, inpatriated ethnic Chinese often struggle with an ambiguous identity: 
Western headquarters views them as “us,” whereas HCNs also expect them to be 
“us.” When these managers favor headquarters on issues where headquarters and 
locals conflict (such as refusing to pay HCNs more), HCNs view them as traitors of 
sorts. These problems erupt in spite of these inpatriates’ Chinese roots—or, per-
haps, because of their Chinese roots.52 Overall, one lesson is that there will be no 
panacea in international staffing. Inpatriates, just like expatriates, have their fair 
share of headaches.
15-6c Across-the-Board Pay Cut versus Reduction in Force
Both HR and line managers often have to make tough decisions. One of the most 
challenging decisions is how to cope with a downturn. Reduction in force (RIF), 
a euphemism for mass layoffs, is often used in the US and UK. However, outside 
the Anglo-American world, mass layoffs are often viewed as unethical. Some crit-
ics label mass layoffs as “corporate cannibalism.” One alternative is for the entire 
firm to have an across-the-board pay cut while preserving all current jobs. Which 
approach is better?
During the SARS crisis in 2003, the Portman Ritz-Carlton hotel in Shanghai im-
plemented an across-the-board pay cut, resulting in a 99.9% employee satisfaction 
rate. According to its general manager, “this was one of those negative things that 
turned out to be extremely positive.”53 However, when US firms experiment with an 
across-the-board pay cut, the results tend to be very negative. To avoid an RIF, Ap-
plied Materials in the post-2001 downturn implemented an across-the-board pay 
cut in the United States: Executives took a 10% hit, managers and professionals 
5%, and hourly production workers 3%. The pay cut lasted for 18 months. An HR 
executive at Applied Materials commented:
This across-the-board pay cut has a longer lasting and far greater negative impact 
on morale than an RIF would have. RIFs are very hard on the impacted employees 
as well as the survivors. However, when managed correctly, impacted employees are 
able to separate from the company with dignity and in the case of Applied Materials, 
with a very generous financial package . . . . I don’t know of any surviving employees 
who appreciated having their paycheck impacted every two weeks for 18 months . . . . 
Ultimately, pay levels were restored. However, employee memories were very long 
and this particular event was pointed to over and over again throughout multiple 
employee surveys as an indicator of poor leadership and a major cause of employee 
dissatisfaction.54
Applied Materials and other US firms that implement across-the-board pay 
cuts have lost numerous star performers who find “greener pastures” elsewhere. 
Although more US firms, such as AMD, FedEx, HP, and New York Times, cut pay 
across the board in an effort to preserve jobs in the 2008–2009 recession, Applied 
Materials’ experience raises serious concerns as to whether such large-scale 
sacrifice is worth it, at least in an individualistic culture (see the Closing Case).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 15   Managing Human Resources Globally	
513
During the 2008–2009 recession, the world econ-
omy faced the greatest rise in unemployment in 
decades. In China, 20 million employees, mostly 
migrant workers, lost their jobs. In India, about 
10 million were let go. As bad as the US unemploy-
ment level of 9% was (which broke a record), Spain’s 
18% unemployment, the highest in the EU, doubled 
the US level. As the recession intensified its grip on 
the world, HRM’s role also intensified. HR manag-
ers occupied the center stage of the recession’s bad 
news. Armed with the sympathetic box of tissues, 
HR managers typically attended tearful layoff meet-
ings. While they often played no role in layoff deci-
sions (which were typically made by line managers), 
HR managers fielded angry calls about broken prom-
ises and did the dirty work of managing termination 
details. “If there was ever a time to underscore the 
importance of HR,” BusinessWeek announced, “it 
has arrived.”
As unemployment numbers skyrocketed around 
the world, how to manage layoffs and how to manage 
survivors remained at the heart of HRM challenges 
during the recession. Experts widely suggested that 
firms needed to treat laid-off employees with dignity, 
fairness, and respect. For plant closures and large-
scale layoffs, key milestones and dates needed to be 
communicated well in advance. The business case 
needed to be explained in detail. Affected employ-
ees should preferably be given options for finding 
other jobs inside the company or resources to hunt 
for jobs outside. HR managers were advised to show 
compassion and understanding. This could be done 
not only in words but also in concrete ways, such 
as offering to serve as a reference to prospective 
employers.
Unfortunately, too many firms did not do it right. 
Many line managers did not have the guts to face 
laid-off employees, and hid behind HR managers 
who had to deliver the bad news. Losing one’s job 
is dehumanizing in any event, but many employees 
left, feeling alienated and unfairly treated. Further, 
a lot of firms gave in to the temptation to short-
change employees on severance when downsiz-
ing. As a result, employee lawsuits for unlawful 
termination skyrocketed. Around the world, dif-
ferent countries have different rules for severance 
arrangements. In France, employees are entitled 
to 30 days of severance pay for each year—an 
employee with 20 years of service can walk away 
with 20 months of pay. In Germany and India, the 
severance is two weeks’ pay per year of service. In 
Britain, it is a minimum of $470 per year of service. 
In China and Russia, workers can be fired with only 
one month of wages. In the United States, there is 
Managing Human Resources in Recession
IN Focus 15.1 
Ethical 
Dilemma
15-7 Management Savvy
What determines the success and failure of HRM around the world? A simple answer 
is effectiveness of HR activities in areas such as staffing, training and development, 
compensation, and labor relations. A more interesting question is: “How much is 
the impact of effective HRM on firm performance?”55 Results from 3,200 firms 
find that change of one standard deviation in the HR system affects 10% to 20% 
of a firm’s market value.56 Findings from 92 studies suggest that an increase of one 
standard deviation in the use of effective HR system is associated with a 4.6% in-
crease in return on assets (ROA).57 These recent findings validate a long-held belief 
among HRM practitioners and scholars: HRM is indeed strategic, as it has become 
a direct answer to the fundamental question of our field: What determines the suc-
cess and failure of firms around the world? In Focus 15.1 illustrates the importance 
of HRM during recession.
Learning Objective
Draw implications for action.
15-7
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

514	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
Consequently, we identify implications for action, listed in Table 15.8, that 
center on the four Cs developed by Susan Meisinger, president of the Society for 
Human Resource Management.58 These insights have important implications for 
HR managers.
First, savvy HR managers need to be curious. They need to be well versed in the 
numerous formal and informal rules of the game governing HRM worldwide. They 
must be curious about emerging trends in the world and be prepared to respond 
to these trends. Second, HR managers must be competent. Far from its lowly roots 
Table 15.8
Implications for Action
For HR managers: The four Cs
  	 Be curious.
  	 Be competent.
  	 Be courageous.
  	 Be caring.
For non-HR managers: The fifth C
  	 Be proactive in managing your (international) career
no legal requirement for severance pay. Severance 
pay is a matter of agreement between US employ-
ers and employees.
In addition to the stress of managing layoffs, 
managing surviving employees is no less challeng-
ing. Even when jobs are relatively safe, employees 
still ask, “When are the layoffs coming?” Survivors 
often see their salaries and work hours cut, budgets 
shaved, and perks gone. When dealing with inter-
national or multiethnic workforces, inappropriate or 
insensitive management can cause major trouble or 
disaster. Many employees are pre-emptively organiz-
ing unions or calling hotlines for suspected corporate 
wrongdoing. Per US law, once employees report any 
corporate wrongdoing (whether real or bogus), they 
become a protected class (“whistleblowers”). Em-
ployers firing “whistleblowers” can be easily dragged 
into court for retaliating against them. As a result, the 
loudmouths and the litigious often end up becoming 
an influential group among the surviving rank and file, 
undermining firms’ ability to get the real job done.
Not all HR news is bad in this tough time. One 
innovative practice emerging out of the recent 
recession is to tell laid-off employees: “You’re 
fired—but please stay in touch.” From Dow Chemi-
cal to JP Morgan Chase, many firms now label laid-
off, former employees “alumni” and cultivate such 
alumni networks online as a forum for opportuni-
ties in networking and for possible future rehiring. 
When the economy recovers, firms hope to recruit 
some of these “alumni” back. Such hire-back cas-
es are now called “boomerangs” in the new HR 
jargon. By showing compassion and understanding 
to laid-off employees, such firms hope to preserve 
some goodwill in a tough time in order to create 
firm-specific advantage when the economy turns 
north. Advising CEOs, two experts wrote, “HR mat-
ters enormously in good times. It defines you in bad 
times.”
Source: Based on (1) BusinessWeek, 2009: Human resources: They’re 
human, too, July 27: 19; (2) BusinessWeek, 2009, The hidden perils of 
layoffs, March 2: 52–53; (3) BusinessWeek, 2009, You’re fired—but 
stay in touch, May 4: 54–55; (4) Economist, 2009, When jobs disap-
pear, March 14: 71–73; (5) R. Sutton, 2009, How to be a good boss in 
a bad economy, Harvard Business Review, June: 42–50; (6) US Depart-
ment of Labor, 2009, eLaws: FLSA advisor, www.dol.gov; (7) J. Welch 
& S. Welch, 2009, Layoffs: HR’s moment of truth, Businessweek, 
March 23 & 30: 104.
IN Focus 15.1 (continued)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 15   Managing Human Resources Globally	
515
as a lackluster administrative support function, HRM is now acknowledged as a 
strategic function. Many HR managers may have been trained more narrowly and 
with a more micro (non-strategic) focus. Now, HR managers must be able not only 
to contribute to the strategy conversation but also to take things off the CEO’s desk 
as full-fledged business partners.
Finally, HR managers must be courageous and caring. As guardians of talent, 
HR managers need to nurture and develop employees. This often means that as 
employee advocates, HR managers sometimes need to be courageous enough to 
disagree with the CEO and other line managers if necessary. GE’s recently retired 
head of HR, William Conaty, is such an example. “If you just get closer to the CEO, 
you’re dead,” Conaty shared with a reporter. “I need to be independent. I need to 
be credible.” GE’s CEO Jeff Immelt called Conaty “the first friend, the guy that 
could walk in my office and kick my butt when it needed to be”—exactly how a full-
fledged business partner should behave.59
In addition, there is a fifth “C” for non-HR managers: Proactively manage your 
career in order to develop a global mindset. Since international experience is a pre-
requisite for reaching the top at many firms, managers need to prepare by investing 
in their own technical expertise, cross-cultural adaptability, and language train-
ing. Some of these investments (such as language) are long-term in nature. This 
point thus has strategic implications for students who are studying this book now: 
Have you learned a foreign language? Have you spent one semester or year abroad? 
Have you made any friends from abroad, perhaps fellow students who are taking 
classes with you now? Have you put this course on your resume? Arm yourself with 
the knowledge now, make proper investments, and advance your career. Remem-
ber: your career is in your hands.
C h a p t e r  S u m m a r y
	15.1	 Explain staffing decisions with a focus on expatriates.
 	 International staffing primarily relies on ethnocentric, polycentric, and geo-
centric approaches.
 	 Expatriates (primarily PCNs and, to a lesser extent, TCNs) play multiple chal-
lenging roles and often have high failure rates. They need to be carefully 
selected, taking into account a variety of factors.
	15.2	 Identify training and development needs for expatriates and HCNs.
 	 Expatriates need to be properly trained and cared for during expatriation 
and repatriation.
 	 Training and development of HCNs is now an area of differentiation among 
many MNEs.
	15.3	 Discuss compensation and performance appraisal issues.
 	 Expatriates are compensated using the going rate and balance sheet 
approaches.
 	 Top-talent HCNs now increasingly command higher compensation.
 	 Performance appraisal needs to be carefully provided to achieve its intended 
purposes.
	15.4	 Understand labor relations in both home and host countries.
 	 Despite efforts to revive unions, the power of unions has been declining in 
developed countries.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

516	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
 	 The power of unions in most developing countries requires some attention 
but is mostly limited.
	15.5	 Discuss how the institution-based and resource-based views shed additional 
light on HRM.
 	 HRM is significantly shaped by formal and informal rules of the game—both 
at home and abroad.
 	 As HRM becomes more strategic, VRIO dimensions are now more important.
	15.6	 Participate in three leading debates concerning HRM.
 	 (1) Best fit versus best practice, (2) expatriation versus inpatriation, and 
(3) across-the-board pay cut versus reduction in force.
	15.7	 Draw implications for action.
 	 HR managers need to have the four Cs: being curious, competent, coura-
geous, and caring about people.
 	 Non-HR managers need to proactively develop their career by developing a 
global mindset.
K e y  T e r m s
Balance sheet  
approach 503
Compensation 502
Development 500
Ethnocentric  
approach 495
Expatriate (expat) 495
Expatriation 498
Geocentric approach 496
Going rate approach 503
Host-country national 
(HCN) 495
Human resource 
management  
(HRM) 494
Inpatriation 511
Labor relations 505
Parent-country national 
(PCN) 495
Performance appraisal 502
Polycentric approach 496
Psychological  
contract 501
Repatriate 501
Repatriation 501
Staffing 495
Third-country national  
(TCN) 495
Training 500
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 Name and describe three MNE staffing approaches.
	 2.	 ON CULTURE: What factors often lead to an expatriate experiencing dif-
ficulties or even failure on an overseas assignment?
	 3.	 ON CULTURE:  How would you use training for spouses of expatriate employees 
to improve employee performance and the duration of service overseas?
	 4.	 ON CULTURE: Describe some of the problems experienced by repatriates 
and how training and development may alleviate those problems.
	 5.	 In relation to expatriate compensation, what is the difference between the 
going rate approach and the balance sheet approach?
	 6.	 What are some of the problems inherent in evaluating an expatriate’s job 
performance?
	 7.	 Why has union power declined in developed countries?
	 8.	 If you were trying to establish a multinational labor organization, what bar-
riers would you need to overcome?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 15   Managing Human Resources Globally	
517
	 9.	 In HR use of VRIO, why is it more difficult to imitate an HR system than a 
practice?
	 10.	 Look at the countries on PengAtlas Map 4.3. Suppose your multinational 
team consists of people from these countries.  In your opinion, is it possible 
to have too much diversity?
	 11.	 Regarding the two countries with the largest labor force shown on 
PengAtlas Map 4.3, what advantage does the large size provide? What is the 
disadvantage?
	 12.	 How can the best fit versus best practice debate be reconciled?
	 13.	 What are the benefits of inpatriation?
	 14.	 What are the four Cs that can benefit HR managers?
	 15.	 What can you do to develop a global mindset and help your career?
C r i t i c a l  D i s c u s s i o n  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 You have been offered a reasonably lucrative opportunity for an expatri-
ate assignment for the next three years, and your boss will have a meeting 
with you next week. How would you discuss this opportunity with your 
boss?
	 2.	 ON ETHICS: If you were a HCN, do you think pay should be equal between 
HCNs and expatriates in equivalent positions? If you were president of 
your subsidiary in a host country, as a PCN your pay is five times higher 
than the pay for the highest paid HCN (your vice president). What do you 
think?
	 3.	 ON ETHICS: As HR director for an oil company, you are responsible for 
selecting 15 expatriates to go to work in Iraq. However, you are personally 
concerned about the safety there. How do you proceed?
G l o b a l  A c t i o n 
	 1.	 You work at a large MNE that operates in every one of the top 100 metro-
politan areas worldwide. One of the most pressing concerns in your firm at 
the moment is to control costs. Therefore, you have been asked to develop 
a forecast for the coming year that identifies the markets in which the firm 
can expect an increase in the cost of living and, as a result, general sal-
ary expenditures. After the report needed for your evaluation is secured, 
classify the cities that have experienced cost increases into their respective 
countries. Which countries have more than one city that meets the criteria 
for your forecast? What are the salary-increase traits associated with each 
city identified?
	 2.	 Currently, your European company is evaluating its standing in the fast-
growing emerging economies known as BRIC (Brazil, Russia, India, and 
China). Based on your evaluation of the cost of living in each country, the 
company may reconfigure some of its operations to increase profitability. 
Your company’s manufacturing facilities are located in Beijing, China; 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

518	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
As a Japanese expatriate in charge of US operations 
of Yamakawa Corporation, you scratch your head con-
fronting a difficult decision: Cut salaries across the 
board or cut jobs when confronting a horrific eco-
nomic downturn with major losses? Headquarters in 
Osaka has advised that earnings at home are bad, and 
that you cannot expect headquarters to bail out your 
operations. Too bad, US government bailouts are only 
good for US-owned firms and are thus irrelevant for 
your unit, which is 100% owned by the Japanese par-
ent company.
As a person being brought up in a collectivistic 
culture, you instinctively feel compelled to suggest 
an across-the-board pay cut for all 1,000 employees 
in the United States. Personally, as the highest-paid 
US-based employee, you are willing to take the high-
est percentage of a pay cut (you are thinking of 30%). 
If implemented, this plan would call for other execu-
tives, who are mostly Americans, to take a 20% to 
25% pay cut, mid-level managers and professionals a 
15% to 20% pay cut, and all the rank-and-file employ-
ees a 10% to 15% pay cut. Indeed, in your previous 
experience at Yamakawa in Japan, you did this with 
positive results among all affected Japanese employ-
ees. This time, most executive colleagues in Japan are 
doing the same. However, since you are now manag-
ing US operations, headquarters in Osaka (being more 
globally minded and sensitive) does not want to im-
pose any uniform solutions around the world and asks 
you to make the call.
As a conscientious executive, you have studied all 
the HRM books—in both Japanese and English—that 
you can get your hands on for this tough decision. 
Cut Salaries or Cut Jobs?
Ethical 
Dilemma
C l o s i n g  C a s e
Mumbai, India; São Paulo, Brazil; and St. Petersburg, Russia. How much 
could be saved if the company were to consolidate into one BRIC location 
that has the lowest cost of living?
V i d e o  C a s e
After watching the video on expatriates, discuss the following:
	 1.	 What kind of staffing approach is being used by Dubai? Explain.
	 2.	 What does Kevin O’Neal, as an expatriate, bring to Dubai?
	 3.	 What characteristics do recruiters look for in expatriates?
	 4.	 How might compensation differ between expatriate Kevin O’Neal and an 
inpatriate?
	 5.	 How do HR personnel/recruiters develop a global mindset?
MIXA/Jupiter Images
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 15   Managing Human Resources Globally	
519
While you understand that US executives routinely 
undertake reduction in force (RIFs), which is a eu-
phemism for mass layoffs, you have also noticed that 
in the recent recession, even “bona fide” US firms, 
such as AMD, FedEx, HP, and New York Times, have all 
trimmed the base pay for all employees. If there is a 
time to change the norm moving toward more across-
the-board pay cuts in an effort to preserve jobs and 
avoid RIFs, this time may be it, according to some US 
executives quoted in the media.
At the same time, you have also read that some 
experts note that across-the-board pay cuts are 
anathema to a performance culture enshrined in the 
United States and taught in virtually all HRM text-
books. “The last thing you want is for your A players—
or people in key strategic positions delivering the 
most value—to leave because you have mismanaged 
your compensation system,” said Mark Huselid, a 
Rutgers University professor and a leading expert on 
HRM, in a media interview. You have also read in a 
recent (September 2009) Harvard Business Review 
survey that, despite the worst recession, 20% of  
high-potential players in US firms have voluntarily 
jumped ship during the 2008–2009 recession, in 
search of greener pastures elsewhere. Naturally, you 
are worried that should you decide to implement the 
across-the-board pay cuts you have envisioned, you 
may end up losing a lot of American star performers 
and end up with a bunch of mediocre players who 
cannot go elsewhere—and you may be stuck with 
the mediocre folks for a long time, even after the 
economy recovers.
After spending two days reading all the materials 
you have gathered, you still do not have a clear pic-
ture. Instead, you have a big headache. You scratch 
your head again. How would you proceed?
Case Discussion Questions:
	 1.	 What are the benefits of across-the-board pay 
cuts?
	 2.	 What are the benefits of reduction in force (mass 
layoffs)?
	 3.	 How would you advise this Japanese expatriate 
working in the United States?
Sources: This case is fictitious. It was inspired by (1) M. Y. Brannen, 2008, Global talent management and learning for the future: Pressing concerns 
for Japanese multinationals, AIB Insights, 8: 8–12; (2) BusinessWeek, 2009, Cutting salaries instead of jobs, June 8: 46–48; (3) BusinessWeek, 2009, 
Pay cuts made palatable, May 4: 67; (4) N. Carter & C. Silva, 2009, High potentials in the downturn: Sharing the pain? Harvard Business Review, 
September: 25.
N O T E S
[Journal acronyms] AME—Academy of Management Executive; AMJ—
Academy of Management Journal; AMR—Academy of Management Re-
view; APJM—Asia Pacific Journal of Management; BW—BusinessWeek 
(before 2010) or Bloomberg Businessweek (since 2010); CMR—Cali-
fornia Management Review; HBR—Harvard Business Review; HRM—
Human Resource Management; HRMR – Human Resource Management 
Review; IJHRM—International Journal of Human Resource Management; 
IJMR—International Journal of Management Reviews; JAP—Journal of 
Applied Psychology; JIBS—Journal of International Business Studies; 
JIM—Journal of International Management; JM—Journal of Manage-
ment; JMS—Journal of Management Studies; JOB—Journal of Orga-
nizational Behavior; JWB—Journal of World Business; PP—Personnel 
Psychology; SMJ—Strategic Management Journal.
1 P. Budhwar & Y. Debrah, 2009, Future research on HRM systems 
in Asia, APJM, 26: 197–218.
2 W. Cascio, 2005, From business partner to driving business suc-
cess, HRM, 44: 159–163; C. Fey, S. Morgulis-Yukushev, H. Park, 
& I. Bjorkman, 2009, Opening the black box of the relationship 
between HRM practices and firm performance, JIBS, 40: 690–712; 
E. Lawler, 2005, From HRM to organizational effectiveness, HRM, 
44: 165–169; J. Paauwe, 2009, HRM and performance, JMS, 46: 
129–142.
3 R. Ployhart, 2006, Staffing in the 21st century, JM, 32: 868–897.
4 E. Farndale et al., 2010, Context-bound configurations of corpo-
rate HR functions in MNCs, HRM, 49: 45–66.
5 C. Chung & P. Beamish, 2005, Investment mode strategy and ex-
patriate strategy during times of economic crisis, JIM, 11: 331–355; 
D. Tan & J. Mahoney, 2006, Why a multinational firm chooses expa-
triates, JMS, 43: 457–484.
6 M. Janssens, T. Cappellen, & P. Zanoni, 2006, Successful female 
expatriates as agents, JWB, 41: 133–148; B. Reiche, A. Harzing, & 
M. Kraimer, 2009, The role of international assignees’ social capital 
in creating inter-unit intellectual capital, JIBS, 40: 509–526; D. Vora 
& T. Kostova, 2007, A model of dual organizational identification in 
the context of the MNE, JOB, 28: 327–350.
7 Y. Chang, Y. Gong, & M. W. Peng, 2012, Expatriate knowledge 
transfer, subsidiary absorptive capacity, and subsidiary perfor-
mance, AMJ (in press).
8 P. Bhaskar-Shrinivas, D. Harrison, M. Shaffer, & D. Luk, 2005, Input-
based and time-based models of international adjustment, AMJ, 48: 
257–281; Economist, 2011, A tale of two expats, January 31: 62–64.
9 R. L. Tung, 1982, Selection and training procedures for US, Euro­
pean, and Japanese multinationals, CMR, 25: 57–71. See also 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

520	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
A. Harzing, 2002, Are our referencing errors undermining our 
scholarship and credibility? JOB, 23: 127–148.
10  P. Dowling & D. Welch, 2005, International Human Resource Manage-
ment, 4th ed. (p. 87), Cincinnati: South-Western Cengage Learning.
11 G. Graen, R. Dharwadkar, R. Grewal, & M. Wakabayashi, 
2006, Japanese career progress, JIBS, 37: 148–161; E. Pellegrini & 
T. Scandura, 2006. Leader-member exchange (LMX), paternalism, 
and delegation in the Turkish business culture, JIBS, 37: 264–279.
12 P. Caligiuri, 2006, Developing global leaders, HRMR, 16: 219–
228; A. Molinsky, 2007, Cross-cultural code-switching, AMR, 32: 
622–640; S. Shin, F. Morgeson, & M. Campion, 2007, What you do 
depends on where you are, JIBS, 38: 64–83; R. Takeuchi, P. Tesluk, 
S. Yun, & D. Lepak, 2005, An integrative view of international expe-
rience, AMJ, 48: 85–100.
13 M. Shaffer & D. Harrison, 2001, Forgotten partners of interna-
tional assignments, JAP, 86: 238–254.
14 L. Dragoni, P. Tesluk, J. Russell, & I. Oh, 2009, Understanding 
managerial development, AMJ, 52: 731–743; E. Drost, C. Frayne, 
K. Lowe & J. M. Geringer, 2002, Benchmarking training and devel-
opment practices, HRM, 41: 67–86; C. Mabey, 2008, Management 
development and firm performance in Germany, Norway, Spain, 
and the UK, JIBS, 39: 1327–1342.
15 A major survey cited in Dowling & Welch, 2005, International 
Human Resource Management (p. 119).
16 M. Lazarova & J. Cerdin, 2007, Revisiting repatriation concerns, 
JIBS, 38: 404–429.
17 N. Furuya, M. Stevens, A. Bird, G. Oddou, & M. Mendenhall, 
2009, Managing the learning and transfer of global management 
competence, JIBS, 40: 200–215; G. Oddou, J. Osland, & R. Blakeney, 
2009, Repatriating knowledge, JIBS, 40: 181–199.
18 T. Amino, a retired US-based Honda executive and a friend of the 
author, personal communication, May 2002.
19 L. Bassi & D. McMurrer, 2007, Maximizing your return on peo-
ple, HBR, March: 115–123.
20 S. Carraher, S. Sullivan, & M. Crocitto, 2009, Mentoring across 
global boundaries, JIBS, 39: 1310–1326; J. Mezias & T. Scandura, 
2005, A needs-driven approach to expatriate adjustment and career 
development, JIBS 36: 519–38.
21 J. DeVaro, 2006, Strategic promotion tournaments and worker 
performance, SMJ, 27: 721–740; K. Lowe, J. Milliman, H. De Cieri, & 
P. Dowling, 2002, International compensation practices, HRM, 41: 
45–66; Y. Yanadori & J. Marler, 2006, Compensation strategy, SMJ, 
27: 559–570.
22 C. Schmidt, 2011, The battle for China’s talent, HBR, March: 
25–27.
23 Economist, 2006, The world is our oyster, October 7: 9.
24 T. Gardner, 2005, Interfirm competition for HR, AMJ, 48: 237–256.
25 F. Chiang & T. Birtch, 2010, Appraising performance across 
borders, JMS, 47: 1365–1392.
26 AFL-CIO, 2007, Ten key facts for the Employee Free Choice Act, 
www.aflcio.org; Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2007, Union members in 
2006, Washington: Department of Labor, www.bls.gov.
27 Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2007, Union member summary, 
Washington: Department of Labor, www.bls.gov.
28  J. Welch & S. Welch, 2007, The unemployment act, BW, March 12: 108.
29 I. Bjorkman, C. Fey, & H. Park, 2007, Institutional theory and 
MNC subsidiary HRM practices, JIBS, 38: 430–446.
30  R. Schuler, P. Budhwar, & G. Florkowski, 2002, International 
HRM (p. 56), IJMR, 4: 71–70.
31 BW, 2005, HP’s French twist, October 10: 52–53.
32  N. Ando, D. Rhee, & N. Park, 2008, Parent country nationals or 
local nationals for executive positions in foreign affiliates, APJM, 
25: 113–134; D. Brock, O. Shenkar, A. Shoham, & I. Siscovick, 2008, 
National culture and expatriate deployment, JIBS, 39: 1293–1309; 
R. Belderbos & M. Heijltjes, 2005, The determinants of expatriate 
staffing by Japanese multinationals in Asia, JIBS, 36: 341–354.
33  Y. Paik & J. Sohn, 2004, Expatriate managers and MNCs’ ability 
to control international subsidiaries, JWB, 39: 61–71.
34 C. Chen, 1995, New trends in allocation preferences, AMJ, 38: 
408–428.
35 S. Toh & A. DeNisi, 2005, A local perspective to expatriate suc-
cess, AME, 19: 132–146.
36 Economist Intelligence Unit, 2010, Up or Out: Next Moves for the 
Modern Expatriate, London: The Economist.
37 HBR, 2011, Developing your global know-how, March: 72.
38 D. Holtbrugge, C. Friedmann, & J. Puck, 2010, Recruitment and re-
tention in foreign firms in India, HRM, 49: 439–455; K. Mossholder,  
H. Richardson, & R. Settoon, 2011, HR systems and helping in orga-
nizations, AMR, 36: 33–52.
39 S. Kang, S. Morris, & S. Snell, 2007, Relational archetypes, orga-
nizational learning, and value creation, AMR, 32: 236–256; K. Law, 
D. Tse, & N. Zhou, 2003, Does HR matter in a transition economy? 
JIBS, 34: 255–265.
40 W. Arthur, W. Bennett, P. Edens, & S. Bell, 2003, Effectiveness of 
training in organizations, JAP, 88: 234–245.
41 J. Arthur & T. Boyles, 2007. Validating the HR system structure, 
HRMR, 12: 77–92; B. Colbert, 2004, The complex resource-based 
view, AMR, 28: 341–358; D. Lepak & S. Snell, 1999, The HR architec-
ture, AMR, 24: 31–48.
42 A. Tsui & J. Wu, 2005, The new employment relationship versus 
the mutual investment approach, HRM, 44: 115–121.
43 J. Shaw, M. Dufy, J. Johnson, & D. Lockhart, 2005, Turnover, 
social capital losses, and performance, AMJ, 48: 594–606; D. Wang, 
A. Tsui, Y. Zhang, & L. Ma, 2003, Employment relationships and 
firm performance, JOB, 24: 511–535.
44 D. Zoogah, D. Vora, O. Richard, & M. W. Peng, 2011, Strategic 
alliance team diversity, coordination, and effectiveness, IJHRM, 22: 
510–529.
45 A. Joshi & H. Roh, 2009, The role of context in work team diver-
sity research, AMJ, 52: 599–627; O. Richard, B. Murthi, & K. Ismail, 
2007, The impact of racial diversity on intermediate and long-term 
performance, SMJ, 28: 1213–1233.
46 K. Dahlin, L. Weingart, & P. Hinds, 2005, Team diversity and 
information use, AMJ, 48: 1107–1123.
47 J. Brett, K. Behfar, & M. Kern, 2006, Managing multicultural 
teams, HBR, November: 84–91; P. Balkundi & D. Harrison, 2006, 
Ties, leaders, and time in teams, AMJ, 49: 49–68; M. Zellmer-Bruhn 
& C. Gibson, 2006, Multinational organization context, AMJ, 49: 
501–518.
48 J. Delery & D. Doty, 1996, Modes of theorizing in strategic HRM, 
AMJ, 39: 80–835.
49 J. M. Geringer, C. Frayne, & J. Milliman, 2002, In search of “best 
practices” in international HRM, HRM, 41: 5–30; M. von Glinow, 
E. Drost, & M. Teagarden, 2002, Converging on IHRM best prac-
tices, HRM, 41: 123–140.
50 P. Boxall & J. Purcell, 2000. Strategic HRM (p. 190), IJMR, 2: 
183–203. See A. Ferner, P. Almond, & T. Colling, 2005, Institutional 
theory and the cross-national transfer of employment policy, JIBS, 36: 
304–321; J. Gamble, 2006, Introducing Western-style HRM practices 
to China, JWB, 41: 328–343; P. Huo, J. Huang, & N. Napier, 2002, 
Divergence or convergence, HRM, 41: 31–44; W.  Newburry & 
N. Yakova, 2006, Standardization preferences, JIBS, 37: 44–60;  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 15   Managing Human Resources Globally	
521
O. Tregaski & C. Brewster, 2006. Converging or diverging? JIBS, 37: 
111–126.
51 B. Becker & M. Huselid, 2006, Strategic HRM (p. 905), JM, 32: 
898–925.
52 M. W. Peng, 2006, Making M&As fly in China, HBR, March: 26–27.
53 A. Yeung, 2006, Setting the people up for success, HRM, 45: 
267–275.
54 S. Parker, EMBA student in the author’s class, individual assign-
ment 1, University of Texas at Dallas, January 2007.
55 S. Colakoglu, D. Lepak, & Y. Hong, 2006, Measuring HRM effec-
tiveness, HRMR, 16: 209–218; D. Datta, J. Guthrie, & P. Wright, 2005, 
HRM and labor productivity, AMJ, 48: 135–145.
56 Becker & Huselid, 2006, Strategic HRM (p. 907).
57 J. Combs, D. Ketchen, A. Hall, & Y. Liu, 2006, Do high perfor-
mance work practices matter? PP, 59: 501–528.
58 S. Meisinger, 2005, The four Cs of the HR profession, HRM, 44: 
189–194.
59 BW, 2007, Secrets of an HR superstar, April 19: 66.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Gary Cameron/Reuters
Chapter 
16 
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
	 16-1	 outline the two means of financing 
decisions, equity and debt.
	16-2	 differentiate various ownership patterns 
around the world.
	16-3	 articulate the role of managers in both 
principal–agent and principal–principal conflicts.
	16-4	 explain the role of the board of directors.
	16-5	 identify voice-based and exit-based 
governance mechanisms and their 
combination as a package.
	16-6	 acquire a global perspective on how 
governance mechanisms vary around the 
world.
	16-7	 articulate how institutions and resources 
affect corporate finance and governance.
	16-8	 participate in two leading debates concerning 
corporate finance and governance.
	16-9	 draw implications for action.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Financing and Governing 
the Corporation Globally
Prior to the 2008–2009 recession, GE Capital had 
been the poster child among GE’s many units that 
operate in numerous unrelated product industries 
ranging from aircraft engines to power generators. 
GE Capital relates to all of them by financing their 
customers. Founded in 1932, GE Capital grew to be 
the largest and most important unit within GE, con-
tributing 37% of GE’s revenues but 55% of the profits 
in 2007. In addition to financing customer purchases 
of GE products, GE Capital undertook a series of 
activities that are purely financial in nature, such as 
property loans and credit cards. Geographically, GE 
Capital is active globally. It has 60,000 employees in 
over 50 countries. If GE Capital were an independent 
bank, it would be the seventh largest bank in the Unit-
ed States, after JP Morgan Chase, Citigroup, Bank of 
America, Wells Fargo, Goldman Sachs, and Morgan 
Stanley (in descending order of size).
GE Capital’s funding model is systematically re-
lated to the risk of the wider financial markets. As a 
non-bank financial institution, it had few retail deposits. 
To fund its lending, GE Capital actively borrowed from 
credit markets, taking advantage of GE’s prized AAA 
credit rating. When credit was plenty, these cheap 
funds propelled GE Capital to scale new heights. But 
when financial markets took a nasty turn in 2008, the 
results were disastrous. In 2009, both GE and GE 
Capital lost their AAA credit rating, being downgraded 
by Standard & Poor’s (S&P) to AA1.
In response, GE tapped cheap credit lines backed 
by the US government’s Temporary Liquidity Guaran-
tee Program (TLGP), reduced GE Capital’s exposure to 
the short-term commercial-paper market, and secured 
more long-term debt. In 2008, GE raised $15 billion 
from a group of investors, including Warren Buffett’s 
Berkshire Hathaway. In an effort to preserve cash to 
stem GE Capital’s losses, GE slashed dividends by 
two-thirds in 2009. A bitter blow to GE’s shareholders, 
this cut was the first time GE reduced its dividends 
since 1938.
There were rumors that after nursing GE Capital 
back to health, GE might sell it. GE CEO Jeff Immelt 
insisted that would not happen. Given GE Capital’s 
competitive advantage in GE’s core product areas, 
such as aviation, media, and energy infrastructure, 
giving it up would be inadvisable. But the goal would 
be to shrink its scale so that it would represent no 
more than 30% of GE’s profit and to reduce its lever-
age. Specifically, GE wanted to make it smaller, less 
risky, and more obviously different from Wall Street 
banks. As a result, GE Capital jettisoned a series of 
unrelated businesses, such as a leasing business in 
South Korea and consumer banks in Argentina, Brazil, 
and Latvia.
O p e n i n g  C a s e
GE Capital
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

524	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
How is GE Capital financed? How does it finance the purchase of GE products such 
as aircraft engines and power generators? How are firms such as GE governed? 
Could they have done differently in their governance structure so that they would 
have avoided the financial mess? How can they improve the effectiveness of their 
financing and governance in the future? These are some of the key questions driving 
this chapter, which focuses on how to finance and govern the corporation around the 
world. Financing refers to how a firm’s money, banking, investments, and credit are 
managed. Corporate governance is “the relationship among various participants in de-
termining the direction and performance of corporations.”1 The primary participants 
in corporate governance are (1) owners, (2) managers, and (3) boards of directors—
collectively known as the “tripod” (Figure 16.1). 
We start by outlining the two means of financing decisions, issue equity or bonds. 
Then we discuss each of the three legs of the corporate governance “tripod.” Next, 
we introduce internal and external governance mechanisms from a global perspec-
tive. Then, institution-based and resource-based views on corporate finance and gover-
nance are outlined. As before, debates and extensions follow.
Financing
How a firm’s money, banking, 
investments, and credit are 
managed.
Corporate governance
The relationship among various 
participants in determining the 
direction and performance of 
corporations.
To some extent, the rescue efforts undertaken 
by GE to save GE Capital, in the worst of economic 
times, were similar to the bailout efforts undertaken 
by Washington to save Wall Street. As some financial 
services firms became “too big to fail,” Washington 
felt compelled to bail them out at taxpayers’ expenses. 
Likewise, as GE Capital became “too big to fail” within 
GE, Immelt had to mobilize resources to bail out the 
financial services division at the expense of GE’s other 
units and shareholders. In comparison with the mess 
that other financial services firms were in, GE Capital’s 
was not too bad. When compared to banks, GE Capital 
had less consumer exposure and no US mortgage or 
auto exposure, and GE Capital’s holdings were more 
global. However, as a company that has long been 
regarded as a model of management excellence, GE 
Capital tarnished GE’s reputation, causing the Econo-
mist to use the following unflattering title to write 
about GE in 2009: “Losing Its Magic Touch.” In 2011, 
GE Capital doubled its profits to $6.5 billion. While a far 
cry from its 2007 profits of $12 billion, GE Capital was 
once again praised by Immelt as a “strong and prof-
itable” business. Once a millstone, GE Capital again 
became a pillar of GE’s earnings.
Sources: Based on (1) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2011, Determined to 
keep it, GE tames GE Capital, December 5: 28–29; (2) Economist, 2009, 
General Electric: Losing its magic touch, March 21: 73–75; (3) GE, 2009, 
Live from New York, it’s GE Capital, March 19, www.gereports.com; 
(4) New York Times, 2012, Once a millstone, GE Capital is now a profit 
center, January 20. 
Owners
Board of
Directors
Managers
Figure 16.1
The Tripod of Corporate Governance
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 16   Financing and Governing the Corporation Globally	
525
16-1 Financing Decisions
Because finance is the lifeblood of the firm, financing decisions are very important. 
Firms, of course, can finance their operations using their own money. But beyond 
firms’ own money, what are the external sources of financing? Broadly, firms’ exter-
nal sources of financing can be classified as (1) equity and (2) debt.2 The decision 
on which way to go boils down to the cost of financing.
16-1a Equity and Debt
Equity refers to the stock (usually expressed in shares) in a firm, which is an em-
bodiment of equity holders’ rights as the firm’s owners. Firm owners are often 
known as shareholders. Ranging from entrepreneurial start-ups to multinational 
enterprises (MNEs), all firms need to raise capital. Shareholders, by definition, 
share the firm’s income generated by its operations, and the firm honors this claim 
by paying dividends. However, the amount of dividends is not fixed and is deter-
mined by management. As shown in the Opening Case, management may decide 
to curtail or cancel dividends. Shareholders purchase stock both for dividends and 
for the growth potential of the stock.3 Firms issue equity to attract investors to 
become shareholders so that firms can access a larger pool of capital that is at man-
agement’s discretion.
Debt refers to a loan that the firm needs to pay back at a given time with inter-
est. The loan is called a bond and is issued by the firm and held by debtors known 
as bondholders. Management has little discretion over a bond. Unlike dividends, 
which can be curtailed or cancelled, the firm has to pay back its bondholders on 
time. Otherwise, it will be in default—failure to satisfy the terms of a loan obliga-
tion. Short of a default, bondholders will get their money back with interest.4 In 
other words, relative to shareholders, bondholders face a lower level of uncertainty. 
16-1b Reducing the Cost of Capital
Financing decisions are primarily driven by the cost of capital, which is the rate 
of return that the firm needs to pay to capital providers.5 For equity, the cost of 
capital is the dividend. For bonds, the cost of capital is the interest. Basic laws in 
supply and demand suggest that in general, the larger the pool of capital provid-
ers, the lower the cost of capital. This can be illustrated in Figure 16.2, using basic 
supply-and-demand curves. Hypothetically, if GE Capital (in the Opening Case) 
could only borrow from the United States, to sell a $10 million bond, it would have 
to pay a 15% interest rate (point A). However, if GE Capital could tap into a global 
pool (and a larger supply) of capital providers, which by definition is larger than 
the domestic pool, it could sell a $10 million bond for only a 10% interest rate 
(point B). Further, GE Capital may be able to raise $20 million at a 12% interest 
rate (point C).
This analysis has major ramifications both for firms’ appetite to tap into global 
capital markets and for financial services providers’ interest to serve this demand 
on a worldwide basis. Many firms have listed their stocks not only on their domestic 
stock exchanges but also on many foreign stock exchanges. Listing shares on foreign 
stock exchanges is known as cross-listing. The New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) 
and NASDAQ have a lot of non-US firms listed. The London Stock Exchange (LSE) 
Learning Objective
Outline the two means of 
financing decisions, equity 
and debt.
16-1
Equity
The stock in a firm (usually 
expressed in shares), which 
represents the owners’ rights.
Shareholder
Firm owner.
Debt
A loan that the firm needs to 
pay back at a given time with 
an interest.
Bond
Loan issued by the firm and 
held by creditors.
Bondholder
Buyer of bonds.
Default
A firm’s failure to satisfy the 
terms of a loan obligation.
Cost of capital
The rate of return that a firm 
needs to pay to capital providers.
Cross-listing
Listing shares on a foreign 
stock exchange.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

526	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
attracts numerous non-UK firms. The Hong Kong Stock Exchange benefits from 
the gush of mainland Chinese listings. Cross-listing has numerous costs, especially 
the more expensive preparation to meet the reporting and compliance require-
ments of foreign securities authorities. Despite the costs, numerous firms have 
cross-listed their shares overseas because the benefits, which are primarily derived 
from a lower cost of capital, outweigh the costs. Likewise, now approximately 30% 
of the bonds are now international bonds, which can be sold at a lower interest rate 
than domestically.
Obviously, financing decisions—whether to issue stocks or bonds—are cru-
cial because they can make or break a firm. Drawing from our Opening Case, 
we can say that GE became such a powerful MNE, in part, because GE Capital 
made a series of smart financing decisions until recently. We can also suggest that 
one of the primary reasons that GE was in trouble in the 2008 crisis was that GE 
Capital messed up a number of financing decisions—first overborrowing from the 
bond markets when financing was cheap, and then overlending to many customers 
around the world who were not creditworthy. Overall, how firms safeguard and 
advance the interest of owners as providers of capital is at the heart of corporate 
governance, a topic to which we turn next.
16-2 Owners
Owners provide capital, bear risks, and own the firm.6 Three broad patterns exist: 
(1) concentrated versus diffused ownership, (2) family ownership, and (3) state 
ownership.
Learning Objective
Differentiate various ownership 
patterns around the world.
16-2
C 
B 
A 
Amount of
bond 
$10 million 
$20 million 
Demand 
Supply (Global) 
Supply (Domestic) 
Cost of capital
(interest) 
15%
12%
10%
Figure 16.2
Cost of Capital Is Lower Globally Than Domestically
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 16   Financing and Governing the Corporation Globally	
527
16-2a Concentrated versus Diffused Ownership
Founders usually start up firms and completely own and control them. This 
is referred to as concentrated ownership and control. However, at some point, 
if the firm aspires to grow and needs more capital, the owners’ desire to 
keep the firm in family hands will have to accommodate the arrival of other 
shareholders. Approximately 80% of listed US firms and 90% of listed UK 
firms are now characterized by diffused ownership, with numerous small share-
holders but none with a dominant level of control.7 In such firms, there is a 
separation of ownership and control, in that ownership is dispersed among many 
small shareholders and control is largely concentrated in the hands of salaried 
professional managers who own little (or no) equity. In short, this refers to 
separation of ownership (by dispersed shareholders) and day-to-day control (by 
managers).
If majority or dominant owners (such as founders) do not personally run the 
firm, they are naturally interested in keeping a close eye on how the firm is run. 
However, dispersed owners, each with a small stake, have neither incentives nor 
resources to do so. Most small shareholders do not bother to show up at annual 
shareholder meetings. They prefer to free-ride and hope that other shareholders 
will properly monitor and discipline managers. If small shareholders are not 
happy, they will simply sell the stock and invest elsewhere. However, if all share-
holders were to behave in this manner, then no shareholder would care, and 
managers would end up acquiring significant de facto control power.
The rise of institutional investors, such as professionally managed mutual 
funds and pension pools, has significantly changed this picture.8 Institutional 
investors have both incentives and resources to closely monitor and control 
managerial actions. However, the increased size of institutional holdings limits 
the ability of institutional investors to dump the stock. This is because when 
one’s stake is large enough, selling out depresses the share price and harms the 
seller.
While the image of widely held corporations is a reasonably accurate descrip-
tion of most modern large US and UK firms, it is not the case in other parts of 
the world. Outside the Anglo-American world, there is relatively little separation 
of ownership and control. Most large firms are typically owned and controlled by 
families or the state.9 Next, we turn our attention to such firms.
16-2b Family Ownership
The vast majority of large firms throughout continental Europe, Asia, Latin 
America, and Africa feature concentrated family ownership and control. On 
the positive side, family ownership and control may provide better incentives for 
the firm to focus on long-term performance. It may also minimize the conflicts 
between owners and professional managers typically encountered in widely owned 
firms. However, on the negative side, family ownership and control may lead to 
the selection of less-qualified managers (who happen to be the sons, daughters, 
and relatives of founders), the destruction of value because of family conflicts, and 
the expropriation of minority shareholders (discussed later). At present, there is 
no conclusive evidence on the positive or negative role of family ownership and 
control on the performance of large firms.10
Concentrated ownership 
and control
Founders start up firms and 
completely own and control 
them on an individual or family 
basis.
Diffused ownership
Publicly traded corporations 
owned by numerous small 
shareholders but none with a 
dominant level of control.
Separation of ownership 
and control
The dispersal of ownership 
among many small sharehold-
ers, in which control is largely 
concentrated in the hands of 
salaried, professional managers 
who own little (or no) equity.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

528	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
16-2c State Ownership
Other than families, the state is another major owner of firms around the world. 
Since the 1980s, many countries—ranging from Britain to Brazil to Belarus—have 
realized that their state-owned enterprises (SOEs) often perform poorly. SOEs 
typically suffer from an incentive problem. Although in theory, all citizens (in-
cluding employees) are owners, in practice, they have neither the rights to enjoy 
dividends generated from SOEs (as shareholders would) nor the rights to transfer 
or sell “their” property. SOEs are de facto owned and controlled by government 
agencies far removed from ordinary citizens and employees. Thus, SOE manag-
ers and employees have little motivation to improve performance, which they can 
hardly benefit from personally. In a most cynical fashion, SOE employees in the 
former Soviet Union summed it up well: “They pretend to pay us, and we pretend 
to work.” A wave of privatization has hit the world since the 1980s. However, SOEs 
have staged a spectacular comeback recently.11 In 2008, many governments in de-
veloped economies nationalized major firms ranging from General Motors (GM, 
which reads “Government Motors”) to Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS) in order to 
prevent massive bankruptcies and job losses. Like the swing of a pendulum (see 
Chapter 1), the upsurge of state ownership has wiped out a substantial chunk of 
the gains of privatization.
16-3 Managers
Managers, especially executives on the top management team (TMT) led by the chief 
executive officer (CEO), represent another crucial leg of the corporate governance 
“tripod.”
16-3a Principal–Agent Conflicts
The relationship between shareholders and professional managers is a relation-
ship between principals and agents—in short, an agency relationship. Principals 
are persons (such as owners) delegating authority, and agents are persons (such 
as managers) to whom authority is delegated. Agency theory suggests a simple, yet 
profound, proposition: To the extent that the interests of principals and agents do 
not completely overlap, there will inherently be principal–agent conflicts. These con-
flicts result in agency costs, including (1) the principals’ costs of monitoring and 
controlling the agents and (2) the agents’ costs of bonding (signaling their trust-
worthiness).12 In a corporate setting, when shareholders (principals) are interested 
in maximizing the long-term value of their stock, managers (agents) may be more 
interested in maximizing their own power, income, and perks.
Manifestations of agency problems include excessive executive compensation, 
on-the-job consumption (such as corporate jets), low-risk short-term investments 
(such as maximizing current earnings while cutting long-term R&D), and empire-
building (such as value-destroying acquisitions). Consider executive compensation. 
In 1980, the average US CEO earned approximately 40 times what the average worker 
earned. Today, the ratio is 400 times. Despite some performance improvement, it 
seems difficult to argue that the average firm CEO improved performance 10 times 
faster than her workers since 1980, and thus deserved the salary of 400 workers 
today. In other words, one can “smell” some agency costs.
Learning Objective
Articulate the role of managers 
in both principal–agent and 
principal–principal conflicts.
16-3
Top management team (TMT)
The team consisting of the 
highest level of executives of a 
firm led by the CEO.
Chief executive officer (CEO)
The main executive manager in 
charge of the firm.
Agency relationship
The relationship between prin-
cipals (such as shareholders) 
and agents (such as professional 
managers).
Principal
A person (such as owner) 
delegating authority.
Agent
A person (such as manager) to 
whom authority is delegated.
Agency theory
A theory that focuses on 
principal–agent relationships (or 
in short, agency relationships).
Principal–agent conflicts
Conflicts between principals 
and agents.
Agency costs
The costs associated with 
principal–agent relationships.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 16   Financing and Governing the Corporation Globally	
529
Directly measuring agency costs, however, is dif-
ficult. In two most innovative (and hair-raising) stud-
ies to measure agency costs directly, scholars find that 
some sudden CEO deaths (plane crashes or heart at-
tacks) are accompanied by an increase in share prices 
of their firms.13 These CEOs reduced agency costs that 
shareholders had to shoulder by dropping dead (!). 
Conversely, we could imagine how much value these 
CEOs destroyed when they had been alive. The capital 
market, sadly, was pleased with such human tragedies.
The primary reason agency problems persist is 
because of information asymmetries between prin-
cipals and agents—that is, agents such as managers 
almost always know more about the property they 
manage than principals do. While it is possible to re-
duce information asymmetries through governance 
mechanisms, it is not realistic to completely eliminate 
agency problems.
16-3b Principal–Principal Conflicts
Since concentrated ownership and control by families is the norm in many parts of 
the world, different kinds of conflicts are at play. One of the leading indicators of 
concentrated family ownership and control is the appointment of family members 
as board chairman, CEO, and other TMT members. In East Asia, approximately 
57% of the corporations have board chairmen and CEOs from the controlling 
families.14 In continental Europe, the number is 68%.15 The families are able to do 
so because they are controlling (although not necessarily majority) shareholders. 
For example, at News Corporation, neither the board nor angry shareholders can 
get rid of the Murdochs, who are controlling shareholders (In Focus 16.1).
Information asymmetries
Asymmetric distribution and 
possession of information 
between two sides.
Do you think US CEOs and other top executives 
deserve high-end benefits, such as private trans-
portation, substantial bonuses, and salaries as 
much as 400 times the average blue-collar worker?
Comstock Images/Getty Images
Founded in Adelaide, Australia, News Corporation (in 
short, News Corp.) is now headquartered in New York  
and listed on the NASDAQ with secondary listings 
on the Australian Securities Exchange. While the 
unethical conduct of its British tabloid operations 
rocked the world in 2011, this was not the first time 
News Corp., which enjoys reporting controversies of 
others, stirred up controversies itself. One consistent 
theme of controversies is how Rupert Murdoch and 
his family as controlling shareholders treat minority 
shareholders.
Exhibit A: In 2003, the 30-year-old James Murdoch 
became CEO of BSkyB, Europe’s largest satellite 
broadcaster, in the face of loud minority shareholder 
resistance. The reason? James’ father Rupert con-
trolled 35% of BSkyB equity and controlled the board.
Exhibit B: In 2007, Rupert Murdoch pursued a pet 
project by paying a rich $5.6 billion price to buy Dow 
Jones, publisher of the Wall Street Journal—against 
the wishes of numerous minority shareholders and 
the advice of Peter Chernin, News Corp. president and 
a non-family member. The upshot? After four months, 
Principal–Principal Conflicts at News Corporation
IN Focus 16.1 
Ethical 
Dilemma
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

530	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
The Murdochs case is a classic example of the conflicts in family-owned and 
family-controlled firms. Instead of between principals (shareholders) and agents 
(professional managers), the primary conflicts are between two classes of prin-
cipals: controlling shareholders and minority shareholders—in other words, 
principal–principal conflicts16 (Figure 16.3 and Table 16.1). Family managers such 
as the Murdochs, who represent (or are) controlling shareholders, may advance 
family interests at the expense of minority shareholders. Controlling shareholders’ 
dominant positions as both principals and agents (managers) may allow them to 
override traditional governance mechanisms designed to curtail principal–agent 
conflicts such as the board of directors.
One manifestation of principal–principal conflicts is that family managers 
may have the potential to engage in expropriation of minority shareholders, de-
fined as activities that enrich controlling shareholders at the expense of minor-
ity shareholders. For example, managers from the controlling family may simply 
divert resources from the firm for personal or family use. This activity is vividly 
nicknamed “tunneling”—digging a tunnel to sneak resources out.17 While such 
“tunneling” (often known as “corporate theft”) is illegal, expropriation can be 
legally done through related transactions, whereby controlling owners buy firm 
assets from another firm they own at above-market prices or spin off the most 
Principal–principal conflicts
Conflicts between two classes 
of principals: controlling 
shareholders and minority 
shareholders.
Expropriation
Activities that enrich controlling 
shareholders at the expense of 
minority shareholders.
Tunneling
A form of corporate theft that 
diverts resources from the firm 
for personal or family use. 
Related transactions
Controlling shareholders sell firm 
assets to another firm they own 
at below-market prices or spin 
off the most profitable part of 
a public firm and merge it with 
another private firm they own.
News Corp. wrote down its value by $2.8 billion; in 
2009, Chernin left.
 Exhibit C: In 2011, in a related transaction News 
Corp. announced that it would pay $673 million to buy 
Shine Group, a London–based media studio owned 
by Rupert’s daughter Elisabeth Murdoch. While Shine 
produced some hit shows such as NBC’s The Office 
and The Biggest Loser, minority shareholders alleged 
that News Corp. had overpaid for Shine with 13.1 times 
Shine’s $45.6 million in earnings before interest, 
taxes, depreciation, and amortization (EBITDA). In con-
trast, Apollo Global Management, a leading private 
equity firm, paid $510 million to purchase American 
Idol owner  CKx, a deal valued at 8.5  times CKx’s 
$60.23  million in EBITDA. Frustrated minority share-
holders, such as Amalgamated Bank and other pension 
funds, filed a lawsuit in Delaware (where News Corp. is 
registered) to block the sale. The complaint alleged that:
Murdoch did not even pretend there was a 
valid strategic purpose for News Corp. to buy 
Shine. . . . The transaction is a naked and selfish 
endeavor by Murdoch to further infuse the 
upper ranks of News Corp. with his offspring.
Rupert Murdoch has been named by the Econ-
omist as the “last of the moguls.” The problem is 
that “no one could say no to Rupert Murdoch,” 
according to Michael Wolff, author of Murdoch’s 
biography The Man Who Owns the News. As a 
result, News Corp.’s stock performance has trailed 
behind that of its largest rivals such as Time Warner, 
Walt Disney, and Viacom. “There’s just this sort of 
generic Murdoch discount, which encompasses 
the concern that he will make decisions that are 
not consistent with other shareholder interests,” 
noted one analyst. In 2011, before a British parlia-
mentary committee on News Corp.’s UK tabloid 
subsidiary’s alleged unethical conduct, the 80-year-
old Rupert Murdoch paused alarmingly and fumbled 
embarrassingly. “Yet, as the halting performance of 
News Corporation’s boss was beamed around the 
world,” observed the Economist, “the firm’s stock 
rose.”
Sources: Based on (1) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2011, Will the scan-
dal tame Murdoch? July 25: 18–20; (2) Economist, 2011, How to lose 
friends and alienate people, July 16: 25–27; (3) Economist, 2011, Last 
of the moguls, July 23: 9.
IN Focus 16.1 (continued)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 16   Financing and Governing the Corporation Globally	
531
Table 16.1
Principal–Agent versus Principal–Principal Conflicts
Principal–Agent conflicts
Principal–Principal conflicts
Ownership pattern
Dispersed—shareholders holding 5% of equity 
are regarded as “blockholders.”
Dominant—often greater than 50% of equity is 
controlled by the largest shareholders.
Manifestations
Strategies that benefit entrenched managers at 
the expense of shareholders (such as shirking, 
excessive compensation, and empire building).
Strategies that benefit controlling shareholders 
at the expense of minority shareholders (such 
as minority shareholder expropriation and 
cronyism). 
Protection of minority 
shareholders
Courts are more protective of minority 
shareholder rights. Informal norms support 
this view.
Formal institutional protection is often lacking. 
Informal norms favor controlling shareholders.
Market for corporate 
control
Active, at least in principle as the “governance 
mechanism of last resort.”
Inactive even in principle. Concentrated 
ownership thwarts notions of takeover.
Source: Adapted from M. Young, M. W. Peng, D. Ahlstrom, G. Bruton, & Y. Jiang, 2008, Corporate governance in emerging economies: A review of the 
principal–principal perspective (p. 202), Journal of Management Studies, 45: 196–220.
Minority
shareholders
Principal–Agent Conﬂicts
Professional
managers
Minority
shareholders
Principal–Principal Conﬂicts
Family managers
are appointed
by controlling
h
h ld
Family
managers
Controlling
shareholders
Figure 16.3
Principal–Agent Conflicts and Principal–Principal Conflicts
Source: M. Young, M. W. Peng, D. Ahlstrom, G. Bruton, & Y. Jiang, 2008, Corporate governance in emerg-
ing economies: A review of the principal–principal perspective (p. 200), Journal of Management Studies, 45:  
196–220.
profitable part of a public firm and merge it with another private firm of theirs 
(see In Focus 16.1).
Overall, while corporate governance practice and research traditionally focus 
on how to control professional managers because of the separation of ownership 
and control in a majority of US and UK firms, how to govern family managers 
in firms with concentrated ownership and control is of equal or higher impor-
tance around the world (including in certain US and UK firms, such as News 
Corporation).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

532	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
16-4 Board of Directors
As an intermediary between owners and managers, the board of directors oversees 
and ratifies strategic decisions and evaluates, rewards, and, if necessary, penalizes 
top managers.
16-4a Board Composition
Otherwise known as the insider/outsider mix, board composition has recently at-
tracted significant attention. Inside directors are top executives of the firm. The 
trend around the world is to introduce more outside (or independent) directors, 
defined as non-management members of the board. Often ideally labeled “inde-
pendent directors,” outside directors are presumably more independent and can 
better safeguard shareholder interests.
Although there is a widely held belief in favor of a higher proportion of out-
side directors, academic research has failed to empirically establish a link between 
the outsider/insider ratio and firm performance (see Emerging Markets 16.1).18 
Even “stellar” firms with a majority of outside directors on the board (on average 
74% of outside directors at Enron, Global Crossing, and Tyco before their scandals 
erupted) can still be plagued by governance problems. In the world’s largest finan-
cial services firms, the more outside directors on the board, the worse their stock 
returns during the 2008 crisis (see the Closing Case).
It is possible that some of these outside directors are affiliated directors who 
may have family, business, and/or professional relationships with the firm or firm 
management. In other words, such affiliated outside directors are not necessarily 
“independent.”
16-4b Leadership Structure
Whether the board is led by a separate chairman or by the CEO who doubles as a 
chairman—a situation known as CEO duality—is also important. From an agency the-
ory standpoint, if the board is to supervise agents such as the CEO, it seems imperative 
that the board be chaired by a separate individual. Otherwise, how can the CEO be 
evaluated by the body that he or she chairs? In other words, can a schoolboy grade his 
own papers? However, a corporation led by two top leaders (a board chairman and a 
CEO) may lack a unity of command and experience top-level conflicts. As a powerful 
executive, a CEO obviously does not appreciate being constantly second-guessed by a 
board chairman. Not surprisingly, there is significant divergence across countries. For 
instance, while a majority of the large UK firms separate the two top jobs, many large 
US firms combine them. One practical difficulty often cited by US boards is that it is 
very hard to recruit a capable CEO without the board chairman title.
Academic research is inconclusive on whether CEO duality (or non-duality) is 
more effective.19 However, pressures have arisen around the world for firms to split 
the two jobs to at least show that they are serious about controlling the CEO (see 
the Closing Case).
16-4c The Role of Boards of Directors
In a nutshell, boards of directors perform (1) control, (2) service, and (3) resource 
acquisition functions. Boards’ effectiveness in serving the control function stems 
from their independence, deterrence, and norms. Specifically:
Learning Objective
Explain the role of the board of 
directors.
16-4
Inside director
A member of the board who is a 
top executive of the firm.
Outside director
A nonmanagement member of 
the board.
CEO duality
The CEO doubles as a chairman 
of the board.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 16   Financing and Governing the Corporation Globally	
533
 	 The ability to effectively control managers boils down to how independent di-
rectors are. Outside directors who are personally friendly and loyal to the 
CEO are unlikely to challenge managerial decisions. Exactly for this reason, 
CEOs often nominate family members, personal friends, and other passive 
directors.20
 	 There is a lack of deterrence on the part of directors should they fail to protect 
shareholder interests. Courts usually will not second-guess board decisions in 
the absence of bad faith or insider dealing.
 	 When challenging management, directors have few norms to draw on. Direc-
tors who “stick their necks out” by confronting the CEO in meetings tend to 
be frozen out of board deliberations.
Corporate governance reforms in China primar-
ily aim to curtail principal–agent conflicts in state-
owned enterprises (SOEs). Although in theory all 
citizens are owners, in practice they have neither 
the rights to enjoy dividends generated from SOEs 
(as real shareholders would), nor the rights to trans-
fer or sell “their” property. Further, they have zero 
influence in corporate governance. Not surprisingly, 
in traditional SOEs, principal–agent problems are 
rampant. Many managers abuse state assets, run 
SOEs into the ground, and are undisciplined.
During the reform era, the government, in an effort 
to tighten governance, has listed a large number of 
traditional SOEs on the Shanghai and Shenzhen Stock 
Exchanges. Such listed firms are still owned and con-
trolled by the state acting as a majority shareholder, 
but they also include other investors, such as insti-
tutional, individual, and foreign investors. Influenced 
by agency theory, Chinese policymakers, academ-
ics, and journalists widely believe that introducing 
outside (presumably independent) directors will curb 
principal–agent problems and enhance these firms’ 
financial performance. Consequently, as of 2002 
(ahead of SOX), listed firms in China are legally re-
quired to appoint outside directors to their boards. Do 
outside directors really have a positive influence on 
financial performance?
The answer from academic research is: Not really! 
From a resource-based view, even though a few out-
side directors may make a difference, if every firm has 
them, outside directors are no longer rare and are un-
able to help differentiate one firm from another. From 
an institution-based view, many outside directors are 
appointed for “window dressing” purposes. Many 
outside directors fail to show up at board meetings 
(and if they do show up, they evidently take a nap 
during the meetings). Finally, how independent some 
of these outside directors are remains questionable. 
Some may have family and/or professional relation-
ships with inside managers.
Academic research from Russia also reports a 
similar lack of impact of outside directors on firm per-
formance. In conclusion, policy prescription inspired 
by agency theory, such as the necessity to appoint 
outside directors, needs to be embraced with caution 
in emerging economies.
Outside Directors at Chinese Corporations 
E m e r g i n g  M a r k e t s  1 6 . 1
Ethical 
Dilemma
Sources: Based on (1) M. W. Peng, 2004, Outside directors and firm performance during institutional transitions, Strategic Management Journal, 25: 
453–471; (2) M. W. Peng, T. Buck, & I. Filatotchev, 2003, Do outside directors and new managers help improve firm performance? An exploratory study in 
Russian privatization, Journal of World Business, 38: 348–360; (3) M. W. Peng, S. Zhang, & X. Li, 2007, CEO duality and firm performance during China’s 
institutional transitions, Management and Organization Review, 3: 205–225; (4) M. Young, M. W. Peng, D. Ahlstrom, G. Bruton, & Y. Jiang, 2008, Corpo-
rate governance in emerging economies: A review of the principal–principal perspective, Journal of Management Studies, 45: 196–220. 
Danny Lehman/Corbis; Björn Meyer/sitox/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

534	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
In addition to control, another important function of the board is service—
primarily advising the CEO.21 Finally, another crucial board function is resource 
acquisition for the focal firm.22
Overall, until recently, many boards of directors simply “rubber stamp” (ap-
prove without scrutiny) managerial actions. Prior to the 1997 economic crisis, 
many South Korean boards did not bother to hold meetings, and so board deci-
sions were literally “rubber stamped”—not even by directors themselves, but by 
corporate secretaries who stamped the seals of all the directors, which were kept in 
the corporate office. However, change is in the air throughout the world. In South 
Korea, board meetings are now regularly held, and seals are personally stamped by 
the directors themselves.23
16-5 Governance Mechanisms As a Package
Governance mechanisms can be classified as internal and external ones—
otherwise known as voice-based and exit-based mechanisms, respectively. Voice-
based mechanisms refer to shareholders’ willingness to work with managers, usually 
through the board, by “voicing” their concerns. Exit-based mechanisms indicate 
that shareholders no longer have patience and are willing to “exit” by selling their 
shares. This section outlines these mechanisms.
16-5a Internal (Voice-Based) Governance Mechanisms
The two internal governance mechanisms typically employed by boards can be 
characterized as (1) “carrots” and (2) “sticks.” In order to better motivate manag-
ers, increasing executive compensation as “carrots” is often a must. Stock options 
that help align the interests of managers and shareholders have become increas-
ingly popular.24 The underlying idea is pay for performance, which seeks to link 
executive compensation with firm performance.25 While in principle this idea is 
sound, in practice it has a number of drawbacks. If accounting-based measures 
(such as return on sales) are used, managers are often able to manipulate num-
bers to make them look better. If market-based measures (such as stock prices) are 
adopted, stock prices obviously are subject to too many forces beyond managers’ 
control. Consequently, the pay-for-performance 
link in executive compensation is usually not very 
strong.26
In general, boards are likely to use “carrots” 
before considering “sticks.” However, when facing 
continued performance failures, boards may have 
to dismiss the CEO.27 Among the world’s 2,500 
largest listed firms, CEO tenure has decreased 
from 8.1 years in 2000 to 6.3 years in 2012 (see the 
Closing Case). In 2010, 12% of these firms changed 
CEOs.28 In brief, boards seem to be more “trigger 
happy” recently. Case in point: Léo Apotheker only 
served ten months as CEO of HP before the board 
fired him.
Because top managers must shoulder substan-
tial firm-specific employment risk (a fired CEO  
Learning Objective
Identify voice-based and exit-
based governance mechanisms 
and their combination as a 
package.
16-5
Voice-based mechanisms
Corporate governance mecha-
nisms that focus on sharehold-
ers’ willingness to work with 
managers, usually through 
the board, by “voicing” their 
concerns.
Exit-based mechanisms
Corporate governance mecha-
nisms that focus on exit, indicat-
ing that shareholders no longer 
have patience and are willing to 
“exit” by selling their shares.
What are some of the “carrots” and “sticks” that 
boards use as internal governance mechanisms?
Sullivan/PhotoLibrary 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 16   Financing and Governing the Corporation Globally	
535
such as Apotheker is extremely unlikely to run another publicly traded company), 
they naturally demand more generous compensation—a premium on the order of 
30% or more—before taking on new CEO jobs. This in part explains the rapidly 
rising levels of executive compensation.29
16-5b External (Exit-Based) Governance Mechanisms
There are three external governance mechanisms: (1) market for product 
competition, (2) market for corporate control, and (3) market for private equity. 
Product market competition is a powerful force compelling managers to maximize 
profits and, in turn, shareholder value. However, from a corporate governance per-
spective, product market competition complements the market for corporate control 
and the market for private equity, each of which is outlined next.
The Market for Corporate Control. This is the main external governance mech-
anism, otherwise known as the takeover market or the mergers and acquisitions 
(M&A) market (see Chapter 12). It is essentially an arena where different man-
agement teams contest for the control rights of corporate assets. As an external 
governance mechanism, the market for corporate control serves as a disciplining 
mechanism of last resort when internal governance mechanisms fail. The under-
lying logic is spelled out by agency theory, which suggests that when managers 
engage in self-interested actions and internal governance mechanisms fail, firm 
stock will be undervalued by investors. Under these circumstances, other manage-
ment teams, which recognize an opportunity to create new value, bid for the rights 
to manage the firm (see Chapter 12). How effective is the market for corporate 
control? Three findings emerge:
 	 On average, shareholders of target firms earn sizable acquisition premiums.
 	 Shareholders of acquiring firms experience slight but insignificant losses.
 	 A substantially higher level of top management turnover occurs following 
M&As.
In summary, while internal mechanisms aim at “fine-tuning,” the market for 
corporate control enables the “wholesale” removal of entrenched managers. As a 
radical approach, the market for corporate control has its own limitations. It is very 
costly to wage such financial battles, because acquirers must pay an acquisition pre-
mium. In addition, a large number of M&As are driven by acquirers’ sheer hubris 
or empire building,30 and the long-term profitability of post-merger firms is not 
particularly impressive (see Chapter 12).
Nevertheless, the net impact, at least in the short run, seems to be positive, 
because the threat of takeovers does limit managers’ divergence from shareholder 
wealth maximization. For example, in Japan, an increasingly credible threat of 
takeovers has been constraining managerial behavior.31
The Market for Private Equity. Instead of being taken over, a large number of 
publicly listed firms have gone private by tapping into private equity—equity capital 
invested in private (non-public) companies. Private equity is primarily invested 
through leveraged buyouts (LBOs). In an LBO, private investors, often in partner-
ship with incumbent managers, issue bonds and use the cash raised to buy the firm’s 
stock—in essence, replacing shareholders with bondholders and transforming the 
firm from a public to a private entity. As another external governance mechanism, 
Private equity
Equity capital invested in private 
companies that, by definition, 
are not publicly traded.
Leveraged buyout (LBO)
A means by which investors, 
often in partnership with incum-
bent managers, issue bonds and 
use the cash raised to buy the 
firm’s stock.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

536	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
private equity utilizes the bond market, as opposed to the stock market, to disci-
pline managers. LBO-based private equity transactions are associated with three 
major changes in corporate governance:
 	 LBOs change the incentives of managers by providing them with substantial 
equity stakes (typically 5% for the CEO and 16% for the whole top manage-
ment team).
 	 The high amount of debt imposes strong financial discipline.
 	 LBO sponsors closely monitor the firms they have invested in.
Overall, evidence suggests that private equity results in relatively small job loss-
es (about 1% to 2%) and improves efficiency by about 2%, at least in the short run.32 
The picture is less clear regarding the long run, because LBOs may have forced 
managers to reduce investments in long-term R&D. However, more recent research 
reports (1) that private equity-backed firms have more focused patents that gener-
ate better economic returns, and (2) that such firms do not suffer from a reduction 
of R&D in the long run.33
16-5c Internal Mechanisms 1 External Mechanisms 5 
Governance Package
Taken together, the internal and external mechanisms can be considered a “pack-
age.”34 Michael Jensen, a leading agency theorist, argues that in the United States, 
failures of internal governance mechanisms in the 1970s activated the market for 
corporate control in the 1980s. Managers initially resisted. However, over time, 
many firms that are not takeover targets or that have successfully defended them-
selves against such attempts end up restructuring and downsizing—doing exactly 
what “raiders” would have done had these firms been taken over. In other words, 
the strengthened external mechanisms force firms to improve their internal 
mechanisms.
Overall, since the 1980s, American managers have become much more focused 
on stock prices, resulting in a new term, “shareholder capitalism,” which has been 
spreading around the world. In Europe, executive stock options become popular 
and M&As more frequent. In Russia, some traces of modern corporate governance 
have emerged.35
16-6 A Global Perspective
Figure 16.4 illustrates how different corporate ownership and control patterns 
around the world lead to a different mix of internal and external mechanisms. 
The most familiar type is Cell 4, exemplified by most large US and UK firms. While 
external governance mechanisms (M&As and private equity) are active, internal 
mechanisms are relatively weak due to the separation of ownership and control 
that gives managers significant de facto control power.
The opposite can be found in Cell 1, namely, firms in continental Europe and 
Japan where the market for corporate control is relatively inactive (although there 
is more activity recently). Consequently, the primary governance mechanisms re-
main concentrated ownership and control.
Overall, the Anglo–American and continental European–Japanese (other-
wise known as German–Japanese) systems represent the two primary corporate 
Shareholder capitalism
A view of capitalism that sug-
gests that the most fundamental 
purpose for firms to exist is to 
serve the economic interests 
of shareholders (also known as 
capitalists).
Learning Objective
Acquire a global perspective on 
how governance mechanisms 
vary around the world.
16-6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 16   Financing and Governing the Corporation Globally	
537
governance families in the world, with a variety of labels (see Table 16.2). Given that 
both the United States and United Kingdom as a group and continental Europe 
and Japan as another group are highly developed and successful economies, it is 
difficult (and probably not meaningful) to argue whether the Anglo-American or 
German–Japanese system is better.
Some other systems do not easily fit into such a dichotomous world. Placed in 
Cell 2, Canada has both a relatively active market for corporate control and a large 
number of firms with concentrated ownership and control—over 380 of the 400 
largest Canadian firms are controlled by a single shareholder. Canadian managers 
thus face powerful internal and external constraints.
Finally, SOEs (of all nationalities) are in an unfortunate position of both weak 
external and internal governance mechanisms (Cell 3). Externally, the market for 
corporate control does not exist. Internally, managers are supervised by officials 
who act as de facto “owners” with little control.
External governance mechanisms
Internal governance mechanisms
Weak
Weak
Strong
Strong
(Cell 1)
Germany
Japan
(Cell 3)
State-owned
enterprises
(Cell 2)
Canada
(Cell 4)
United States
United Kingdom
Figure 16.4
Internal and External Governance Mechanisms: 
A Global Perspective 
Source: Cells 1, 2, and 4 are adapted from E. Gedajlovic & D. Shapiro, 1998, Management and ownership effects: 
Evidence from five countries (p. 539), Strategic Management Journal, 19: 533–553. The label of Cell 3 is suggested 
by the present author.
Table 16.2
Two Primary Families of Corporate Governance Systems
Corporations in the United States  
and United Kingdom
Corporations in Continental Europe  
and Japan
Anglo-American corporate governance 
models
German-Japanese corporate governance 
models
Market-oriented, high-tension systems
Bank-oriented, network-based systems
Rely mostly on exit-based, external 
mechanisms
Rely mostly on voice-based, internal 
mechanisms
Shareholder capitalism
Stakeholder capitalism
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

538	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
Overall, firms around the world are governed by a combination of internal and 
external mechanisms. For firms in Cells 1, 2, and 4, there is some partial substitu-
tion between internal and external mechanisms (for example, weak boards may be 
partially substituted by a strong market for corporate control).
16-7 Institutions, Resources, and Corporate 
Finance and Governance
The institution-based view posits that differences around the world are affected by 
formal securities laws, corporate charters, and codes as well as informal conventions, 
norms, and values—collectively known as “institutions.”36 The resource-based view 
argues that among a number of firms financed in the same way and governed by 
the same set of rules, some excel more than others because of differences in firm-
specific capabilities (Figure 16.5). This section examines these views.
16-7a Institutions and Corporate Finance and Governance
Formal Institutional Frameworks. A fundamental difference is between the sep-
aration of ownership and control in (most) Anglo-American firms and the con-
centration of ownership and control in the rest of the world. Why is there such a 
difference? While explanations abound, a leading answer is an institutional one. 
In brief, better formal legal protection of shareholder rights, especially those held 
by minority shareholders, in the United States and the United Kingdom encourages 
founding families to dilute their equity to attract minority shareholders and del-
egate day-to-day management to professional managers. Given reasonable investor 
protection, founding families themselves (such as the Rockefellers) may, over time, 
feel comfortable becoming minority shareholders of the firms they founded. On 
the other hand, when formal legal and regulatory institutions are dysfunctional, 
founding families must run their firms directly. In the absence of investor protec-
tion, inviting outside professional managers may invite abuse and theft.
Strong evidence exists that the weaker the formal legal and regulatory 
institutions protecting shareholders, the more concentrated the ownership 
and control rights become—in other words, there is some substitution between 
Learning Objective
Articulate how institutions 
and resources affect corporate 
finance and governance.
16-7
Institution-Based View
- Formal institutional frameworks
- Informal institutional frameworks
Resource-Based View
- Value
- Rarity
- Imitability
- Organization
Corporate
Finance and
Governance
Figure 16.5
Institutions, Resources, and Corporate Finance and Governance
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 16   Financing and Governing the Corporation Globally	
539
the two. Common-law countries generally have the strongest legal protection 
of investors and the lowest concentration of corporate ownership.37 Among 
common-law countries, such ownership concentration is higher for firms in 
emerging economies (such as Hong Kong, India, and Israel) than in developed 
economies (such as Australia, Canada, Ireland, and New Zealand). In short, con-
centrated ownership and control is an answer to potentially rampant principal–
agent conflicts in the absence of sufficient legal protection of shareholder rights.
However, what is good for controlling shareholders is not necessarily good for 
minority shareholders and for an economy. As noted earlier, the minimization of 
principal–agent conflicts through concentration of ownership and control, unfor-
tunately, introduces more principal–principal conflicts (see In Focus 16.1). Conse-
quently, many potential minority shareholders may refuse to invest. “How to avoid 
being expropriated as a minority shareholder?” One popular saying in Asia sug-
gests, “Don’t be one!” If minority shareholders are informed enough to be aware 
of these possibilities and still decide to invest, they are likely to discount the shares 
floated by family owners, resulting in lower valuations, fewer publicly traded firms, 
inactive and smaller capital markets, and, in turn, lower levels of economic develop-
ment in general.
Given that almost every country desires vibrant capital markets and economic 
development, it seems puzzling that Anglo-American-style investor protection is 
not universally embraced. It is important to note that at its core, corporate gov-
ernance ultimately is a choice about political governance. For largely historical 
reasons, most countries have made hard-to-reverse political choices. For example, 
the German practice of “codetermination” (employees control 50% of the votes on 
supervisory boards) is an outcome of political decisions made by post-war German 
governments.38 If German firms had Anglo-American–style dispersed ownership 
and still allowed employees to control 50% of the votes on supervisory boards, 
these firms would end up becoming employee-dominated firms. Thus, concentrated 
ownership and control becomes a natural response.
Changing political choices, although not impossible, will encounter significant 
resistance, especially from incumbents (such as German labor unions or Asian 
families) who benefit from the present system. Some of the leading business fami-
lies not only have great connections with the government, sometimes, they are the 
government. Two recent prime ministers of Italy and Thailand—Silvio Berlusconi 
and Thaksin Shinawatra, respectively—came from leading business families and 
were the richest men in these countries.
Only when extraordinary events erupt would some politicians muster sufficient 
political will to initiate major corporate governance reforms. The spectacular 
corporate scandals in the United States (such as Enron) are examples of such 
extraordinary events prompting more serious political reforms such as the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX). The 2008 financial crisis resulted in the enactment of 
the Dodd-Frank Act in 2010, which for the first time allows shareholders to cast 
proxy votes on executive compensation—in short, “say on pay.”
Informal Institutional Frameworks. In the last two decades around the world, 
why and how have informal norms and values concerning corporate governance 
changed to such a great extent?39 From the United States and the United Kingdom, 
the idea of shareholder capitalism is rapidly spreading. At least three sources of 
these changes can be identified: (1) the rise of capitalism, (2) the impact of global-
ization, and (3) the global diffusion of “best practices.”
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

540	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
First, recent changes in corporate governance around the world are part of 
the greater political, economic, and social movement embracing capitalism. The 
triumph of capitalism naturally boils down to the triumph of capitalists (otherwise 
known as shareholders). However, “free markets” are not necessarily free. Even 
some of the most developed countries have experienced significant governance 
failures, calling for a sharper focus on shareholder value.
Second, at least three aspects of recent globalization have a bearing on corpo-
rate governance.
 	 Thanks to more trade and investment, firms with different governance norms 
increasingly come into contact and expose their differences. Being aware of 
alternatives, shareholders as well as managers and policymakers are no longer 
easily persuaded that “our way” is the best way of corporate governance.40
 	 Foreign portfolio investment (FPI)—foreigners purchasing stocks and bonds— 
has scaled new heights. These investors naturally demand better share­holder 
protection before committing their funds.
 	 The global thirst for capital has prompted many firms to pay attention to cor-
porate governance. Foreign firms cross-listed in New York and London have 
to be in compliance with US and UK listing requirements.
Third, the changing norms and values are also directly promoted by the global 
diffusion of “best practices” in the form of corporate governance codes (see Table 
16.3).41 A lot of codes are advisory and not legally binding. However, strong pressures 
exist for firms to adopt these codes “voluntarily.” For example, in Russia, although 
adopting the 2002 Code of Corporate Conduct is voluntary, firms not adopting it 
have to publicly explain why, essentially naming and shaming themselves.
In addition, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD) has spearheaded efforts to globally diffuse “best practices” through the 
OECD Principles of Corporate Governance (1999). The Principles are non-binding, even 
for the 34 OECD member countries. Nevertheless, the global norms seem to be 
moving toward the Principles. For example, China and Taiwan, both non-OECD 
members, have recently taken a page from the Principles and allowed for class action 
lawsuits brought by shareholders.
Slowly but surely, change is in the air (see the Closing Case). But such change 
is not necessarily in one direction. The ferociousness of the 2008 global financial 
Table 16.3
Selected Corporate Governance (CG) Codes Around the World  
since the 1990s
Developed economies
Emerging economies
Cadbury Report (United Kingdom, 1992)
King Report (South Africa, 1994)
Dey Report (Canada, 1994)
Confederation of Indian Industry Code of 
CG (India, 1998)
Bosch Report (Australia, 1995)
Korean Stock Exchange Code of Best 
Practice (Korea, 1999)
CG Forum of Japan Code (Japan, 1998)
Mexican Code of CG (Mexico, 1999)
German Panel on CG Code 
(Germany, 2000)
Code of CG for Listed Companies 
(China, 2001)
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (United States, 2002)
Code of Corporate Conduct (Russia, 2002)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 16   Financing and Governing the Corporation Globally	
541
crisis has caused tremendous resentment toward fat executive pay packages, in-
come inequality, and the financial services industry in general. Movements such as 
Occupy Wall Street and Occupy London are tangible indications of the changing 
informal sentiments as the swing of the pendulum, which have triggered or intensi-
fied formal regulatory changes (see In Focus 16.2).
Attacks on bankers by protesters from Occupy Wall 
Street, Occupy London, and Occupy any city where 
a financier might have the temerity to turn a quick 
buck spiced up the dreary economic news of 2011. Yet 
hostility is not confined to the left. Even the bankers’ 
supposed allies are putting the boot in—and nowhere 
more so than in Britain. The prime minister, David 
Cameron, has promised to “end excess” in the City 
of London. His ministers boast about their efforts to 
“rebalance” the economy away from dodgy finance to 
honest manufacturing. Sir Mervyn King, the governor 
of the Bank of England, has made a habit of lambasting 
the Square Mile’s short-term “profits next week” cul-
ture. In continental Europe the City is viewed with mix-
ture of loathing (on the ground that it single-handedly 
caused the euro crisis) and covetousness (on the 
ground that all those clever French and Italian finan-
ciers should ply their trade in Paris and Rome instead).
The European leaders’ attacks, at least, should 
have an upside: their hypocrisy and self-interest 
should serve to remind Britons what is at risk. London 
is by many measures the world’s biggest financial 
center, and weakening it is in nobody’s interest—least 
of all Britain’s. Better regulation of banks is certainly 
needed, especially to protect British taxpayers. And 
so far the City-bashing has been mainly rhetorical. 
But running down one of the world’s most success-
ful (and mobile) commercial clusters is folly—and it 
is surely not the legacy Mr. Cameron would wish to 
leave his successors.
Strangely, California Doesn’t  
Talk Down Silicon Valley
Finance—the funneling of savings to their best use—
is a vital industry. Britain is very good at it, leading the 
world in various financial markets, including foreign 
exchange and over-the-counter derivatives. The City’s 
comparative advantage is clear from Britain’s trade 
balance. The export surplus in financial services and 
insurance was 2.6% of GDP in the first three quarters 
of 2011. Add in the exports of related services, such 
as law, accountancy, and consulting, and the trade 
surplus rises above 3% of GDP. An industrial cluster 
that can generate foreign earnings on such a scale is 
enviable. No other country, not even America, comes 
close to matching Britain’s trade balance in finance. 
And with its domestic economy floundering, Britain 
needs all the exporting power it can muster.
Yet the City is in danger from two sorts of 
threats—one that you can do nothing much about, 
and one that you can. Even with wiser politicians, the 
City would be likely to shrink over the next few years. 
New mortgages are being approved at half their pre-
crisis rate, which means less business for retail banks. 
The number of employees working in finance across 
Britain is 7% below its level three years ago. The rich 
Save the City of London
IN Focus 16.2 
Ethical 
Dilemma
Paul Brown/Alamy
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

542	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
16-7b Resources and Corporate Finance and Governance
From a corporate finance and governance standpoint, the ability to successfully 
list on a high-profile exchange such as New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) and 
London Stock Exchange (LSE) is valuable, rare, and hard to imitate. In 1997, the 
valuations of foreign firms listed in New York were 17% higher than their domes-
tic counterparts in the same country that were either unable or unwilling to list 
abroad.42 Now, despite hurdles such as SOX, the select few that are able to list in 
world’s economic funk and mostly lifeless asset mar-
kets mean the outlook for trading and the deals that 
bring in fat fees is the worst for years—perhaps de-
cades. Tighter regulation also means thinner profits. 
And there is bound to be some drift in deal making 
towards the emerging world, whose governments are 
trying to develop their own financial centers.
Still, Asia also presents an opportunity. China and 
India have underdeveloped financial markets; Britain 
has the expertise. If London could become a global 
center for dollar trading, why not for yuan dealings 
too? Continental Europe’s underdeveloped personal 
finance market should be another target.
But the City can compete successfully with other 
financial centers only if Britain has the right policies on 
regulation, tax, and immigration. On regulation, there 
is an understandable fear that an outsized financial ser-
vices industry means an outsized risk for taxpayers. 
The proposals from Britain’s Vickers Commission go a 
long way to deal with this, dividing a tightly regulated 
domestic banking system (the bit that puts taxpayers 
at risk) from a more freewheeling international market 
for global capital. By contrast, the thrust of many of 
the proposals coming out of Brussels looks harmful. 
Some, such as the financial transactions tax, can 
be blocked by a British veto. The rest are subject to 
majority vote, and Mr. Cameron’s stand-off with his 
European partners in December 2011—supposedly to 
protect the City, but really to avoid having to sell a more 
integrated Europe to Tory Eurosceptics—has now 
given London’s rivals the excuse to hamstring the City.
The British government’s own policies on tax and 
immigration are also doing a lot of damage. The 50% 
tax rate, introduced by the previous Labor government 
in 2010, brings in little money and has made London 
the most taxed out of ten financial centers for high net 
worth individuals. The present generation of financial 
bosses, who live in and like London, may tolerate it 
for a while, but younger ones are feeling the pull of 
Switzerland, Hong Kong, or Dubai. As for immigration 
policy, the best way to win Asian business is to lure the 
young Asian financiers to London. Tight limits on tal-
ented immigrants damage the City’s prospects—and 
indeed the prospects of every bit of British business.
Let Stockbrokers Make Cars—and  
Other Mad Dreams
The politicians and regulators have all sorts of ex-
cuses. Abolishing the 50% tax rate is now politically 
dangerous. Immigrants are unpopular. And, they 
maintain, the risks of attacking the City are small, 
for it has formidable advantages that are hard to rep-
licate quickly. London’s long business day bridges 
the close of Asia’s markets with the opening of 
New York’s, making it a convenient location for 
global asset managers and traders. Trading attracts 
liquidity and skills in a virtuous circle. But even the 
strongest incumbent is vulnerable to competition. 
Each decision to locate a new trading desk some-
where else compounds over time to a loss of the 
critical mass that has sustained the City as a leading 
financial center.
Economies work best when they reflect a coun-
try’s innate competitive advantages. Britain should, 
therefore, host a relatively big financial sector, and 
policymakers should celebrate it, rather than deride it. 
If they continue their policy of malign neglect, Britain 
will one day wake up to discover that it has lost one 
of the world’s most successful business clusters, and 
the best hope the next generation has of earning a 
decent living.
Source: Economist, 2012, Save the City, January 7: 2. 
IN Focus 16.2 (continued)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 16   Financing and Governing the Corporation Globally	
543
New York are rewarded more handsomely: Their valuations are now 37% higher 
than comparable groups of domestic firms in the same country.43 London-listed 
foreign firms do not enjoy such high valuations.44 This is classic resource-based 
logic at work: Precisely because it is much more challenging to list in New York in 
the SOX era, the small number of foreign firms that are able to do this are truly 
exceptional. Thus, they deserve much higher valuations.
Some of the most valuable, rare, and hard-to-imitate firm-specific resources are 
top managers and directors—often regarded as managerial human capital. Some of 
these resources, such as the social networks of these executives, are highly unique 
and likely to add value.45 Also, top managerial talents are hard to imitate—unless 
they are hired away by competitor firms. 
The last crucial component in the VRIO framework is O: organizational. It is 
within an organizational setting (in TMTs and boards) that managers and direc-
tors function.46 Overall, the few people at the top of an organization can make a 
world of difference—Steve Jobs at Apple was a great example. Governance mecha-
nisms need to motivate and discipline them properly to ensure that they make a 
positive impact.
16-8 Debates and Extensions
Corporate finance and governance often generate significant debates. This section 
discusses two: (1) opportunistic agents versus managerial stewards and (2) global 
convergence versus divergence.
16-8a Opportunistic Agents versus Managerial Stewards
Agency theory assumes managers to be agents who may engage in self-serving 
opportunistic activities if left to their own devices. However, critics contend that 
most managers are likely to be honest and trustworthy. Managerial mistakes may 
be due to a lack of competence, information, or luck, and not necessarily due to 
self-serving motives. Thus, it may not be fair to characterize all managers as op-
portunistic agents. Although very influential, agency theory has been criticized 
as an “anti-management theory of management.”47 A “pro-management” theory, 
stewardship theory, has emerged recently. It suggests that most managers can be 
viewed as owners’ stewards. Safeguarding shareholders’ interests and advancing 
organizational goals will maximize (most) managers’ own utility functions.
If all principals view all managers as self-serving agents with control mechanisms 
to put managers on a “tight leash,” some managers, who initially view themselves 
as stewards, may be so frustrated that they end up engaging in the very self-serving 
behavior that agency theory seeks to minimize. In other words, as a self-fulfilling 
prophecy, agency theory may induce such behavior.
16-8b Global Convergence versus Divergence
Another leading debate is whether corporate governance is converging or diverg-
ing globally. Convergence advocates argue that globalization unleashes a “survival-
of-the-fittest” process by which firms will be forced to adopt global best (essentially 
Anglo-American) practices. Global investors are willing to pay a premium for stock 
in firms with Anglo-American–style governance, prompting other firms to follow.
Learning Objective
Participate in two leading 
debates concerning corporate 
finance and governance.
16-8
Managerial human capital
The skills and abilities acquired 
by top managers. 
Stewardship theory
A “pro-management” theory 
that suggests that most manag-
ers can be viewed as owners’ 
stewards interested in safe-
guarding shareholders’ interests.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

544	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
One interesting phenomenon often cited by convergence advocates is cross-
listing. Cross-listing is primarily driven by the desire to tap into larger pools of 
capital. Foreign firms thus must comply with US and UK securities laws and adopt 
Anglo-American corporate governance norms. For instance, Japanese firms listed 
in New York and London, compared with those listed at home, are more concerned 
about shareholder value. A US or UK listing can be viewed as a signal of the firm’s 
commitment to strengthen shareholder value, resulting in higher valuations.
Critics contend that governance practices will continue to diverge throughout 
the world.48 For example, promoting more concentrated ownership and control is 
often recommended as a solution to combat principal–agent conflicts in US and 
UK firms. However, making the same recommendation to reform firms in the rest 
of the world may be counterproductive or even disastrous.49 This is because the 
main problem there is that controlling shareholders typically already have too 
much ownership and control. Finally, some US and UK practices differ significant-
ly. In addition to the split on CEO duality (the UK against, the US for) discussed 
earlier, none of the US anti-takeover defenses (such as “poison pills”) is legal in 
the UK.
In the case of cross-listed firms, divergence advocates make two points. First, 
despite some convergence on paper (such as having more outside directors), cross-
listed foreign firms do not necessarily adopt US governance norms before or after 
listing. Second, despite the popular belief that US and UK securities laws would ap-
ply to cross-listed foreign firms, in practice, these laws have rarely been effectively 
enforced against foreign firms’ “tunneling.”50
At present, complete divergence is probably unrealistic, especially for large 
firms in search of capital from global investors. Complete convergence also seems 
unlikely. What is more likely is “cross-vergence,” balancing the expectations of glob-
al investors and those of local stakeholders.51
16-9 Management Savvy
From the institution-based and resource-based views, two straightforward impli-
cations for action emerge (Table 16.4). First, savvy managers need to understand 
both the formal and informal rules, anticipate changes, and be aware of differ-
ences when addressing financing and governance issues.52 Consider executive 
compensation. In 2008, a year during which Wall Street had to be bailed out by 
billions of taxpayer dollars, Wall Street executives paid themselves $18 billion in 
bonuses. In 2011, the first year that shareholders were granted a “say on pay” in US 
firms, median pay for CEOs at S&P 500 firms jumped 35% to $8.4 million.53 While 
these practices did not break any formal laws, what the executives failed to read 
was the informal, but very tangible, normative pressures coming from an angry 
public fanned by the media and fueled by politicians who wanted to show they 
were “tough.” As a result, formal efforts to limit executive compensation have been 
Learning Objective
Draw implications for action.
16-9
Table 16.4
Implications for Action
  	 Understand the rules affecting corporate finance and governance, anticipate changes, 
and be aware of differences
  	 Develop firm-specific capabilities to differentiate a firm on corporate finance and 
governance dimensions
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 16   Financing and Governing the Corporation Globally	
545
initiated in most countries. While critics may argue that governments have no 
business in limiting executive compensation at private-sector firms, unfortunately, 
the rules have changed. As controlling shareholders of many formerly private-sec-
tor firms that have now become SOEs financed by public funds, governments do 
have legitimate ownership rights to intervene.54
Second, managers need to develop firm-specific capabilities to differentiate on 
governance dimensions.55 In India, while Satyam has emerged as a “bad apple,” 
Infosys has served as an exemplar.56 Infosys leads the pack by being the first Indian 
firm to follow US generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) and one of the 
first to introduce outside directors. Since its listings in Bombay in 1993 and on the 
NASDAQ in 1999, it has gone far beyond disclosure requirements mandated by 
both Indian and US standards. On the NASDAQ, Infosys voluntarily behaves like a 
US domestic issuer, rather than subjecting itself to the less stringent standards of a 
foreign issuer. The primary reason for such practices, according to Infosys execu-
tives, is to gain credibility with Western customers in the rough-and-tumble soft-
ware market. In other words, excellent financing and governance practices make 
Infosys stand out in the product market.
C h a p t e r  S u m m a r y
	16.1	 Outline the two means of financing decisions, equity and debt.
 	 Equity refers to the stock (usually expressed in shares) in a firm, and debt 
refers to the loan that the firm needs to pay back at a given time with a pre-
specified interest.
 	 Tapping into a larger pool of capital globally allows firms to lower their cost 
of capital.
	16.2	 Differentiate various ownership patterns around the world.
 	 In the US and UK, firms with separation of ownership and control dominate.
 	 Elsewhere, firms with concentrated ownership and control in the hands of 
families or governments are predominant.
	16.3	 Articulate the role of managers in both principal–agent and principal–
principal conflicts.
 	 In firms with separation of ownership and control, the primary conflicts are 
principal–agent conflicts.
 	 In firms with concentrated ownership, principal–principal conflicts prevail.
	16.4	 Explain the role of the board of directors.
 	 The board of directors performs (1) control, (2) service, and (3) resource-
acquisition functions.
 	 Around the world, boards differ in composition and leadership structure.
	16.5	 Identify voice-based and exit-based governance mechanisms and their com-
bination as a package.
 	 Internal, voice-based mechanisms and external, exit-based mechanisms 
combine as a package to determine corporate governance effectiveness. 
The market for corporate control and the market for private equity are two 
primary means of external mechanisms.
	16.6	 Acquire a global perspective on how governance mechanisms vary around 
the world.
 	 Different combinations of internal and external governance mechanisms 
lead to four main groups.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

546	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
	16.7	 Articulate how institutions and resources affect corporate finance and 
governance.
 	 Institution-based and resource-based views shed light on finance and gover-
nance issues.
	16.8	 Participate in two leading debates concerning corporate finance and 
governance.
 	 (1) Opportunistic agents versus managerial stewards and (2) global conver-
gence versus divergence.
	16.9	 Draw implications for action.
 	 Understand the rules, anticipate changes, and be aware of differences. 
 	 Develop firm-specific capabilities to differentiate a firm on corporate fi-
nance and governance dimensions.
K e y  T e r m s
Agency costs 528
Agency relationship 528
Agency theory 528
Agent 528
Bond 525
Bondholder 525
Chief executive  
officer (CEO) 528
CEO duality 532
Concentrated  
ownership and  
control 527
Corporate  
governance 524
Cost of capital 525
Cross-listing 525
Debt 525
Default 525
Diffused ownership  
527
Equity 525
Exit-based  
mechanisms 534
Expropriation 530
Financing 524
Information  
asymmetry 529
Inside director 532
Leveraged buyout  
(LBO) 535
Managerial human  
capital 543
Outside director 532
Principal 528
Principal–agent  
conflicts 528
Principal–principal  
conflicts 530
Private equity 535
Related transactions 530
Separation of ownership 
and control 527
Shareholder 525
Shareholder  
capitalism 536
Stewardship theory 543
Top management  
team (TMT) 528
Tunneling 530
Voice-based  
mechanism 534
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 What are the two primary means of financing? How do they differ?
	 2.	 Why does tapping into a global pool of capital providers can result in a lower 
cost of capital?
	 3.	 How would you characterize a corporation with diffused ownership?
	 4.	 ON CULTURE: What are some of the pros and cons of family ownership?
	 5.	 Describe the differences between principal–agent conflicts and principal–
principal conflicts.
	 6.	 Define the concept of expropriation of minority shareholders.
	 7.	 What do inside directors bring to a board of directors? What do outside 
directors have to offer?
	 8.	 What are the advantages and disadvantages of having two different indi-
viduals hold the positions of board chair and CEO rather than combining 
these two positions?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 16   Financing and Governing the Corporation Globally	
547
	 9.	 Name and describe the two internal governance mechanisms typically em-
ployed by boards.
	 10.	 Briefly summarize the three external governance mechanisms.
	 11.	 Under what conditions are the primary governance mechanisms likely to 
involve concentration of ownership and control?
	 12.	 Why do most SOEs suffer from weak external and internal governance 
mechanisms?
	 13.	 What are some of the formal institutions that affect corporate governance?
	 14.	 Explain how three aspects of recent globalization have influenced corporate 
governance.
	 15.	 Where does managerial human capital fit into a VRIO framework?
	 16.	 Explain stewardship theory, and compare it to “opportunistic agents.”
	 17.	 Given the arguments for converging versus diverging corporate governance 
around the world, which do you think is more likely to occur and why?
	 18.	 Compare PengAtlas Map 1.1 with Map 3.4. Countries that have low levels of 
development often benefit from outsourcing due to their low wages. Assume 
that a firm’s board of directors is truly independent and makes decisions 
based only on economic considerations. Why would it not also outsource the 
top executive jobs? To the extent that such a thing might be possible, how 
might it be done? 
	 19.	 See PengAtlas Map 3.5 (Poorest Ten). Other than low wages, why might a 
firm outsource its activities to one of these countries?
	 20.	 ON ETHICS: The text refers to the recent uproar over executive bonuses. Sup-
pose you were CEO of a firm that lost $50 million, but you were given a bonus 
of $100 million, and thus you have been vilified in the media and brought 
before a Congressional committee that has accused you of financial outrage. 
However, you point out that the most optimistic forecast for your firm had 
been that it would lose over $6 billion. There was no change in markets, the 
economy, or anything else during the year other than the new strategy that 
you implemented—a strategy that reduced losses by $5,950,000 000 to only 
$50,000,000, and thus you feel that you were actually underpaid. However, the 
politicians feel that it still looks bad and that if you had been socially responsi-
ble, you would have refused the bonus. Do you agree? What is your response?
C r i t i c a l  D i s c u s s i o n  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 Some argue that the Anglo–American–style separation of ownership and 
control is an inevitable outcome. Others contend that this is one variant 
(among several) of how large firms can be effectively governed and that it is 
not necessarily the most efficient form. What do you think?
	 2.	 Recent corporate governance reforms in various countries urge (and often 
require) firms to add more outside directors to their boards and to separate 
the jobs of board chairman and CEO. Yet, academic research has not been 
able to conclusively confirm the merits of both practices. Why?
	 3.	 ON ETHICS: As a chairman/CEO, you are choosing between two candidates 
for one outside independent director position on your board. One is anoth-
er CEO, a longtime friend whose board you have served for many years. The 
other is a known shareholder activist whose tag line is “No need to make fat 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

548	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
cats fatter.” Placing him on the board will earn you kudos among analysts 
and journalists for inviting a leading critic to scrutinize your work. But he 
may try to prove his theory that CEOs are overpaid—in other words, your 
compensation can be on the line. Whom would you choose?
G l o b a l  A c t i o n
	 1.	 Your privately owned company consistently balances the interests of business 
freedom and labor freedom in its operations. As such, it has become an ex-
ample for other firms worldwide to emulate. Since the tension between wages 
and prices at both the labor and business levels must be constantly re-evaluated 
and improved, evaluate the leading countries that your firm can use as a mod-
el for continued commitment to the freedoms of business as well as labor.
	 2.	 As CEO of a large multinational firm, the financial globalization level of a 
country can present different problems and solutions for success. Using a well-
known index of financial globalization, evaluate and discuss specific countries 
in which the concerns of a high and low level of globalization must be addressed.
V i d e o  C a s e
After watching the video on microcredit (microfinance), discuss the following:
	 1.	 What is the source of funds within microcredit? How does this differ from 
traditional sources of financing?
	 2.	 What internal and external governance mechanisms are in place in 
microcredit?
	 3.	 What roles do norms and values play in the globalization of microcredit? 
Explain.
	 4.	 Does the stewardship theory apply to microcredit? Why or why not?
	 5.	 Is microcredit the result of global divergence?
“Revolutions” can take place in surprising places. 
The past decade has seen nothing less than a revolu-
tion in the command centers of capitalism: corporate 
boardrooms. The ancien régime of club ties and long 
lunches has been swept aside, and replaced by a new 
order based on transparency and accountability.
The new order has its roots in the work of 
sans-culottes (radical militants) such as Sir Adrian 
Cadbury in the 1990s. But it was given a powerful 
shove in 2001–2002 by debacles at Enron and 
WorldCom, and the subsequent Sarbanes-Oxley 
(SOX) legislation. Reformers in America and else-
where argued that checks and balances were just 
as important in the corporate realm as they are in 
politics. Companies needed to have powerful share-
holders and independent directors to keep a watch-
ful eye on managers. In 2009 both the New York 
Stock Exchange and the NASDAQ demanded that 
What Is Good About Good Corporate Governance?
Ethical 
Dilemma
C l o s i n g  C a s e
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 16   Financing and Governing the Corporation Globally	
549
companies should have a majority of independent 
directors. 
Booz & Company’s annual survey of the world’s 
biggest public companies shows how far reaching this 
revolution has been. Firms now routinely separate the 
jobs of chairman and chief executive: in 2009 less 
than 12% of incoming CEOs were also made chair-
men, compared with 48% in 2002. CEOs are held 
accountable for their performance—and turfed out if 
they fail to perform, with the average length of tenure 
dropping from 8.1 years in 2000 to 6.3 years today. 
Companies have turned to a new class of professional 
directors, and would-be directors sign up for bespoke 
courses at business schools because SOX makes 
them personally liable for the accounts they sign.
This model is quickly becoming the norm around the 
world. But is it quite as robust as the reformers claim? 
The financial crisis of 2007–2008 provided the tough-
est possible test. Some firms weathered it much better 
than others: America’s Citigroup and Switzerland’s UBS 
experienced severe losses, whereas JPMorgan Chase 
and Credit Suisse (also in America and Switzerland, re-
spectively) suffered far less damage.
Corporate reformers immediately seized on the 
crisis as yet more proof of their arguments. Banks had 
always been badly managed, they argued. And bank-
ing CEOs were past masters at bamboozling share-
holders and directors. Neil Minow, one of the most 
industrious of the reformers, flatly declared that “the 
recent volatility proved the need for better corporate 
governance has never been clearer or more pressing.”
But skeptics could point to counter-examples. 
Some banks that performed best during the crisis 
flouted the roles of good corporate governance: 
Santander had a family culture and a powerful execu-
tive chairman. And some banks that did worse were 
paragons of good governance: Citigroup and Lehman 
Brothers employed powerful outside directors (in-
cluding, in Lehman’s case, an economist known as 
“Dr. Doom”). Royal Bank of Scotland received en-
thusiastic encouragement from its institutional share-
holders of its acquisition of bits of ABN AMRO.
New research by David Erkens, Mingyi Hung, 
and Pedro Matos, of the University of Southern 
California, powerfully reinforced the skeptics’ case. 
The authors conducted a comprehensive study of the 
performance in 2007–2008 of 296 financial institu-
tions with assets of more than $10 billion. They found 
that none of the tenets of good corporate governance 
stood up to close examination. Directors who were 
well informed about finance performed no better than 
know-nothings. Companies that separated CEOs and 
chairmen did no better. Far from helping companies 
to weather the crisis, powerful institutional sharehold-
ers and independent directors did worse in terms of 
shareholder value. Indeed, the proportion of indepen-
dent directors on the boards was inversely related to 
companies’ stock returns.
Why was this? The authors argue that in the run-
up to the crisis, powerful institutional owners pushed 
firms to take more risks to boost shareholder returns. 
This suggests, they argue, that outside shareholders 
may be inherently more risk-hungry than managers 
who have their livelihood tied up with their compa-
nies. They also argue that independent directors were 
much more likely to press firms into raising more eq-
uity capital even when the company’s share price was 
tanking. One possible reason for this is that indepen-
dent board members are worried that their value in 
the market for directorships will plummet if they have 
overseen companies that have filed for bankruptcy or 
debated restructuring.
What do these striking results tell us about corpo-
rate governance? Certainly not that companies should 
turn conventional wisdom down and re-embrace the old 
order. Admirably skeptical about their own skepticism, 
the authors point out that the evidence from Asia since 
its 1997–1998 financial crisis suggests that greater ex-
ternal monitoring has produced better performance. 
Banks are odd creatures; there is no sign that external 
monitoring has produced the same perverse results for 
other companies. And behavior during the crisis may 
be no guide to behavior in more normal times.
But the study does at least suggest that one 
should not expect too much from corporate gover-
nance. Good corporate governance on its own will not 
protect companies from taking excessive risks. They 
need to tackle the problem directly, by setting up bet-
ter risk control, rather than indirectly by ticking various 
corporate governance boxes. Good corporate gover-
nance on its own cannot make up for a toxic corporate 
culture. Reformers should continue to experiment 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

550	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence
[Journal acronyms] AER—American Economic Review; AMJ—
Academy of Management Journal; AMP—Academy of Management Per-
spectives; AMR—Academy of Management Review; APJM—Asia Pacific 
Journal of Management; BW—BusinessWeek (before 2010) or Bloomberg 
Businessweek (since 2010); CG—Corporate Governance; JAE—Journal 
of Accounting and Economics; JEP—Journal of Economic Perspectives; 
JF—Journal of Finance; JFE—Journal of Financial Economics; JIBS—
Journal of International Business Studies; JMS—Journal of Manage-
ment Studies; JWB—Journal of World Business; MIR—Management 
International Review; MOR—Management and Organization Review; 
OSc—Organization Science; OSt—Organization Studies; RES—Review 
of Economics and Statistics; RFS—Review of Financial Studies; SMJ—
Strategic Management Journal.
1 R. Monks & N. Minow, 2001, Corporate Governance (p. 1), Oxford, 
UK: Blackwell. See also M. Benz & B. Frey, 2007, Corporate gover-
nance, AMR, 32: 92–104; ; S. Globerman, M. W. Peng, & D. Shapiro, 
2011, Corporate governance and Asian companies, APJM, 28: 1–14.
2  E. Lim, S. Das, & A. Das, 2009, Diversification strategy, capital 
structure, and the Asian financial crisis, SMJ, 30: 577–594; 
M. Simlerly & M. Li, 2000, Environmental dynamism, capital struc-
ture, and performance, SMJ, 21: 31–49.
3 X. Zhao, 2009, Determinants of flows into retail international eq-
uity finds, JIBS, 39: 1169–1177.
4 G. Dissanaike & I. Markar, 2009, Corporate financing in East Asia 
before the 1997 crash, JIBS, 40: 990–1004. 
5 L. Hail & C. Leuz, 2009, Cost of capital effects and changes in 
growth expectations around US cross-listings, JFE, 93: 428–454.
6 B. Connelly, R. Hoskisson, L. Tihanyi, & S. T. Certo, 2010, Owner-
ship as a form of corporate governance, JMS, 47: 1561–1589.
7 R. Stulz, 2005, The limits of financial globalization (p. 1618), JF, 
60: 1595–1638.
8 K. Schnatterly, K. Shaw, & W. Jennings, 2008, Information advan-
tages of large institutional owners, SMJ, 29: 219–227.
9 R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, & A. Shleifer, 1999, Corporate 
ownership around the world, JF, 54: 471–517.
10 Y. Jiang & M. W. Peng, 2011, Are family ownership and control in 
large firms good, bad, or irrelevant? APJM, 28: 15–39; M. W. Peng 
& Y. Jiang, 2010, Institutions behind family ownership and control 
in large firms, JMS, 47: 253–273; W. Schulze & E. Gedajlovic, 2010, 
Whither family business? JMS, 47: 191–204.
11 Economist, 2012, The rise of state capitalism, January 21: 11.
12  M. Jensen & W. Meckling, 1976, Theory of the firm, JFE, 3: 305–360.
13 J. Combs, D. Ketchen, A. Perryman, & M. Donahue, 2007, The 
moderating effect of CEO power on the board composition-firm per-
formance relationship, JMS, 44: 1309–1322; W. Johnson, R. Magee, 
N. Nagarajan, & H. Newman, 1985, An analysis of the stock price 
reaction to sudden executive deaths, JAE, 7: 151–174.
14 S. Claessens, S. Djankov, & L. Lang, 2000, The separation of own-
ership and control in East Asian corps, JFE, 58: 81–112.
15 M. Faccio & L. Lang, 2002, The ultimate ownership of Western 
European corporations, JFE, 65: 365–395.
16 M. Young, M. W. Peng, D. Ahlstrom, G. Bruton, & Y. Jiang, 2008, 
Corporate governance in emerging economies, JMS, 45: 196–220. 
17 S. Johnson, R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, & A. Shleifer, 2000, 
Tunneling, AER, 90: 22–27.
18 D. Dalton, C. Daily, A. Ellstrands, & J. Johnson, 1998, Meta-
analytic reviews of board composition, leadership structure, and 
financial performance, SMJ, 19: 269–290; M. Kroll, B. Walters, & 
S. Le, 2007, The impact of board composition and top manage-
ment team ownership structure on post-IPO performance in young 
entrepreneurial firms, AMJ, 50: 1198–1216; M. W. Peng, T. Buck, & 
I. Filatotchev, 2003, Do outside directors and new managers help 
improve firm performance? JWB, 38: 348–360.
19 V. Chen, J. Li, & D. Shapiro, 2011, Are OECD-prescribed “good 
corporate governance practices” really good in an emerging econo-
my? APJM, 28: 115–138; M. W. Peng, S. Zhang, & X. Li, 2007, CEO 
duality and firm performance during China’s institutional transi-
tions, MOR, 3: 205–225.
20 J. Tang, M. Crossan, & W. G. Rowe, 2011, Dominant CEO, deviant 
strategy, and extreme performance, JMS, 48: 1479–1502; J. Westphal &  
I. Stern, 2007, Flattery will get you everywhere, AMJ, 50: 267–288.
21 A. Gore, S. Matsunaga, & P. E. Yeung, 2011, The role of technical 
expertise in firm governance structure, SMJ, 32: 771–786; M. Kroll, 
B. Walters, & P. Wright, 2008, Board vigilance, director experience, 
and corporate outcomes, SMJ, 29: 363–382; M. McDonald, J. Westphal, 
& M. Graebner, 2008, What do they know? SMJ, 29: 1155–1177.
22 M. W. Peng, 2004, Outside directors and firm performance dur-
ing institutional transitions, SMJ, 25: 453–471.
23 A. Chizema & J. Kim, 2010, Outside directors on Korean boards, 
JMS, 47: 109–129.
N O T E S
with systems of checks and balances. But they would 
also profit from spending less time drawing ideal 
constitutions and more time thinking about intangible 
things such as firms’ values and traditions.
Case Discussion Questions:
	 1.	 Why has there been a corporate governance 
“revolution” throughout the world recently?
	 2.	 What are the main areas of deficiencies as point-
ed out by corporate governance reformers?
	 3.	 ON ETHICS: Representing skeptics of corporate 
governance reforms, how would you defend the 
“old order” featuring CEO duality, few (or no) 
outside directors, and little influence of powerful 
institutional shareholders?
Source: Economist, 2010, Corporate constitutions, October 30: 74. The most recent version of the study referred to in this case is D. Erkens, 
M. Hung, & P. Matos, 2012, Corporate governance in the 2007–2008 financial crisis: Evidence from financial institutions worldwide, working paper, 
Marshall School of Business, University of Southern California. Another interesting paper that is not referenced in this case but that is in the same 
spirit is: V. Chen, J. Li, & D. Shapiro, 2011, Are OECD-prescribed “good corporate governance practices” really good in an emerging economy? Asia 
Pacific Journal of Management, 28: 115–138.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 16   Financing and Governing the Corporation Globally	
551
24 C. Devers, R. Wiseman, & R. M. Holmes, 2007, The effects of 
endowment and loss aversion in managerial stock option valua-
tion, AMJ, 50: 191–208; M. Goranova, T. Alessandri, P. Brandes, & 
R. Dharwadkar, 2007, Managerial ownership and corporate diver-
sification, SMJ, 28: 211–225; W. G. Sanders & A. Tuschke, 2007, The 
adoption of institutionally contested organizational practices, AMJ, 
50: 33–56.
25 C. Cadsby, F. Song, & F. Tapon, 2007, Sorting and incentive effects 
of pay for performance, AMJ, 50: 387–405; T. Cho & W. Shen, 2007, 
Changes in executive compensation following an environmental shift, 
SMJ, 28: 747–754; M. Larraza-Kintana, R. Wiseman, L. Gomez-Mejia, 
& T. Welbourne, 2007, Disentangling compensation and employment 
risks using the behavioral agency model, SMJ, 28: 1001–1019.
26 L. Bebchuk & J. Fried, 2004, Pay without Performance, Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press; J. Wade, J. Porac, T. Pollock, & 
S. Graffin, 2006, The burden of celebrity, AMJ, 49: 643–660; 
X. Zhang, K. Bartol, K. Smith, M. Pfarrer, & D. Khanin, 2008, CEOs 
on the edge, AMJ, 51: 241–258.
27 A. Cowen & J. Marcel, 2011, Damaged goods, AMJ, 54: 509–527; 
M. Wiersema & Y. Zhang, 2011, CEO dismissal, SMJ, 32: 1161–1182.
28 Economist, 2012, The shackled boss, January 21: 76.
29 R. Hoskisson, M. Castleton, & M. Withers, 2009, Complementar-
ity in monitoring and bonding, AMP, May: 57–74.
30 V. Bodolica & M. Spraggon, 2009, The implementation of special 
attributes of CEO compensation contracts around M&A transactions, 
SMJ, 30: 985–1011; N. Hiller & D. Hambrick, 2007, Conceptualizing 
executive hubris, SMJ, 26: 297–319; R. Masulis, C. Wang, & F. Xie, 
2007, Corporate governance and acquirer returns, JF, 62: 1851–1889. 
31 M. Nakamura, 2011, Adoption and policy implications of 
Japan’s new corporate governance practices after the reform, APJM, 
28: 187–213; T. Yoshikawa & J. McGuire, 2008, Change and continu-
ity in Japanese corporate governance, APJM, 25: 5–24.
32 S. Kaplan & P. Stromberg, 2009, Leveraged buyouts and private 
equity, JEP, 23: 147–166; L. Phalippou, 2009, Beware of venturing 
into private equity, JEP, 23: 147–166; P. Phan & C. Hill, 1995, Orga-
nizational restructuring and economic performance in leveraged 
buyouts, AMJ, 38: 704–739.
33 J. Lerner, P. Stromberg, & M. Sorensen, 2008, Private equity and 
long-run investment, in J. Lerner & A, Gurung (eds.), The Global 
Economic Impact of Private Equity Report 2008 (pp. 27–42), Geneva, 
Switzerland: World Economic Forum.
34 R. Aguilera, I. Filatotchev, H. Gospel, & G. Jackson, 2008, An 
organizational approach to comparative corporate governance, OSc, 
19: 475–492; B. Boyd, K. Haynes, & F. Zona, 2011, Dimensions of 
CEO-board relations, JMS, 48: 1892–1923; E. Chen & J. Nowland, 
2010, Optimal board monitoring in family-owned companies, CG, 
18: 3–17; G. Dowell, M. Shackell, & N. Stuart, 2011, Boards, CEOs, 
and surviving a financial crisis, SMJ, 32: 1025–1045; B. Hermalin, 
2005, Trends in corporate governance, JF, 60: 2351–2384.
35 D. McCarthy & S. Puffer, 2008, Interpreting the ethicality of cor-
porate governance decisions in Russia, AMR, 33: 11–31.
36 C. Kwok & S. Tadesse, 2006, National culture and financial sys-
tems, JIBS, 37: 227–247; J. Siegel, 2009, Is there a better commitment 
mechanism than cross-listings for emerging-economy firms? JIBS, 
40: 1171–1191.
37 A. Bris & C. Cabolis, 2008, The value of investor protection, RFS, 
21: 605–648; C. Doidge, A. Karolyi, & R. Stulz, 2007, Why do coun-
tries matter so much for corporate governance? JFE, 86: 1–39.
38 T. Buck & A. Shahrim, 2005, The translation of corporate gover-
nance changes across national cultures, JIBS, 36: 42–61. 
39 S. Estrin & M. Prevezer, 2011, The role of informal institutions in 
corporate governance, APJM, 28: 41–67.
40 P. David, T. Yoshikawa, M. Chari, & A. Rasheed, 2006, Strategic 
investments in Japanese corporations, SMJ, 27: 591–600.
41 R. Aguilera & A. Cuervo-Cazurra, 2009, Codes of good gover-
nance, CG, 17: 376–387; I. Haxhi & H. van Ees, 2010, Explaining 
diversity in the worldwide diffusion of codes of good governance, 
JIBS, 41: 710–726.
42 C. Doidge, A. Karolyi, & R. Stulz, 2004, Why are foreign firms 
listed in the US worth more? JFE, 71: 205–238.
43 A. Karolyi, 2010, Corporate governance, agency problems, and 
international cross-listings, working paper, Cornell University.
44 C. Doidge, A. Karolyi, & R. Stulz, 2009, Has New York become 
less competitive than London in global markets? JFE, 91: 253–277; 
N. Fernandes, U. Lel, & D. Miller, 2010, Escape from New York, JFE, 
95: 129–147.
45 M. W. Peng & Y. Luo, 2000, Managerial ties and firm performance 
in a transition economy, AMJ, 43: 486–501. See also C. Collins & 
K. Clark, 2003, Strategic human resource practices, top manage-
ment team social networks, and firm performance, AMJ, 46: 740–751; 
A. Mackey, 2008, The effects of CEOs on firm performance, SMJ, 29: 
1357–1367. 
46 S. Boivie, D. Lange, M. McDonald, & J. Westphal, 2011, Me or we, 
AMJ, 54: 551–576; J. He & Z. Huang, 2011, Board informal hierarchy 
and firm financial performance, AMJ, 54: 1119–1139; S. Nadkarni & 
P. Herrmann, 2010, CEO personality, strategic flexibility, and firm 
performance, AMJ, 53: 1050–1073; A. Raes, M. Heijltjes, U. Glunk, & 
R. Roe, 2011, The interface of the top management team and middle 
managers, AMR, 36: 102–126; Z. Simsek, 2007, CEO tenure and or-
ganizational performance, SMJ, 28: 653–662; C. Tuggle, K. Schnat-
terly, & R. Johnson, 2010, Attention patterns in the boardroom, AMJ, 
53: 550–571; Y. Zhang & M. Wiersema, 2009, Stock market reaction 
to CEO certification, SMJ, 30: 693–710.
47 L. Donaldson, 1995, American Anti-management Theories of Manage-
ment, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
48 M. Lubatkin, P. Lane, S. Collin, & P. Very, 2005, Origins of corpo-
rate governance in the USA, Sweden, and France, OSt, 26: 867-888; 
Y. Shi, M. Magnan, & J. Kim, 2012, Do countries matter for voluntary 
disclosure? JIBS, 43: 143–165.
49 M. van Essen, J. van Oosterhout, & P. Heugens, 2012, Competi-
tion and cooperation in corporate governance, OSc (in press).
50 J. Siegel, 2003, Can foreign firms bond themselves effectively by 
renting US securities laws? JFE, 75: 319–359.
51 A. Chizema & Y. Shinozawa, 2012, The “company with commit-
tees,” JMS, 49: 77–101; C. Crossland & D. Hambrick, 2007, How 
national systems differ in their constraints on corporate execu-
tives, SMJ, 28: 767–789; T. Khanna, J. Kogan, & K. Palepu, 2006, 
Globalization and similarities in corporate governance, RES, 88: 
69–90.
52 G. Davis, 2009, The rise and fall of finance and the end of the 
society of organizations, AMP, August: 27–44.
53 BW, 2011, After much hoopla, investor “say on pay” is a bust, 
June 20: 23–24.
54 M. W. Peng, G. Bruton, & C. Stan, 2012, Theories of the (state-
owned) firm, working paper, University of Texas at Dallas.
55 T. Yoshikawa, L. Tsui-Auch, & J. McGuire, 2007, Corporate gover-
nance reform as institutional innovation, OSc, 18: 973–988. 
56 T. Khanna & K. Palepu, 2004, Globalization and convergence in 
corporate governance, JIBS, 35: 484–507.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
	 17-1	 articulate what is a stakeholder view of 
the firm.
	 17-2	 apply the institution-based and resource-
based views to analyze corporate social 
responsibility.
	 17-3	 participate in two leading debates 
concerning corporate social responsibility.
	17-4	 draw implications for action.
Gareth Cattermole/Getty Images
Chapter 
17 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Managing Corporate 
Social Responsibility 
Globally
Founded in 1884, Marks & Spencer (M&S) is a lead-
ing UK retailer specializing in clothing and luxury food 
products. It is the UK’s largest clothing retailer with 
a 12% market share. It also has 4% of the UK food 
market. Listed on the London Stock Exchange, M&S is 
a constituent member of the FTSE 100 Index. In 2012, 
it had 78,000 employees, over 700 stores in the UK, 
and over 300 stores in more than 40 other countries, 
serving approximately 21 million customers every 
week. It had 2,000 suppliers, over 20,000 farms, and 
250,000 workers who helped produce products carried 
by M&S. 
In 2007, M&S launched an ambitious corporate-
wide Plan A—a five-year plan that addressed some of 
the biggest social and environmental challenges with 
100 concrete commitments that it aspired to achieve by 
2012. In 2010, following three years of successful im-
plementation of Plan A, M&S added 80 commitments. 
Every store had a dedicated Plan A champion. Plan A 
was divided into five areas (with leading examples): 
  	 Climate change: becoming carbon neutral for all 
its UK and Irish operations
  	 Waste reduction: sending no waste to landfills
  	 Sustainable raw materials: tripling sales of 
organic food
  	 Fair partnership with suppliers: introducing ran-
dom checking of suppliers to ensure that M&S’s 
Global Sourcing Principles are being adhered to 
at all times
  	 A healthy lifestyle for customers and employees: 
introducing more nutritionally balanced food, 
with more informative labeling, no artificial color-
ing, and a reduced amount of salt
In Plan A’s first year (2007), M&S reduced energy-
related CO2 emissions from its stores and offices by 
55,000 tons, opened three pilot “eco-stores,” and 
completed a carbon footprint assessment for its 
food business. Among its numerous actions was an 
effort to reduce plastic shopping bags, which were 
always given away to shoppers free of charge. M&S 
argued that from an environmental standpoint, plas-
tic bags are not “free” because they are not bio-
degradable and will be stuck in landfills essentially 
forever. Starting in 2007, its 50 stores in Southwest-
ern England and Northern Ireland gave customers a 
free cloth Bag for Life. After four weeks, these trial 
stores started charging 10 pence (US$0.16) for each 
Bag for Life (which would be replaced free of charge 
when worn out), and five pence (US$0.08) for each 
plastic food carrier bag. The effect was immediate: in 
trial stores, the customers’ use of food carrier bags 
dropped by over 70%, and M&S also sold eight times 
more Bags for Life than it did in 2006. Throughout 
all its stores, M&S cashiers simply asked shoppers:  
O p e n i n g  C a s e
Marks & Spencer’s Plan A
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

554	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
Although Marks and Spencer (M&S) aspires to be one of the most socially responsible 
firms, the Opening Case raises three crucial questions: (1) Why does it label its main 
committee in charge of Plan A as the How We Do Business (HWDB) committee? (2) In 
light of the challenges launched against M&S by some NGOs, can a firm ever be socially 
responsible enough? (3) When a firm pursues a social mission, is it setting itself up 
to be a target? Obviously, these questions have no easy answers. This chapter helps 
you answer these and other questions concerning corporate social responsibility (CSR), 
which refers to “consideration of, and response to, issues beyond the narrow economic, 
technical, and legal requirements of the firm to accomplish social benefits along with 
the traditional economic gains which the firm seeks.”1 Although historically, issues con-
cerning CSR have been on the “back burner” of management discussions, these issues 
are increasingly brought to the forefront of corporate agendas.2 While this chapter is 
positioned as the last in this book, by no means do we suggest that CSR is the least 
important topic. Instead, this chapter is one of the best ways to integrate all previous 
chapters concerning international trade, investment, strategy, supply chain, and human 
resources.3 
At the heart of CSR is the concept of stakeholder, which is “any group or individual 
who can affect or is affected by the achievement of the organization’s objectives.”4 
Corporate social 
responsibility (CSR)
Consideration of, and response 
to, issues beyond the narrow 
economic, technical, and legal 
requirements of the firm to ac-
complish social benefits along 
with the traditional economic 
gains which the firm seeks.
Stakeholder
Any group or individual who 
can affect or is affected 
by the achievement of the 
organization’s objectives.
“Do you need a carrier?” Overall, in 2007, M&S re-
duced its use of plastic bags by 11% across all its 
stores—a total of 37 million fewer bags given out. All 
profits from the sale of bags in 2007, over $125,000, 
went to an environmental charity, Groundwork, to 
support environmental regeneration projects. Based 
on these successful trials, M&S rolled out its pro-
gram to charge for shopping bags in all its UK and 
Irish stores in May 2008. 
Although clearly motivated by considerations for 
corporate social responsibility (CSR), M&S has been 
careful not to label this program a “CSR” plan. The 
committee in charge of Plan A is called the How We 
Do Business (HWDB) Committee, which is headed by 
the CEO. Where does the term “Plan A” come from? 
According to Plan A’s website:
We’re doing this because it’s what you want us 
to do. It’s also the right thing to do. We’re calling 
it Plan A because we believe it’s now the only 
way to do business. There is no Plan B.
“Backed by a strong business case,” said Richard 
Gillies, director of Plan A, CSR, and sustainable busi­
ness, “Plan A is at the heart of the exciting new 
growth plan for M&S, both in the UK and internation-
ally.” By the end of the fourth year, M&S achieved  
95 of the 180 Plan A commitments, resulting in a 
reduced environmental footprint, a positive contri-
bution to communities, and increased efficiencies. 
In 2011, Plan A contributed a net benefit of over 
$110 million. Starting in its first year, Plan A earned 
numerous kudos from various CSR groups. M&S led 
the global retail sector in the Dow Jones Sustain-
ability Index. It was awarded the World Environment 
Center Gold Medal for Sustainable Business. In the 
UK, it received recognition from Greenpeace (top 
retailer for using wood from sustainable sources), 
Compassion in World Farming (top retailer for high 
food animal welfare standards), and National Con-
sumer Council (for operating market-leading green  
supermarkets). 
Yet, not all was rosy. In autumn 2007, some non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) challenged M&S, 
demanding that it be more aspirational in its commit-
ments to improve labor standards. In response, M&S 
increased the number of labor experts from seven to 
23 on the visitation teams for labor standards compli-
ance and promised to do more.
Sources: Based on (1) Economist, 2008, Just good business, January 19: 3–6; 
(2) M&S, 2007, Plan A News, plana.marksandspencer.com; (3) M&S, 2008, 
Plan A: Year 1 Review, January 15, plana.marksandspencer.com; (4) M&S, 
2011, How We Do Business Report 2011, plana.marksandspencer.com.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17   Managing Corporate Social Responsibility Globally	
555
Shown in Figure 17.1, while shareholders certainly are an important group of stake-
holders, other stakeholders include managers, non-managerial employees (hereafter 
“employees”), suppliers, customers, communities, governments, and social and en-
vironmental groups. Since Chapter 16 has already discussed shareholders at length, 
this chapter focuses on non-shareholder stakeholders, whom we term “stakehold-
ers” here for compositional simplicity. One leading debate on CSR is whether man-
agers’ efforts to promote the interests of these stakeholders are at odds with their 
fiduciary duty (required by law) to safeguard shareholder interests.5 To the extent that 
firms are not social agencies and that their primary function is to serve as economic 
enterprises, it is certainly true that firms should not (and are unable to) take on all the 
social problems of the world. However, failing to heed to certain CSR imperatives 
may be self-defeating in the long run. Therefore, the key is how to prioritize (see the 
Closing Case).
The remainder of this chapter first introduces a stakeholder view of the firm. Then 
we discuss how the institution-based and resource-based views inform the CSR dis-
cussion. Debates and extensions follow.
17-1 A Stakeholder View of the Firm
17-1a A Big Picture Perspective
A stakeholder view of the firm, with a quest for global sustainability, represents a 
“big picture.” One key goal for CSR is global sustainability, which is defined as the 
ability “to meet the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future 
generations to meet their needs.”6 It refers not only to a sustainable social and natu-
ral environment, but also to sustainable capitalism.7 
Learning Objective
Articulate what is a stakeholder 
view of the firm.
17-1
Global sustainability
The ability to meet the needs of 
the present without compromis-
ing the ability of future genera-
tions to meet their needs around 
the world.
Figure 17.1
A Stakeholder View of the Firm
Governments
Social groups
Customers
Environmental
groups
Communities
Shareholders
Employees
THE FIRM
Managers
Suppliers
Source: Adapted from T. Donaldson & L. Preston, 1995, The stakeholder theory of the corporation: Concepts, 
evidence, and implications (p. 69), Academy of Management Review, 20: 65–91.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

556	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
Globally, at least three sets of drivers are related to the urgency of sustainability 
in the 21st century. First, rising levels of population, poverty, and inequity associ-
ated with globalization call for new solutions. The repeated protests staged around 
the world are but tips of an iceberg of such sentiments. Second, non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs) and other civil society stakeholders have now become in-
creasingly assertive around the world.8 Finally, industrialization has created some 
irreversible effects on the environment.9 Global warming, air and water pollution, soil 
erosion, deforestation, and overfishing have become problems demanding solutions 
(see PengAtlas Map 4.4). Because firms contribute to many of these problems, many 
citizens believe that firms should also take on some responsibility for solving them.
Drivers underpinning global sustainability are complex and multidimensional. 
For multinational enterprises (MNEs) with operations spanning the globe, their 
CSR areas, shown in Table 17.1, seem mind-boggling. This bewilderingly complex 
“big picture” forces managers to prioritize.10 To be able to do that, primary and 
secondary stakeholders must be identified.11
17-1b Primary and Secondary Stakeholder Groups
Primary stakeholder groups are constituents on which the firm relies for its con-
tinuous survival and prosperity. Shareholders, managers, employees, suppliers, 
Primary stakeholder groups
Constituents on which the firm 
relies for its continuous survival 
and prosperity.
Table 17.1
Corporate Social Responsibilities for Multinational Enterprises (MNEs) Recommended  
by International Organizations
MNEs and Host Governments
  	 Should not interfere in the internal political affairs of the 
host country (OECD, UN)
  	 Should consult governmental authorities and national 
employers’ and workers’ organizations to ensure that 
their investments conform to the economic and social 
development policies of the host country (ICC, ILO, 
OECD, UN)
  	 Should reinvest some profits in the host country (ICC)
MNEs and Environmental Protection
  	 Should respect the host country laws and regulations 
concerning environmental protection (OECD, UN)
  	 Should supply to host governments information concerning 
the environmental impact of MNE activities (ICC, UN)
MNEs and Consumer Protection
  	 Should preserve the safety and health of consumers by 
disclosing appropriate information, labeling correctly, and 
advertising accurately (UN)
MNEs and Laws, Regulations, and Politics
  	 Should respect the right of every country to exercise control 
over its natural resources (UN)
  	 Should refrain from improper or illegal involvement in local 
politics (OECD)
  	 Should not pay bribes or render improper benefits to public 
servants (OECD, UN)
MNEs and Employment Practices
  	 Should cooperate with host governments to create jobs in 
certain locations (ICC)
  	 Should give advance notice of plant closures and mitigate 
the adverse effects (ICC, OECD)
  	 Should respect the rights for employees to engage in 
collective bargaining (ILO, OECD)
MNEs and Technology Transfer
  	 Should develop and adapt technologies to the needs of host 
countries (ICC, ILO, OECD)
  	 Should provide reasonable terms and conditions when 
granting licenses for industrial property rights (ICC, OECD)
MNEs and Human Rights
  	 Should respect human rights and fundamental freedoms in 
host countries (UN)
Sources: Based on (1) ICC: The International Chamber of Commerce Guidelines for International Investment (www.iccwbo.org); (2) ILO: The International Labor 
Office Tripartite Declarations of Principles Concerning Multinational Enterprises and Social Policy (www.ilo.org); (3) OECD: The Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises (www.oecd.org); (4) UN: The United Nations Code of Conduct on Transnational 
Corporations (www.un.org).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17   Managing Corporate Social Responsibility Globally	
557
customers—together with governments and communities whose laws and regula-
tions must be obeyed and to whom taxes and other obligations may be due—are 
typically considered primary stakeholders.
Secondary stakeholder groups are defined as “those who influence or affect, or 
are influenced or affected by, the corporation, but they are not engaged in transac-
tions with the corporation and are not essential for its survival.”12 Environmental 
groups (such as Greenpeace) often take it upon themselves to fight pollution. Fair 
labor practice groups (such as Fair Labor Association) frequently challenge firms 
that allegedly fail to provide decent labor conditions for employees. While the firm 
does not depend on secondary stakeholder groups for its survival, such groups may 
have the potential to cause significant embarrassment and damage to a firm—
think of Nike in the 1990s. 
One key proposition of the stakeholder view of the firm is that instead of only 
pursuing economic bottom line such as profits and shareholder returns, firms 
should pursue a more balanced set of triple bottom line, consisting of economic, 
social, and environmental performance, by simultaneously satisfying the demands 
of all stakeholder groups. To the extent that some competing demands obviously 
exist, it seems evident that the CSR proposition represents a dilemma. In fact, it has 
provoked a fundamental debate introduced next.
17-1c A Fundamental Debate
The CSR debate centers on the nature of the firm in society. Why does the firm 
exist? Most people would intuitively answer, “To make money.” Milton Friedman, 
a former University of Chicago economist and Nobel laureate, eloquently argued: 
“The business of business is business.”13 The idea that the firm is an economic 
enterprise seems uncontroversial. At issue is whether the firm is only an economic 
enterprise. Emerging Markets 17.1 shows that although Friedman passed away in 
2006, his ideas continue to be influential.14
One side of the debate argues that “the social responsibility of business is to 
increase its profits,” which is the title of Friedman’s influential article mentioned 
earlier that was published in 1970. This free market school of thought draws upon 
Adam Smith’s idea that pursuit of economic self-interest (within legal and ethi-
cal bounds) leads to efficient markets. Free market advocates believe that the 
first and foremost stakeholder group is shareholders, whose interests managers 
have a fiduciary duty to look after. To the extent that the hallmark of our eco-
nomic system remains capitalism, the providers of capital—namely, capitalists or 
shareholders—deserve utmost managerial attention. Since the 1980s, a term that 
explicitly places shareholders as the single most important stakeholder group, 
shareholder capitalism, has become increasingly influential around the world (see 
Chapter 11). 
Free market advocates argue that if firms attempt to attain social goals, such as 
providing employment and social welfare, managers will lose their focus on profit 
maximization (and its derivative, shareholder value maximization). Consequently, 
firms may lose their character as capitalistic enterprises and become socialist or-
ganizations. This perception of socialist organization is not a pure argumenta-
tive point, but an accurate characterization of numerous state-owned enterprises 
(SOEs) throughout the pre-reform Soviet Union, Central and Eastern Europe, and 
China, as well as other developing countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. 
To privatize SOEs, in essence, is to remove the social function of these firms and 
Secondary stakeholder groups
Those who influence or affect, 
or are influenced or affected 
by, the corporation but are not 
engaged in transactions with the 
firm and are not essential for its 
survival.
Triple bottom line
Economic, social, and environ-
mental performance that simul-
taneously satisfies the demands 
of all stakeholder groups.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

558	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
Public relations folk are not noted for burning the 
midnight oil over the works of great economists. 
But Edelman, an American firm, has come up with 
a clever idea. It asked members of the “informed 
public”—broadly, people with university degrees 
who are in the top quarter of wage earners in their 
particular groups and countries—what they think 
of Milton Friedman’s famous assertion that “the 
social responsibility of business is to increase its  
profits.”
The issue of whether businesses should pro-
mote CSR is hotly debated. Many of the world’s big-
gest companies (including BP and the now defunct 
Enron) have embraced the notion. So have politicians. 
Britain’s 2006 Companies Act requires businesses 
to report on their CSR records. The United Nations 
has a “global compact” for CSR. But the world’s 
Friedmanites have waged a relentless guerrilla war 
against the idea, denouncing it as a farrago of value-
destroying nonsense.
Edelman’s research gives a good overview of the 
state of the global battle. The world’s most Friedman-
friendly country is the United Arab Emirates, with 
84% agreeing with his dictum: perhaps not surpris-
ing for a small, business-oriented country. Second 
prize goes to Japan, a country normally associated 
with stakeholder capitalism, but which may have 
tired of its model after two decades of stagnation. 
Sweden also scored remarkably highly, with 60% 
of people agreeing with Friedman. Perhaps people 
feel little need for CSR when the government cares 
for them from cradle to grave. Yet some suppos-
edly Friedmanite bastions went wobbly, with Britain 
scoring 43% and Friedman’s own homeland, the 
United States, 56%.
The world’s striving nations tend to disdain CSR. 
The top ten Friedmanite countries include four emerg-
ing markets (India, Indonesia, Mexico, and Poland) 
Milton Friedman Goes Global 
E m e r g i n g  M a r k e t s  1 7 . 1
Ethical 
Dilemma
Source: Economist, 2011, Milton Friedman goes on tour, January 29: 63.
Figure 17.2
Forget CSR, Make Money
UAE
Forget CSR, make money
“The social responsibility of business is to
increase its proﬁts”, % who agree*
0
20
40
60
80
100
Japan
India
South Korea
Singapore
Sweden
Indonesia
Mexico
US
Poland
Australia
Canada
France
Russia
Argentina
Netherlands
Britain
Ireland
China
Brazil
Germany
Italy
Spain
Source: Edelman
Trust Barometer 2011
*Informed publics who “strongly agree”
or “somewhat agree” with this
Milton Friedman quote
and two recently emerged ones (Singapore and South 
Korea). But there are important exceptions to the rule. 
Well-informed folk in China and Brazil almost match 
their peers in Germany and Italy for corporate do-
gooding.
Danny Lehman/Corbis; Björn Meyer/sitox/iStockphoto.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17   Managing Corporate Social Responsibility Globally	
559
restore their economic focus through private ownership (see Chapter 16). Overall, 
the free market school is influential around the world. It has also provided much of 
the intellectual underpinning for globalization spearheaded by MNEs. 
It is against such a formidable and influential school of thought that the 
CSR movement has emerged. CSR advocates argue that a free market system 
that takes the pursuit of self-interest and profit as its guiding light—although in 
theory constrained by rules, contracts, and property rights—may in practice fail 
to constrain itself, thus often breeding greed, excesses, and abuses. Firms and 
managers, if left to their own devices, may choose self-interest over public inter-
est. The financial meltdown in 2008 and 2009 is often fingered as a case in point. 
While not denying that shareholders are important stakeholders, CSR advocates 
argue that all stakeholders have an equal right to bargain for a “fair deal.” Given 
stakeholders’ often conflicting demands, the very purpose of the firm, instead 
of being a profit-maximizing entity, is argued to serve as a vehicle for coordinat-
ing their interests. Of course, one very thorny issue in the debate is whether all 
stakeholders indeed have an equal right and how to manage their (sometimes 
inevitable) conflicts.15
Starting in the 1970s as a peripheral voice in an ocean of free market believers, 
the CSR school of thought has slowly but surely made progress in becoming a more 
central part of global business discussions.16 Strategy guru Michael Porter has been 
vehemently advocating the importance of creating shared value, “which involves 
creating economic value in a way that also creates value for society by addressing its 
needs and challenges” (see In Focus 17.1). 
The capitalist system is under siege. In recent years 
business increasingly has been viewed as a major 
cause of social, environmental, and economic prob-
lems. Companies are widely perceived to be prosper-
ing at the expense of the broader community.
Even worse, the more business has begun to em-
brace CSR, the more it has been blamed for society’s 
failures. The legitimacy of business has fallen to 
levels not seen in recent history. This diminished 
trust in business leads political leaders to set policies 
that undermine competitiveness and sap economic 
growth. Business is caught in a vicious circle.
A big part of the problem lies with companies 
themselves, which remain trapped in an outdated 
approach to value creation that has emerged over 
the past few decades. They continue to view value 
creation narrowly, optimizing short-term financial 
performance in a bubble while missing the most 
important customer needs and ignoring the broader 
influences that determine their long-term success. 
How else could companies overlook the well-being of 
customers, the depletion of natural resources vital to 
their businesses, the viability of key suppliers, or the 
economic distress of the communities in which they 
produce and sell? How else could companies think 
that simply shifting activities to locations with even 
lower wages was a sustainable “solution” to com-
petitive challenge? Government and civil society have 
often exacerbated the problem by attempting to ad-
dress social weaknesses at the expense of business. 
The presumed trade-offs between economic efficien-
cy and social progress have been institutionalized in 
decades of policy choices. 
Companies must take the lead in bringing busi-
ness and society back together. The recognition is 
there among sophisticated business and thought 
leaders, and promising elements of a new model are 
emerging. Yet, we still lack an overall framework for 
Michael Porter on Creating Shared Value
IN Focus 17.1 
Ethical 
Dilemma
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

560	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
guiding these efforts, and most companies remain 
stuck in a “CSR” mind-set in which societal issues 
are at the periphery, not the core.
The solution lies in the principles of shared value, 
which involves creating economic value in a way that 
also creates value for society by addressing its needs 
and challenges. Businesses must reconnect company 
success with social progress. Shared value is not 
CSR, philanthropy, or even sustainability, but a new 
way to achieve economic success. It is not on the 
margin of what companies do but at the center. We 
believe that it can give rise to the next major transfor-
mation of business thinking. 
A growing number of companies known for their 
hard-nosed approach to business—such as GE, 
Google, IBM, Intel, Johnson & Johnson, Nestlé, 
Unilever, and Wal-Mart—have already embarked 
on important efforts to create shared value by re-
conceiving the intersection between society and 
corporate performance. Yet our recognition of the 
transformative power of shared value is still in its 
genesis. Realizing it will require leaders and manag-
ers to develop new skills and knowledge—such as a 
far deeper appreciation of societal needs, a greater 
understanding of the true bases of company pro-
ductivity, and the ability to collaborate across profit/
nonprofit boundaries. Government must learn how 
to regulate in ways that enable shared value rather 
than work against it.
Capitalism is an unparalleled vehicle for meeting 
human needs, improving efficiency, creating jobs, and 
building wealth. But a narrow conception of capitalism 
has prevented business from harnessing its full po-
tential to meet society’s broader challenges. The op-
portunities have been there all along but have been 
overlooked. Businesses acting as businesses, not as 
charitable donors, are the most powerful force for 
addressing the pressing issues we face. The moment 
for a new conception of capitalism is now; society’s 
needs are large and growing, while customers, 
employees, and a new generation of young people are 
asking business to step up. 
The purpose of the corporation must be rede-
fined as creating shared value, not just profit per se. 
This will drive the next wave of innovation and pro-
ductivity growth in the global economy. It will also 
reshape capitalism and its relationship to society. 
Perhaps most important of all, learning how to cre-
ate shared value is our best chance to legitimate 
business again.
Source: Excerpts from M. E. Porter & M. R. Kramer, 2011, Creating shared 
value, Harvard Business Review, January–February: 62–77. Michael 
Porter is a professor at Harvard Business School, and Mark Kramer is 
managing director of FSG, a global social impact consulting firm that he 
co-founded with Porter.
IN Focus 17.1 (continued)
The CSR school has two driving forces. First, even as free markets march 
around the world, the gap between the haves and have-nots has widened. Although 
many emerging economies have been growing by leaps and bounds, the per capita 
income gap between developed economies and much of the developing world has 
widened.17 While 2% of the world’s children living in America enjoy 50% of the 
world’s toys, one-quarter of the children in Bangladesh and Nigeria are in their 
countries’ work force. Even within developed economies such as the United States, 
the income gap between the upper and lower echelons of society has widened. In 
1980, the average American CEO was paid 40 times more than the average worker. 
The ratio is now above 400. Although American society accepts a greater income 
inequality than many others do, aggregate data of such widening inequality, which 
both inform and numb, often serve as a stimulus for reforming the “leaner and 
meaner” capitalism. Participants in the Occupy Wall Street movement in 2011 
argued that the 1% have gained at the expense of the 99%.18 However, the re-
sponse from free market advocates is that to the extent there is competition, there 
will always be both winners and losers. What CSR critics describe as “greed” is 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17   Managing Corporate Social Responsibility Globally	
561
often translated as “incentive” in the vocabulary of free market 
advocates.
A second reason behind the rise of CSR seems to be waves 
of disasters and scandals.19 In 1989, the oil tanker Exxon Valdez 
spilled its cargo of oil in the pristine waters of Alaska. In 2002, 
scandals of Enron, WorldCom, Royal Ahold, and Parmalat 
rocked the world. In 2009, excessive amounts of Wall Street 
bonuses distributed by financial services firms receiving 
government bailout funds were criticized as being socially in-
sensitive and irresponsible. In 2010, BP made a huge mess in 
the Gulf of Mexico. In 2011, a Japanese earthquake triggered 
the meltdown of the Fukushima nuclear power station. Not sur-
prisingly, new disasters and scandals often propel CSR to the 
forefront of public policy and management discussions.
Overall, managers as a stakeholder group are unique in that 
they are the only group positioned at the center of all these re-
lationships.20 It is important to understand how they make deci-
sions concerning CSR, as illustrated next.
17-2 Institutions, Resources,  
and Corporate Social Responsibility
While some people do not view CSR as an integral part of global 
business, Figure 17.3 shows that the two traditional perspectives 
that we have used to illustrate every traditional topic (ranging from strategy to 
supply chain) thus far can inform CSR discussions with relatively little adaptation. 
This section articulates why this is the case.
17-2a Institutions and CSR
The institution-based view sheds considerable light on the gradual diffusion of the 
CSR movement and the strategic responses of firms.21 At the most fundamental 
Learning Objective
Apply the institution-based 
and resource-based views 
to analyze corporate social 
responsibility.
17-2
Figure 17.3
Institutions, Resources, and Corporate Social Responsibility
Institution-Based View
- Formal institutions governing
CSR in home/host countries
- Informal norms, values, and cultures
governing CSR
Resource-Based View
- Value
- Rarity
- Imitability
- Organization
Corporate Social
Responsibility
In what ways do manmade accidents 
and natural disasters, like the 2011 
earthquake in Japan, affect people, 
businesses, communities, and the 
environment?
Gamma-Rapho/Getty Images
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

562	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
level, regulatory pressures underpin formal institutions, whereas normative and 
cognitive pressures support informal institutions.22 The strategic response frame-
work consists of (1) reactive, (2) defensive, (3) accommodative, and (4) proactive 
strategies, as first introduced in Chapter 3 (see Table 3.3). This framework can be 
extended to explore how firms make CSR decisions, as outlined in Table 17.2.
A reactive strategy is indicated by relatively little or no support by top manage-
ment of CSR causes. Firms do not feel compelled to act in the absence of disasters 
and outcries. Even when problems arise, denial is usually the first line of defense. 
Put another way, the need to accept some CSR is neither internalized through 
cognitive beliefs, nor does it result in any norms in practice. That leaves only formal 
regulatory pressures to compel firms to comply. For example, in the United States, 
food and drug safety standards that we take for granted today were fought by food 
and drug companies in the first half of the 20th century. The basic idea that food 
and drugs should be tested before being sold to customers and patients was bitterly 
contested, even as unsafe foods and drugs killed thousands of people. As a result, 
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) was progressively granted more powers. 
That era is not necessarily over. Today, many dietary supplement makers, whose 
products are beyond the FDA’s regulatory reach, continue to sell untested supple-
ments and deny responsibility.
A defensive strategy focuses on regulatory compliance. Top management 
involvement is piecemeal at best, and the general attitude is that CSR is an added 
cost or nuisance. Firms admit responsibility but often fight it. After the establish-
ment of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in 1970, the US chemical 
industry resisted the EPA’s intrusion (see Table 17.2). The regulatory requirements 
were at significant odds with the norms and cognitive beliefs held by the industry 
at that time.
How do various institutional pressures change firm behavior? In the absence of 
informal normative and cognitive beliefs, formal regulatory pressures are the only 
feasible way to push firms ahead (see the Closing Case). One key insight of the 
Reactive strategy
A strategy that would only 
respond to CSR causes when 
required by disasters and 
outcries.
Defensive strategy
A strategy that focuses on 
regulatory compliance but with 
little actual commitment to CSR 
by top management.
Table 17.2
The US Chemical Industry Responds to Environmental Pressures
Phase
Strategic response
Representative statements from the industry’s trade  
journal, Chemical Week
1962–70
Reactive
Denied the severity of environmental problems and argued that 
these problems could be solved independently through the industry’s 
technological prowess.
1971–82
Defensive
“Congress seems determined to add one more regulation to the already 
27 health and safety regulations we must answer to. This will make the 
EPA [Environmental Protection Agency] a chemical czar. No agency in a 
democracy should have that authority” (1975).
1983–88
Accommodative
“The EPA has been criticized for going too slow . . . Still, we think that it is 
doing a good job” (1982). “Critics expect an overnight fix. The EPA deserves 
credit for its pace and accomplishments” (1982).
1989–present
Proactive
“Green line equals bottom line—The Clean Air Act (CAA) equals efficiency. 
Everything you hear about the ‘costs’ of complying with the CAA is 
probably wrong . . . Wiser competitors will rush to exploit the Green 
Revolution” (1990).
Sources: Extracted from text from A. Hoffman, 1999, Institutional evolution and change: Environmentalism and the US chemical industry, Academy of 
Management Journal, 42: 351–371. Hoffman’s last phase ended in 1993; its extension to the present is done by the present author.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17   Managing Corporate Social Responsibility Globally	
563
institution-based view is that individuals and organizations make rational choices 
given the right kind of incentives. For example, one efficient way to control pol-
lution is to make polluters pay some “green” taxes—ranging from gasoline retail 
taxes to landfill charges. But how demanding these regulatory pressures should 
be remains controversial. One side of the debate argues that tough environmental 
regulation may lead to higher costs and reduced competitiveness, especially when 
competing with foreign rivals that are not subject to such demanding regulations. 
Others argue, however, that “green” taxes simply force firms to pay real costs that 
they otherwise place on others. If a firm pollutes, it is imposing a cost on the sur-
rounding community that must either live with the pollution or pay to clean it up. 
By imposing a pollution tax that roughly equals the cost to the community, the firm 
has to account for pollution as a real cost. Economists refer to this as “internalizing 
an externality.”
CSR advocates, endorsed by former vice president and Nobel laureate Al Gore, 
further argue that stringent environmental regulation may force firms to innovate, 
however reluctantly, thus benefiting the competitiveness of both the industry and 
country.23 For example, a Japanese law set standards to make products easier to 
disassemble. Although Hitachi initially resisted the law, it responded by redesign-
ing products to simplify disassembly. The company reduced the parts in its washing 
machines by 16% and in vacuum cleaners by 30%. The products became not only 
easier to disassemble but also easier and cheaper to assemble in the first place, thus 
providing Hitachi with a significant cost advantage.
The accommodative strategy is characterized by some support from top man-
agers, who may increasingly view CSR as a worthwhile endeavor. Since formal 
regulations may be in place and informal social and environmental pressures 
may be increasing, a number of firms themselves may be concerned about CSR, 
leading to the emergence of some new industry norms. Further, new managers 
who are passionate about, or sympathetic toward, CSR causes may join the or-
ganization, or some traditional managers may change their outlook, leading to 
increasingly strong cognitive beliefs that CSR is the right thing to do. In other 
words, from both normative and cognitive standpoints, it becomes legitimate or 
a matter of social obligation to accept responsibility and do all that is required.24 
For example, in the US chemical industry, such a transformation probably took 
place in the early 1980s (see Table 17.2). More recently, Burger King, Kraft, 
Nestlé and Unilever were pressured by Greenpeace to be concerned about the 
deforestation practices undertaken by their major palm oil supplier, Sinar Mas, 
in Indonesia. Eventually, the food giants accommodated Greenpeace’s demands 
and dumped Sinar Mas as a supplier, leading to a new industry norm that is more 
earth-friendly.25 
Adopting a code of conduct is a tangible indication of a firm’s willingness to 
accept CSR. A code of conduct (sometimes called a code of ethics) is a set of writ-
ten policies and standards outlining the proper practices for a firm. The global 
diffusion of codes of conduct is subject to intense debate. First, some argue that 
firms adopting these codes are not necessarily sincere. This negative view suggests 
that an apparent interest in CSR may simply be window dressing. Some firms feel 
compelled to appear sensitive to CSR, following what others are doing, but have 
not truly and genuinely internalized CSR concerns.26 For example, in 2009, BP 
implemented a new safety-oriented operating management system.27 But after 
the 2010 oil spill, it became apparent that this system had not been seriously im-
plemented, and the result was a huge catastrophe. Second, an instrumental view  
Accommodative strategy
A strategy characterized by 
some support from top manag-
ers, who may increasingly view 
CSR as a worthwhile endeavor.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

564	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
suggests that CSR activities simply represent a 
useful instrument to make good profits.28 Firms 
are not necessarily becoming more ethical. For 
example, after the 2010 oil spill, BP reshuffled 
management and created a new worldwide 
safety division. The instrumental view would 
argue that these actions did not really mean that 
BP became more ethical. Finally, a positive view 
believes that (at least some) firms and managers 
may be self-motivated to do it right regardless of 
social pressures.29 Codes of conduct tangibly ex-
press values that organizational members view 
as central and enduring.
The institution-based view suggests that all 
three perspectives are probably valid. This is 
to be expected, given how institutional pres-
sures work to instill value. Regardless of actual 
motive, the fact that firms are practicing CSR 
is indicative of the rising legitimacy of CSR on the management agenda.30 Even 
firms that adopt a code of conduct simply as window dressing open doors for more 
scrutiny by concerned stakeholders because they have publicized a set of CSR 
criteria against which they can be judged. Such pressures are likely to transform 
the firms internally into more self-motivated, better corporate citizens. Thus, it 
probably is fair to say that Nike is a more responsible corporate citizen now than 
it was in 1994.
From a CSR perspective, the best firms embrace a proactive strategy when 
engaging in CSR, constantly anticipating responsibility and endeavoring to do 
more than is required (see the Opening Case).31 Top management at a proactive 
firm not only supports and champions CSR activities, but also views CSR as a source 
of differentiation that permeates throughout the corporate DNA. For example, 
Whole Foods’ co-founder and co-CEO John Mackey commented: 
When people are really happy in their jobs, they provide much higher degrees of 
service to the customers. Happy team members result in happy customers. Happy 
customers do more business with you. They become advocates for your enterprise, 
which results in happy investors. That is a win, win, win, win strategy. You can expand 
it to include your suppliers and the communities where you do business, which are 
tied in to this prosperity circle.32 
Similarly, since 2001 Starbucks has voluntarily published an annual report on 
CSR, which embodies its founder, chairman, and CEO Howard Schultz’s vision that 
“we must balance our responsibility to create value for shareholders with a social 
conscience.”33
Proactive firms often engage in three areas of activity. First, some firms, such 
as Swiss Re (In Focus 17.2) and Duke Energy, actively participate in regional, 
national, and international policy and standards discussions.34 To the extent that 
policy and standards discussions today may become regulations in the future, it 
seems better to get involved early and (hopefully) steer the course in a favorable 
direction. Otherwise—as the saying goes—if you’re not at the table, you’re on 
the menu. For example, Duke Energy operates 20 coal-fired power plants in five 
states. It is the third largest US emitter of CO2 and the 12th largest in the world. 
But its CEO, Jim Rogers, has proactively worked with green technology producers, 
Proactive strategy
A strategy that endeavors to do 
more than is required in CSR.
Is a written code of conduct enough to ensure true 
corporate social responsibility?
US COAST GUARD/HANDOUT/EPA/Newscom
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17   Managing Corporate Social Responsibility Globally	
565
activists, and politicians to engage in policy and legislative discussions. These are 
not merely defensive moves to protect his firm and the power utility industry. 
Unlike his industry peers, Rogers has been “bitten by the climate bug” and is 
genuinely interested in reducing greenhouse gas emissions.35 
Second, proactive firms often build alliances with stakeholder groups. For 
example, many firms collaborate with NGOs.36 Because of the historical tension 
and distrust, these “sleeping with the enemy” alliances are not easy to handle. The 
key lies in identifying relatively short-term, manageable projects of mutual inter-
ests. For instance, Starbucks collaborated with Conservation International to help 
reduce deforestation practices. 
Third, proactive firms often engage in voluntary activities that go beyond what 
is required by regulations.37 While examples of industry-specific self-regulation 
abound, an area of intense global interest is the pursuit of the International Stan-
dards Organization (ISO) 14001 certification of the environment management 
system (EMS). Headquartered in Switzerland, the ISO is an influential NGO 
consisting of national standards bodies in 111 countries. Launched in 1996, the 
ISO 14001 EMS has become the gold standard for CSR-conscious firms. Although 
not required by law, many MNEs, such as Ford and IBM, have adopted ISO 14001 
standards in all their facilities worldwide. Firms such as Toyota, Siemens, and 
General Motors have demanded that all of their top-tier suppliers be ISO 14001 
certified.
From an institutional perspective, these proactive activities are indicative of 
the normative and cognitive beliefs held by many managers on the importance 
of doing the right thing.38 While there is probably a certain element of window 
dressing and a quest for better profits, it is obvious that these efforts provide some 
tangible social and environmental benefits.
Founded in Zurich, Switzerland, in 1863, Swiss Re 
is the world’s largest reinsurer. It operates in more 
than 20 countries. Reinsurance is a low-profile 
business, which insures the insurance companies. 
Although Swiss Re has been in the United States for 
over 100 years and was the lead insurer of the World 
Trade Center during the 9/11 attacks, few people out-
side the industry knew what it was. In recent years, 
Swiss Re’s quiet existence has been transformed by 
its strategic choice to be a vanguard in the climate 
change battle. This is because climate change poses 
significant climate-related risks in the form of floods, 
storms, and tsunamis. While other industries avoid 
risk, Swiss Re embraces risk by offering financial 
services products that enable risk taking by other 
firms. As a result, Swiss Re has developed a special 
interest in understanding more about the risk associ-
ated with climate change, and played a leading role in 
disseminating this knowledge and enhancing public 
awareness. Since the 1990s, Swiss Re has placed 
climate change at the core of what it does, sponsor-
ing a series of high-profile public forums, research 
projects, and TV documentaries. Swiss Re is obvi-
ously not totally altruistic. It has deployed its consid-
erable expertise in climate risk modeling to develop 
innovative products such as weather derivatives and 
strophe bonds, in which it is the world market leader. 
Sources: Based on (1) A. Hoffman, 2006, Getting Ahead of the Curve: 
Corporate Strategies that Address Climate Change (pp. 76–87), Arlington, 
VA: Pew center on Global Climate Change; (2) www.swissre.com.
Swiss Re’s Climate-Smart Strategy
IN Focus 17.2 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

566	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
Overall, the typology of (1) reactive, (2) defensive, (3) accommodative, and 
(4) proactive strategies is an interesting menu provided for different firms to choose. 
At present, the number of proactive firms is still a minority. While many firms are 
compelled to do something, a lot of CSR activities probably are still window dress-
ing. Only sustained pressures along regulatory, normative, and cognitive dimen-
sions may push and pull more firms to do more. After publicizing its Plan A for 
one year, Marks & Spencer (M&S) reported interesting data on the distribution of 
its consumers and employees along these four dimensions (Table 17.3). Since CSR 
cannot be embarked upon in a vacuum, a firm’s particular strategy needs to have 
some alignment with the CSR propensity of its consumers, employees, and other 
stakeholders. In other words, it is not realistic to implement a proactive strategy 
when the firm has numerous reactive employees and consumers.
17-2b Resources and CSR
CSR-related resources can include tangible technologies and processes as well as 
intangible skills and attitudes.39 The VRIO framework can shed considerable light 
on CSR.
Value. Do CSR-related resources and capabilities add value? This is the litmus test 
for CSR work (see In Focus 17.1). Many large firms, especially MNEs, can apply their 
financial, technological, and human resources toward a variety of CSR causes. For 
example, firms can choose to appease environmental groups by purchasing energy 
only from power plants utilizing green sources, such as wind-generated power. 
Or firms can respond to human rights groups by not doing business in or with 
countries accused of human rights violations. These activities can be categorized 
as social issue participation, which refers to a firm’s participation in social causes 
not directly related to the management of its primary stakeholders. Research sug-
gests that these activities may actually reduce shareholder value.40 Overall, although 
social issue participation may create some remote social and environmental value, 
it does not satisfy the economic leg of the triple bottom line, so these abilities do 
not qualify as value-adding firm resources.
Rarity. CSR-related resources are not always rare. Remember that even a valuable 
resource is not likely to provide a significant advantage if competitors also pos-
sess it. For example, both Home Depot and Lowe’s have NGOs such as the For-
est Stewardship Council certify that suppliers in Brazil, Indonesia, and Malaysia 
use only material from renewable forests. These complex processes require strong 
Social issue participation
Firms’ participation in social 
causes not directly related to the 
management of primary stake-
holders.
Table 17.3
Distribution of Marks & Spencer’s Consumers and Employees
Conceptual category
M&S’s label
Percentage of 
consumers
Percentage of 
employees
Reactive
“Not my problem”
24%
  1%
Defensive
“What’s the point”
38%
21%
Accommodative
“If it’s easy”
27%
54%
Proactive
“Green crusaders”
11%
24%
Source: Based on text in Marks & Spencer, 2008, Plan A: Year 1 Review (p. 16), January 15, plana.marksandspencer.com. See the Opening Case for details.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17   Managing Corporate Social Responsibility Globally	
567
management capabilities, such as negotiating with local suppliers, undertak-
ing internal verification, coordinating with NGOs for external verification, and 
disseminating such information to stakeholders. Such capabilities are valuable. But 
since both competitors possess capabilities to manage these processes, they are 
common (but not rare) resources.
Imitability. Although valuable and rare resources may provide some competi-
tive advantage, the advantage will only be temporary if competitors can imitate it. 
Resources must be not only valuable and rare but also hard to imitate in order to 
give firms a sustainable (not merely temporary) competitive advantage. At some 
firms, CSR-related capabilities are deeply embedded in idiosyncratic managerial 
and employee skills, attitudes, and interpretations. The socially complex way of 
channeling organizational energy and conviction toward CSR at Marks & Spencer, 
exemplified by Plan A, cannot be easily imitated (see the Opening Case). 
Organization. Does the firm have organizational capabilities to do a good job on 
CSR? Is the firm organized to exploit the full potential of CSR? Numerous com-
ponents within a firm, such as formal management control systems and informal 
relationships between managers and employees, may be relevant. These compo-
nents are often called complementary assets (see Chapter 4), because, by them-
selves, they typically do not generate advantage. However, complementary assets, 
when combined with valuable, rare, and hard-to-imitate capabilities, may enable a 
firm to fully utilize its CSR potential.
For example, assume that Firm A is able to overcome the three hurdles men-
tioned above (V, R, I) by achieving a comprehensive understanding of some 
competitors’ best practices in pollution prevention. Although Firm A has every 
intention to implement such best practices, chances are that they will not work 
unless Firm A also possesses a number of complementary assets. Process-focused 
best practices of pollution prevention are not in isolation and are often difficult 
to separate from a firm’s other activities. These best practices require a number 
of complementary assets, such as a continuous emphasis on process innovation 
and a dedicated workforce. These complementary assets are not developed as part 
of new environmental strategies; rather, they are grown from more general busi-
ness strategies such as differentiation. If such complementary assets are already 
in place, they can be leveraged in the new pursuit of best environmental practices 
(see the Opening Case). Otherwise, single-minded imitation is not likely to be 
effective.
The CSR-Economic Performance Puzzle. The resource-based view helps solve 
a major puzzle in the CSR debate: the CSR-economic performance puzzle. The 
puzzle—a source of frustration to CSR advocates—is why there is no conclusive 
evidence on a direct, positive link between CSR and economic performance such 
as profits and shareholder returns. Although some studies do indeed report a 
positive relationship,41 others find a negative relationship42 or no relationship.43 
Viewed together, “CSR does not hurt [economic] performance, but there is no 
concrete support to believe that it leads to supranormal [economic] returns.”44 
While there can be a number of explanations for this intriguing mess, a resource-
based explanation suggests that because of the capability constraints discussed 
above, many firms are not cut out for a CSR-intensive (differentiation) strategy.45 
Since all studies have some sampling bias (no study is perfect), studies that over­
sample firms not yet ready for a high level of CSR activities are likely to report a 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

568	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
negative relationship between CSR and economic performance. Likewise, studies 
that oversample firms ready for CSR may find a positive relationship. Also, stud-
ies with more balanced (more random) samples may fail to find any statistically 
significant relationship. In summary, since each firm is different (a basic assump-
tion of the resource-based view), not every firm’s economic performance is likely 
to benefit from CSR.
17-3 Debates and Extensions
CSR has no shortage of debates. Here, we discuss two previously unexplored 
debates particularly relevant for international operations: (1) race to the bottom 
versus race to the top and (2) active versus inactive CSR engagement overseas. 
17-3a Race to the Bottom (“Pollution Haven”) 
versus Race to the Top
One side of the debate argues that because of heavier environmental regulation 
in developed economies, MNEs may have an incentive to shift pollution-intensive 
production to developing countries with lower environmental standards. To attract 
investment, developing countries may enter a “race to the bottom” by lowering (or 
at least not tightening) environmental standards, and some may become “pollution 
havens” (see PengAtlas Map 4.4).
The other side argues that globalization does not necessarily have negative 
effects on the environment in developing countries to the extent suggested by the 
“pollution haven” hypothesis. This is largely due to many MNEs’ voluntary adher-
ence to environmental standards higher than those required by host countries.46 
Most MNEs reportedly outperform local firms in environmental management. 
The underlying motivations behind MNEs’ voluntary “green practices” can be 
attributed to (1) worldwide CSR pressures in general, (2) CSR demands made by 
customers in developed economies, and (3) requirements of MNE headquarters for 
worldwide compliance of higher CSR standards (such as ISO 14001). Although it is 
difficult to suggest that the “race to the bottom” does not exist, MNEs as a group do 
not necessarily add to the environmental burden in developing countries.47 Some 
MNEs, such as Dow Chemical, have actively facilitated the diffusion of better envi-
ronmental technologies to these countries.
17-3b Active versus Inactive CSR Engagement Overseas
Active CSR engagement is now increasingly expected of MNEs.48 MNEs that fail to 
do so are often criticized by NGOs. In the 1990s, Shell was harshly criticized for “not 
lifting a finger” when the Nigerian government brutally cracked down on rebels in 
the Ogoni region where Shell operated. In 2009 Shell settled a long-running case 
brought by Ogoni activists for $15.5 million.49 However, such well-intentioned calls 
for greater CSR engagement are in direct conflict with a longstanding principle 
governing the relationship between MNEs and host countries: non-intervention in 
local affairs (see the first principle in Table 17.1).
The non-intervention principle originated from concerns that MNEs may en-
gage in political activities against the national interests of the host country. Chile 
in the 1970s serves as a case in point. After the democratically elected socialist 
Learning Objective
Participate in two leading 
debates concerning corporate 
social responsibility.
17-3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17   Managing Corporate Social Responsibility Globally	
569
President Salvador Allende had threatened to expropriate the assets of 
MNEs, ITT (a US-based MNE), allegedly in connection with the Central 
Intelligence Agency (CIA), promoted a coup that killed President 
Allende. Consequently, the idea that MNEs should not interfere in the 
domestic political affairs of the host country has been enshrined in a 
number of codes of MNE conduct sponsored by international organiza-
tions such as the United Nations (UN).
However, CSR advocates have been emboldened by some MNEs’ 
actions during the apartheid era in South Africa, when local laws 
required racial segregation of the workforce. While many MNEs with-
drew, those that remained (such as BP) challenged the apartheid 
system, by desegregating their employees and thus undermining the 
government’s base of power. Emboldened by the successful removal 
of the apartheid regime in South Africa in 1994, CSR advocates have 
unleashed a new campaign, stressing the necessity for MNEs to engage 
in actions that often constitute political activity, in particular in the 
human rights area. Shell, after its widely criticized (lack of) action in 
Nigeria, has explicitly endorsed the UN Declaration on Human Rights 
and supported the exercise of such rights “within the legitimate role 
of business.”
But what exactly is the “legitimate role” of CSR initiatives in host 
countries? In almost every country, there are local laws and norms 
that some foreign MNEs may find objectionable. In Estonia, ethnic 
Russians are being discriminated against. In many Arab countries, 
women do not have the same legal rights as men. In the United States, 
a number of groups (ranging from Native Americans to homosexuals) claim to be 
discriminated against. At the heart of this debate is whether foreign MNEs should 
spearhead efforts to remove some of these discriminatory practices or should re-
main politically neutral by conforming to current host country laws and norms. 
This obviously is a nontrivial challenge. 
17-4 Management Savvy
Concerning CSR, the institution-based and resource-based views suggest three 
clear implications for action (Table 17.4). First, savvy managers need to understand 
the formal and informal rules of the game, anticipate changes, and seek to shape 
such changes. In the area of climate change, although the US government refused 
to ratify the 1997 Kyoto Protocol and did not agree to any binding target in the 
2009 Copenhagen Accord, many farsighted US managers realize that competi-
tors based in countries whose governments support serious efforts in greenhouse 
Learning Objective
Draw implications for action.
17-4
In your opinion, should Shell have 
intervened in the Nigerian govern-
ment crackdown on rebels, or was 
Shell correct in not getting involved?
Adrian Arbib/Corbis
Table 17.4
Implications for Action
  	 Understand the rules of the game, anticipate changes, and seek to shape and influence 
such changes.
  	 Pick your CSR battles carefully—don’t blindly imitate other firms’ CSR activities.
  	 Integrate CSR as part of the core activities and processes of the firm—faking it doesn’t 
last very long.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

570	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
gas reduction may gain a strong “green” advantage.50 Therefore, many US firms 
voluntarily participate in CSR activities not (yet) mandated by law, in anticipation 
of more stringent environmental requirements down the road.
Second, savvy managers need to pick CSR battles carefully. The resource-
based view suggests an important lesson captured by Sun Tzu’s timeless teach-
ing: “Know yourself, know your opponents.” While your opponents may engage in 
high-profile CSR activities, allowing them to earn a lot of bragging rights while 
contributing to their triple bottom line, blindly imitating these practices, while 
not knowing enough about “yourself” (you as a manager and the firm/unit you 
lead), may lead to some disappointment. Instead of always chasing the newest best 
practices, firms are advised to select CSR practices that fit with their existing re-
sources and capabilities. In a recession, launching expensive new CSR initiatives 
may be inadvisable. Managers have to put profitability first and be more selective 
about CSR involvement. The point is simple: “You have to make money first to give 
it away.”51
Third, given the increasingly inescapable responsibility to be good corpo-
rate citizens, managers may want to integrate CSR as part of the core activities 
of the firm—instead of “faking it,” making cosmetic changes, or just giving away 
some money. For example, instead of treating NGOs as threats, Dow Chemical, 
Home Depot, Lowe’s, and Unilever work with them. The attitude viewing CSR as a 
nuisance may underestimate potential business opportunities brought by CSR (see 
Emerging Markets 17.1). 
What determines the success and failure of firms around the world? No doubt, 
CSR will increasingly be an important part of the answer. The best-performing 
firms are likely to be those that can integrate CSR activities into the core economic 
functions of the firm while addressing social and environmental concerns.52 It is 
important to note that we live in a dangerous period of global capitalism devastated 
by financial meltdown, economic crisis, and climate change. In the post–Great 
Recession and post–Occupy Wall Street world, managers, as a unique group of 
stakeholders, have an important and challenging responsibility to safeguard and 
advance capitalism. From a CSR standpoint, this means building more humane, 
more inclusive, and fairer firms that not only generate wealth and develop econo-
mies, but also respond to changing societal expectations concerning the social and 
environmental role of the firm around the world.53
C h a p t e r  S u m m a r y
	17.1	 Articulate what is a stakeholder view of the firm.
  	 A stakeholder view of the firm urges companies to pursue a more balanced 
set of triple bottom line, consisting of economic, social, and environmental 
performance.
  	 Despite the fierce defense of the free market school, especially its 
shareholder capitalism variant, the CSR movement has now become a more 
central part of management discussions around the globe.
	17.2	 Apply the institution-based and resource-based views to analyze CSR.
  	 The institution-based view suggests that when confronting CSR pressures, 
firms may employ (1) reactive, (2) defensive, (3) accommodative, and 
(4) proactive strategies. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17   Managing Corporate Social Responsibility Globally	
571
  	 The resource-based view suggests that not all CSR activities satisfy the VRIO 
requirements.
	17.3	 Participate in two leading debates concerning CSR.
  	 (1) Race to the bottom versus race to the top and (2) active versus inactive 
CSR engagement overseas.
	17.4	 Draw implications for action.
  	 Understand the rules of the game, anticipate changes, and seek to influence 
such changes.
  	 Pick your CSR battles carefully—don’t blindly imitate other firms’ CSR 
activities.
  	 Integrate CSR as part of the core activities and processes of the firm.
K e y  T e r m s
Accommodative  
strategy 563
Corporate social 
responsibility  
(CSR) 554
Defensive strategy 562
Global sustainability 555
Primary stakeholder 
groups 556
Proactive strategy 564
Reactive strategy 562
Secondary stakeholder 
groups 557
Social issue  
participation 566
Stakeholder 554
Triple bottom  
line 557
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 How do you define global sustainability?
	 2.	 How do the concerns of a primary stakeholder differ from those of a 
secondary stakeholder?
	 3.	 What does it mean for a corporation to have a triple bottom line?
	 4.	 Using Table 17.2, summarize the four types of strategies that can be used to 
make CSR decisions.
	 5.	 Devise two examples: one in which a corporation’s participation in a social 
issue adds value to the firm and one in which it decreases value in the eyes 
of the shareholders.
	 6.	 Using a resource-based view, explain why some firms improve their 
economic performance by adopting a CSR strategy, whereas others achieve 
either no results or damaging results.
	 7.	 Do you think “green practices” should be voluntary or mandatory for 
businesses? Explain your answer.
	 8.	 ON ETHICS: In your opinion, do you think an MNE should remain politically 
neutral and adopt practices and laws of the host country?
	 9.	 As a manager, what are some of the considerations you would take into 
account before adopting any CSR-related policy?
	 10.	 How does the concept of “picking your battles carefully” apply to CSR?
	 11.	 Using PengAtlas Map 4.3, in your opinion, from a labor perspective, which 
country would present the biggest CSR challenge if you had operations in 
that country?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

572	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
	 12.	 Using PengAtlas Map 4.3, in your opinion, which country would be at the 
greatest risk from a profit perspective if its firms aggressively pursued in 
CSR values regarding human rights?
	 13.	 Compare PengAtlas Map. 4.5 with Map 1.1. Suppose your firm is located in 
a developed economy that is considering curbing carbon emissions, which 
could create severe problems for your firm and threaten its existence. Would 
you recommend relocating operations to an emerging economy that still has 
many people in desperate need of employment and where the government 
is defiantly resisting any restrictions to curb such emissions because its 
scientists have different views of the risks than many in the United States? 
What are the pros and cons of relocating? 
C r i t i c a l  D i s c u s s i o n  Q u e s t i o n s
	 1.	 ON ETHICS: In a landmark case in 1919, Dodge v. Ford, the Michigan State 
Supreme Court determined whether or not Henry Ford could withhold 
dividends from the Dodge brothers (and other shareholders of the Ford 
Motor Company) to engage in what today would be called CSR activities. 
With a resounding “No,” the court opined that “A business organization is 
organized and carried on primarily for the profits of the stockholders.” If 
the court in your country were to decide on this case this year (or in 2019), 
what do you think would be the likely outcome? 
	 2.	 ON ETHICS: Your employer encourages you to contribute to CSR causes 
using your personal time. Do you have a problem with this? Why?
	 3.	 ON ETHICS: Your CPA firm is organizing a one-day-long CSR activity using 
company time, such as cleaning up a dirty road or picking up trash on the 
beach. A colleague tells you: “This is so stupid! I already have so much unfin-
ished work. Now to take a whole day away from work? Come on! I don’t mind 
CSR. If the company is serious, why don’t they donate one day of my earn-
ings, which I am sure will be more than the value I can generate by cleaning 
up the road or picking up trash? With that money, they can just hire someone 
to do a better job than I would.” What are you going to say to her? (Your 
colleague makes $73,000 a year and on a per-day basis she makes $200.)
	 4.	 ON ETHICS: Hypothetically, your MNE is the largest foreign investor in 
Vietnam, where dissidents and religious leaders are reportedly being perse-
cuted. As the country manager there, you understand that the MNE is being 
pressured by NGOs to help the oppressed groups in Vietnam. But you also 
understand that the host government could be upset if your firm is found 
to engage in local political activities deemed inappropriate. These alleged 
activities, which you personally find distasteful, are not directly related to 
your operations. How would you proceed? 
G l o b a l  A c t i o n
	 1.	 China has been a recipient of considerable investment recently. Howev-
er, little research has been conducted by the green technology company 
for which you work concerning the exact nature of socially responsible 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17   Managing Corporate Social Responsibility Globally	
573
technology investment. Since your firm’s goal is to operate in China in a 
way  that promotes social responsibility, you must identify the sectors of 
green technology that receive the most investment. Develop a report that re-
sponds to this issue and adds to the development of your company’s strategy 
in China. Based on your analysis, be sure to include possible new products 
that could be introduced in the Chinese market.
	 2.	 Microfinance is an emerging area of individualized financial investment 
in developing countries that is based on social responsibility principles. 
However, since it involves the investment of resources with the expectation 
that a profit will be made, microfinance investors tend to search for regions 
and portfolios that have the highest profitability. Analyze information in a 
global data set to determine which areas of the world seem to have the most 
profitable microfinance activities. What conclusions can you draw from this 
information?
V i d e o  C a s e
After watching the video on mining in Australia, discuss the following:
	 1.	 Is the Chinese firm interested in global sustainability?
	 2.	 How has the Chinese firm categorized the Aboriginal people as a stakehold-
er group?
	 3.	 How can the Chinese firm take more of a stakeholder view in iron ore min-
ing in Australia?
	 4.	 What do you believe will be the relationship of CSR and economic perfor-
mance as a result of the Chinese firm’s activities?
	 5.	 What CSR strategy do you believe that the Chinese firm is using in mining 
in Australia? Justify your answer. 
Wolves are the planet’s most widespread land-based 
large mammals. They used to be humans’ most direct 
competitors for meat. As a result, the Big Bad Wolf 
occupied a center stage in our psyche as a demon 
character in many cultures. Humans fought wolves 
for ages. Relentlessly shot, poisoned, and trapped, 
wolves were completely defeated in these old wolf 
wars. In Yellowstone National Park the last gray wolf 
was killed in 1926. In the continental United States 
(except northern Minnesota), the gray wolf was com-
pletely exterminated by 1950.
However, winning the wolf wars made (some) 
humans feel guilty. In 1995 and 1996, the US Fish 
and Wild Life Service deliberately reintroduced 
66  wolves captured in Canada into the wild by 
releasing them into Yellowstone National Park 
and central Idaho’s wilderness. By 2009, more 
than 1,600 wolves populated the northern Rocky 
Mountain states (primarily Idaho, Montana, and 
Wyoming), and smaller packs penetrated northeast-
ern Washington (state) and Colorado. “The West 
is getting wilder by the hour,” declared National 
Wolf Wars
Ethical 
Dilemma
C l o s i n g  C a s e
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

574	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
Geographic. Wildlife enthusiasts and tourists were 
elated. In Yellowstone, thousands of tourists came 
to watch wolves every year, adding millions of 
dollars to the local economy. The revival of the gray 
wolves was viewed one of the most resounding 
victories of the Endangered Species Act enacted 
in 1973. In 2008, gray wolves in Wyoming were 
declared no longer endangered by the Department 
of the Interior. In 2009, gray wolves in Montana and 
Idaho started to enjoy such a status. Finally, in 2011, 
gray wolves in eight states across the West and 
upper Great Lakes were delisted.
Will humans and wolves live happily ever after? 
Not likely! “Packs are back,” wrote National Geo-
graphic, “Westerners are glad, scared, and howling 
mad.” Other than the group who are glad, a lot of 
people are scared. Small children, cats, and dogs 
are no longer safe in wolf-infested areas. A pleas-
ant walk in the woods may result in unpleasant en-
counters. But two groups are howling mad. First, 
hunters complain that too many elk have become 
wolf food. In a region struggling with economic 
hardship such as lumber mill closures, wolves are 
direct competitors for meat to feed the family. In 
some places, “Howdy?” is replaced by “Get your 
elk yet?” Some folks openly talk about taking the 
matter into their own hands by shooting the wolves 
as their forefathers did. A popular bumper sticker 
sports a crossed-out wolf with the caption “Smoke 
a Pack a Day.”
The second group that opposes the reappearance 
of gray wolves is ranchers who raise livestock such 
as cattle and sheep for a living. Wolves literally eat 
into the thin profits of ranchers and jack up the price 
of beef, lamb, milk, cheese, yogurt, and ice cream 
that all of us have to pay. A pack of wolves (generally 
about 3 to 10) typically kills a (wild) elk or a cattle calf 
every two to three days. In a single night, a pack of 
three adult wolves and five pups killed 122 sheep on 
a ranch in Montana, consuming little to no meat—
the adults were probably teaching the pups how to 
kill. Wyoming and Montana compensate ranchers for 
livestock loss to wolves (for example, about $600 a 
calf) if ranchers can prove that such losses are due 
to wolf kills. The trouble is that if ranchers do not 
find and document a carcass right away, scavengers 
such as grizzly bears may drag off or shred all the evi-
dence. For every wolf kill that is compensated, sev-
eral more are uncompensated. In addition, surviving 
cattle harassed by wolves over one season can lose 
30 to 50 pounds each. Further, livestock with injuries 
scratched by unsuccessful wolf chases or with infec-
tions from wounds are not marketable, and ranchers 
have to eat such losses. Finally, stress results in a lot 
of livestock miscarriages.
Some ranchers are aware of their CSR. One was 
quoted as saying: “We have to realize that the general 
US population wants wolves. That population is also 
our customers for beef. It’s not a good idea to tell your 
customers they don’t know what they’re doing.” But, 
the other side of the debate argues: “Isn’t the think-
ing that the CSR of cattle ranchers is to tolerate their 
livestock being wolf feed going too far?”
Frustrated ranchers cannot defend their private 
property by shooting wolves. Instead, they vote pol-
iticians on a pro-wolf platform out of office and fill 
state legislatures in Idaho, Montana, and Wyoming 
with candidates who vow to make wolves go away. 
After gray wolves were delisted from the (federal) 
engendered species list in Wyoming, the state gov-
ernment immediately labeled them varmints (or 
pests), allowing virtually unlimited shooting and 
trapping. A resulting lawsuit filed by environmental 
and animal-protection groups forced the Depart-
ment of the Interior to temporarily put wolves back 
Arco Images/Reinhard, H/Alamy Limited
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17   Managing Corporate Social Responsibility Globally	
575
on the endangered list. Taking the lesson, Montana 
and Idaho, after wolves were delisted in their states, 
labeled them game animals and set quotas for the 
first legal wolf hunts in their history—75 in Montana 
and 220 in Idaho. In addition, Idaho started shooting 
wolves from helicopters to kill predators that biolo-
gists say are harming elk herds. In response, angry 
environmentalists went back to court again, arguing 
that the legislative removal of wolves from federal 
protection was unconstitutional and that wolves 
would be annihilated again. Overall, the age-old wolf 
wars continue to rage. But in this new chapter, wolf 
wars are not waged between wolves and humans—
instead, they are waged between different groups 
of humans with opposing views (the rural folks 
populating the cattle country versus the urban types 
who vow to protect wild animals at all costs). So stay 
tuned.
Case Discussion Questions:
	 1.	 ON ETHICS: Do ranchers have any CSR to help 
preserve the wolves by tolerating livestock loss-
es? Or does their CSR lie in their efforts to get 
rid of the wolves from their private property? (By 
doing that, they also generate the social benefits 
of bringing down the costs on beef, lamb, milk, 
cheese, yogurt, and ice cream for all of us.) 
	 2.	 ON ETHICS: If ranchers cannot make a living, 
they are likely to sell property to developers, 
who will facilitate more urban sprawl. Urban land 
almost never goes back to agricultural or ranch 
use. Should CSR advocates help ranchers make 
a living, or should they push ranchers to accept 
more losses from wolf predation?
	 3.	 ON ETHICS: Compensating ranchers for wolf kills 
is a solution. However, as state budgets shrink 
and economic recession bites, should taxpayers 
(including many who do not hunt and do not make 
a living by ranching) foot such an escalating bill? 
(An expanding wolf population will need more 
food, which will result in more livestock losses.)
	 4.	 ON ETHICS: While “wolf wars” take place in 
the United States, “elephant wars” in Africa (ele-
phants leave protected areas and destroy crops) 
and “tiger wars” in India (tigers leave protected 
areas and attack livestock and children) feature 
similar tensions. Answer Questions 1 to 3 above, 
using either “elephant wars” or “tiger wars” as 
your background.
Sources: Based on (1) Christian Science Monitor, 2011, Wolf wars: Can man and predator coexist in the West, June 3; (2) Missoula News, 2009, Three 
views of the wolf wars, August 25; (3) National Geographic, 2010, Wolf wars, March: 34–55.
[Journal acronyms] AMJ—Academy of Management Journal; AMP—
Academy of Management Perspectives; AMR—Academy of Management Re-
view; APJM—Asia Pacific Journal of Management; BSR—Business and 
Society Review; BW—BusinessWeek (before 2010) or Bloomberg Business-
week (since 2010); HBR—Harvard Business Review; JBE—Journal of 
Business Ethics; JIBS—Journal of International Business Studies; JIM—
Journal of International Management; JMS—Journal of Management 
Studies; JWB—Journal of World Business; NYTM—New York Times 
Magazine; OSt—Organization Studies; SMJ—Strategic Management 
Journal; TIBR—Thunderbird International Business Review
1 K. Davis, 1973, The case for and against business assump-
tion of social responsibilities (p. 312), AMJ, 16: 312–322. See also 
R. Aguilera, R. Rupp, C. Williams, & J. Ganapathi, 2007, Putting the 
S back in CSR, AMR, 32: 836–863; P. Cappelli, H. Singh, J. Singh, 
& M. Useem, 2010, The India way, AMP, May: 6–24; J. Campbell, 
L. Eden, & S. Miller, 2012, Multinationals and CSR in host coun-
tries, JIBS, 43: 84–106; D. Matten & J. Moon, 2008, “Implicit” and 
“explicit” CSR, AMR, 33: 404–424.
2 C. Egri & D. Ralston, 2008, Corporate responsibility, JIM, 14: 
319–339; P. Godfrey, 2005, The relationship between corpo-
rate philanthropy and shareholder wealth, AMR, 30: 777–798; 
T.  Hemphill, 2004, Corporate citizenship, BSR, 109: 339–361; 
T. Jones, W. Felps, & G. Bigley, 2007, Ethical theory and stakeholder-
related decisions, AMR, 32: 137–155; T. London, 2009, Making bet-
ter investments at the base of the pyramid, HBR, May: 106–113; 
S. Puffer & D. McCarthy, 2008, Ethical turnarounds and transfor-
mational leadership, TIBR, 50: 303–314.
3 Y. He, Z. Tian, & Y. Chen, 2007, Performance implications of 
nonmarket strategy in China, APJM, 24: 151–169; K. O’Shaughnessy, 
E. Gedajlovic, & P. Reinmoeller, 2007, The influence of firm, indus-
try, and network on the corporate social performance of Japanese 
firms, APJM, 24: 283–304; A. Scherer & G. Palazzo, 2011, The new 
political role of business in a globalized world, JMS, 48: 899–931.
4 E. Freeman, 1984, Strategic Management: A Stakeholder Approach 
(p.  46), Boston: Pitman. See also M. Barnett, 2007, Stakeholder 
influence capacity and the variability of financial returns to CSR, 
N O T E S
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

576	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
AMR, 32: 794–816; S. Brickson, 2007, Organizational identity ori-
entation, AMR, 32: 864–888; D. Crilly, 2011, Predicting stakeholder 
orientation in the MNE, JIBS, 42: 694–717; T. Jensen & J. Sandstrom, 
2011, Stakeholder theory and globalization, OSt, 32: 473–488; 
A. Kacperczyk, 2009, With greater power comes greater responsibil-
ity? SMJ, 30: 261–285.
5 P. David, M. Bloom, & A. Hillman, 2007, Investor activism, man-
agerial responsiveness, and corporate social performance, SMJ, 
28: 91–100; J. Harrison, D. Bosse, & R. Phillips, 2010, Managing 
for stakeholders, stakeholder utility functions, and competitive 
advantage, SMJ, 31: 58–74.
6 World Commission on Environment and Development, 1987, Our 
Common Future (p. 8), Oxford: Oxford University Press. See also 
P. Bansal, 2005, Evolving sustainably, SMJ, 26: 187–218.
7 S. Hart, 2005, Capitalism at the Crossroads, Philadelphia: Wharton 
School Publishing; R. Rajan, 2010, Fault Lines, Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.
8 J. Doh & T. Guay, 2006, CSR, public policy, and NGO activism in 
Europe and the United States, JMS, 43: 47–73. 
9 P. Romilly, 2007, Business and climate change risk, JIBS, 38: 474–480.
10  J. Coombs & K. M. Gilley, 2005, Stakeholder management as a pre-
dictor of CEO compensation, SMJ, 26: 827–840; B. Husted & D. Allen, 
2006, CSR in the MNE, JIBS, 37: 838–849; G. Kassinis & N. Vafeas,  
2006, Stakeholder pressures and environmental performance, AMJ, 
49: 145–159.
11 C. Eesley & M. Lenox, 2006, Firm responses to secondary stake-
holder action, SMJ, 27: 765–781.
12 M. Clarkson, 1995, A stakeholder framework for analyzing and 
evaluating corporate social performance (p. 107), AMR, 20: 92–117. 
See also F. den Hond & F. de Bakker, 2007, Ideologically motivated 
activism, AMR, 32: 901–924; C. Marquis, M. Glynn, & G. Davis, 
2007, Community isomorphism and corporate social action, AMR, 
32: 925–945; S. Waddock, 2008, Building a new institutional infra-
structure for corporate responsibility, AMP, August: 87–109.
13 M. Friedman, 1970, The social responsibility of business is to 
increase its profits, NYTM, September 13: 32–33.
14 D. Ahlstrom, 2010, Innovation and growth, AMP, August: 11–24.
15 A. Delios, 2010, How can organizations be competitive but dare to 
care? AMP, August: 25–36. 
16 A. Mackey, T. Mackey, & J. Barney, 2007, CSR and firm perfor-
mance, AMR, 32: 817–835.
17 G. Bruton, 2010, Business and the world’s poorest billion, AMP, 
August: 6–10.
18 Economist, 2011, Rage against the machine, October 22: 13. 
19 Y. Mishina, B. Dykes, E. Block, & T. Pollock, 2010, Why “good” 
firms do bad things, AMJ, 53: 701–722; A. Muller & R. Kraussl, 
2011, Doing good deeds in times of need, SMJ, 32: 911–929; C. Oh 
& J. Oetzel, 2011, Multinationals’ response to major disasters, SMJ, 
32: 658–681.
20 K. Basu & G. Palazzo, 2008, Corporate social responsibility, AMR, 
33: 122–136.
21 J. Campbell, 2007, Why would corporations behave in socially 
responsible ways? AMR, 32: 946–967; J. Murillo-Luna, C. Garces-
Ayerbe, & P. Rivera-Torres, 2008, Why do patterns of environmental 
response differ? SMJ, 29: 1225–1240; A. Terlaak, 2007, Order with-
out law? AMR, 32: 968–985; D. Waldman et al., 2006, Cultural and 
leadership predictions of CSR values of top management, JIBS, 37: 
823–837.
22 B. Gifford, A. Kestler, & S. Anand, 2010, Building local legitimacy 
into CSR, JWB, 45: 304–311. 
23 A. Gore, 2006, An Inconvenient Truth, Emmaus, PA: Rodale Press.
24 A. Muller & A. Kolk, 2010, Extrinsic and intrinsic drivers of 
corporate social performance, JMS, 47: 1–26.
25 Economist, 2010, The other oil spill, June 26: 71–73. 
26 J. Janney & S. Gove, 2011, Reputation and CSR aberrations, 
trends, and hypocrisy, JMS, 48: 1562–1584.
27 BW, 2010, Nine questions (and provisional answers) about the 
spill, June 14: 62.
28 D. Siegel, 2009, Green management matters only if it yields more 
green, AMP, August: 5–16.
29 A. Marcus & A. Fremeth, 2009, Green management matters 
regardless, AMP, August: 17–26.
30 V. Hoffmann, T. Trautmann, & J. Hemprecht, 2009, Regulatory 
uncertainty, JMS, 46: 1227–1253.
31 N. Darnall, I. Henriques, & P. Sadorsky, 2010, Adopting proactive 
environmental strategy, JMS, 47: 1072–1094.
32 J. Mackey, 2011, What is it that only I can do? (p. 121), HBR, 
January: 119–123. 
33 Starbucks Global Responsibility Report 2010, 2011, Message from 
Howard Schultz, www.starbucks.com.
34 G. Unruh & R. Ettenson, 2010, Winning in the green frenzy, 
HBR, November: 110–116.
35 BW, 2010, The smooth-talking king of coal—and climate change, 
June 7: 65.
36 A. King, 2007, Cooperation between corporations and environ-
mental groups, AMR, 32: 889–900; A. Kourula, 2010, Corporate 
engagement with NGOs in different institutional contexts, JWB, 
45: 395–404; J. Nebus & C. Rufin, 2010, Extending the bargaining 
power model, JIBS, 41: 996–1015.
37 M. Barnett & A. King, 2008, Good fences make good neigh-
bors, AMJ, 51: 1150–1170; M. Delmas and M. Montes-Sancho, 2010, 
Voluntary agreements to improve environmental quality, SMJ, 31: 
575–601.
38 B. Arya & G. Zhang, 2009, Institutional reforms and investor 
reactions to CSR announcements, JMS, 46: 1089–1112; M. Delmas 
& M.  Toffel, 2008, Organizational responses to environmental 
demands, SMJ, 29: 1027–1055; E. Reid & M. Toffel, 2009, Respond-
ing to public and private politics, SMJ, 30: 1157–1178; E. Wong, 
M. Ormiston, & P. Tetlock, 2011, The effects of top management 
team integration complexity and decentralized decision making on 
corporate social performance, AMJ, 54: 1207–1228.
39 A. Kolk & J. Pinkse, 2008, A perspective on MNEs and climate 
change, JIBS, 39: 1359–1378.
40 A. Hillman & G. Keim, 2001, Shareholder value, stakeholder 
management, and social issues, SMJ, 22: 125–139.
41 R. Chan, 2010, Corporate environmentalism pursuit by foreign 
firms competing in China, JWB, 45: 80–92; Y. Eiadat, A. Kelly, 
F. Roche, & H. Eyadat, 2008, Green and competitive? JWB, 43: 131–145; 
P. Godfrey, C. Merrill, & J. Hansen, 2009, The relationship between 
CSR and shareholder value, SMJ, 30: 425–445; B. Lev, C. Petrovits, & 
S. Radhakrishnan, 2010, Is doing good good for you? SMJ, 31: 182–200; 
S. Ramchander, R. Schwebach, & K. Staking, 2012, The information-
al relevance of CSR, SMJ, 33: 303–314; M. Sharfman & C. Fernando, 
2008, Environmental risk management and the cost of capital, SMJ, 
29: 569–592; H. Wang & C. Qian, 2011, Corporate philanthropy and 
corporate financial performance, AMJ, 54: 1159–1181.
42  S. Ambec & P. Lanoie, 2008, Does it pay to be green? AMP, 
November: 45–62; D. Vogel, 2005, The low value of virtue, HBR, 
June: 26.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17   Managing Corporate Social Responsibility Globally	
577
43 S. Brammer & A. Millington, 2008, Does it pay to be different? SMJ, 
29: 1325–1343; J. Surroca, J. Tribo, & S. Waddock, 2010, Corporate 
responsibility and financial performance, SMJ, 31: 463–490.
44 T. Devinney, 2009, Is the socially responsible corporation a myth? 
AMP, May: 53.
45 J. Choi & H. Wang, 2009, Stakeholder relations and the persis-
tence of corporate financial performance, SMJ, 30: 895–907; C. Hull 
& S. Rothenberg, 2008, Firm performance, SMJ, 29: 781–789.
46 P. Christmann & G. Taylor, 2006, Firm self-regulation through 
international certifiable standards, JIBS, 37: 863–878.
47 P. Madsen, 2009, Does corporate investment drive a “race to the 
bottom” in environmental protection? AMJ, 52: 1297–1318.
48 S. Brammer, S. Pavelin, & L. Porter, 2009, Corporate charitable 
giving, MNCs, and countries of concern, JMS, 46: 575–596; 
B. Scholtens, 2009, CSR in the international banking industry, JBE, 
86: 159–175.
49 Economist, 2009, Spilling forever, June 13: 51.
50 A. Kolk & J. Pinkse, 2008, A perspective on MNEs and climate 
change, JIBS, 39: 1359–1378; J. Lash & F. Wellington, 2007, Competi-
tive advantage on a warming planet, HBR, March: 95–102.
51 J. Welch & S. Welch, 2009, Giving in an unforgiving time, BW, 
June 1: 80.
52 B. Husted & J. Salazar, 2006, Taking Friedman seriously, JMS, 
43: 75–91.
53 R. Bies, J. Bartunek, T. Fort, & M. Zald, 2007, Corporations as 
social change agents, AMR, 32: 788–793; N. Gardberg & C. Fombrun, 
2006, Corporate citizenship, AMR, 31: 329–346.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

578	
 
part 4
atlas
Map 4.1
World Shipping and Transportation Routes 
ARCTIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
INDIAN
OCEAN
Map 4.2
World’s Busiest Airports
Source: Adapted from Airports Council International (ACI), 2011.
ARCTIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
INDIAN
OCEAN
3,916,811
89,331,622
66,774,738
3,228,081
4,165,852
73,948,133
Passenger Ranking:
Cargo Ranking:
Atlanta International Airport
Beijing International Airport
Chicago O’Hare International
Airport
Hong Kong International Airport
Memphis International Airport
Shanghai International Airport
© Cengage Learning
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part 4   Atlas	
579
Source: Adapted from Country Comparison: Labor Force, World Factbook, 2011.
Map 4.3
Countries with the Largest Labor Forces 
China
795,500,000
Japan
65,930,000
Russia
75,410,000
Nigeria
52,160,000
India
487,600,000
Pakistan
58,410,000
Germany
43,620,000
Bangladesh
75,420,000
Philippines
40,000,000
Vietnam
46,480,000
Indonesia
117,400,000
United States
153,600,000
Mexico
49,170,000
Brazil
104,700,000
ARCTIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
INDIAN
OCEAN
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
European Union
228,400,000
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

580	
Part 4   Atlas 
Map 4.4
Unemployment Rates in Select Countries
Source: Adapted from Country Comparison: Unemployment Rate, World Factbook, 2011.
Zambia
50%
ARCTIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
INDIAN
OCEAN
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
Zimbabwe
95%
Senegal
48%
Greece
17%
Bosnia and
Herzegovina
43%
Spain
22%
Ireland
14%
Kosovo
45%
Macedonia
31%
Dominican Republic
13%
Djibouti
59%
Iran
15%
Nigeria
21%
South Africa
25%
Namibia
51%
Haiti
41%
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part 4   Atlas	
581
Map 4.5
Top CO2 Emissions in Metric Tons Per Person
Sources: Adapted from 2009–2010 estimates published by the CDIAC and the International Energy Agency. Note: world average is 4.9 tons per person.
Saudi Arabia
18.2
Iran
7.6
South Korea
11.5
Australia
16.0
Russia
11.8
China 
6.2
Germany
9.3
United States
17.6
Canada
14.9
Japan
8.9
South Africa
8.9
United Kingdom
7.9
Poland
8.1
Italy
6.7
France
5.5
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

582	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
ESET: From a “Living-Room” Firm to a Global Player  
in the Antivirus Software Industry1
Arnold Schuh (Vienna University of Economics and Business)
I n t e g r a t i v e  C a s e  4 . 1
1) © Arnold Schuh. Reprinted with permission.
2) “spol. s.r.o.“ refers to private limited liability company (LLC), according to 
Slovak law.
From its humble roots in Slovakia, ESET has become a leading 
player in the global antivirus software industry. How did it ac-
complish such amazing growth? How did it successfully market 
around the world mission-critical software that was originally 
developed in Slovakia? 
ESET, spol. s.r.o. is a global vendor of security software 
for companies of all sizes and households.2 Its software 
solutions deliver instant, comprehensive protection 
against evolving computer security threats. The com-
pany pioneered and continues to lead the industry in 
proactive threat detection. Six private Slovak IT spe-
cialists own the company that was founded 20 years 
ago in Bratislava, the capital of Slovakia. Today, ESET 
is one of the top five global players in the antivirus soft-
ware market.
The Beginning Behind the Iron Curtain and After the 
Velvet Revolution
During the Cold War (1945–1989), Czechoslovakia 
was a country run by a communist regime and part of 
the Eastern Bloc. The economy was closed and strictly 
regulated. Running a private business was heavily re-
stricted but allowed as a small scale operation. Personal 
computer penetration was low and the country was 
isolated from Western IT markets. Two young Slovak 
programming enthusiasts, Peter Pasko and Miroslav 
Trnka, were asked to help sort out a virus problem at 
a Slovak nuclear power plant. They were indeed able 
to discover the virus, one of the world’s first computer 
viruses. They dubbed it “Vienna” and wrote a program 
for its detection and elimination that formed the ba-
sis for their first antivirus product named NOD. NOD 
stood for “Nemocnica Na Okraji Disku” or “Hospital 
on the Edge of the Disk.” Inspired by a popular Slo-
vak TV series with the same title, NOD was the first 
antivirus software with graphical user interface and an 
integration of detection, fixing, and prevention. The 
whole production process of NOD—recording, label-
ing, and packaging of diskettes—took place in the liv-
ing room. They distributed their program mostly for 
free to a small network of friends and IT enthusiasts. 
Selling to state-owned companies was complex and dif-
ficult due to a bureaucratic sourcing process. Export-
ing was impossible. Thus, the two inventors faced the 
situation of having a brilliant product with limited po-
tential for commercialization under the given political 
conditions.
In 1989 the communist regime in Czechoslovakia 
ended in a non-violent revolution, which was called 
the Velvet Revolution. After 42 years under communist 
rule, the country became a democracy and opened up 
to the Western world. The new government started the 
transformation of a (mostly) state-owned and centrally 
planned economy into a market-based economy with 
private entrepreneurship as a key element. The trans-
formation process was accompanied by a re-orientation 
of exports from former Eastern Bloc countries toward 
Western markets. At this time, many Czechoslovak 
products were of mediocre quality, selling at a dis-
count and with some difficulty in the West. The GDP 
per capita was about 25% of that of neighboring 
Austria. The first years after the system change were 
chaotic. Private businesses were expanding quickly 
in Czechoslovakia but legislation and administration 
were lagging behind. 
Because the Internet was not developed yet, soft-
ware sales relied on physical distribution. Computer 
viruses had a limited spread and the security software 
industry was in its infancy. NOD was still a side busi-
ness for the founders whose company was run out of 
an apartment in Bratislava. Domestic sales grew slowly 
but continually. In 1990, they started selling NOD in 
Austria under the name “Stopvir” via a local distribu-
tor. Although the export business was not very success-
ful at the beginning, in 1991 the first million in local 
currency (about US$36,000) in revenues was earned. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Four   Integrative Cases	
583
Establishment of ESET and Its First Years 
In 1992 ESET, spol. s.r.o. was founded by Rudolf Hruby, 
Peter Pasko, and Miroslav Trnka in Bratislava in the 
Slovak part of the former Czechoslovakia as a privately 
owned limited liability company (LLC). At this time, 
the founders did not focus on antivirus software alone. 
They also saw a good business opportunity in develop-
ing book keeping software. In the early years of the 
transition process, thanks to the enormous pent-up 
demand, almost any business was offering attractive 
growth to entrepreneurs. Although computer usage 
was still in its infancy, the demand for applications in 
all types of functional and sectoral areas was growing. 
Then came the break-up of Czechoslovakia in 1993 into 
two independent countries, the Czech Republic and 
the Slovak Republic. 
Suddenly, ESET lost a large part of the former home 
market, which forced the founders to look for new ex-
port markets. In the same year, Trnka began contribut-
ing to the column “Virus Radar” in the leading Slovak 
periodical PC Revue, which helped build ESET’s repu-
tation as an antivirus specialist. In the following years, 
improved versions of NOD were launched. A turning 
point was winning the first Virus Bulletin award in 1998. 
Virus Bulletin is a British magazine dedicated to provid-
ing PC users with regular information about the pre-
vention, detection, and removal of computer malware. 
When this renowned magazine praised ESET for its 
quality, international users became aware of the com-
pany and foreign distributors started to ask for sales 
agreements. 
However, the Slovak origin of the company still 
posed a psychological barrier to prospective foreign 
buyers and, as a consequence, restrained the growth 
of sales in foreign markets. Software originating from 
a relatively unknown, former Eastern bloc country was 
not perceived as a reliable high-performance product. 
Management discussed how they could counter this 
negative country-of-origin effect. In 1999 ESET LLC 
was established in San Diego, California, in the United 
States, with the help of Anton Zajac. This subsidiary 
was upgraded to be the international business center 
for ESET, responsible for all foreign markets. By sell-
ing its software through the US subsidiary, ESET got 
rid of the negative country-of-origin associations and 
international revenues began to rise. This dual struc-
ture was terminated 10 years later through a merger of 
the US subsidiary with its parent ESET, spol. s.r.o. In 
the meantime, ESET had itself established as a leading 
player in the industry and was valued above all for its 
competence and not its country of origin anymore. The 
choice of the United States as a location for the inter-
national business center was also driven by the fact that 
it was the largest and leading IT market of the world, 
with a progressive IT industry and demanding custom-
ers who would stimulate ESET’s innovation efforts.
Era of Rapid International Expansion and Growth
From the year 2000 on, the company showed remark-
able growth. In 2002 the global auditing and consulting 
company Deloitte added ESET to its rankings of fast-
est growing companies, namely “Deloitte Technology 
Fast 50 in Central Europe” and “Fast 500 in EMEA” 
(Europe, Middle East, and Africa). This growth of sales 
was driven, on the one hand, by demand as viruses 
became a widespread threat through the fast evolu-
tion of the Internet and, on the other hand, by the 
improved international presence. In 1990 estimates of 
new and different computer viruses ranged from 200 
to 500. In 2000 the number was 50,000. In 2008 an-
other leading antivirus company Symantec claimed 
that the firm’s antivirus programs detected 1.1 million 
viruses. In 2010 the estimate was 2 million viruses. All 
statistics show that the number is constantly growing. 
A higher penetration of computers, new devices such 
as smartphones and tablets, widely available mobile 
broadband technology, cloud computing, and intensi-
fied usage have increased the exposure of computer us-
ers to malware. The need to protect against these cyber 
threats has fuelled the sales of ESET: sales volume in 
local currency grew from 2000 to 2010 by a factor of 
150 (!). While foreign sales accounted for less than 30% 
of overall sales in 2003, this share grew to 90% in 2010. 
In the first 15 years the company grew organically. 
That changed in the last few years. In 2008 and 2010 two 
companies in the field of information security services 
and antispam systems were acquired. In 2008 ESET 
bought the Czech security company Setrenet in order 
to expand its offering to information security services. 
Two years later, ESET acquired Comdom Software, a 
Slovak software company acclaimed for antispam solu-
tions. By acquiring Comdom, ESET increased its capac-
ity for developing advanced security solutions. “ESET 
is a research and development-oriented company that 
is going to benefit from this merger by tapping into 
the potential of this manufacturer of advanced anti-
spam solutions. Building on the team of skilled pro-
grammers and researchers, we envision introducing 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

584	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
new activities, along with injecting new potential into 
the development of security software,” noted Miroslav 
Trnka, ESET’s then CEO.
People and Culture as a Basis of Success
Highly talented and motivated employees are central 
to ESET’s success. Andrew Lee, CEO of ESET North 
America, emphasizes this aspect: 
Great software is the product of great people. ESET 
seeks to recruit people who are not only some of the 
brightest and best at what they do, but who also fit the 
positive culture of trust, integrity, innovation, effec-
tiveness, and cheerfulness that drives everything that 
we do as a company. Throughout our organization, 
each employee is a carefully selected fit for the role, 
and as such is a key to our success.
This attitude is also expressed in the mission state-
ment: “Intelligent people develop intelligent products 
for intelligent customers.” In order to attract and retain 
this type of employee ESET has to pay salaries accord-
ing to West European standards. Team building events, 
skill trainings, language courses, pension schemes, and 
health insurance contribute to a high level of employee 
satisfaction and low employee turnover. Owners and man-
agement cultivate an informal and personal style in the 
interaction with their employees and try to not only know 
their skills and strengths, but also their personal lives. 
Due to the fast growth of the company, it became 
more difficult to find excellent software programmers 
in Slovakia alone, a country of five million inhabitants. 
Therefore, ESET opened a new R&D center in Krakow, 
Poland, in 2008. The purpose was to strengthen its re-
search base and to be better able to deliver innovation 
in countering the growing volumes and sophistication 
of cyber threats. Krakow is a major center of edu-
cation in Poland and Central Europe with around 
210,000 students and well-known technical universities. 
It is a place where the IT community is very strong and 
well organized (with about 320 IT firms). Krakow is 
even dubbed by some folks as “Europe’s Silicon Valley.” 
Today, ESET offers a portfolio of products for all 
types of users—home users, small- and medium-sized 
companies, and large corporate and institutional cus-
tomers. NOD32 Antivirus is the flagship product for 
homes and businesses. ESET Mobile Security protects 
smartphones. ESET Smart Security provides a com-
prehensive protection combining antivirus, firewall, 
and antispam. Cybersecurity for Macs was developed 
for Apple users. The superior antivirus performance 
of ESET is documented in several tests by industry 
magazines. The NOD32 Antivirus program holds the 
world record for the largest consecutive number of  
the Virus Bulletin “VB100%” Awards since 1998 and 
has never missed a single “In-the-Wild” worm or virus 
since the launch of the test. A vast distribution net-
work of partners and resellers parallel to sales offices 
in all major markets guarantee a presence in more 
than 180 countries worldwide. The almost 800 employ-
ees generated a turnover of 140 million euros in 2010. 
The company grew by more than 500% in the last five 
years. According to OPSWAT, ESET in 2012 held the 
fifth rank in the global antivirus market based on ap-
plications installed on endpoint computers running on 
Windows systems (Exhibit 1).
The foundations of ESET’s strategy have not changed 
markedly since the inception. Despite its growth from 
a “living-room” company to a global player, this firm is 
still driven by an entrepreneurial spirit and built on ex-
cellent technological competence. The goal is to devel-
op high-performance, mission-critical security solutions 
for private and business users to keep out all known and 
emerging forms of malware. The focus on research and 
continuous product development is key for the superior 
performance of its NOD product. Top management 
Company 
Market Share
Company
Market Share
1. Avast Software
16.26%
  6. Symantec Corporation
9.97%
2. Avira GmbH
11.65%
  7. Kaspersky Labs
7.75%
3. AVG Technologies
10.96%
  8. McAfee, Inc.
4.74%
4. Microsoft Corporation
10.08%
  9. Panda Software
3.77%
5. ESET Software
10.06%
10. Trend Micro, Inc.
2.22%
Exhibit 1
Worldwide Antivirus Vendor Market Share
Source: OPSWAT, March 2012
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Four   Integrative Cases	
585
and employees are living these values, creating a culture 
that is characterized by responsibility, reliability, and in-
novativeness. Antivirus business is built on the user’s 
trust and this is mirrored in the culture of ESET. What 
changed over the last 20 years is the scope of operations. 
A broader range of solutions is offered today to home 
users, companies of all sizes, and mobile phone users 
worldwide. The higher degree of internationalization 
of its business is not only reflected in a larger volume 
and share of foreign sales but also in the presence of its 
R&D centers on all continents. The latest one to open in 
2012 is the technological hub in Montreal, Canada, with 
offices directly on the campus of the highly recognized 
Ecole Polytechnique Montreal. 
ESET currently runs R&D centers in Europe 
(Brati­slava, Kosice, Krakow, Moscow, Prague, and 
Warsaw), the Americas (Buenos Aires, Montreal, and 
San Diego), and Asia (Singapore). Spreading its mal-
ware research centers over many time zones allows 
ESET to respond effectively to the rise of cyber threats 
and technological challenges. This is the only way to 
learn quickly about new cyber threats and monitor 
trends. It also gives access to programming talent and 
knowledge hubs that are located all over the world.
Case Discussion Questions
	 1.	 How could a company from Slovakia become a 
leading global player in the antivirus software 
industry?
	 2.	 From a resource-based view, what are ESET’s 
sources of competitive advantage?
	 3.	 When companies from emerging economies 
market their products abroad, what do they typi-
cally encounter?
	 4.	 From an institution-based view, country-of-
origin images reflect the informal rules and per-
ceptions of the game that customers (especially 
those in developed economies) accept. How can 
companies from emerging economies overcome 
negative country-of-origin images? 
Sources: Based on (1) Company Report of ESET, spol. s.r.o., Amadeus da-
tabase, April 2012; (2) K. Dyba & J. Svejnar, 1992, Stabilization and transi-
tion in Czechoslovakia, in O. Blanchard, K. Froot, & J. Sachs (eds.), The 
Transition in Eastern Europe, Volume 1 (pp. 93-122), Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press; (3) ESET website, April 2012, www.eset.com/about/
profile/overview/; (4) OPSWAT, 2011, Security industry market share analy-
sis, March 2011, www.opswat.com/sites/default/files/OPSWAT-market-
share-report-march-2012.pdf; (5) M. Trnka on the History of ESET, 2012, 
Presentation at the 4th Grow East Congress, March 7, Vienna, Austria.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

586	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
A promising Indian-born and US-educated manager, who cur-
rently works at Dallas Instruments’ subsidiary in New Delhi, 
tries to decide whether he wants to accept a new assignment to 
go to the headquarters in Dallas. This appears to be a great 
career move for him, but he is not sure if his family will like it. 
Prashant Sarkar is director for corporate development 
for the New Delhi, India, subsidiary of the US-based 
Dallas Instruments. Sarkar has an engineering degree 
from the Indian Institute of Technology and an MBA 
from the University of Texas at Dallas. After obtain-
ing his MBA in 1990, Sarkar worked at a Dallas Instru-
ments facility in Richardson, Texas (a suburb of Dallas 
in which UT Dallas is located), and picked up a green 
card (US permanent residency) while maintaining his 
Indian passport. In 2000, when Dallas Instruments 
opened its first Indian subsidiary in New Delhi, Sarkar 
was tapped to be one of the first managers sent from 
the United States. India of the 21st century is certainly 
different from the India of the mid 1980s that Sarkar 
had left behind. Reform is now in the air, multination-
als are coming left and right, and an exhilarating self-
confidence permeates the country. 
As a manager, Sarkar has shined in his native 
New Delhi. His wife and two children (born in 1995 and 
1998 in Dallas) are also happy. After all, curry in New 
Delhi is a lot more authentic and fresher than that in 
Indian grocery stores in Dallas. Grandparents, relatives, 
and friends are all happy to see the family back. In Dallas, 
Prashant’s wife, Neeli, a teacher by training, taught on a 
part-time basis, but could not secure a full-time teaching 
position because she did not have a US degree. Now she 
is principal of a great school. The two children are en-
rolled in the elite New Delhi American School, the cost 
of which is paid for by the company. New Delhi is not 
perfect, but the Sarkars feel good about coming back. 
At the end of 2012, the American CEO of the sub-
sidiary has a conversation with Sarkar: 
Prashant, I have great news for you! Headquarters 
wants you to move back to Dallas. You’ll be in charge 
of strategy development for global expansion, working 
directly under the Group Vice President. Isn’t that ex-
citing?! They want someone with proven success. You 
are my best candidate. I don’t know what design they 
have for you after this assignment, but I suspect it’ll 
be highly promising. Don’t quote me, but I’d say you 
may have a shot to eventually replace me or the next 
American CEO here. While I personally enjoy working 
here, my family sometimes still complains a bit about 
the curry smell. Or, folks in Dallas may eventually 
want you to go somewhere else like China or Brazil—
frankly, I don’t know but I’m just trying to help you 
speculate. I know it’s a big decision. Talk to Neeli and 
the kids. But they lived in Dallas before, so they should 
be fine going back. Of course, I’ll put you in touch 
with the folks in Dallas directly so that you can ask 
them all kinds of questions. Let me know what you 
think in a week.
Instead of calling his wife immediately, Sarkar 
has decided to wait till he gets home in the evening 
so that he can have a few hours to think about this. 
Going from Dallas to New Delhi, Sarkar, with his In-
dian passport, is a host-country national (HCN). How-
ever, with his green card, he is also considered a US 
national and thus an expatriate. He wonders whether 
he should accept the new assignment and whether he 
would be an expatriate or inpatriate if he decides to 
go to Dallas from New Delhi. He thinks this will be 
a great career move for him, but he is not sure if his 
family will like it.
Case Discussion Questions
	 1.	 What questions should Sarkar ask the people at 
headquarters in Dallas? Please help him prepare 
a list.
	 2.	 Will Neeli and the children be happy about this 
move? Why?
	 3.	 What differences does Sarkar’s status as an ex-
patriate or inpatriate make?
	 4.	 Should Sarkar accept or decline this opportu-
nity? Why? 
Sources: Based on the author’s interviews. All individual and corporate 
names are fictitious.
Dallas Versus Delhi1
Mike W. Peng (University of Texas at Dallas)
I n t e g r a t i v e  C a s e  4 . 2
1) This research was supported by the O. P. Jindal Chair at the Jindal School 
of Management, University of Texas at Dallas. All views and errors are those 
of the author. © Mike W. Peng. Reprinted with permission.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Four   Integrative Cases	
587
Microfinance: Macro Success or Global Mess?1
Mike W. Peng (University of Texas at Dallas)
I n t e g r a t i v e  C a s e  4 . 3
As an innovative movement to solve financing problems in the 
developing world, microfinance has been phenomenally suc-
cessful. However, it has also attracted significant criticisms 
lately. What has happened? 
A Global Success
Teach a man to fish, and he will eat for a lifetime. 
However, here is a catch: In many poor developing 
countries, numerous eager fishermen—also known 
as entrepreneurs—cannot afford a fishing pole. In 
1976, Muhammad Yunus, a young economics pro-
fessor who received his PhD from Vanderbilt Uni-
versity, lent $27 out of his own pocket to a group of 
poor craftsmen in his native Bangladesh. He also 
helped found a village-based enterprise called the 
Grameen Project. It never occurred to Yunus that he 
would inspire a global movement for entrepreneurial 
financing, much less that 30 years later, in 2006, he 
and the Grameen Bank he founded would be award-
ed the Nobel Peace Prize. 
Used to buy everything from milk cows to mobile 
phones (to be used as pay phones by the entire village), 
microloans (between $50 and $300) can make a huge 
difference. The poor tend to have neither assets 
(necessary for collateral) nor credit history, making 
traditional loans risky. The innovative, simple solu-
tion is to lend to women. In lenders’ opinion, women, 
on average, are more likely to use their earnings to 
1) This research was supported by the O. P. Jindal Chair at the Jindal School of 
Management, University of Texas at Dallas. All views and errors are those of 
the author. © Mike W. Peng. Reprinted with permission.
support family needs than men, who may be more 
likely to indulge in drinking, gambling, or drugs. A 
more sophisticated solution is to organize the women 
in a village into a collective and lend money to the 
collective rather than to individuals. Overall, 84% of 
microloan recipients are women. While interest rates 
average a hefty 35%, they are still far below the rates 
charged by local loan sharks. By 2011, more than 
7,000 microfinance institutions (MFIs) had served 
120  million borrowers around the world. A number 
of them have successfully gone through initial public 
offerings (IPOs) (see Exhibit 1).
Debates and Controversies
However, as microfinance grows from periphery to 
mainstream, not all is rosy. Two ferocious debates 
have erupted recently. The first debate deals with 
how to view the IPOs of MFIs. The “successful” IPOs  
MFI
Country
Capital raised via IPOs
Year
Bank Rakyat Indonesia
Indonesia
$480 million
2003
Equity Bank
Kenya
$88 million
2006
Banco Compartamos
Mexico
$467 million
2007
SKS Microfinance
India
$1.5 billion
2010
Exhibit 1
Initial Public Offerings of Microfinance Institutions
AP Photo/Thanassis Stavrakis
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

588	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
of several MFIs have attracted criticisms that these 
MFIs and their new shareholders, most of whom are 
rich investors from the United States and Europe, 
have enriched themselves at the expense of very 
poor people at the base of the pyramid. In short, the 
rich have literally profited from the dirt poor. Is that 
right? 
Second, with the onslaught of the 2008–2009 global 
crisis, default rates have skyrocketed. Several competi-
tive MFIs may have dumped several microfinance loans 
to the same uneducated clients. In a microfinance 
boom, some lending practices have increasingly be-
come competitive and reckless, similar to subprime 
lending in the West before the financial crisis. Should 
crops or ventures fail, clients thus face crushing debt 
loads. Recovery methods from MFIs sometimes involve 
intimidation. The Indian government had a list of 
85 MFI “victims,” who committed suicide. 
In response, policymakers in some parts of India 
capped the interest rate at 24%, and called default bor-
rowers to refuse to pay up. Thus, in some parts of India, 
nearly 80% of borrowers were in default. Because of 
the high costs of making and collecting payments on 
millions of tiny loans, MFIs’ margins are razor-thin. 
Such massive defaults quickly pushed some MFIs to go 
under, and the Indian government reluctantly spent 
$221 million to bail them out in 2010.
Sheikh Hasina, Bangladesh’s prime minister, charged 
MFIs with “sucking blood from the poor” and treating  
the people of Bangladesh as “guinea pigs.” She launched 
an investigation into Grameen Bank’s alleged ques-
tionable operations. Although as managing director of 
Grameen Bank, Yunus was eventually cleared of wrong-
doing, microfinance—and its missionary pioneer—has 
suffered from a crisis of faith.
Case Discussion Questions 
	 1.	 From a financing standpoint, why has microfi-
nance been quite successful on a worldwide basis?  
	 2.	 Using agency theory, identify the areas for im-
provement for the governance of certain MFIs 
that have been found to engage in questionable 
practices.
	 3.	 ON ETHICS: Given the criticisms that “the rich 
have literally profited from the dirt poor,” do 
you have any reservations about investing in 
MFIs that have gone through IPOs? 
Sources: Based on (1) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2010, An IPO for India’s 
top lender to the poor, May 10: 16–17; (2) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2010, 
In a microfinance boom, echoes of subprime, June 21: 50-51; (3) Business-
Week, 2005, Microcredit missionary, December 26: 20; (4) Economist, 
2010, Leave well alone, November 20: 16; (5) Economist, 2010, Under water, 
December 11: 56; (6) Economist, 2011, Saint under siege, January 8: 75; 
(7) Newsweek, 2010, The micromess, December 20: 10; (8) B. Pinkham and 
P. Nair, 2011, Microfinance: Going global . . . and global public? Case study, 
University of Texas at Dallas. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Four   Integrative Cases	
589
Sino Iron: Engaging Stakeholders in Australia1
Sunny Li Sun (University of Missouri-Kansas City)
Yanli Zhang (Montclair State University)
Zhu Chen (PFC Energy)
I n t e g r a t i v e  C a s e  4 . 4
Confronting significant liabilities of foreignness, the Sino Iron 
project in Australia experienced a great deal of delays and cost 
overruns. What could the management team do to better en-
gage stakeholders in the host country?
The Sino Iron Project
In January 2010, Hua Dongyi rushed to assume his 
duty as Chairman of Sino Iron Pty Ltd. (Australia) in 
Perth, the capital and largest city in Western Australia. 
The parent company of Sino Iron, China International 
Trust and Investment Corporation (CITIC), just trans-
ferred him from CITIC Construction Co., a subsidiary 
focused on infrastructural projects in Africa and Asia, 
to Sino Iron in Australia. The massive Sino Iron project 
was the largest magnetite mining and processing op-
eration under construction in Australia, and was one 
of China’s largest investments into the Australian re-
sources sector (see Exhibits 1, 2, 3, and 4).
Hua had an urgent meeting with his management 
team. Sino Iron faced tremendous challenges: Spotting 
1) This research was supported in part by the Bloch Summer Research Grants, 
University of Missouri-Kansas City. We thank Professors Mike W. Peng and 
John Cantwell for their constructive guidance. The views expressed are those 
of the authors and not those of the sponsor. © Sunny Li Sun, Yanli Zhang, and 
Zhu Chen. Reprinted with permission.
the high potential demand for iron ores in China, 
CITIC had purchased the mining license of Australian 
magnetite iron ores, and started the project in 2007. 
After investing A$1.6 billion, the project had suffered 
significant delays and cost overruns, pushing back the 
planned date of operation from the first half of 2009 
to early 2011, and now even that date was not realistic.2 
The challenge for Hua and his team was to push the 
project forward and launch operations soon.  
The global price of iron ores changed dramatically. 
In 2010, negotiations broke down between China Steel 
Association and the world’s three biggest mining com-
panies—BHP Billiton, Rio Tinto, and Vale of Brazil. 
Some Chinese steel companies had to accept a nearly 
100% price increase of iron ore imports from these 
three mining giants and quarterly price adjustments. 
After the recent price hike, a correction could be due 
any time and price could fall drastically later, which 
would be bad timing for Sino Iron if production was 
further delayed. Furthermore, magnetite iron ores due  
Exhibit 1
The Sino Iron Project
The massive Sino Iron project is being developed at Cape Preston, 100 kilometers south west of Karratha in Western Australia’s 
Pilbara region. It is the largest magnetite mining and processing operation under construction in Australia. The Sino Iron project 
is focused on delivering a world-class magnetite iron ore development which will add value to the Western Australian economy 
through significant downstream processing, employment, community benefits and international technology transfer while 
balancing social and environmental considerations.
The project is one of China’s largest investments into the Australian resources sector and is owned by Hong Kong-based CITIC 
Pacific. Production and export of concentrate is expected in the latter half of 2012. CITIC Pacific Mining has rights to acquire an 
additional three billion tonnes of resources which would lift production to 70 million tonnes each year. At peak construction about 
4,000 people will be employed building the project. When in operation there will be about 800 permanent positions, in addition to 
the 250 roles at corporate level.
The Sino Iron project is an important project for both Australia and China. Once completed, CITIC Pacific Mining will become the 
first Chinese-owned mining company to ship iron ore products from Western Australia to China. Australia and China will enjoy mutual 
wide-ranging benefits from the Sino Iron project including long-term economic, social and community dividends for decades to come.
Source: CITIC Pacific Mining website, www.citicpacificmining.com/en/project/sino-iron-project/ (accessed May 14, 2012).
2) As of this writing (May 14, 2012), the Sino Iron website estimated the pro-
duction and export of iron ore projects to start in the second half of 2012 (see 
Exhibit 1).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

590	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
Exhibit 2
Location of the Sino Iron Project
Source: CITIC Pacific Annual Report 2011.
Preston Island
Cape Preston
Port
Stockpiles
Pellet Plant
Desalination Plant
Service corridor including
road, power transmission,
slurry & water pipelines
Mardie
Station
Tailings
Karratha
85kms
North West
Coastal Highway
Fortescue River Road
Gas Pipeline and
Mine Access Road
Power Station
Grinding and
Crushing Facilities
Waste Rock
Magnetite
Concentrator
In-pit Crusher
Fortescue River
Mine Pit
Temporary Camp (124)
Construction Village (123)
Fortescue
Rivermouth
Mine Site
Pannawonica
Dampier
Roebourne
Karratha
Australia
Cape Preston
Exhibit 3
Ownership Structure of the Sino Iron Project
Source: CITIC Pacific Annual Report 2010.
China International Trust and 
Investment Corporation
(Mainland China)
CITIC Paciﬁc
(Hong Kong)
Sino Iron Pty Ltd.
(Australia)
China Metallurgical Group
(Mainland China)
57.52%
80%
20%
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Four   Integrative Cases	
591
to their nature had a 40% higher production cost than 
other premium resources mainly under the control of 
BHP Billiton and Rio Tinto, which never allowed joint 
investment with Chinese companies. This could put 
Sino Iron in a very disadvantaged position if it found 
price dropping after its mine started operating. 
Sino Iron’s CEO Barry Fitzgerald was a local guy with 
30 years of experience in iron ore operations. While 
he reported to Hua, he was not responsible for the de-
lay and cost overruns. The main reason was the unex-
pectedly long time of approval procedures from the 
government. Delay meant higher labor costs—the cost 
of prospecting would increase another US$350 million 
from the original plan of US$3.5 billion. 
However, Hua did not trust the local managers very 
well, because they were still leaving work every day on 
regular time, taking vacations, and expecting the bo-
nus at the end of the year. Sometimes engineers were in 
the middle of processing concretes and as soon as it was 
time to go home, they would leave work without worry-
ing whether it would cause problems. When there were 
problems, they would try to blame each other, and the 
sense of belonging and loyalty typical in Chinese firms 
was nowhere to be found here. 
At the end of 2009, during the wave of acquisitions 
in Australia by Chinese steel companies, the Australian 
people’s resistance and hostility to Chinese companies 
increased suddenly. Once, an Australian employee 
blurted out that after all, this was all the Chinese gov-
ernment’s money so why should he care. Hua got upset: 
“Our parent company, CITIC Pacific, is a public com-
pany in Hong Kong. The Chinese government is only 
one of many shareholders, and there are also other in-
vestors. I represent all the investors!”
In order to control the progress of the project, Hua 
had to have some capable Chinese managers working 
for him. From the end of 2009 to January 2010, four of 
his old subordinates from CITIC Construction came to 
his rescue in Perth. However, Hua and his management 
team still faced significant challenges in dealing with 
different stakeholders in Australia (Exhibit 5).
Government Relationship
In recent years, many Chinese companies began to in-
vest in Australian mines. For example, Yanzhou Coal 
Enterprise acquired Australia Felix. Sichuan Hanlong 
invested US$200 million into a Molybdenum mine in 
Australia. Chongqing Iron & Steel Group acquired 
the Asian Iron and Steel holding company, which 
was in control of Australian iron ore in Istanbul Xin. 
China Minmetals Corporation acquired some assets of 
Australia OZ Minerals for US$1.34 billion. 
Overall, the Australian government has been 
open to these acquisitions. Yet it has also been on 
the alert to the acquirers that mostly have a govern-
ment background, concerned that these companies 
may try to reduce taxes to the Australian govern-
ment through internal transfer pricing, diminish 
local employment opportunities, and affect the local 
environment. Thus, the Australian government has 
tightened regulations. For example, the Australian 
Foreign Investment Review Board (FIRB) required 
China Nonferrous Metal Mining Group to reduce its 
stake during its acquisition of Lynas, which led to the 
failure of the acquisition. China Alumni Corpora-
tion’s acquisition of Rio Tinto also failed due to the 
extended review of FIRB, which led to the opposition 
of other stakeholders. 
Exhibit 4
Magnetite Mining and Process Flowchart
Source: CITIC Pacific Annual Report 2010.
Conveyor
Screening
Secondary
crusher
Open
mine pit
Coarse ore
stockpile
Product
screens
Fines and
lump
stockpiles
Rail transport
Stockpiles
Bulk carrier
Primary crusher
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

592	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
Exhibit 5
Project Milestones and Stakeholder Relationships
Stakeholder categories
Milestones
2008
Main Mine Business
  	 A bulk sample of iron ore was extracted from the mine pit in August, and testing was 
conducted successfully to refine and optimize the process plant design.
Government
  	 Australian Government approval to commence construction in May.
  	 Amendments to the State Agreement Act, under which the project operates, were passed 
by the Western Australian Parliament in December.
  	 Indigenous Land Use Agreements were signed with three Native Title claimant groups 
covering the Cape Preston area.
Contractors
  	 500 contractors on site.
  	 Bulk earthworks for the concentrator and power plant were completed, and civil works 
commenced.
Employees
  	 530 employees in Western Australia.
  	 The business was also certified as a registered training organization.
Environment and 
Heritage
  	 CITIC Pacific Mining’s heritage team successfully managed obligations under Australian 
Native Title and cultural heritage legislation to allow ground disturbance over the project area.
  	 Completed the transfer of approximately 2,500 hectares of land to Western Australia’s 
Conservation Estate.
2009
Main Mine Business
  	 Over 50 million tonnes of material removed from the mine pit.
Government
  	 Obtained approval under the Western Australian Government’s Environmental Protection 
Act and Iron Ore Processing (Mineralogy Pty Ltd) Agreement Act to build port and expand 
the project to export 28 mtpa of concentrate product.
Contractors
  	 Close to 3,000 contractor employees on site.
  	 The contractors completed the installation of the gas and steam turbine generators, heat 
recovery steam generators, and cooling towers.
  	 More than 7.8 million tonnes of material was removed, much of it used to build the port 
breakwater.
Employees
  	 CITIC Pacific Mining directly employed approximately 800 people.
Environment and 
Heritage
  	 The heritage team fulfilled obligations under Indigenous Land Use Agreements (ILUAs) to 
ensure relationships remain strong with the indigenous people where the project operates.
2010
Main Mine Business
  	 More than 87 million tonnes of waste removed from the mine pit.
  	 About 830,000 tonnes of magnetite stockpiled.
Government
  	 Australian Government announced it would introduce a Resource Super Profits Tax (RSPT).
Contractor
  	 About 80% of concentrator civil works completed.
  	 4 of 12 grinding mills placed on foundations.
  	 Gas pipeline and ancillary facilities commissioned.
  	 Major earthworks completed.
  	 All major roads and corridors finished.
Employees
  	 3,500 contractor employees involved in building the project, most of whom resided on site 
on a fly-in fly-out basis. 
  	 CITIC Pacific Mining directly employed about 650 people.
Environment and 
Heritage
  	 Monitoring of ground water, corals, turtles, shore birds, dust, noise, coastal stability, and 
mangroves showed results in accordance with the approvals.
  	 The heritage team undertook a number of archaeological and ethnographic surveys across 
the project site and gained all relevant Ministerial approvals to clear and develop the land.
2011
Government
  	 On 24 February 2011, Australian Government announced plans to introduce a fixed price 
on carbon from 1 July 2012.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Four   Integrative Cases	
593
At the same time, since Australia’s premium iron ore 
resources are mainly under the control of BHP Billiton 
and Rio Tinto, Chinese companies, as late comers, can 
only invest in those magnetite iron ores that have a 
40% higher production cost. For example, Australia’s 
third largest iron ore producer, FMG, never agreed to 
joint investment with Chinese companies, thinking it 
was not worthwhile to give the foreign side shares. But 
FMG would seek Chinese shares in magnetite iron ore 
projects. The reason that CITIC and Chongqing Iron & 
Steel Group’s acquisitions received the approval from 
FIRB and that they were able to acquire 100% of the 
shares was exactly due to the fact that the production 
cost and risk of magnetite iron ores were too high. 
Local Australian firms did not want to touch these 
high-risk projects. 
Hua Dongyi’s interactions with the Australian gov-
ernment were forceful but did not have much effect. 
In Africa, CITIC can leverage its state ownership back-
ground and obtain much support from the local gov-
ernment with a lot of preferential treatment. However, 
in Australia, the state ownership background of CITIC 
has not brought any benefits in interactions with the 
Australian government. On the contrary, state-owned 
enterprises (SOEs) and their subsidiaries can easily be 
regarded as agents of foreign governments and may be 
viewed as threats to national security.  
On May 2, 2010, the Australian government an-
nounced that it would exact a 40% Resource Super 
Profits Tax (RSPT) on mining firms starting in July 
2012, in order to pay for the increasingly higher cost of 
infrastructure investment and pensions. The new tax 
encouraged more exploration and mergers and acquisi-
tions (M&As) within policy constraints. Sino Iron could 
gain some competitive advantage over BHP Billiton 
and Rio Tinto for the resource tax, because the new tax 
would allow companies to deduct the book value of in-
ventory assets during the first five years of the new tax. 
Labor and Contractor Relationship
The Sino Iron project is located in the northwestern 
corner of Australia, occupying an area of 25 square 
kilometers (Exhibit 2). Looking from the airplane, it 
is an area of flat brown earth with few trees and not 
many people. The mine is 100 kilometers from the 
closest town Karratha, and a one-night stay in a motel 
there is even more expensive than a five-star hotel in 
Sydney. The only function of the town is to provide a 
point of transit for the nearby mine workers to go from 
and back to Perth. 
A prosperous mining industry led to high de-
mand for labor, and the result is that a mine worker 
in Western Australia typically has an annual salary of 
over A$100,000, approximately the level of Australian 
university professors and twice the average income 
of Australians. A regular excavator driver can make 
A$160,000. Even a cleaner in the mining area can make 
A$80,000. Depending on the type of work, some work-
ers can rest a week out of every three weeks, and some 
every two weeks. The company pays for their airfare 
if they go back home during vacation. Furthermore, 
due to the high demand from China and the start-up 
of many large resource projects, competition for labor 
has increased with many mine workers threatening to 
switch companies if denied a raise. 
Sino Iron and its engineering contractor China 
Metallurgical Group used to assume that they could 
transport a large batch of capable (and low-cost) work-
ers from China and rapidly move the project along. 
However, worker visas became a serious problem. 
Despite the lobbying of both the companies and the 
Chinese government, only several hundred visas were 
issued. Yet, the Australian government required all 
workers to pass a certification in English, which almost 
made it impossible for all the workers ready to come. 
“If our workers can score a 7 in IELTS (International 
English Language Testing System), they would not be 
coming here,” Hua Dongyi sighed helplessly. Not only 
did the Chinese mine workers fail to come, the chefs that 
CITIC found to cater to the Chinese tastes of their man-
agers could not get visas either. “We have found three 
chefs successfully, and none of them can get a visa.” 
Now the Chinese managers could only cook for them-
selves after work in the apartments that they rented. 
In order to save labor costs, the project used the 
world’s biggest and most powerful rod mill, the world’s 
largest wheel loader, and the world’s largest excava-
tor—with a price tag of US$19 million and a capacity 
of 1000 tonnes each time. This also promoted the de-
velopment of China’s domestic equipment industry. For 
example, CITIC Pacific’s sister company CITIC Heavy 
Industries developed a large-scale mining rod mill, 
which could increase mining abilities by 40% and re-
duce resource consumption by 20%. Such equipment 
thus could fully utilize low-grade iron ores and increase 
the mining efficiency greatly.
Community Relations
“Even though Australia is a developed country, this 
area is the countryside. In many ways it is not even as 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

594	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
good as Africa.” This was Hua Dongyi’s first impression 
after arriving at the project site. CITIC Pacific had to 
invest a great deal in infrastructure. Since the project 
started in August 2006, billions of dollars have already 
been invested in the mineral processing plant, pel-
let plant, slurry pipeline, port facilities, power plant, 
and desalination plant (see Exhibit 4). One Chinese 
manager joked, “Usually you would feel more accom-
plished when you construct things and are able to see 
the effect. But here it seems that even though you have 
invested hundreds of thousands of dollars, there is still 
not much difference.” What the Chinese manager did 
not comment on was that these infrastructure invest-
ments could not be taken away, so after the end of the 
25-year mining period, they would be given to the 
locals for free. 
Sino Iron also established a team to deal with his-
torical remains, and did a series of explorations on the 
project site. In 2009, Sino Iron obtained various per-
mits on land development and utilization. With these 
permits and proper care of historical remains, Sino 
Iron was able to enter the whole area on the project site, 
which enabled the smooth operation of construction. 
The historical remains team also abided by the obliga-
tions as listed in the Indigenous Land Use Agreements 
and ensured the close relationship between the project 
and the aboriginals living in the area. 
Sino Iron also obtained various environmental 
permits critical to the progress of the project and its 
future expansion. During the process, the environ-
mental team monitored the underground water, ani-
mals in caves, and sea turtles and birds on land. It also 
audited the environmental performance of its contrac-
tor in order to ensure the protection of the natural 
environment. 
By March 2010, Hua had obtained all the key gov-
ernment permits and approvals regarding the envi-
ronment and historical remains, yet he also began to 
worry about the cost increases they would bring. A two-
hole bridge, which would cost about 5 million yuan 
(about A$800,000) in China, ended up costing over 
A$50 million since it used steel pipe pile to protect the 
local environment. The cost differences were incred-
ible. Moreover, many other things drove him crazy. For 
example, during meetings, usually the first two hours 
would be spent not discussing issues about the project, 
but rather environmental protection. For example, if 
a hole was left in the mining area, would it be neces-
sary to build a ladder in case animals fell into the hole 
and could not climb up? If they built a two-hole bridge 
near the dock and there were people working under 
the bridge, would that disturb the ecological environ-
ment of crabs near the seawall?
All of these certainly increased the project’s various 
costs, and were unforeseen before the investment. It 
appears that when undertaking overseas investments, 
Chinese managers need to put different priorities on 
different issues and stakeholders. Things that are easy 
to deal with in China are often difficult in other coun-
tries, and vice versa. 
Case Discussion Questions
	 1.	 If you were Hua Dongyi, Chairman of Sino 
Iron in Australia, how would you deal with the 
Australian government, given its negative atti-
tude toward Chinese investment? 
	 2.	 Compare CITIC’s overseas project investments 
and operations in Africa and Australia. What are 
the institutional differences? How do these dif-
ferences affect firm performance? 
	 3.	 What liabilities of foreignness has CITIC encoun-
tered in Australia? How can these be overcome?
	 4.	 Who are the stakeholders in the Sino Iron proj-
ect? How can the Chinese company best engage 
them?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Four   Integrative Cases	
595
Foxconn1
Weichieh Su (University of Texas at Dallas)
I n t e g r a t i v e  C a s e  4 . 5
1) © Weichieh Su. Reprinted with permission.
The historically low-profile company that made a lot of popular 
electronics gadgets suddenly found itself under the global me-
dia spot light when a number of employees committed suicide. 
What happened? How should it go forward? 
While you are playing on your Apple iPhone, Sony Play-
station, or Hewlett-Packard (HP) computer, you prob-
ably know those gadgets are not made in the United 
States, and you probably guess they are from China. But 
you probably cannot recall the name of the company 
that produces them. This company has nearly one mil-
lion employees, more than the population of Detroit, 
Michigan. Its 25 factories are not only concentrated 
in China, but are also scattered across 12  countries 
(Australia, Brazil, the Czech Republic, India, Japan, 
Mexico, the Netherlands, Poland, Russia, Slovakia, 
Singapore, and the United States). This company is 
named Foxconn Technology Group, anchored by the 
Taiwan-based Hon Hai Precision Industry and run by 
Terry Gou, founder and chairman of the board.
Early History
Gou’s entrepreneurial orientation drove the early suc-
cess of his company. Gou started his business in 1974. 
With three years of vocational training and two years 
of experience as a shipping clerk, he witnessed the 
boom of Taiwan’s export economy. With a $7,500 loan 
from his mother, he bought a couple of plastic mold-
ing machines and started making channel-changing 
knobs for black-and-white televisions. His first cus-
tomer was Chicago-based Admiral TV, and he soon 
landed deals to supply RCA, Zenith, and Philips. In 
the early 1980s, Gou made his first big push into the 
United States, visiting 32 states over the course of 
an 11-month tour. His proactiveness was not dimin-
ished by the lack of a prestigious college degree. He 
dropped in on companies unannounced, like a door-
to-door salesman, arriving in a “big and safe” Lincoln 
Town car he rented in every city. “He is really one of 
the top sales guys in the world,” said Max Fang, the 
former head of procurement for Dell in Asia who did 
business with Gou. “He is very aggressive and always  
on your tail.”
Managing an Expanding Firm
Gou dares to take strategic risks. As the Taiwanese 
labor market tightened and wages rose throughout 
the 1980s, manufacturers started moving to Malaysia, 
the Philippines, and Thailand. Although China was 
nearby and offered a virtually limitless supply of cheap 
labor, few Taiwanese companies dared to go there. 
The primitive infrastructure and inscrutable commu-
nist government scared them off. Gou was undeterred, 
setting up shop in a dusty suburb of Shenzhen across 
the border from Hong Kong, where factories produc-
ing cheap garments, shoes, and toys were springing 
up. The political situation was tricky. Beijing still re-
gards Taiwan as one of its provinces that should be 
integrated back into the motherland—by force if nec-
essary. By 1996, believing that China would become a 
manufacturing juggernaut, Gou started heavily invest-
ing in Shenzhen, where he eventually built his city-like 
factory complex with 470,000 employees. In addition 
to the investment in China, Gou also invested aggres-
sively in the Czech Republic and Brazil, among many 
other countries. 
Like Henry Ford, Gou understood the importance 
of vertical integration—producing his own materials 
and tweaking his assembly lines for maximum ef-
ficiency. “He had this vision and the guts to do any-
thing in a big way,” said Fang. “When I first visited the 
factory, I saw the whole value chain nicely and effec-
tively designed, starting from a big coil of sheet metal 
at one end that was cut, formed, welded, and stamped 
to make the top and bottom of the chassis. Then they 
did the in-line subassembly, adding a floppy drive, the 
power supply, and cables. It was all shipped to custom-
ers who only had to install the motherboard, CPU, 
memory, and hard drive. After this revolution by Gou, 
final computer assembly was easy.” To sustain an effi-
cient Chinese workforce, Gou quickly discovered that 
he had to provide housing, food, and health care—
additional costs that kept the barriers to entry high.  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

596	
Part Four   Building Functional Excellence 
“He had to do everything himself,” said Michael Marks, 
then chief executive officer of contract-manufacturing 
giant Flextronics. “They had chicken farms to lay the 
eggs for the cafeteria.” 
To manage such a large company with its armies 
of employees, Foxconn had to cultivate a military-like 
tough culture. On the walls of factories are various 
written aphorisms, such as “Work itself is a type of joy,” 
“A harsh environment is a good thing,” “Hungry people 
have especially clear minds,” and “An army of one thou-
sand is easy to get; one general is tough to find.” 
This military-style management constantly attracts 
criticisms, though Gou usually sees such criticisms as 
a compliment. In 2006, a British newspaper claimed 
that Foxconn was Apple’s “sweatshop.” To mitigate 
criticisms, Foxconn provided Apple’s auditors from 
the United States, China, and Singapore with unfet-
tered access to its employees and working environ-
ment. Apple’s final report showed no forced labor, but 
it found that employees were exceeding the company’s 
limits on working hours and days. Foxconn considered 
Apple’s report to be fairly accurate. However, in 2012, 
some media still labeled Foxconn a “sweatshop.”
Suicides and iPads
Apple’s investigation provided vindication for Foxconn 
but provided little benefits for its workers. Grumbles 
from employees in terms of psychological stress still 
did not catch managers’ attention. One 21-year-old 
assembly-line worker, who asked that his name not 
be used, told reporters that conditions at Foxconn 
made his life seem meaningless. He said conversation 
on the production line was forbidden, bathroom breaks 
were kept to 10 minutes every two hours, and workers 
were yelled at frequently. In 2010, a wave of employee 
suicides caught the attention of top managers as well 
as the public around the world. At least 12 employees 
had committed suicide within half a year. Thereafter, 
news regarding suicides was blocked by the Chinese 
government. 
Gou admitted that he did not notice any differenc-
es when the first three suicides took place. Not until 
the fifth one committed suicide did he realize that he 
needed to do something to fix the problem. Unfortu-
nately, Foxconn did not respond to it as a serious corpo-
rate crisis until the ninth suicide case took place. But it 
was too late. A low-profile, secretive company suddenly 
became the spotlight of the media around the world. 
At a press conference in May 2010 confronting aggres-
sive reporters, Gou was virtually speechless. “No matter 
how you force me, I don’t know [the causes of these 
suicides].”
Regardless of the clumsy responses by Foxconn, two 
intriguing questions emerge. First, given such nega-
tive publicity, why do image-conscious companies, such 
as Apple, Cisco, HP, IBM, and Microsoft, keep doing 
business with Foxconn? Second, who should assume 
responsibility for these suicide events or similar social 
issues in the future?
For many companies, Foxconn is difficult to substi-
tute. On the one hand, Foxconn is willing to take risk 
on behalf of its major clients. Foxconn spent $1 billion 
on a factory that would produce 30 million machines 
a year just for HP. When Apple’s iPhone 4 was near-
ing production, Foxconn and Apple discovered that 
the metal frame was so specialized that it could be 
made only by an expensive, low-volume machine usu-
ally reserved for prototypes. Apple’s designers would 
not budge on their specs, so Gou ordered more than 
1,000 of the $20,000 machines from a Japanese com-
pany. Most competitors have just one. Foxconn may 
compromise its bottom line in order to earn trust from 
its clients, resulting in more business orders from its 
clients down the road. 
Foxconn’s business, on the other hand, is not just 
relying on cheap, unskilled labor. It now employs 
50,000 toolmakers, including a team of 2,000-plus 
employees who focus on the design and fabrication 
of molds and dies. It also employs about 1,000 work-
ers in a Houston, Texas, plant that specifically provides 
high-end servers for its clients. By the end of 2010, 
Foxconn had a total of 88,200 patent applications, 
of which 39,870 were awarded, ranking No. 13 in the 
United States for the number of patents awarded. This 
knowledge-intensive labor force enables Foxconn to 
boost production faster than anyone else. This is espe-
cially important in the handset market where new mod-
els are constantly introduced.
While most of its corporate clients know that 
overdependence on Foxconn may constrain their 
flexibility, it is hard for them to switch from a partner 
the size and sophistication of Foxconn. Separating 
from Foxconn can be painful because it possesses 
most of the knowledge involved in the production and 
prototyping of any forthcoming product. For example, 
while Apple tries to reduce its dependence on Foxconn 
by finding other suppliers, Foxconn is the only capable 
manufacturer that can make the iPad and one of the 
only two producers that can make the iPhone. From 
the perspective of Apple, it does not want to expose 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Four   Integrative Cases	
597
its commercial knowledge to too many contractors. 
Although low-cost labor that Foxconn possesses 
does not seem too difficult to duplicate, a high level 
of accumulated knowledge is not easy to imitate in 
a short time. In addition, Foxconn has managed to 
find a way to orchestrate all of its resources with the 
best combination to meet clients’ needs and create 
competitive advantage. 
Foxconn’s Views on Social Responsibility 
As economic conditions become better, not only do 
wages go up, the cost of taking care of employees and 
other stakeholders also shoot up. Despite the suicide 
events, Foxconn is proud of being one of the leading 
companies in providing benefits to its Chinese employ-
ees. For example, Foxconn is one of the few companies 
that provide scholarships to help employees finish their 
education degrees. Foxconn also provides annual medi­
cal checkups for employees, and one of its campuses in 
Shenzhen even has a branch of a local hospital. 
Providing employees with basic necessities includ-
ing a safe and convenient place to live at work site might 
have been sufficient in the past, but this arrangement 
no longer satisfies the needs of today’s young migrant 
workers. After the suicide events Foxconn has made 
a lot of effort to improve morale and working condi-
tions. It more than doubled wages in Shenzhen in 
2011 and instituted a program called “Care-Love.” 
In 2012, Foxconn generously invited 216 employees 
from 17 provinces in China to tour Taiwan. “This trip 
is to help reduce worker stress and encourage high-
performing workers,” said Gou. For example, Li, 20, is 
one of close to 500,000 people working in Shenzhen. 
She is not only making more money but has made new 
friends and gone on company-sponsored outings with 
colleagues. “I’ve been to the beach and the mountains,” 
she says. “People are definitely much happier.”
However, a change in Foxconn regarding “social 
responsibility” is coming. “We came in the early ’90s 
to Shenzhen, built factories, and provided dormitories, 
cafeterias, and everything, even laundries,” said Gou. 
“We are not just a factory, we take care of social respon-
sibility.” Now, “I think we need to change the way things 
are. Businesses should focus on business, and social re-
sponsibility should be the government’s responsibility.” 
Gou is negotiating with the provincial government to 
provide low-cost housing to his workers. Meanwhile, 
Gou has decided to stop operating its own dormitories 
for workers. Foxconn has essentially outsourced its liv-
ing arrangements to two real estate companies that will 
eventually take over the operations of 153 dormitories 
that house half of its workers in Shenzhen. But can this 
effort change society’s expectation of Foxconn’s ap-
proach to corporate social responsibility? While you 
are playing on your iPhone, iPad, and the like, you may 
have some issues to contemplate. 
Case Discussion Questions
	 1.	 From the resource-based view, what kinds of re-
sources create Foxconn’s value?
	 2.	 ON ETHICS: From an institution-based view, 
was Foxconn responsible for a series of worker 
suicides? 
	 3.	 ON ETHICS: Gou recently suggested that the 
government—rather than firms such as Foxconn—
should assume the social responsibility for em-
ployees. Do you agree or disagree?
Sources: Based on (1) BusinessWeek, 2006, Hon Hai: Vindicated by Apple 
report? August 21; (2) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2010, Chairman Gou, 
September 13, 2010; (3) Bloomberg Businessweek, 2010, Life and death 
at the iPad factory, June 7; (4) Economist, 2010, Life and death, May 29; 
(5)  New York Times, 2010, A Chinese factory outsources worker dorms, 
June 26; (6) New York Times, 2011, Moral issues behind iPhone and its 
makers, October 18; (7) Taipei Times, 2012, Foxconn treats Chinese workers 
to Taiwan trip, April 23.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A
Absolute advantage. The economic advantage one nation enjoys 
that is absolutely superior to other nations.
Absorptive capacity. The ability to recognize the value of new in-
formation, assimilate it, and apply it.
Accommodative strategy.  A strategy characterized by some 
support from top managers, who may increasingly view CSR as a 
worthwhile endeavor.
Acquisition. A transfer of the control of operations and manage-
ment from one firm (target) to another (acquirer), the former be-
coming a unit of the latter.
Acquisition premium.  The difference between the acquisition 
price and the market value of target firms.
Adaptability. The ability to change supply chain configurations in 
response to longer-term changes in the environment and technology.
Administrative policy. Bureaucratic rules that make it harder to 
import foreign goods.
Agency costs.  The costs associated with principal-agent 
relationships.
Agency relationship. The relationship between principals (such as 
shareholders) and agents (such as professional managers).
Agency theory. A theory that focuses on principal-agent relation-
ships (or in short, agency relationships).
Agent. A person (such as manager) to whom authority is delegated.
Agglomeration. Clustering of economic activities in certain locations.
Agility. The ability to react quickly to unexpected shifts in supply 
and demand.
Alignment. Alignment of interests of various players.
Andean Community. A customs union in South America that was 
launched in 1969.
Antidumping duty.  Tariffs levied on imports that have been 
“dumped” (selling below costs to “unfairly” drive domestic firms 
out of business).
Antidumping laws. Laws that make it illegal for an exporter to 
sell goods below cost abroad with the intent to raise prices after 
eliminating local rivals.
Antitrust laws. Laws that outlaw cartels (trusts).
Antitrust policy. Government policy designed to combat monopo-
lies and cartels.
Appreciation. An increase in the value of the currency.
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC). The official title for 
regional economic integration involving 21 member economies 
around the Pacific.
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). The organiza-
tion underpinning regional economic integration in Southeast Asia.
Attack. An initial set of actions to gain competitive advantage.
Australia–New Zealand Closer Economic Relations Trade 
Agreement (ANZCERTA or CER).  A free trade agreement 
between Australia and New Zealand that was launched in 1983.
B
Balance of payments. A country’s international transaction state-
ment, which includes merchandise trade, service trade, and capital 
movement.
Balance of trade. The aggregation of importing and exporting that 
leads to the country-level trade surplus or deficit.
Balance sheet approach. A compensation approach that balances 
the cost of living differences relative to parent country levels and 
adds a financial inducement to make the package attractive.
Bandwagon effect. The effect of investors moving in the same 
direction at the same time, like a herd.
Bargaining power. Ability to extract favorable outcome from ne-
gotiations due to one party’s strengths.
Base of the pyramid. Economies where people make less than 
$2,000 per capita per year.
Beijing Consensus. A view that questions Washington Consen-
sus’ belief in the superiority of private ownership over state owner-
ship in economic policy making, which is often associated with the 
position held by the Chinese government.
Benchmarking. Examining whether a firm has resources and ca-
pabilities to perform a particular activity in a manner superior to 
competitors.
Bid rate. The price to buy a currency.
Blue ocean strategy. Strategy that focuses on developing new mar-
kets (“blue ocean”) and avoids attacking core markets defended by 
rivals, which is likely to result in a bloody price war or a “red ocean.”
Bond. Loan issued by the firm and held by creditors.
Bondholder. Buyer of bonds.
Born global.  Start-up companies that attempt to do business 
abroad from inception.
Bounded rationality. The necessity of making rational decisions 
in the absence of complete information.
Bretton Woods system. A system in which all currencies were 
pegged at a fixed rate to the US dollar.
BRIC. Brazil, Russia, India, and China.
Build-operate-transfer (BOT) agreement. A nonequity mode of 
entry used to build a longer-term presence by building and then op-
erating a facility for a period of time before transferring operations 
to a domestic agency or firm.
Business process outsourcing (BPO). Outsourcing business pro-
cesses to third-party providers.
C 
Capability.  The tangible and intangible assets a firm uses to 
choose and implement its strategies.
Capacity to punish.  Sufficient resources possessed by a price 
leader to deter and combat defection.
Capital flight.  A phenomenon in which a large number of indi-
viduals and companies exchange domestic currency for a foreign 
currency.
Glossary
598
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Glossary	
599
Captive sourcing. Setting up subsidiaries abroad so that the work 
done is in-house but the location is foreign. Also known as foreign 
direct investment (FDI).
Cartel (trust). An output- and price-fixing entity involving multiple 
competitors.
Causal ambiguity. The difficulty of identifying the causal determi-
nants of a firm’s successful performance.
Center of excellence. An MNE subsidiary explicitly recognized as a 
source of important capabilities, with the intention that these capa-
bilities be leveraged by, and/or disseminated to, other subsidiaries.
CEO duality. The CEO doubles as a chairman of the board.
Chief executive officer (CEO).  The main executive manager in 
charge of the firm.
Civil law. A legal tradition that uses comprehensive statutes and 
codes as a primary means to form legal judgments.
Civilization. The highest cultural grouping of people and the broad-
est level of cultural identity people have.
Classical trade theories. The major theories of international trade 
that were advanced before the 20th century, which consist of (1) mer-
cantilism, (2) absolute advantage, and (3) comparative advantage.
Clean (or free) float.  A pure market solution to determine ex-
change rates.
Cluster. Countries that share similar cultures.
Code of conduct (code of ethics). A set of guidelines for making 
ethical decisions.
Cognitive pillar. The internalized (or taken-for-granted) values and 
beliefs that guide individual and firm behavior.
Collectivism. The idea that an individual’s identity is fundamen-
tally tied to the identity of his or her collective group.
Collusion.  Collective attempts between competing firms to re-
duce competition.
Collusive price setting. Price setting by monopolists or collusion 
parties at a level higher than the competitive level.
Co-marketing. Efforts among a number of firms to jointly market 
their products and services.
Command economy. An economy that is characterized by govern-
ment ownership and control of factors of production.
Commoditization.  A process of market competition through 
which unique products that command high prices and high margins 
gradually lose their ability to do so, thus becoming commodities.
Common denominator. A currency or commodity to which the 
value of all currencies are pegged.
Common law. A legal tradition that is shaped by precedents and 
traditions from previous judicial decisions.
Common market. Combining everything a customs union has, a 
common market, in addition, permits the free movement of goods 
and people.
Comparative advantage. Relative (not absolute) advantage in one 
economic activity that one nation enjoys in comparison with other 
nations.
Compensation. The determination of salary and benefits.
Competition policy. Government policy governing the rules of the 
game in competition.
Competitive dynamics.  Actions and responses undertaken by 
competing firms.
Competitor analysis. The process of anticipating rivals’ actions 
in order to both revise a firm’s plan and prepare to deal with rivals’ 
response.
Complementary assets. The combination of numerous re­sources 
and assets that enable a firm to gain a competitive advantage.
Concentrated ownership and control. Founders start up firms 
and completely own and control them on an individual or family 
basis.
Concentration ratio.  The percentage of total industry sales ac-
counted for by the top four, eight, or twenty firms.
Contagion (imitation) effect. The reaction of local firms to rise 
to the challenge demonstrated by MNEs through learning and 
imitation.
Contender strategy. Strategy that centers on a firm engaging in 
rapid learning and then expand overseas.
Context. The underlying background upon which social interaction 
takes place.
Contractual (non-equity-based) alliances.  Associations be-
tween firms that are based on contracts and do not involve the 
sharing of ownership.
Copyright. Exclusive legal rights of authors and publishers to pub-
lish and disseminate their work.
Corporate governance.  The relationship among various partici-
pants in determining the direction and performance of corporations.
Corporate social responsibility (CSR). Consideration of, and 
response to, issues beyond the narrow economic, technical, 
and legal requirements of the firm to accomplish social ben-
efits along with the traditional economic gains which the firm  
seeks.
Corruption. The abuse of public power for private benefits, usually 
in the form of bribery.
Cost of capital. The rate of return that a firm needs to pay to capi-
tal providers.
Counterattack. A set of actions in response to attack.
Country-of-origin effect. The positive or negative perception of 
firms and products from a certain country.
Country (regional) manager. Manager of a geographic area, ei-
ther a country or a region.
Cross-listing. Listing shares on a foreign stock exchange.
Cross-market retaliation.  Retaliatory attacks on a competitor’s 
other markets if this competitor attacks a firm’s original market.
Cross-shareholding.  Both firms investing in each other to be-
come cross-shareholders.
Cultural distance.  The difference between two cultures along 
identifiable dimensions such as individualism.
Cultural intelligence.  An individual’s ability to understand and 
adjust to new cultures.
Culture. The collective programming of the mind that distinguishes 
the members of one group or category of people from another.
Currency board. A monetary authority that issues notes and coins 
convertible into a key foreign currency at a fixed exchange rate.
Currency hedging. A transaction that protects traders and inves-
tors from exposure to the fluctuations of the spot rate.
Currency risk. The potential for loss associated with fluctuations in 
the foreign exchange market.
Currency swap.  A foreign exchange transaction between two 
firms in which one currency is converted into another at Time 1, 
with an agreement to revert it back to the original currency at a 
specified Time 2 in the future.
Customs union. One step beyond a free trade area (FTA), a cus-
toms union imposes common external policies on nonparticipating 
countries.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

600	
Glossary
D
Deadweight cost. Net losses that occur in an economy as a result 
of tariffs.
Debt. A loan that the firm needs to pay back at a given time with 
an interest.
Default. A firm’s failure to satisfy the terms of a loan obligation.
Defender strategy. Strategy that centers on local assets in areas 
in which MNEs are weak.
Defensive strategy. A strategy that focuses on regulatory compli-
ance but with little actual commitment to CSR by top management.
Democracy. A political system in which citizens elect representa-
tives to govern the country on their behalf.
Demonstration effect. The reaction of local firms to rise to the 
challenge demonstrated by MNEs through learning and imitation.
Depreciation. A loss in the value of the currency.
Development. Long-term, broader preparation to improve mana-
gerial skills for a better career.
Diffused ownership.  Publicly traded corporations owned by 
numerous small shareholders but none with a dominant level of 
control.
Direct exports. The sale of products made by firms in their home 
country to customers in other countries.
Dirty (or managed) float. Using selective government interven-
tion to determine exchange rates.
Dissemination risk. The risk associated with unauthorized diffu-
sion of firm-specific know-how.
Distribution channel. The set of firms that facilitates the move-
ment of goods from producers to consumers.
Dodger strategy.  Strategy that centers on cooperating through 
joint ventures with MNEs and sell-offs to MNEs.
Doha Round. A round of WTO negotiations to reduce agricultural 
subsidies, slash tariffs, and strengthen intellectual property protec-
tion that started in Doha, Qatar, in 2001. Officially known as the 
“Doha Development Agenda,” it was suspended in 2006 due to 
disagreements.
Downstream vertical FDI. A type of vertical FDI in which a firm 
engages in a downstream stage of the value chain in a host country.
Dumping. An exporter selling goods below cost.
Due diligence. Investigation prior to signing contracts.
E
Economic system. Rules of the game on how a country is gov-
erned economically.
Economic union.  Having all the features of a common market, 
members also coordinate and harmonize economic policies (in 
areas such as monetary, fiscal, and taxation) to blend their econo-
mies into a single economic entity.
Emerging economies. A term that has gradually replaced the term 
“developing countries” since the 1990s.
Emerging markets. A term that is often used interchangeably with 
“emerging economies.”
Entrepreneurs. Founders and/or owners of new businesses or man-
agers of existing firms who identify and exploit new opportunities.
Entrepreneurship. The identification and exploitation of previously 
unexplored opportunities.
Equity.  The stock in a firm (usually expressed in shares), which 
represents the owners’ rights.
Equity-based alliances. Alliances based on ownership or financial 
interest between the firms.
Equity mode. A mode of entry (JV and WOS) that indicates a rela-
tively larger, harder-to-reverse commitment.
Ethical imperialism. A perspective that suggests that “there is 
one set of Ethics (with a capital E) and we have it.”
Ethical relativism.  A perspective that suggests that all ethical 
standards are relative.
Ethics.  The principles, standards, and norms of conduct that 
govern individual and firm behavior.
Ethnocentric approach. An emphasis on the norms and practices 
of the parent company (and the parent country of the MNE) by rely-
ing on PCNs.
Ethnocentrism.  A self-centered mentality by a group of people 
who perceive their own culture, ethics, and norms as natural, ratio-
nal, and morally right.
Euro. The currency currently used in 17 EU countries.
Euro zone. The 17 EU countries that currently use the euro as the 
official currency.
European Union (EU). The official title of European economic in-
tegration since 1993.
Exit-based mechanisms.  Corporate governance mechanisms 
that focus on exit, indicating that shareholders no longer have pa-
tience and are willing to “exit” by selling their shares.
Expatriate manager. A manager who works abroad, or “expat” 
for short.
Expatriation. The process of selecting, managing, and motivating 
expatriates to work abroad.
Explicit collusion. Firms directly negotiate output and pricing and 
divide markets.
Explicit knowledge. Knowledge that is codifiable (can be written 
down and transferred with little loss of richness).
Export intermediary. A firm that performs an important middle-
man function by linking domestic sellers and foreign buyers that 
otherwise would not have been connected.
Exporting. Selling abroad.
Expropriation.  (1) Government’s confiscation of foreign assets. 
(2) Activities that enrich controlling shareholders at the expense of 
minority shareholders.
Extender strategy.  Strategy that centers on leveraging home-
grown competencies abroad.
F
Factor endowment.  The extent to which different countries 
possess various factors of production such as labor, land, and 
technology.
Factor endowment theory (Heckscher-Ohlin theory). A theory 
that suggests that nations will develop comparative advantages 
based on their locally abundant factors.
FDI flow. The amount of FDI moving in a given period (usually a 
year) in a certain direction.
FDI inflow. Inbound FDI moving into a country in a year.
FDI outflow. Outbound FDI moving out of a country in a year.
FDI stock. Total accumulation of inbound FDI in a country or out-
bound FDI from a country across a given period (usually several 
years).
Femininity.  A relatively weak form of societal-level sex role dif-
ferentiation whereby more women occupy positions that reward 
assertiveness and more men work in caring professions.
Financing. How a firm’s money, banking, investments, and credit 
are managed.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Glossary	
601
First-mover advantages. Benefits that accrue to firms that enter 
the market first and that late entrants do not enjoy.
Fixed exchange rate policy. A government policy to set the ex-
change rate of a currency relative to other currencies.
Floating (or flexible) exchange rate policy. A government policy 
to let supply-and-demand conditions determine exchange rates.
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA). A US law enacted in 1977 
that bans bribery of foreign officials.
Foreign direct investment (FDI). Investment in, controlling, and 
managing value-added activities in other countries.
Foreign exchange market. The market where individuals, firms, 
governments, and banks buy and sell foreign currencies.
Foreign exchange rate.  The price of one currency in terms of 
another.
Foreign portfolio investment (FPI). Investment in a portfolio of 
foreign securities such as stocks and bonds.
Formal institutions. Institutions represented by laws, regulations, 
and rules.
Forward discount. A condition under which the forward rate of one 
currency relative to another currency is higher than the spot rate.
Forward premium. A condition under which the forward rate of one 
currency relative to another currency is lower than the spot rate.
Forward transaction.  A foreign exchange transaction in which 
participants buy and sell currencies now for future delivery.
Franchising. Firm A’s agreement to give Firm B the rights to use 
A’s proprietary assets for a royalty fee paid to A by B. This is typi-
cally done in service industries.
Free market view on FDI. A political view that suggests that FDI 
unrestricted by government intervention is the best.
Free trade. The idea that free market forces should determine how 
much to trade with little or no government intervention.
Free trade area (FTA). A group of countries that remove trade bar-
riers among themselves.
Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA) A proposed free trade 
area for the entire Western Hemisphere.
G
Game theory. A theory that studies the interactions between two 
parties that compete and/or cooperate with each other.
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). A multilateral 
agreement governing the international trade of goods (merchan-
dise).
General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS). A WTO agree-
ment governing the international trade of services.
Geocentric approach. A focus on finding the most suitable man-
agers, who can be PCNs, HCNs, or TCNs.
Geographic structure. An organizational structure that organizes 
the MNE according to different geographic areas (countries and 
regions).
Global account structure.  A customer-focused dimension that 
supplies customers (often other MNEs) in a coordinated and con-
sistent way across various countries.
Global business. Business around the globe.
Global economic integration. Efforts to reduce trade and invest-
ment barriers around the globe.
Global matrix. An organizational structure often used to alleviate 
the disadvantages associated with both geographic area and global 
product division structures, especially for MNEs adopting a trans-
national strategy.
Global product division structure.  An organizational structure 
that assigns global responsibilities to each product division.
Global standardization strategy. A strategy that focuses on de-
velopment and distribution of standardized products worldwide in 
order to reap the maximum benefits from low-cost advantages.
Global sustainability. The ability to meet the needs of the pres-
ent without compromising the ability of future generations to meet 
their needs around the world.
Global virtual team. A team whose members are physically dis-
persed in multiple locations in the world and often operate on a 
virtual basis.
Globalization. The close integration of countries and peoples of 
the world.
Going rate approach. A compensation approach that pays expatri-
ates the prevailing (going) rate for comparable positions in a host 
country.
Gold standard. A system in which the value of most major curren-
cies was maintained by fixing their prices in terms of gold.
Greenfield operations. Building factories and offices from scratch 
(on a proverbial piece of “green field” formerly used for agricultural 
purposes).
Gross domestic product (GDP). The sum of value added by resi-
dent firms, households, and government operating in an economy.
Gross national income (GNI). Gross domestic product (GDP) plus 
income from non-resident sources abroad. GNI is the term used by 
the World Bank and other international organizations to supersede 
the term GNP.
Gross national product (GNP).  GDP plus income from non-
resident sources abroad.
Group of 20 (G-20).  The group of 19 major countries plus the 
European Union (EU) whose leaders meet on a biannual basis to 
solve global economic problems.
H
High-context culture. A culture in which communication relies a 
lot on the underlying unspoken context, which is as important as 
the words used.
Home replication strategy. A strategy that emphasizes the dupli-
cation of home country-based competencies in foreign countries.
Horizontal FDI. A type of FDI in which a firm duplicates its home 
country-based activities at the same value chain stage in a host 
country.
Host-country national (HCN). An individual from the host country 
who works for an MNE.
Hubris. Overconfidence in one’s capabilities.
Human resource management (HRM). Activities that attract, se-
lect, and manage employees.
I
Import quota. Restriction on the quantity of imports.
Import tariff. A tax imposed on imports.
Importing. Buying from abroad.
Indirect export. A way to reach overseas customers by exporting 
through domestic-based export intermediaries.
Individualism. The idea that an individual’s identity is fundamen-
tally his or her own.
Infant industry argument. The argument that if domestic firms 
are as young as “infants,” in the absence of government interven-
tion, they stand no chances of surviving and will be crushed by 
mature foreign rivals.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

602	
Glossary
Informal institutions. Institutions represented by cultures, ethics, 
and norms.
Information asymmetries. Asymmetric distribution and posses-
sion of information between two sides.
In-group. Individuals and firms regarded as a part of “us.”
Inpatriation. Relocating employees of a foreign subsidiary to the 
MNE’s headquarters for the purposes of filling skill shortages at 
headquarters and developing a global mind-set for such inpatriates.
Inside director. A member of the board who is a top executive of 
the firm.
Institution-based view. A leading perspective in global business 
that suggests that the success and failure of firms are enabled and 
constrained by institutions.
Institutional distance. The extent of similarity or dissimilarity be-
tween the regulatory, normative, and cognitive institutions of two 
countries.
Institutional framework.  Formal and informal institutions that 
govern individual and firm behavior.
Institutional transitions. Fundamental and comprehensive chang-
es introduced to the formal and informal rules of the game that affect 
firms as players.
Institutions. Formal and informal rules of the game.
Intangible resources and capabilities. Assets that are hard to 
observe and difficult (if not impossible) to quantify.
Integration-responsiveness framework. A framework of MNE 
management on how to simultaneously deal with two sets of pres-
sures for global integration and local responsiveness.
Intellectual property. Intangible property that is the result of intel-
lectual activity.
Intellectual property (IP) rights. Rights associated with the own-
ership of intellectual property.
Internalization. The replacement of cross-border markets (such 
as exporting and importing) with one firm (the MNE) locating and 
operating in two or more countries.
International business (IB). (1) A business (firm) that engages in 
international (cross-border) economic activities and/or (2) the action 
of doing business abroad.
International division. An organizational structure that is typically 
set up when firms initially expand abroad, often engaging in a home 
replication strategy.
International entrepreneurship.  A combination of innovative, 
proactive, and risk-seeking behavior that crosses national borders 
and is intended to create wealth in organizations.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). An international organization 
that was established to promote international monetary coopera-
tion, exchange stability, and orderly exchange arrangements.
International premium.  A significant pay raise when working 
overseas.
Intrafirm trade. International transactions between two subsidiaries 
in two countries controlled by the same MNE.
J
Joint venture (JV).  A new corporate entity created and jointly 
owned by two or more parent companies.
K
Knowledge management.  The structures, processes, and sys-
tems that actively develop, leverage, and transfer knowledge.
Knowledge spillover. Knowledge diffused from one firm to others 
among closely located firms.
L
Labor relations. A firm’s relations with organized labor (unions) in 
both home and host countries.
Late-mover advantages. Benefits that accrue to firms that enter 
the market later and that early entrants do not enjoy.
Learning by doing. A way of learning, not by reading books but by 
engaging in hands-on activities.
Learning race. A situation in which alliance partners aim to outrun 
each other by learning the “tricks” from the other side as fast as 
possible.
Legal system. The rules of the game on how a country’s laws are 
enacted and enforced.
Letter of credit (L/C). A financial contract that states that the im-
porter’s bank will pay a specific sum of money to the exporter upon 
delivery of the merchandise.
Leveraged buyout (LBO). A means by which investors, often in 
partnership with incumbent managers, issue bonds and use the 
cash raised to buy the firm’s stock.
Liability of foreignness.  The inherent disadvantage that foreign 
firms experience in host countries because of their non-native status.
Licensing. Firm A’s agreement to give Firm B the rights to use A’s 
proprietary technology (such as a patent) or trademark (such as a 
corporate logo) for a royalty fee paid to A by B. This is typically done 
in manufacturing industries.
Lingua franca. A global business language.
LLL advantages. A firm’s quest of linkage (L) advantages, leverage 
(L) advantages, and learning (L) advantages. These advantages are 
typically associated with multinationals from emerging economies.
Local content requirement. A requirement stipulating that a cer-
tain proportion of the value of the goods made in one country must 
originate from that country.
Local responsiveness. The necessity to be responsive to different 
customer preferences around the world.
Localization (multidomestic) strategy. A strategy that focuses 
on a number of foreign countries/regions, each of which is regarded 
as a standalone local (domestic) market worthy of significant atten-
tion and adaptation.
Location. Advantages enjoyed by firms operating in a certain location.
Location-specific advantages. The benefits a firm reaps from the 
features specific to a place.
Long-term orientation.  Dimension of how much emphasis is 
placed on perseverance and savings for future betterment.
Low-context culture. A culture in which communication is usually 
taken at face value without much reliance on unspoken context.
M
Make-or-buy decision. The decision on whether to produce in-
house (“make”) or to outsource (“buy”).
Management control rights. The rights to appoint key managers 
and establish control mechanisms.
Managerial human capital. The skills and abilities acquired by top 
managers.
Managerial motives. Managers’ desire for power, prestige, and 
money, which may lead to decisions that do not benefit the firm 
overall in the long run.
Market commonality. The overlap between two rivals’ markets.
Market economy. An economy that is characterized by the “invis-
ible hand” of market forces.
Market imperfection (market failure). The imperfect rules gov-
erning international transactions.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Glossary	
603
Market orientation. A philosophy or way of thinking that places 
the highest priority on the creation of superior customer value in 
the marketplace.
Market segmentation. Identifying segments of consumers who 
differ from others in purchasing behavior.
Marketing.  Efforts to create, develop, and defend markets that 
satisfy the needs and wants of individual and business customers.
Marketing mix.  The four underlying components of marketing: 
(1) product, (2) price, (3) promotion, and (4) place.
Masculinity. A relatively strong form of societal-level sex role dif-
ferentiation whereby men tend to have occupations that reward 
assertiveness and women tend to work in caring professions.
Merchandise. Tangible products being traded.
Mercosur. A customs union in South America that was launched 
in 1991.
Merger. The combination of operations and management of two 
firms to establish a new legal entity.
Microfinance. A practice to provide micro loans ($50–$300) used 
to start small businesses with the intention of ultimately lifting the 
entrepreneurs out of poverty.
Micro-macro link. The micro, informal interpersonal relationships 
among managers of various units that may greatly facilitate macro, 
intersubsidiary cooperation among these units.
Mixed economy. An economy that has elements of both a market 
economy and a command economy.
Mode of entry. Method used to enter a foreign market.
Modern trade theories. The major theories of international trade 
that were advanced in the 20th century, which consist of (1) product 
life cycle, (2) strategic trade, and (3) national competitive advantage 
of industries.
Monetary union. A group of countries that use a common currency.
Moral hazard. Recklessness when people and organizations (in-
cluding firms and governments) do not have to face the full conse-
quences of their actions.
Multilateral trading system. The global system that governs in-
ternational trade among countries—otherwise known as the GATT/
WTO system.
Multimarket competition. Firms engage the same rivals in mul-
tiple markets.
Multinational enterprise (MNE). A firm that engages in foreign 
direct investment (FDI).
Mutual forbearance.  Multimarket firms respect their rivals’ 
spheres of influence in certain markets, and their rivals reciprocate, 
leading to tacit collusion.
N
Nondiscrimination. A principle that a country cannot discriminate 
among its trading partners.
Nonequity mode. A mode of entry (exports and contractual agree-
ments) that tends to reflect relatively smaller commitments to over-
seas markets.
Nongovernmental organization (NGO). An organization that is 
not affiliated with governments.
Nontariff barrier (NTB).  Trade barrier that relies on nontariff 
means to discourage imports.
Normative pillar. The mechanism through which norms influence 
individual and firm behavior.
Norms. Values, beliefs, and actions of relevant players that influ-
ence the focal individuals and firms.
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). A free trade 
agreement among Canada, Mexico, and the United States.
O
Obsolescing bargain. The deal struck by MNEs and host govern-
ments, which change their requirements after the initial FDI entry.
Offer rate. The price to sell a currency.
Offshoring. Outsourcing to an international or foreign firm.
OLI advantages.  A firm’s quest for ownership (O) advantages, 
location (L) advantages, and internalization (I) advantages via FDI.
Oligopoly. Industry dominated by a small number of players.
Onshoring. Outsourcing to a domestic firm.
Open innovation. The use of purposive inflows and outflows of 
knowledge to accelerate internal innovation and expand the mar-
kets for external use.
Opportunism. The act of seeking self-interest with guile.
Opportunity cost. Cost of pursuing one activity at the expense of 
another activity, given the alternatives (other opportunities).
Organizational culture.  The collective programming of the 
mind that distinguishes the members of one organization from 
another.
Organizational fit. The similarity in cultures, systems, and structures.
Original brand manufacturer (OBM). A firm that designs, manu-
factures, and markets branded products.
Original design manufacturer (ODM). A firm that both designs 
and manufactures products.
Original equipment manufacturer (OEM). A firm that executes 
design blueprints provided by other firms and manufactures such 
products.
Out-group. Individuals and firms not regarded as a part of “us.”
Outside director. A nonmanagement member of the board.
Outsourcing. Turning over an organizational activity to an outside 
supplier that will perform it on behalf of the focal firm.
Ownership. An MNE’s possession and leveraging of certain valu-
able, rare, hard-to-imitate, and organizationally embedded (VRIO) 
assets overseas in the context of FDI.
P
Parent–country national (PCN). An individual who comes from 
the parent country of the MNE and works at its local subsidiary.
Patent. Exclusive legal rights of inventors of new products or pro-
cesses to derive income from such inventions.
Peg. A stabilizing policy of linking a developing contry’s currency to 
a key currency.
Performance appraisal. The evaluation of employee performance 
for promotion, retention, or termination purposes.
Piracy. Unauthorized use of intellectual property.
Place. The location where products and services are provided.
Political risk. Risk associated with political changes that may neg-
atively impact domestic and foreign firms.
Political system. The rules of the game on how a country is gov-
erned politically.
Political union. The integration of political and economic affairs 
of a region.
Polycentric approach. An emphasis on the norms and practices 
of the host country.
Post-Bretton Woods system. A system of flexible exchange rate 
regimes with no official common denominator.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

604	
Glossary
Power distance. The extent to which less powerful members within 
a country expect and accept that power is distributed unequally.
Pragmatic nationalism on FDI. A political view that only approves 
FDI when its benefits outweigh its costs.
Predatory pricing. An attempt to monopolize a market by setting 
prices below cost and intending to raise prices to cover losses in 
the long run after eliminating rivals.
Price.  The expenditures that customers are willing to pay for a 
product.
Price elasticity. How demand changes when price changes.
Price leader. A firm that has a dominant market share and sets “ac-
ceptable” prices and margins in the industry.
Primary stakeholder groups. Constituents on which the firm re-
lies for its continuous survival and prosperity.
Principal. A person (such as owner) delegating authority.
Principal–agent conflicts. Conflicts between principals and agents.
Principal–principal conflicts. Conflicts between two classes of 
principals: controlling shareholders and minority shareholders.
Prisoners’ dilemma. In game theory, a type of game in which the 
outcome depends on two parties deciding whether to cooperate 
or to defect.
Private equity. Equity capital invested in private companies that, 
by definition, are not publicly traded.
Proactive strategy. A strategy that endeavors to do more than is 
required in CSR.
Product. Offerings that customers purchase.
Product life cycle theory. A theory that accounts for changes in 
the patterns of trade over time by focusing on product life cycles.
Promotion. Communicatons that marketers insert into the market-
place.
Property rights. The legal rights to use an economic property (re-
source) and to derive income and benefits from it.
Protectionism. The idea that governments should actively protect 
domestic industries from imports and vigorously promote exports.
Psychological contract. An informal understanding of expected 
delivery of benefits in the future for current services.
Purchasing power parity (PPP). A conversion that determines the 
equivalent amount of goods and services different currencies can 
purchase.
Q
Quota.  The weight a member country carries within the IMF, 
which determines the amount of its financial contribution (techni-
cally known as its “subscription”), its capacity to borrow from the 
IMF, and its voting power.
R
R&D contract. Outsourcing agreement in R&D between firms.
Radical view on FDI. A political view that is hostile to FDI.
Reactive strategy.  A strategy that would only respond to CSR 
causes when required by disasters and outcries.
Real option. An investment in real operations as opposed to finan-
cial capital.
Regional economic integration. Efforts to reduce trade and in-
vestment barriers within one region.
Regulatory pillar. The coercive power of governments.
Related transactions. Controlling shareholders sell firm assets to 
another firm they own at below-market prices or spin off the most 
profitable part of a public firm and merge it with another private 
firm they own.
Relational (or collaborative) capability. Ability to manage inter-
firm relationships.
Relationship orientation. A focus to establish, maintain, and en-
hance relationships with customers.
Repatriate. Returning expatriate.
Repatriation. The process of facilitating the return of expatriates.
Resources (or capabilities). The tangible and intangible assets a 
firm uses to choose and implement its strategies.
Resource-based view. A leading perspective in global business 
that posits that firm performance is fundamentally driven by differ-
ences in firm-specific resources and capabilities.
Resource mobility. Assumption that a resource used in producing 
a product for one industry can be shifted and put to use in another 
industry.
Resource similarity. The extent to which a given competitor pos-
sesses strategic endowment comparable, in terms of both type 
and amount, to those of the focal firm.
Reverse innovation. An innovation that is adopted first in emerg-
ing economies and is then diffused around the world.
Risk management. The identification and assessment of risks and 
the preparation to minimize the impact of high-risk, unfortunate 
events.
S
Scale of entry. The amount of resources committed to entering a 
foreign market.
Scenario planning. A technique to prepare and plan for multiple 
scenarios (either high or low risk).
Schengen. A passport-free travel zone within the EU.
Secondary stakeholder groups. Those who influence or affect, 
or are influenced or affected by, the corporation but are not engaged 
in transactions with the firm and are not essential for its survival.
Semiglobalization. A perspective that suggests that barriers to 
market integration at borders are high, but not high enough to insu-
late countries from each other completely.
Separation of ownership and control. The dispersal of owner-
ship among many small shareholders, in which control is largely 
concentrated in the hands of salaried, professional managers who 
own little (or no) equity.
Serial entrepreneur. An entrepreneur who starts, grows, and sells 
several businesses throughout his/her career.
Services. Intangible services being traded.
Shareholder. Firm owner.
Shareholder capitalism. A view of capitalism that suggests that 
the most fundamental purpose for firms to exist is to serve the eco-
nomic interests of shareholders (also known as capitalists).
Small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). Firms with fewer 
than 500 employees in the United States and with fewer than 250 
employees in the European Union.
Social capital. The informal benefits individuals and organizations 
derive from their social structures and networks.
Social complexity. The socially intricate and interdependent ways 
firms are typically organized.
Social issue participation. Firms’ participation in social causes 
not directly related to the management of primary stakeholders.
Social mobility. The degree to which members from a lower so-
cial category can rise to a higher status.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Glossary	
605
Social stratification. The hierarchical arrangement of individuals 
into social categories (strata) such as classes, castes, or divisions 
within a society.
Social structure. The way a society broadly organizes its mem-
bers.
Solutions-based structure.  A customer-focused solution in 
which a provider sells whatever combination of goods and services 
the customers prefer, including rivals’ offerings.
Sovereign wealth fund (SWF). A state-owned investment fund 
composed of financial assets such as stocks, bonds, real estate, 
or other financial instruments funded by foreign exchange assets.
Spot transaction.  The classic single-shot exchange of one cur-
rency for another.
Spread. The difference between the offer price and the bid price.
Staffing. HRM activities associated with hiring employees and fill-
ing positions.
Stage model. Model of internationalization that portrays the slow 
step-by-step (stage-by-stage) process an SME must go through to 
internationalize its business.
Stakeholder. Any group or individual who can affect or is affected 
by the achievement of the organization’s objectives.
State-owned enterprise.  A firm owned and controlled by the 
state (government).
Stewardship theory. A “pro-management” theory that suggests 
that most managers can be viewed as owners’ stewards interested 
in safeguarding shareholders’ interests.
Strategic alliance.  A voluntary agreement of cooperation be-
tween firms.
Strategic fit. The effective matching of complementary strategic 
capabilities.
Strategic hedging. Spreading out activities in a number of coun-
tries in different currency zones to offset any currency losses in one 
region through gains in other regions.
Strategic investment. One firm investing in another as a strategic 
investor.
Strategic trade policy. Government policy that provides compa-
nies a strategic advantage in international trade through subsidies 
and other supports.
Strategic trade theory. A theory that suggests that strategic in-
tervention by governments in certain industries can enhance their 
odds for international success.
Subsidiary initiative. The proactive and deliberate pursuit of new 
opportunities by a subsidiary.
Subsidy. Government payment to domestic firms.
Sunk cost. Cost that a firm has to endure even when its invest-
ment turns out to be unsatisfactory.
Supply chain.  Flow of products, services, finances, and infor-
mation that passes through a set of entities from a source to the 
customer.
Supply chain management. Activities to plan, organize, lead, and 
control the supply chain.
SWOT analysis.  A tool for determining a firm’s strengths (S), 
weaknesses (W), opportunities (O), and threats (T).
T
Tacit collusion.  Firms indirectly coordinate actions by signaling 
their intention to reduce output and maintain pricing above com-
petitive levels.
Tacit knowledge. Knowledge that is non-codifiable, whose acqui-
sition and transfer require hands-on practice.
Tangible resources and capabilities. Assets that are observable 
and easily quantified.
Target exchange rates (or crawling bands).  Specified upper 
or lower bounds within which an exchange rate is allowed to 
fluctuate.
Tariff barrier. Trade barrier that relies on tariffs to discourage imports.
Technology spillover. Technology diffused from foreign firms to 
domestic firms.
Theocratic law. A legal system based on religious teachings.
Theory of absolute advantage. A theory that suggests that under 
free trade, a nation gains by specializing in economic activities in 
which it has an absolute advantage.
Theory of comparative advantage. A theory that focuses on the 
relative (not absolute) advantage in one economic activity that one 
nation enjoys in comparison with other nations.
Theory of mercantilism. A theory that suggests that the wealth 
of the world is fixed and that a nation that exports more and imports 
less will be richer.
Theory of national competitive advantage of industries (dia-
mond theory).  A theory that suggests that the competitive ad-
vantage of certain industries in different nations depends on four 
aspects that form a “diamond.”
Third-country national (TCN). An individual who is from neither 
the parent country nor the host country of the MNE.
Third-party logistics (3PL). A neutral, third-party intermediary in 
the supply chain that provides logistics and other support services.
Top management team (TMT). The team consisting of the high-
est level of executives of a firm led by the CEO.
Total cost of ownership.  Total cost needed to own a product, 
consisting of initial purchase cost and follow-up maintenance/ser-
vice cost.
Totalitarianism (dictatorship).  A political system in which 
one person or party exercises absolute political control over the 
population.
Trade deficit. An economic condition in which a nation imports 
more than it exports.
Trade embargo. Politically motivated trade sanctions against for-
eign countries to signal displeasure.
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS).  
A WTO agreement governing intellectual property rights.
Trade surplus. An economic condition in which a nation exports 
more than it imports.
Trademark. Exclusive legal rights of firms to use specific names, 
brands, and designs to differentiate their products from others.
Training. Specific preparation to do a particular job.
Transaction costs. The costs associated with economic transac-
tions or, more broadly, the costs of doing business.
Transnational strategy. A strategy that endeavors to be simul-
taneously cost-efficient, locally responsive, and learning-driven 
around the world.
Triad. North America, Western Europe, and Japan.
Triple bottom line. Economic, social, and environmental perfor-
mance that simultaneously satisfies the demands of all stakeholder 
groups.
Tunneling. A form of corporate theft that diverts resources from 
the firm for personal or family use.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

606	
Glossary
Voice-based mechanisms.  Corporate governance mechanisms 
that focus on shareholders’ willingness to work with managers, 
usually through the board, by “voicing” their concerns.
Voluntary export restraint (VER).  An international agreement 
that shows that exporting countries voluntarily agree to restrict 
their exports.
VRIO framework. The resource-based framework that focuses on 
the value (V), rarity (R), imitability (I), and organizational (O) aspects 
of resources and capabilities.
W
Washington Consensus. A view centered on the unquestioned 
belief in the superiority of private ownership over state ownership 
in economic policy making, which is often spearheaded by two 
Washington-based international organizations: the International 
Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
Wholly owned subsidiary (WOS). A subsidiary located in a foreign 
country that is entirely owned by the parent multinational.
World Trade Organization (WTO). The official title of the multilat-
eral trading system and the organization underpinning this system 
since 2005.
Worldwide (global) mandate. A charter to be responsible for one 
MNE function throughout the world.
Turnkey project. A project in which clients pay contractors to de-
sign and construct new facilities and train personnel.
U
Uncertainty avoidance. The extent to which members in a cul-
ture accept or avoid ambiguous situations and uncertainty.
Union of South American Nations (USAN/UNASUR). A regional 
integration mechanism integrating two existing customs unions 
(Andean Community and Mercosur) in South America.
United States–Dominican Republic–Central America Free 
Trade Agreement (CAFTA). A free trade agreement between the 
United States and five Central American countries and the Domini-
can Republic.
Upstream vertical FDI. A type of vertical FDI in which a firm en-
gages in an upstream stage of the value chain in a host country.
V
Value chain. A series of activities used in the production of goods 
and services that make a product or service more valuable.
Venture capitalist (VC).  Investor who provides risk capital for 
early stage ventures.
Vertical FDI.  A type of FDI in which a firm moves upstream or 
downstream at different value chain stages in a host country.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A
Aarnio, C., 90n7
Abdelnour, S., 60n8
Academy of Management 
Review, 116n5
Acedo, F., 116n3
Acemoglu, D., 61n36
Acs, Z., 308n4
Adams, G., 116n4
Adams, M., 335n27
Adegbesan, J. A., 116n3, 
392n9
Adner, R., 117n19, 309n37
AFL-CIO, 520n26
Agarwal, R., 309n11, 392n9
Agarwal, S., 491n51
Aggarwal, V., 309n28
Agmon, T., 191, 202n32
Agrawal, N., 490n13
Agrawal, V., 490n13
Aguilera, R., 334n8, 393n34, 
551nn34, 41, 575n1
Ahlstrom, D., 309nn22, 31,  
39, 531, 533, 550n16, 
576n14
Aifaro, L., 202n16
Aime, F., 117n22
Ainuddin, R. Z., 392n9
Akremi, A., 335n31
Alam, A., 490n19
Albertson, P., 130
Alessandri, T., 61n15, 551n24
Alexy, O., 444
Al-Hamadi, A., 90n1
Al Jazeera, 43
Allard, G., 224
Allatta, J., 393n44
Allee, T., 202n16
Allen, D., 576n10
Allen, L., 202n16
Allende, Salvador, 569
Almeida, P., 423n40
Almond, P., 520n50
Alon, I., 224
Altenborg, E., 393n42
Altomonte, C., 202n23
Ambec, S., 576n42
Ambos, B., 422n29
Ambos, T., 422n29, 423n39
Amino, T., 520n18
Amiti, M., 172n2
Anand, J., 362n10, 392n8, 
393n34
Anand, S., 576n22
Anderson, B., 335n24
Andersson, U., 423n39
Ando, N., 520n32
Name Index
607
Andrade, G., 392n25
Ang, S., 85, 392n11
Anokhin, S., 308n7
Antweiler, W., 172n2
APEC Secretariat, 263n29
Apotheker, Leo, 407, 534–535
Apte, U., 491n44
Apud, S., 91n45
Arcieri, K., 96
Ariely, D., 61n19
Arikan, A., 309n11, 334n9
Arino, A., 392n18, 393n.32
Arkolakis, C., 172n2
Armington, C., 308n4
Arora, A., 309n11
Arregle, J., 116n2, 421n3
Arrfelt, M., 490n2
Arthur, J., 520n41
Arthur, W., 520n40
Arthurs, J., 309n21, 490n16
Arvidsson, N., 422n29
Arya, B., 576n38
Asaba, S., 117n25
Asakawa, K., 422n17
ASEAN Secretariat, 263n28
Ashton, Catherine, 242
Asmussen, C., 334n4, 421n3
Au, K., 308n4, 309n22
Aulakh, P., 30n5, 31n31, 
335n31, 382, 392n22
Autio, E., 297, 309nn7, 33
Autry, C., 491n35
Aviation News, 338
Avittathur, B., 490n24
Avolio, B., 60n6
Aybar, B., 30n5
Aycan, Z., 91n18
B
Babakus, E., 422n31
Babe, Greg, 413–414
Bachrack, M., 355
Baden-Fuller, C., 422n12
Bagchi, P., 490n19
Baggs, J., 172n3
Bailey, W., 91n23
Bakay, Z, 74
Baker, J., 362n3
Baker, John, 206
Baker, T., 308n3
Balkundi, P., 520n47
Ballmer, Steve, 137
Balogun, J., 423n40
Bals, L., 116n10
Banalieva, E., 335n35
Bansal, P., 576n6
Bao, Y., 90n2
Barden, J., 392n29
Barkema, H., 335n14, 335n25
Barmeyer, Christoph, 494
Barnard, H., 30n5, 31n20
Barner-Rasmussen, W., 90n7
Barnett, H., 91n33
Barnett, M., 575n4, 576n37
Barney, J., 31n16, 60n8, 95, 
101, 116nn1, 6-7, 117nn18, 
28, 308, 362n8, 576n16
Barr, P., 90n2
Barro, R., 61n36
Barroso, C., 116n3
Barry, D., 309n14
Barry, F., 202n26
Barry, K., 130
Barthelmy, J., 335n31
Bartikowski, B., 470
Bartlett, C., 91n17, 409, 422n10
Bartol, K., 551n26
Bartunek, J., 577n53
Bassi, L., 520n19
Bastiat, F., 162, 172n18
Basu, K., 576n20
Beal, B., 334n5
Beamish, P., 116n4, 392nn2, 
9, 29, 393n49, 421n3, 
423nn39-40, 519n5
Beaulieu, M., 61n24
Bebchuk, L., 551n26
Becerra, M., 362n2
Becker, B., 521n51, 56
Behfar, K., 520n47
Behring, Alex, 380
Beijing Review, 324
Belderbos, R., 334n8, 520n32
Bell, J., 309n33
Bell, R. G., 309n39
Bell, S., 334n9, 520n40
Benito, G., 335n33, 421
Benner, M., 362n7
Bennett, W., 520n40
Benton, W. C., 490n31
Benz, M., 550n1
Bergh, R., 61n21
Berlusconi, Silvio, 539
Berman, S., 422n15
Bernard, A., 172n4
Bernardes, R., 135
Bernhofen, D., 172n11
Bernstein, A., 24
Bernstein, P., 61n43
Berry, H., 334n7
Berry, L., 490n4
Berry, S., 172n17
Bessinger, A., 444
Beugelsdijk, S., 116n10
Bhagat, R., 31n25, 76, 91n35, 
335n41
Bhagwati, J., 165–166, 
172nn26-27, 252, 263n31
Bhalla, G., 490n3
Bhaskar-Shrinivas, P., 519n8
Bhattacharya, A., 30n4
Bhattal, Jesse, 391
Bhaumik, S., 31n14, 116n2, 
334n1
Bialik, C., 130
Bianchi, M., 422n17
Bierly, P., 422n24
Bies, R., 577n53
Bigley, G., 575n2
Bilous, Keith, 102
Bingham, C., 309n23
Bird, A., 91n18, 520n17
Birkinshaw, J., 335n26, 421, 
422n29, 423n39
Birtch, T., 520n25
Björk, 66
Bjorkman, A., 423n38
Bjorkman, I., 91n15, 519n2, 
520n29
Blakeney, R., 520n17
Blalock, G., 202n24
Blanding, M., 125
Blavatnik, Len, 452–454
Blevins, D., 31n33, 194, 
202n35
Block, E., 576n19
Bloom, M., 576n5
Bloomberg, 391
Bloomberg Businessweek, 43, 
102, 109, 125, 142, 154, 
167, 171, 201, 230, 247, 
262, 312–313, 333–334, 
338, 371, 380, 384, 396, 
407, 434, 444, 454, 476, 
524, 530
Boal, K., 335n25
Boddewyn, J., 172n23
Bode, C., 490n24
Bodolica, V., 551n30
Boehe, Dirk Michael, 276–278
Boeker, W., 392n17
Boisot, M., 309n39
Boivie, S., 551n46
Bosch, F., 422n31
Bosse, D., 576n5
Bouquet, C., 335n26, 423n39
Bourda, F., 154
Bourdeau, B., 392n12
Bowen, H., 308n7, 335n35
Boxall, P., 520n50
Boyd, B., 551n34
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

608	
Name Index
Boyd, J., 363n23
Boyles, T., 520n41
Bradford, S., 172n12
Brammer, S., 577nn43, 48
Brander, J., 172nn3, 7
Brandes, P., 551n24
Brannen, M., 90n1,  
393n44, 519
Branson, Sir Richard, 294
Branzai, O., 60n8
Braunerhjelm, P., 202n29, 421
Bremer, Paul, 432–433
Brenner, S., 362n4
Bresser, R., 363n23
Brett, J., 520n47
Brettel, M., 117n26
Brewster, C., 521n50
Brickson, S., 576n4
Bridoux, F., 117n19
Brin, Sergei, 429–430
Bris, A., 551n37
Brock, D., 520n32
Broderick, A., 490n10
Brouthers, K., 335n26
Brouthers, L., 335n26, 490n16
Brown, J., 172n11, 491n51
Brush, T., 392n8, 490n28
Bruton, G., 30n4, 50, 61n45, 
202n10, 309nn22, 39, 
531, 533, 550n16, 
551n54, 576n17
Buchan, N., 76
Buchholtz, A., 362n2
Buck, T., 533, 550n18, 551n38
Buckley, P., 202n17
Budhwar, P., 90n1, 91n38, 
519n1, 520n30
Buffett, Warren, 523
Buley, T., 444
Bunyaratawej, K., 117n14, 
202n25
Bureau of Labor Statistics, 
520n27
Burgelman, R., 423n41
Burggraeve, Chris, 467–468
Burns, J., 451
Burrus, D., 117n33
Bush, George W., 20, 249
Business Journal, 96
Business Times, 66
BusinessWeek, 18, 23, 60n10, 
61nn17-18, 110, 116, 
116n11, 117nn21, 24, 165, 
172nn13, 20, 202nn28,36, 
231nn17-18, 263nn16, 20, 
22, 275, 309nn10, 13, 16, 
334n3, 335nn10, 22–23, 
349, 391, 393n46, 421, 
422nn8, 35–36, 434, 489, 
490nn6, 18, 491n47, 514, 
519, 520n31, 521n59, 
551n53, 576nn27, 35
Bygrave, W., 297
Byles, Charles M., 279–282
C
Cable, Vince, 167
Cabolis, C., 551n37
Cadbury, Adrian, 548
Cadsby, C., 551n25
Calatone, R., 490n35
Caligiuri, P., 520n12
Callarman, T., 491n36
Cameron, David, 167, 245, 
541–542
Camp, S. M., 308n1
Campa, J., 392n24
Campbell, B., 309n11
Campbell, J., 116n2, 575n1, 
576n21
Campion, M., 520n12
Canales, I., 423n38
Cannella, A., 362n11,  
363n26
Cantwell, J., 31n17
Capaldo, A., 117n19
Capelleras, J., 309n7
Cappellen, T., 519n6
Cappelli, P., 575n1
Capron, L., 61n21, 362n1
Carbaugh, R., 230n10
Cardinal, L., 335n35
Cardon, M., 309n14
Cardoso, Fernando Henrique, 
131–134
Caringal, C., 117n23
Carney, M., 61n33
Carr, C., 91n38
Carraher, S., 520n20
Carrieri, F., 231n12
Cars Guide, The, 459n9
Carter, N., 519
Cascio, W., 519n2
Cassar, G., 309n30
Casson, M., 202n17
Castellucci, F., 392n9
Castleton, M., 551n29
Castro, Fidel, 59–60
Castro, Raúl, 59–60
Caves, R., 30n1, 201n1
Cavusgil, S. T., 423n43,  
491n46
Cerdin, 520n16
Certo, S. T., 363n23, 550n6
CFO, 137
Chacar, A., 61n15, 393n34
Chachkes, A., 445
Chakrabarti, R., 393n44
Chakraborty, S., 202n16
Chamon, M., 218
Chan, C., 90n5, 334n5,  
392n29
Chan, J., 391
Chan, Jackie, 129
Chan, R., 576n41
Chan, V., 459n13
Chande, Anuj, 311
Chandler, A., 422n5
Chandra, Y., 308n3
Chang, H., 31n21
Chang, S., 31n25, 91n35, 
335nn41, 43, 393n34, 
498
Chang, Y., 519n7
Chari, M., 117n26, 34, 335n42, 
551n40
Chase, R., 491n44
Chatain, O., 61n21, 117n19, 
362n1
Chatterji, A., 309n11
Chaudhry, P., 61n30,  
128–129, 130
Chávez, Hugo, 59–60
Chelekis, Jessica, 30
Chen, C., 91n39, 363n25, 
520n34
Chen, D., 392n3
Chen, E., 551n34
Chen, H., 31n15, 60n2
Chen, L., 445
Chen, M., 348, 362nn1, 9, 
363nn22, .26
Chen, S., 202n17, 309n31, 
393nn34,.38
Chen, Tim, 137
Chen, V., 550n19
Chen, X., 91n18
Chen, Y., 382, 575n3
Chen, Yuan Yi, 455–458
Chernin, Peter, 529–530
Chesbrough, H., 422n25
Cheung, M., 335n17, 393n34
Chi, S., 91n18
Chi, T., 117n27, 393n50
Chiang, F., 520n25
Child, J., 392n16
China Business Infocentre, 
459n8
China Business Review, 
165, 255, 263n32, 421, 
460–463
China Car Times, 459nn10–11
China Daily, 371, 459n4
Chintakananda, A., 61n15, 
335n29
Chirac, Jacques, 507
Chitakananda, A., 392n13
Chittoor, R., 30n5, 382, 392n22
Chizema, A., 550n23, 551n51
Cho, M., 335n13
Cho, T., 551n25
Choi, B., 335n12
Choi, C., 393n49
Choi, E., 391
Choi, J., 577n45
Choi, T., 117n31, 490n2
Chou, Peter, 108–109
Choudhari, Anjou, 4
Christensen, C., 309n17, 19
Christmann, P., 393n47, 
577n46
Chu, W., 391
Chua, R., 392n21
Chung, C., 519n5
Chung, W., 335n11
Ciabuschi, F., 423nn37, 39
Ciravegna, L., 309n38
Claessens, S., 550n14
Clark, K., 551n45
Clarke, J., 309n14
Clarkson, G., 362n12
Clarkson, M., 576n12
Click, R., 61n25
Clinton, William J., 249
Clougherty, J., 355, 363n33
Cochran, P., 91n20
Cockburn, A., 342, 451
Coeurderoy, R., 61n15, 117n19, 
309n7
Cohen, M., 490n13
Cohen, W., 422n31
Colakoglu, D., 521n55
Colbert, B., 520n41
Colbert, Jean-Baptiste, 146
Collier, P., 60n12
Collin, S., 551n48
Colling, T., 520n50
Collins, C., 551n45
Collinson, S., 335n36
Combs, J., 490n31, 521n57, 
550n13
Conaty, William, 515
Condé Nast Traveler, 510
Confucius, 82
Connelly, B., 117n19, 363n23, 
550n6
Contardo, I., 362n2
Cooksey, R., 490n16
Coombs, J., 576n10
Cooper, B., 91n38
Cooper, W. H., 283
Coovadia, Firhose, 311
Coovadia, Shashi, 311
Copeland, B., 172n2
Corbett, A., 309n30
Corbett, C., 490n34
Cordell, V., 130
Cording, M., 393n47
Cornwell, S., 445
Corredoira, R., 60n13
Cosrsten, D., 392n8
Cosset, J., 61n24
Coucke, K., 116n10
Coughlan, J., 423n40
Coviello, N., 308n3
Covin, J., 308n1, 392n23
Cowen, A., 551n27
Coyne, K., 362n1
Crilly, D., 576n4
Criscuolo, P., 422n17, 444
Crocitto, M., 520n20
Cronin, J., 392n12
Crook, T., 61n21
Crook, T. R., 490n31
Croson, R., 392n9
Crossan, M., 550n20
Crossland, C., 551n51
Crovitz, L. G., 445
Crowe, C., 218
Cuervo-Cazurra, A., 30n4, 
60n13, 91n30, 116n2, 
334n2, 422n31, 551n41
Cui, L., 30n5, 382
Cullen, J., 91n25, 91n42
Cumming, D., 308n3
Cuypers, I., 392n13
Czinkota, M., 60n8, 363n37
D
Dacin, M. T., 309n39, 392n6
Dacin, T., 61n15
Dagnino, G., 117n34, 363n32
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Name Index	
609
Dahlin, K., 520n46
Daily, C., 392n23, 550n18
Dalgic, T., 473, 484
Dallas Morning News, 142
Dalton, D., 392n23, 550n18
Dalziel, T., 309n21
Damanpour, F., 422n24
Darling, D., 154
Darnall, J., 576n31
Das, A., 550n2
Das, D. K., 283
Das, S., 550n2
Datta, D., 521n55
Dau, L., 60n13, 116n2
D’Aveni, R., 117n34,  
363nn32, 34
David, P., 117nn26, 34, 335n42, 
551n40, 576n5
Davies, H., 172n10
Davis, G., 551n52, 576n12
Davis, K., 575n1
Davis, L., 445
Davis, M., 491n43
Dawar, N., 352, 363n29
Day, Stockwell, 270
Dean, A., 423n42
Deaton, A., 61n34
De Bakker, F., 576n12
De Cieri, H., 520n21
De Clercq, D., 308n7
Debrah, Y., 519n1
Deeds, D., 309n32
Delery, J., 520n48
Delios, A., 30n4, 335nn20,  
25, 422n7, 423n39, 
576n15
Dellestrand, H., 423nn39-40
Delmas, M., 576nn37-38
Delmestri, G., 335n13
Demidova, S., 172n2
Demirbag, M., 117n14
Den Hond, F., 576n12
Deng, L., 392n17
Deng, P., 30n5, 382
DeNisi, A., 520n35
Desarbo, W., 363n25
Deshpande, R., 91n21, 510
De Soto, H., 45, 60n8, 61n28
Dess, G., 309n17, 445
Dev, C., 491n51
Devaraj, S., 117n26, 335n42
DeVaro, J., 520n21
Devers, C., 551n24
Devinney, T., 577n44
Dew, N., 308n1
Dhanaraj, C., 12, 334n4, 
392nn5, 29
Dharwadkar, R., 520n11, 551n24
Diez, J., 490n14
Dighero, Robert, 428–430
Dimitratos, P., 202n21
Dinur, A., 422n29
Dissanaike, G., 550n4
Dixon, M., 490n35
Djankov, S., 550n14
Dobrev, S., 335n24
Doh, J., 117n14, 202nn21, 25, 
576n8
Doidge, C., 551nn37, 42, 
551n44
Doing Business, 290–292, 294
Donahue, M., 550n13
Donaldson, T., 79, 91n24, 
551n47, 555
Dooley, K., 491n36
Dorfman, P., 72, 76, 91n12
Dorrenbacher, C., 423n40
Doty, D., 520n48
Dotzel, T., 490n4
Dou, W., 61n49, 491n46
Dow, D., 490n5
Dow, L., 130
Dowell, G., 551n34
Dowling, P., 499, 508, 
520nn10, 15, 21
Down, J., 422n15
Dragoni, L., 520n14
Driffield, N., 202n12, 422n12
Drnovsek, M., 309n14
Droge, C., 117n13, 335n17
Drogendijk, R., 335n14
Drost, E., 520nn14, 49
Du, J., 91n26
Dudley Bob, 452–454
Dufy, M., 520n43
Dunfee, T., 91n23
Dunlap-Hinkler, D., 422n16
Dunning, J., 30n1, 31nn15, 
17, 180, 202n8, 334n8, 
335n35
Durand, R., 60n5, 91n20, 117n19
Durisin, B., 422n31
Dyer, J., 309n17
Dykes, B., 393n40, 576n19
E
Earley, P. C., 85
East Asian Miracle, The, 82
Easterby-Smith, M., 422n31
Easterly, W., 61n29
Eaton, K., 445
Ebben, J., 309n15
Ebenezer, Simon, 438–444
Economist, 6, 18, 34, 37, 43, 
52, 60, 60n9, 61nn16, 23,  
37, 46, 66, 79, 90, 94, 
108, 109, 110, 125, 142, 
154, 165, 171, 172nn15-
16, 176, 189–190, 194, 
201, 202nn27, 34, 37, 
207–210, 212, 218, 230, 
230nn1,3, 231n18, 240, 
246, 249, 256, 262, 
263nn4–6, 10–15, 17–19, 
25–26, 34, 271–273, 275, 
278, 279–282, 283, 295, 
309nn9,18, 316–317, 
334n3, 335nn19, 34, 
338, 342, 362n16, 391, 
392n10, 399, 407, 421, 
434, 445, 446, 451,  
453–454, 489, 490nn12, 
21, 25, 491n38, 514, 
520n23, 524, 530, 542, 
550, 550nn11, 28, 554, 
558, 576nn18, 25, 577n49
Economist Atlas, The, 67
Economist Intelligence Unit, 
520n36
Eddleston, K., 335n35
Eden, L., 392n17, 575n1
Edens, P., 520n40
Ederington, J., 172n5
Eesley, C., 576n11
Egelhoff, W., 116n4, 422n6
Egri, C., 575n2
Eiadat, Y., 576n41
Eisenhardt, K., 309nn17,28, 
422n12
Eisner, A., 445
Elango, B., 30n4, 202n10, 
334n2
Elfenbein, H., 362n13
Ellis, P., 172n10, 491n50
Ellram, L., 490n24
Ellstrands, A., 550n18
Eng, T., 490n35
Enright, M., 334n8
Epstein, Z., 445
Erez, M., 76
Eriksson, T., 116n10
Erkens, D., 549–550
Ertug, G., 392n9
España, Juan, 131–134
Essaddam, N., 61n24
Esterby-Smith, M., 422n29
Estrin, S., 31n14, 116n2, 334n1, 
551n39
Ethiraj, S., 117n26
Ettenson, R., 576n34
Eunni, R., 309n7
European Commission, 283
European Union: A Guide for 
Americans, 263n7
Evangelista, F., 393n34
Evans, P., 202n30
Eyadat, H., 576n41
F
Faccio, M., 550n15
Faems, D., 393n31
Faff, R., 231n14
Fails, D., 117n14
Faldin, Maxim, 428–430
Fang, E., 392n9, 393n34
Fang, T., 76
Farndale, E., 519n4
Farrell, D., 106, 117n29
Favaro, K., 491n37
Federal Trade Commission, 
392n4
FEER, 202n9, 309n27
Feinberg, S., 202n15
Felix, N., 64
Felps, W., 575n2
Ferdows, K., 18
Fergusen, I., 271
Fernandes, N., 551n44
Fernández de Kircher,  
Cristina, 200
Fernando, C., 576n41
Ferner, A., 520n50
Fernhaber, S., 309n23
Ferrier, W., 363n23
Fetscherin, M., 224
Fey, C., 91n15, 334n2, 422n32, 
519n2
Ficici, A., 30n5
Fidrmuc, J., 91n8
Field, J., 116n12
Figueiredo, P., 135
Filatotchev, I., 8, 30n4, 31n7, 
60n13, 202n18, 309nn17, 
39, 533, 550n18, 551n34
Financial Times, 451, 452–453, 
459n1
Finkelstein, S., 392n26
Fishman, C., 363n36
Flores, R., 334n8
Florkowski, G., 520n30
Folta, T., 202n13
Fombrun, C., 577n53
Forbes, 430, 451
Ford, Bill, 115
Foreign Affairs, 53
Forsgren, M., 423n37
Forster, W., 308n1
Fort, T., 577n53
Fortune, 22, 137, 172n22
Foss, N., 422nn12, n34
Fotak, V., 54
Fournier, S., 490n17, 491n40
Franco, A., 309n11
Francois, J., 172n23
Fransson, A., 422n12
Fratianni, M., 263n36
Frayne, C., 520nn14, 49
Freeman, E., 575n4
Freeman, K., 490n35
Freene, F., 309n7
Fremeth, A., 576n29
Frese, E., 116n4
Frey, B., 550n1
Fridman, M., 372, 392n19, 
452–454
Fried, J., 551n26
Friedman, M., 557–558, 
576n13
Friedman, R., 91n18
Friedman, T., 31n32, 111, 
117n36
Friedmann, C., 520n38
Frigant, V., 135
Frost, T., 352, 363n29
Frynas, J. G., 335n20
Fuentelsaz, L., 363n25
Fujino, Michimasa, 96
Fujita, J., 335n35
Fukuyama, F., 91n43
Funding Universe, 324
Funk, C., 490n16
Furu, P., 422n32
Furuya, N., 520n17
G
Galan, J., 116n3, 202nn11, 19, 
335n27, 422n5
Gamble, J., 520n50
Gammelgaard, J., 423n40
Gammeltoft, P., 30n5
Gampa, R., 391
Ganapathy, J., 575n1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

610	
Name Index 
Ganco, M., 309n11
Gao, G., 30n5, 116n2, 335n25, 
490n28, 491n45
Garbe, J., 422n6
Garces-Ayerbe, C., 576n21
Garcia-Canal, E., 30n5, 334n8
Garcia-Pont, C., 423n38
Gardberg, N, 577n53
Gardner, T., 520n24
Garg, M., 30n4
Garibaldi, B., 130
Garten, J., 263n23
Gates, Bill, 136–137
Gaur, A., 309n17, 335n20, 
393n36
Gaur, S., 309n17
Gazette, The, 459n12
Gedajlovic, E., 61n33, 308n3, 
537, 550n10, 575n3
Geenley, G., 490n10
George, G., 309nn15, 17
Geringer, J. M., 520nn14, 49
Gerner, John, 395
Getz, K., 61n22
Ghauri, P., 202n12, 393n34
Ghemawat, P., 31n28, 423n44
Ghosh, A., 218
Ghoshal, S., 91nn17, 41, 409, 
422n10
Ghosn, Carlos, 406, 502
Gianiodis, P., 362n2
Giarrantana, M., 309n23
Gibbons, P., 423n40
Gibson, C., 76, 422n30, 
520n47
Giddens, A., 31n21
Gifford, B., 576n22
Gilbert, B., 309n23
Gilley, K. M., 576n10
Gillies, Richard, 554
Gimeno, J., 334n5, 348, 
362n4, 363n22
Gioia, D., 91n31
Giroud, A., 202n22
Glaister, K., 117n14
Global Competitiveness  
Report, 34
“Globalization of Markets, 
The,” 397, 469, 471
Globe and Mail, 271
Globeman, Steven, 288
Globerman, S., 54, 91n27, 271, 
550n1
Glunk, U., 551n46
Glynn, M., 576n12
Gnyawali, D., 60n6, 90n2, 
392n9, 422n29
Godfrey, P., 575n2, 576n41
Godrej, Adi, 311
Goerzen, A., 116n4
Golden, B., 363n24
Goldstein, D., 31n26
Goldstein, J., 263n35
Golovko, E., 309n17
Gomez, J., 335n24, 363n25
Gomez-Mejia, L., 551n25
Gonçalves, João, 278
Gong, Y., 519n7
Gonzalez-Benito, J., 202nn11, 
19, 335n27
Gooderham, P., 422n14
Goodman, S., 91n44
Gooner, R., 490n33
Gopalakrishnan, M., 491n36
Goranova, M., 551n24
Gore, A., 550n21, 563, 576n23
Gospel, H., 551n34
Gotsopoulos, A., 335n24
Gottfredson, M., 117n30
Gough, N., 459n5
Gould, Alan, 396
Gould, S., 423n45
Gove, S., 117n20, 363n20, 
576n26
Govindarajan, V., 4, 31nn10-11, 
309n34, 362n14, 411, 
422nn13, 22
Goyer, R., 96
Graddol, D., 67, 90n6
Graebner, M., 309n29, 550n21
Graen, G., 520n11
Graffin, S., 551n26
Graham, E., 362n15
Graham, J., 91n18
Grahovac, J., 117n19
Granzow, A., 479n
Greenawy, D., 172n4
Greenwald, B., 421n3
Gregerson, H., 309n17
Gregoire, D., 309n30
Gregorio, D., 117n13
Grein, A., 423n45
Greve, H., 116n4, 362n10, 
392n12, 422n23
Grewal, R., 363n25, 520n11
Griffin, R., 363n30
Griffith, D., 91n47, 117n13, 
335n25, 490nn10, 35
Grimpe, C., 117n13
Grosse, R., 202n11
Grossman, G., 172n24
Grove, A., 414, 423n41
Gruber, M., 117n26
Gu, F., 490n10, 491n48
Guardian, 137
Guay, T., 576n8
Gubbi, S., 30n5, 382, 392n22
Guedri, Z., 362n10
Gugler, P., 224
Guillen, M., 30n5, 61n15, 201, 
334n8
Gui Shengyue, 456
Gulati, R., 393n34
Gunning, J., 60n12
Gupta, A., 202n15, 309n34, 
411, 422n13, 422n22
Gupta, V., 72, 91n12
Gupta-Mukherjee, S., 393n44
Gurung, A., 551n33
Gutenberg, S., 135
Guthrie, J., 521n55
Gyoshev, B., 309n7
H
Haas, M., 422n30
Hadjimarcou, J., 490n16
Hahn, E., 117n14, 202n25
Hail, L., 550n5
Hakanson, L., 422n12
Halbrich, M., 172n23
Hall, A., 521n57
Hall, E., 91n10
Hall, M., 91n10
Hall, P., 61n33
Hall, R., 95
Hambrick, D., 551nn30, 51
Hamilton, R., 422n29
Handfield, R., 490n32
Hanges, P., 72, 76, 91n12
Hannah, S., 60n6
Hansem, M., 202n12
Hansen, J., 576n41
Harmancioglu, N., 117n13
Harrington, S., 61n43
Harrison, D., 91n20, 519n8, 
520nn13, 47
Harrison, J., 576n5
Hart, S., 9, 31n9, 91n32, 576n7
Hartmann, E., 116n10
Harvard Business Review, 10, 
13, 18, 23, 34, 155, 414, 
498, 514, 520n37
Harzing, A., 90n7, 422n33, 
519n6, 520n9
Hashai, N., 309n24
Hatani, F., 202n12
Hatem, T., 91n15
Hatonen, J., 116n10, 117n14
Hau, L., 393n34
Haxhi, I., 551n41
Haynes, K., 551n34
He, J., 551n46
He, X., 363n21
He, Y., 575n3
Heath, P., 116n4
Hebert, L., 421n3
Heckscher, Eli, 150
Heide, J., 334n9
Heijblom, R., 473, 484
Heijltjes, M., 551n46
Heikkla, J., 90n7
Heine, K., 117n27
Heineke, J., 491n43
Heinemann, F., 117n26
Hejazi, W., 335n43
Heleblian, J., 393n40
Hellman, J., 91n29
Helpman, E., 172nn1, 4
Hemphill, T., 575n2
Hemprecht, J., 576n30
Henisz, W., 61n22
Hennart, J., 335n35
Henriques, I., 576n31
Henry, N., 202n13
Henry, P., 231n16
Heritage Foundation, 61n32
Hermalin, B., 551n34
Herrmann, P., 309n35,  
551n46
Hess, A., 117n27
Hesseldahl, A., 430
Heugens, P., 551n49
Higgins, M., 392n9
Hill, A., 117n22
Hill, C., 61n30, 72, 309n40, 
362n7, 422n15, 551n32
Hiller, N., 551n30
Hillman, A., 576nn5, 40
Hinds, P., 520n46
Hirst, G., 91n38
Hitt, M., 101, 116nn2-3, 
117n20, 308n1, 363nn20, 
23, 392n17, 490n27
Hoang, H., 422n24
Hodgetts, R., 421n4
Hoegl, M., 91n42
Hoekman, B., 172n23
Hoetker, G., 491n46
Hoffman, A., 562, 565
Hoffmann, V., 576n30
Hofstede, G., 65nn34, 75–77, 
91nn16, 46
Holburn, G., 61n21
Holcomb, T., 117n19
Holdsworth, D., 490n16
Holm, U., 421
Holmes, M., 117n19
Holmes, R. M., 551n24
Holt, D., 490n11
Holtbrugge, D., 335n43, 
520n38
Holzinger, I., 61n21
Hong, J., 422nn29, 31
Hong, S., 91n26
Hong, Y., 521n55
Hope, O., 393n51
Horn, J., 362n1
Horton, Dave, 460
Hoskisson, R., 8, 31n7, 60n13, 
101, 308n1, 334n5, 
550n6, 551n29
House, R., 71–72, 74, 76, 91n12
Hsieh, L., 392n16
Hsu, D., 309n28
Huang, J., 520n50
Huang, K., 61n15
Huang, X., 91n18, 422n19
Huang, Z., 61n15, 551n46
Huffpost Business, 275
Hu Jintao, 136
Hull, C., 577n45
Hulland, J., 392n9
Hult, G. T., 490n2
Hung, K., 490nn10, 48
Hung, Mingyi, 549–550
Hungeling, S., 117n26
Hunter, L., 61n15
Huntington, S., 67, 71–72, 
91n13
Huo, A., 391
Huo, P., 520n50
Huselid, M., 519, 521nn51, 56
Husted, B., 576n10, 577n52
Husted, K., 422n12
Hutson, E., 230n11
I
Ichiba, Rakuten, 429
Iger, Robert A., 395
Immelt, J., 10, 31n11, 115, 343, 
362n14, 523
Inkpen, A., 422nn29, 33
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Name Index	
611
International Monetary  
Fund, 6–7
Ireland, R. D., 101, 116n3, 
308n1, 309n39, 392n17
Ismail, K., 520n45
Isobe, T., 90n5, 334n5, 392n29
Ito, K., 363n28
J
Jacks, D., 172n1
Jackson, A., 459n2
Jackson, G., 551n34
Jacque, L., 231n12
Jagad, Mallika, 510
Jandik, T., 335n32
Janney, J., 576n26
Jansen, J., 422n31
Janssens, M., 393n31, 519n6
Jap, S., 335n25
Jarzabkowski, P., 423n40
Javidan, M., 72, 76, 91n12
Javorcik, B., 202n23
Jayachandran, S., 491n35
Jayaraman, N., 393n44
Jean, R., 491n46
Jeijltjes, M., 520n32
Jenkins, M., 202n13
Jennings, W., 550n8
Jensen, J., 172n4
Jensen, M., 392n17, 536, 
550n12
Jensen, P., 116n10
Jensen, R., 422n29
Jensen, T., 576n4
Jiang, C., 392n21, 422n27, 531
Jiang, F., 30n5, 31n15, 382
Jiang, M., 335n31
Jiang, Y., 60n2, 533, 550n10, 
550n16
Jindra, B., 202n22
Jobe, L., 490n27
Jobs, Steve, 543
Jocz, K., 491n37
Johanson, J., 31n19, 334n2
Johnson, A., 309n15
Johnson, J., 91nn25, 45, 
520n43, 550n18
Johnson, L., 74
Johnson, Lyndon, 215
Johnson, R., 308n1, 551n46
Johnson, S., 117n22, 309n14, 
550n17
Johnson, W., 550n13
Joireman, J., 490n16
Jones, G., 91n29
Jones, T., 575n2
Jones, V. C., 283
Jonsson, S., 117n25
Joshi, A., 392n9, 520n45
Ju, M., 490n28
Julian, S., 61n15
Jurenas, R., 283
Justis, R., 61n15
K
Kacperczyk, A., 576n4
Kahn, J., 421n3
Kaiser, Nick, 287–288, 293
Kaiser, U., 117n13
Kale, P., 392nn2, 8, 393n34
Kaleka, A., 490n33
Kalemli-Ozcan, S., 202n16
Kali, R., 172n1, 335n32
Kalnins, A., 363n24
Kalotay, K., 313
Kandogan, Y., 91n45
Kang, Karambir Singh, 510
Kang, S., 520n39
Kanwar, Neeraj, 311–312
Kaplan, R., 393n33
Kaplan, S., 551n32
Kapoor, R., 117n19
Karolyi, A., 551nn37, 42–44
Karuturi, Sai Ramakrishna, 312
Kassinis, G., 576n10
Kathman, D., 287–288
Katou, A., 90n1
Katsikeas, C., 490n5
Kaufmann, D., 91n29
Kay, J., 130
Kearney, C., 202n26
Kedia, B., 116nn10, 12, 422n31
Keil, M., 392n12
Keil, T., 393n41
Keim, G., 576n40
Keller, K., 490n3
Kelly, A., 576n41
Kelnow, P., 172n2
Kenney, M., 117n13
Kent, Mehta, 124–125,  
406–407
Kern, M., 520n47
Kestler, A., 576n22
Ketchen, D., 309nn14, 39, 
490n2, 521n57, 550n13
Ketkar, S., 335n12
Keveos, P., 76
Khanin, D., 551n26
Khanna, T., 12, 498,  
551nn51, 56
Khodorkovsky, Mikhail, 34
Khoury, T., 60n8, 263n37, 
335n35
Kieschnick, R., 130
Kilduff, G., 362n13
Kim, B., 31n17
Kim, D., 309n8, 309n11
Kim, J., 218, 392n26, 550n23, 
551n48
Kim, K., 117n32
Kim, S., 91n26
Kim, W. C., 363n27, 422n5
Kindleberger, C., 235
King, A., 91n33, 117n23, 
576n36–37
King, D., 392n23, 393n47
King, Mervyn, 541–542
Kircher, Néstor, 200
Kirkman, B., 76
Kirton, J., 263n21
Kistruck, G., 309n39
Klein, S., 30n4
Kneller, R., 172n4
Knemeyer, A. M., 490n19
Knickerbocker, F., 202n14
Knight, G., 60n8, 309n11
Knight, J., 490n16
Kochan, T., 61n15
Kogan, J., 551n51
Koka, B., 422n31
Kolk, A., 576nn24, 39, 577n50
Konings, J., 172n2
Kornai, J., 61n44
Koster, K., 90n7
Kostova, T., 61n5, 409,  
422n14, 423n39, 519n6
Kotabe, M., 30n5, 116n2, 
117n26, 363n37, 392n21, 
422n16, 490n28, 
491nn41, 45
Kotha, S., 309n17
Kotler, P., 490n3, 491n42
Kourula, A., 576n36
Kraatz, M., 91n22
Kraimer, M., 519n6
Kramer, M. R., 560
Krasnikov, A., 491n35
Krause, D., 490nn2, 32
Kraussl, R., 576n19
Kreinin, M., 230n4
Krishnan, M., 117n26
Krishnaswamy, S., 491n42
Kroes, Neelie, 275
Kroll, M., 550nn18, 21
Krugman, P., 164,  
172nn7-8, 21
Kruse, G., 60n13
Kucera, D., 445
Kuma, V., 117n15
Kumar, K., 116n10, 335n42
Kumar, N., 30n4, 362n1
Kumar, V., 335n13
Kunc, M., 117n19
Kundu, S., 117n15, 309n38, 
335n42
Kurmakayev, Kamil, 428–430
Kurman, M., 445
Kwan, H., 309n22
Kwok, C., 91n30, 551n36
L
La, V., 117n19
Laamanen, T., 393n41, 421
Lagarde, Christine, 246–247
Lages, L., 335n25
Lahiri, N., 422n17
Lahiri, S., 116n12
Lai, J., 393n34
Lamin, A., 117n14
Lamont, B., 116n4, 393n45
Lampton, D., 194
Lane, P., 230n9, 422n31, 
551n48
Lang, L., 550n14–15
Lange, D., 551n46
Lanoie, P., 576n42
Lanzolla, G., 335n24
La Porta, R., 61n26, 550n9, 
550n17
Larimo, J., 91n18
Larraza-Kintana, M., 551n25
Lash, J., 577n50
Lau, C. M., 30n4, 202n10
Lau, V., 308n4
Laursen, K., 422n26
Laux, P., 231n13
Lavie, D., 393n34
Law, K., 520n39
Lawler, E., 519n2
Lazarova, M., 520n16
Le, S., 550n18
Lee, Ang, 66
Lee, B., 61n15
Lee, G., 116n6, 335n24, 
392n28
Lee, H., 490n23
Lee, K., 91n18, 498
Lee, L., 490n17, 491n40
Lee, S., 31nn16, 27, 60n8, 
61n21, 91nn18, 26, 
231n13, 308, 335nn12, 21
Lefever, Matthew, 438–444
Lehman, J., 445
Lejeune, M., 490n1
Lel, U., 551n44
Lemak, D., 335n24
Lemann, Jorge Paulo, 380
Lenartowicz, T., 91n45
Lenox, M., 91n33, 576n11
Lentz, P., 491n46
Lepak, D., 309n11, 520nn12, 
41, 521n55
Lerner, J., 551n33
Leslie, E., 135
Leung, H., 391
Leung, K., 76
Leuz, C., 550n5
Lev, B., 576n41
Levie, J., 309n7
Levinsohn, J., 172n17
Levinthal, D., 422n31
Levitt, T., 91n36, 397, 421n1, 
469, 471, 490n7
Levy, D., 117n17
Lewin, A., 117n13
Lewis, D., 31n22, 201n4
Lewis, M., 18
Li, D., 392n17
Li, H., 309n39
Li, J., 91n18, 335n12, 393n33, 
489, 550n19
Li, M., 550n2
Li, P., 30n4, 335n25
Li, S., 91n18, 335n43
Li, X., 533, 550n19
Li, Y., 117n13, 490n30
Lichtenthaler, U., 422n24
Lieberman, M., 117n25, 392n28
Lieberthal, K., 422n9
Lien, Y., 30n4, 202n18
Liesch, P., 60n8, 335n18, 
422n12
Liew, R., 391
Lim, E., 550n2
Lin, H., 363n22
Lin, Z., 393nn37, 39
Lindblom, C., 202n31
Liouka, I., 202n21
Lipstein, R., 362n17
Liu, C., 393n34
Liu, E., 391
Liu, L., 91n18
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

612	
Name Index 
Liu, R., 117n14
Liu, X., 202n22
Liu, Y., 117n13, 521n57
Livengood, R. S., 362n13
Liveris, Andrew, 115–116
Loane, S., 309n33
Locke, G., 165, 255
Lockett, A., 392n16
Lockhart, D., 520n43
London, T., 31n9, 575n2
Long, C., 91n38
Looy, B., 393n31
Lopez, L., 309n38
Lopez-de-Silanes, F., 61n26, 
550nn9, 17
Losada, F., 490n14
Lovallo, D., 117n23
Love, E. G., 91n22
Love, J., 202n12, 422n12
Lowe, K., 76, 520nn14, 21
Lu, J., 30n5, 116n2, 309n31, 
393nn33, 36
Lu, Y., 61n39, 422n12
Lubatkin, M., 308n3, 551n48
Luk, D., 519n8
Luke, Horace, 108–109
Lula da Silva, Luiz Ignacio,  
20, 276
Lumpkin, G. T., 309n17, 445
Lundau, S., 31nn15, 17
Lung, Y., 135
Lunnan, R., 421
Luo, X., 392n17
Luo, Y., 30n4, 335n40, 392n21, 
393n35, 422n34, 491n49, 
551n45
Lupton, N., 392n2
Luque, M., 76
Lux, S., 61n21
Luzio, F., 380
Lyles, M., 392nn5, 29, 
393nn34, 49, 422n29
Lyons, R., 213–214, 230n6
M
Ma, H., 363n24
Ma, L., 520n43
Ma, X., 422n7
Mabey, C., 520n14
Machuca, J., 18
Mackenzie, W., 117n26
Mackey, A., 551n45, 576n16
Mackey, J., 564, 576n32
Mackey, T., 576n16
Madhok, A., 30n5, 393n31
Madsen, P., 577n47
Magee, R., 550n13
Maggi, G., 172n5
Magnan, M., 551n48
Magner, U., 90n7
Mahoney, J., 334n7, 392nn9, 
15, 519n5
Maicas, J., 335n24
Majerbi, B., 231n12
Makhjia, M., 31n27, 231n13
Makino, S., 90n5, 334n5, 
335nn15, 20, 392n29
Malbert, V., 491n39
Malhotra, D., 61n48
Maloney, M., 334n2
Maloni, M., 490n31
Manigart, S., 392n16
Manolova, T., 309n7
Manrakhan, 334n2
Mansfield, E., 61n22
Mantega, Guido, 212
Manyin, M. E., 283
Marcel, J., 551n27
Marciano, S., 451
Marcus, A., 576n29
Markar, I., 550n4
Markman, G., 362n2
Marler, J., 520n21
Marquis, C., 61n15, 576n12
Marsh, S., 363n19
Marshall, A., 231n14
Marshall, Alfred, 315
Martin, J., 422n12
Martin, K., 91n25
Martin, O., 423nn37, 39
Martin, X., 392n13
Martinez-Fernandez, M., 
392n21
Mason, C., 491n45
Masseland, R., 76
Massini, S., 117n13
Masulis, R., 551n30
Mather, D., 490n16
Mathews, J., 31n31, 309n36, 
328, 335n39
Matos, Pedro, 549–550
Matsunaga, S., 550n21
Matten, D., 575n1
Matthews, L., 263n24
Mauborgne, R., 363n27, 422n5
May, D., 60n6
Mayer, C., 490n19
Mayrhofer, Ulrike, 494
McCann, B., 202n13, 335n9
McCarter, M., 392n15
McCarthy, Dan, 34, 91n23, 
309n39, 428–430, 
551n35, 575n2
McDermott, G., 60n13
McDonald, M., 550n21, 
551n46
McDougall, P., 308n3, 309n23
McGrahan, A., 309n11
McGuire, J., 551nn31, 55
McGurie, J., 362n10
McIntyre, D., 392n13
McKinsey Global Institute, 
105–106
McMullen, J., 308n1, 309n30
McMurrer, D., 520n19
McNamara, G., 393n40
McNamara, Robert S., 61n19
McNaughton, R., 309n33
McNerney, Jim, 164
Meckelprang, A., 491n35
Meckling, W., 550n12
Medvedev, Dmitry, 34
Meer, D., 491n37
Megginson, W., 54
Meier, D., 393n41
Meisinger, S., 514, 521n58
Meissner, C., 172n1
Melitz, M., 172nn1, 4
Mellahi, K., 335n20
Melton, H. Keith, 357
Mendenhall, M., 520n17
Menghinello, S., 422n12
Mentzer, J., 393n34
Merino, René, 212
Merkel, Angela, 275
Merrill, C., 576n41
Mesquita, L., 362n10,  
392nn8, 21, 490n28
Metcalf, L., 91n18
Metzler, Katie, 438–444
Meuleman, M., 392n16
Meyer, C., 393n42
Meyer, K., 31n14, 64, 66, 
116n2, 176, 202n22, 
231n19, 234, 334n1, 
335n25
Meyer, Klaus, 479
Mezias, J., 520n20
Michael, D., 30n4
Michailova, S., 34, 422n12
Michel, J., 363n22
Mignonac, K., 335n31
Milesi-Ferretti, G., 230n9
Miller, C. C., 335n35
Miller, D., 117n19, 551n44
Miller, S., 575n1
Milliman, J., 520nn21, 49
Millington, A., 577n43
Minbaeva, D., 422n14
Minin, A., 422n17
Minniti, M., 297
Minow, N., 550n1
Mishina, Y., 576n19
Mishra, H., 422n16
Mitchell, M., 392n25
Mitchell, R., 309n8
Mitsuhashi, H., 392n12
Mockaitis, A., 90n7
Modi, S., 491n39
Mogi, Yazaburo, 398–399
Mohan, S., 491n36
Mohr, A., 335n43
Mole, K., 309n7
Molina-Morales, F., 392n21
Molinsky, A., 91n45, 520n12
Monin, P., 91n20
Monks, R., 550n1
Monteiro, L. F., 171, 422n29
Montes-Sancho, M., 576n37
Moon, J., 575n1
Moore, C., 309n39
Moore, K., 31n22, 201n4
Moorman, C., 490n3
Morales, E., 194
Moran, P., 91n41
Morecroft, J., 117n19
Morgan, N., 490n33, 491n45
Morgan, R., 491n35
Morgeson, F., 520n12
Morgulis-Yukushev, S., 519n2
Morris, S., 520n39
Morrison, A., 335n26
Mors, M., 422n34
Morse, E., 309n8
Morse, G., 357
Mosakowski, E., 85
Moschieri, C., 392n24
Mossholder, K., 520n38
Mudambi, R., 116n12, 308n6, 
422n28
Mudambi, Susan M., 30, 
116n10
Mueller, R., 490n10
Mukherjee, D., 116nn10, 12, 
309n17
Mukhopadhyay, S., 335n26
Muller, A., 576n19, 576n24
Mundi, Craig, 136
Murdoch, Elisabeth, 530
Murdoch, James, 529–530
Murdoch, Rupert, 349,  
529–530
Murillo-Luna, J., 576n21
Murray, F., 61n15
Murray, G., 61n15, 309n7
Murray, J., 30n5, 116n2, 
117n26, 392n21, 490n28, 
491nn41, 45
Murtha, T., 117n13
Murthi, B., 520n45
Musteen, M., 117n13
Mutlu, Canan, 366
Myers, M., 335n17, 393n34
N
Nachum, L., 91n47, 334n8, 
422n11
Nadkarni, S., 90n2, 309n35, 
551n46
Nadolska, A., 335n25
Nagano, M., 459n15
Nagarajan, N., 550n13
Nair, A., 491n35
Nakamura, M., 551n31
Nandkumar, A., 309n11
Napier, N., 66, 520n50
Narula, R., 422n17
Nasra, R., 309n39
Nasser, Jacques, 406
National Commission on 
Terrorist Attacks on the 
United States, 91n37
Navarra, P., 422n28
Navarro, A., 490n14
Nazareth, R., 445
Ndofor, H., 363n21
Nebus, J., 576n36
Neeleman, David, 134, 
293–294, 301
Nelson, Christina, 460
Nelson, K., 91n19
Nerkar, A., 392n9
Ness, H., 392n29
Newbert, S., 116n3
Newburry, W., 61n15, 91n18, 
520n50
Newman, H., 550n13
New York Times, 275
Nguyen, H., 66
Nguyen, T., 422n29
Nguyen, V. T., 66
Niederauer, Duncan, 39, 421
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Name Index	
613
Nielsen, B., 393n34
Nielsen, S., 393n34
Nieto, M., 422n17
Niezen, C., 490n29
Nijssen, E., 491n46
9/11 Report, The, 91n37
Nixon, Richard, 215
Noble, C., 117n26
Noboa, F., 423n38
Noorderhaven, N, 422n33
Nooyi, Indra, 406
North, D., 35, 60n3,  
61nn35, 38
Northcraft, G., 392n15
Norton, D., 393n33
Novy, D., 172n1
Nowland, J., 551n34
Nye, C., 490n14
O
Obama, Barack, 39, 249
O’Connell, E., 490n16
Oddou, G., 520n17
OECD, 362n18
Oetzel, J., 61n22, 202n21, 
576n19
Ofori-Brobbey, K., 263n30
Ofori-Dankwa, J., 61n15
Oh, C., 263n36, 335n37
Oh, I., 520n14
Oh, K., 91n26
Ohlin, Bertil, 150
Ojode, L., 263n30
Olffen, W., 334n8
Oliver, C., 61n21, 392n6
Oliver, Jeremy, 205
Olsen, E., 230n7
Olson, B., 90n2
Olsson, Hans-Olov, 457
O’Mahony, S., 61n15
O’Neill, H., 335n29
O’Neill, Paul, 164
Ono, S., 130
Oppenheimer, Ernest, 446
Oppenheimer, Nicky, 450
Ormiston, M., 576n38
Orr, R., 61n47
Ortiz, C., 434
Osegowitsch, T., 335n35
O’Shaughnessy, K., 575n3
Osland, J., 520n17
Ostry, J., 218
Overby, T., 283
Oviatt, B., 308n3
Oxelheim, L., 202n29
Ozcan, P., 309n28
Ozer, M., 61n21
P
Paauwe, J., 519n2
Pacheco-de-Almeida, G., 
117n35
Paik, Y., 392n3, 520n33
Pajunen, K., 61n15
Pakes, A., 172n17
Palazzo, G., 575n3, 576n20
Palepu, K., 551n51, 551n56
Palich, L., 335n35
Pan, Y., 263n3, 321,  
335nn25, 31
Panagariya, A., 172nn12, 26-27
Pande, A., 117n16
Pangarkar, N., 393n31
Panibratov, A., 313
Pantzalis, C., 231n13
Papandreou, George, 260–262
Pappu, R., 490n16
Parayitam, S., 90n2
Parboteeah, K., 91nn25, 42
Parente, R., 117n26, 335n12, 
422n16, 491n41
Parfitt, Bill, 167
Park, H., 309n11, 519n2
Park, N., 520n32
Park, S., 392n3
Parker, Robert, 205
Parker, S., 521n54
Parmigiani, A., 116n9
Parnell, J., 91n15
Pascal-Lamy, 255–256
Pathak, S., 422n31
Patterson, P., 117n19
Pattnaik, C., 30n4, 202n10
Paulson, Henry, 53–54
Pavelin, S., 577n48
Pearl Jam, 467
Pedersen, T., 116n10, 117n15, 
202n12, 334n4, 335n43, 
422nn14, 34
Peeters, C., 117n13
Peinhardt, C., 202n16
Pellegrini, E., 91n15, 520n11
Peng, M. W., 8, 24, 31nn5, 
7-8, 13-16, 18, 25, 30, 
31n33, 50, 60nn1-2, 7-8, 
61nn13-14, 20, 30–32, 39, 
42, 45, 72, 90n5, 91nn26, 
35, 39, 116, 116nn1-2, 4, 
9, 124–125, 127, 136–137, 
142, 154, 172n4, 194, 
202nn33, 35, 231n19, 234, 
263n37, 270–275, 308, 
309nn25–26, 31-32, 40, 
324, 334nn1, 6, 335nn21, 
28–30, 35, 38, 41, 342, 
377, 382, 386, 392nn3, 
5, 14, 20, 30, 393nn35, 
37, 39, 422nn12, 18, 34, 
431–434, 445, 446–451, 
452–454, 490nn26, 30, 
491n49, 519n7, 520n44, 
521n52, 531, 533, 
550nn1, 10, 16, 18–19, 22, 
551nn45, 54
Penner-Hahn, J., 422n18
Pennings, E., 202n23
Perez, P., 309n35
Perez-Nordtvedt, L., 422n31
Perrigot, R., 335n31
Perry, A., 172n23
Perryman, A., 550n13
Petersen, B., 116n10, 202n12, 
335n33
Petersen, K., 490n24
Peterson, L. E., 127
Peterson, M., 393n44
Petrovits, C., 576n41
Pfarrer, M., 551n26
Phalippou, L., 551n32
Phan, P., 551n32
Phelps, C., 422n12
Phene, A., 392n21, 423n40
Philippe, D., 60n5
Phillips, R., 576n5
Phillips, S., 117n30
Piekkari, R., 423n38
Pierce, L., 116
Piesse, J., 30n4, 202n18, 
309n17
Pigman, G., 335n20
Pignal, S., 127
Pilcher, J., 130
Pinch, S., 202n13
Pinkham, B., 31n15, 60n2, 
126–127, 454
Pinkse, J., 576n39, 577n50
Pisano, G., 116, 116n6
Pitellis, C., 30n3
Platzer, M. E., 283
Ployhart, R., 117n26, 519n3
Plummer, William, 444
Polidoro, F., 117n25
Pollock, T., 551n26, 576n19
Porac, J., 551n26
Porter, L., 577n48
Porter, M., 49, 61n40, 116n8, 
155–156, 172n9, 451, 474, 
490n20, 559–560
Portes, Jonathan, 167
Powell, T., 117n23
Prahalad, C. K., 9, 31n9, 422n9
Prasso, S., 445
Prescott, J., 31n17
Presley, Elvis, 110
Preston, L., 555
Prevezer, M., 551n39
Priem, R., 491n35
Prince, Eric, 433
Prince, J., 362n10
Puck, J., 335n43, 520n38
Puffer, Sheila, 34, 91n23, 
309n39, 428–430, 
551n35, 575n2
Puranam, P., 117n26, 393n38
Purcell, J., 520n50
Purda, L., 31n26
Puryear, R., 117n30
Pustay, M., 363n30
Putin, Vladimir, 33–34
Q
Qian, C., 576n41
Qian, G., 263n37, 335n35
Qian, L., 335n25
Qian, Z., 263n37, 335n35
Quelch, J., 490n11, 491n37
Quester, P., 490n16
R
Rabinovich, E., 490n19
Rackham, N., 491n42
Radhakrishnan, S., 576n41
Radrik, D., 61n34
Raes, A., 551n46
Ragozzino, R., 392n7
Raice, S., 445
Raina, A., 91n21, 510
Rajan, R., 31n32, 230n8,  
576n7
Ralston, D., 66, 575n2
Ramamurti, R., 31n31
Ramasubbu, N., 117n26
Ramchander, S., 576n41
Ramstad, E., 445
Ranft, A., 116n4
Rangan, S., 309n37
Rao, H., 91n20
Rao, P., 202n12
Rasheed, A., 551n40
Ray, D., 61n34
Ray, S., 30n5, 382, 392n22
Redding, G., 90n1
Reed, R., 335n24
Reger, R., 362n13
Regner, P., 117n25
Reiche, B., 519n6
Reichstein, R., 479
Reid, E., 576n38
Reinholt, M., 422n34
Reinmoeller, P., 575n3
Ren, B., 31n5, 382
Ren Zhengfei, 438
Reuer, J., 61n15, 392nn4, 7, 14, 
393nn32, 34
Reus, T., 116n4, 393n45
Reuters, 201, 391
Reyes, J., 172n1
Reynolds, S., 91n19
Rhee, D., 520n32
Rhee, J., 335n43
Rhodes, Cecil, 446
Ricardo, David, 148, 150,  
157–158, 163, 186
Rich, Al, 323
Richard, O., 520n44–45
Richardson, D., 362n15
Richardson, H., 520n38
Richter, N., 422n6
Ricks, D., 91n9, 473, 484, 
490n15, 508
Ridge, J., 117n22
Rigby, D., 490n8
Rihanna, 467
Rindova, V., 309n14, 362n2, 
363n23
Ring, P., 392n18
Ritmüller, Wilhelm, 323–324
Ritzman, L., 116n12
Rivera-Torres, P., 576n21
Rivers, D., 263n35
Rivkin, J., 61n40
Robertson, C., 91n26
Robinson, J., 61n36
Roche, F., 576n41
Rockefeller, E., 363n35
Rodrigues, S., 392n16
Rodriguez, A., 422n17
Rodriguez-Clare, A., 172nn2, 5
Roe, R., 551n46
Rogers, Jim, 564–565
Roh, H., 520n45
Romberger, T., 491n37
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

614	
Name Index 
Rometty, Ginni, 101
Romilly, P., 576n9
Ronen, S., 71–72, 74, 91n11
Rose, A., 256, 263nn33, 35
Rose, E., 363n28
Rosenzweig, M., 61n34
Rosenzweig, P, 61n19
Rossetti, C., 117n31
Rossi-Hansberg, E., 172n24
Roth, K., 61n15, 409, 422n14, 
423n39
Roth, M., 490n14
Rothaermel, F., 117n27,  
362n7, 392n17, 422n24, 
490n27
Rothenberg, S., 577n45
Rouse, M., 392n9
Rousseff, Dilma, 171, 278
Rowe, W. G., 550n20
Roy, A., 91n38, 392n17,  
490n14
Roy, J., 392n6
Rubinstein, Y., 172n1
Rufin, C., 576n36
Rugelsjoen, B., 393n33
Rugman, A., 263nn21, 36, 327–
328, 335n36–37, 421n2
Rui, H., 382
Ruia, Ravi, 311
Rupp, R., 575n1
Russell, C., 91n47
Russell, J., 520n14
Rust, R., 490n3
Ruzo, E., 490n14
Ryan, Katie, 438–444
S
Sachez-Bueno, M., 422n5
Sadorsky, P., 576n31
Safizadeh, H., 116n12
Sakamoto, Takashi, 435–436
Sala-i-Martin, X., 61n36
Salam, Monem, 288
Salazar, J., 577n52
Salk, J., 90n1, 393n34
Salter, A., 422n26, 444
Samiee, S., 490nn5, 16
Sammartino, A., 335n35
Sampson, R., 392n11
Samuelson, P., 164–165, 
172n25
Sanders, W. G., 551n24
Sandstrom, J., 576n4
Sanna-Randaccio, F., 422n20
Santangelo, G., 202n12
Santor, E., 335n43
Santoro, M., 422n24
Santos, F., 309n17
Saparito, P., 91n39
Sapienza, H., 308n3, 309n33
Sarala, R., 393n45
Sarasvathy, S., 308n1
Sargent, J., 263n24
Sarkar, M., 30n5, 116n10, 382, 
392n22
Sarkozy, Nicholas, 245–246
Sarno, L., 230n5
Sbragia, R., 135
Scandura, T., 91n15,  
520nn11, 20
Schatz, A., 445
Scherer, A., 575n3
Schilling, M., 334n9
Schmid, F., 309n17
Schmidt, C., 520n22
Schmidt, T., 422n20
Schnatterly, K., 550n8, 551n46
Scholnick, B., 117n14
Scholtens, B., 577n48
Schotter, A., 423n40
Schreiner, M., 392n8
Schuh, A., 74, 490n8
Schuler, R., 520n30
Schultz, H., 564, 576n33
Schulze, W., 550n10
Schumpeter, Joseph, 303
Schwartz, M., 434
Schwartz, S., 91n14
Schwarzenegger, Arnold, 129
Schwebach, R., 576n41
Scott, P., 423n40
Scott, Richard, 35
Scott, W. R., 60n4, 61n47
Scott-Kennel, J., 202nn13, 22
Seawright, K., 309n8
Segal-Horn, S., 423n42
Semadeni, M., 335n24, 
362nn6, 11
Senor, Dan, 295
Sese Seko, Mobutu, 342, 448
Seth, A., 117n27
Settoon, R., 520n38
Sexton, D., 308n1
Shackell, M., 551n34
Shackleton, Ian, 467–468
Shaffer, M., 308n4, 519n8, 
520n13
Shah, R., 392n17
Shahrim, A., 551n38
Shakespeare, William, 307
Shakira, 66
Shane, S., 308n2
Shankar, V., 490n4
Shankarmahesh, M., 91n18
Shanley, M., 392n1
Shapiro, C., 445
Shapiro, Daniel, 53–54, 91n27, 
537, 550nn1, 19
Sharfman, M., 576n41
Sharma, P., 490n16
Sharma, R., 31n6
Sharma, S., 490n16
Sharp, Z., 422n30
Shaver, J. M., 335n43, 422n18
Shaw, J., 520n43
Shaw, K., 550n8
Shen, J., 445
Shen, W., 551n25
Shenkar, O., 30n2, 71–72, 
74, 91nn11, 18, 47, 165, 
335nn12-13, 375, 377, 
386, 392nn27, 30, 520n32
Shepherd, D., 308n1
Shi, L., 423n43
Shi, W., 90n5, 392n3
Shi, Y., 551n48
Shih, W., 116
Shimoharaguchi T., 459n6
Shimp, T., 490n14
Shimps, T., 490n16
Shin, H., 24
Shin, S., 335n24, 520n12
Shinawatra, Thaksin, 539
Shing, H., 393n34
Shinozawa, Y., 551n51
Shipton, H., 91n38
Shirouzu, N., 459n14
Shleifer, A., 34, 61n26,  
550nn9, 17
Shoham, A., 520n32
Shomaker, M., 91n47
Shuen, A., 116n6
Shufu Li, 455–458
Sicupira, Carlos Alberto, 380
Siegel, D., 308n3, 393n41, 
576n28
Siegel, J., 551nn36, 50
Silva, Anderson, 467
Silva, C., 519
Simerly, M., 550n2
Simkins, B., 231n13
Simon, B., 459n3
Simon, D., 202n24, 362n10
Simons, K., 393n41
Simsek, Z., 309n14, 551n46
Simula, T., 421
Sinani, E., 202n22
Singal, M., 422n29
Singer, Saul, 295
Singh, H., 392n2, 393n44, 
575n1
Singh, J., 31n31, 202n13, 
309n14, 491n46, 575n1
Singh, K., 91n47
Singh, N., 470
Sinha, R., 117n26
Sinkovics, R., 202n21, 393n34, 
491n46
Sirmon, D., 116nn2-3, 117n20, 
308n1, 363n20–21
Siscovick, I., 520n32
Slangen, A., 335n12
Sleuwaegen, L., 116n10
Slone, R., 490n22
Smale, A., 90n7
Smith, Adam, 47–48, 145–146, 
148, 150–151, 157–158, 
163, 186, 339, 482
Smith, K., 117n34, 309n11, 
363n32, 551n26
Snell, R., 422n31
Snell, S., 520nn39, 41
Sofka, W., 422n20
Sohn, J., 520n33
Som, A., 422n17
Somaya, D., 445
Song, F., 551n25
Song, J., 498
Song, S., 422n11
Sorensen, M., 551n33
Soskice, D., 61n33
Souder, D., 309n14
South China Morning  
Post, 137
Sovereign Wealth Fund 
Institute, 53–54
Spa, D., 451
Spartz, Chris, 438–444
Speck, Doug, 458
Speck, S., 91n38, 490n14
Spencer, B., 172n7
Spencer, J., 422n26
Spicer, A., 91n23
Spickette-Jones, J., 490n35
Spisak, M., 64
Spitznagel, M., 31n26
Spraggon, M., 551n30
Sprague, L., 491n36
Sribivasan, T., 172n26
Srikanth, K., 117n26, 393n38
Srivastava, M., 392n9
Stafford, E., 392n25
Stahl, G., 393n44
Staking, K., 576n41
Stalder, H., 64
Stan, C., 50, 61n45, 551n54
Stanislaw, J., 31n23
Start-Up Nation, The, 295
Staw, B., 362n13
Steen, J., 60n8, 116n4,  
335n18
Steensma, H. K., 91n20, 
309n11, 392nn5, 29, 
393n49, 422n12
Stern, I., 550n20
Stern, T., 130
Stevens, Charles E., 435–437
Stevens, J., 91n20
Stevens, M., 520n17
Stevenson, S., 230n11
Stieglitz, N., 117n27
Stiglitz, J., 31n24, 218, 353, 
363n31
Storer, P., 271
Storey, D., 309n7
Straková, Markéta, 23
Strange, R., 30n4, 202n18
Stringer, Howard, 406–407
Stromberg, P., 551nn32-33
Stuart, N., 551n34
Stulz, R., 550n7, 551nn37,  
42, 44
Stumpf, S., 130
Styles, C., 117n19
Su, C., 61n49, 491n46
Su, K., 362n1, 363n26
Su, Y., 116
Suarez, F., 335n24
Subramanian, A., 263n35
Subramanian, M., 117n14, 
362n11
Sull, D., 309n12
Sullivan, S., 520n20
Sun, M., 116n3
Sun, S., 31n5, 31n33, 15,  
60n2, 90n5, 194, 202n35, 
382, 392n3, 393n37
Sun Tzu, 338, 357, 570
Surroca, J., 577n43
Swamidass, P., 490n24
Swaminathan, V., 392n17
Szulanski, G., 422n29
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Name Index	
615
T
Tadesse, S., 91n30, 551n36
Tait, N., 127
Takeuchi, R., 520n12
Talay, M., 490n9
Taleb, N., 31n26
Tallman, S., 116n10, 202n13, 
335n43, 375, 392nn21, 
27, 393n34
Tan, D., 334n7, 335n43, 392n5, 
519n5
Tan, J., 335n21, 392n5
Tang, J., 550n20
Tang, L., 76
Tao, Z., 309n31
Tapon, F., 551n25
Taylor, A., 230n2
Taylor, E., 490n11
Taylor, G., 577n46
Taylor, M., 230nn2, 5
Taylor, M. S., 172n2, 309n11
Teagarden, M., 520n49
Team, T., 445
Teece, D., 116n6, 445
Teigland, R., 422n28
Telles, Marcel, 380
Teo, H., 490n30
Terjesen, S., 421
Terlaak, A., 91n33, 576n21
Terziovski, M, 309n17
Tesluk, P., 520nn12, 14
Tetlock, P., 576n38
Thatcher, Margaret, 51
Theodosiu, M., 490n5
Thomas, D., 117n13
Thomas, W., 393n51
Thulin, P., 202n29
Tian, X., 202n12
Tian, Z., 575n3
Tihanyi, L., 91n47, 363n23, 
392nn5, 29, 550n6
Time, 217
Tire Industry Association,  
160, 172n14
Tiwana, A., 392n12
Todorova, G., 422n31
Toffel, M., 576n38
Toh, P., 117n25, 362n12
Toh, S., 520n35
Tolstoy, Leo, 373
Tom, G., 130
Toman, N, 490n35
Tomassen, S., 421
Tomz, M., 263n35
Tong, T., 61n15, 392nn4, 14
Tong Zhi Cheng, 323
Torrisi, S., 309n23
Torstila, S., 421
Townsend, J., 490n9
Tracer, Z., 445
Tracey, P., 334n9
Trahms, C., 308n1
Trautman, T., 576n30
Trautmann, G., 116n10
Tregaski, O., 521n50
Treisman, D., 34
Trevino, L., 91n19, 202n11, 
490n16
Tribo, J., 577n43
Trimble, C., 4, 31n10, 31n11, 
362n14
Trompenaars, F., 91n14
Trotman, Alex, 406
Tsai, W., 117n32, 362n1, 
363n26
Tsang, E., 61n39, 116,  
335n15–16, 422nn12, 
29, 33
Tse, D., 321, 491n48,  
520n39
Tse, E., 116n3
Tse, S., 391
Tsui, A., 520n42-43
Tsui-Auch, L., 551n55
Tuggle, C., 551n46
Tung, R., 30n4, 335n40, 519n9
Turner, Ted, 349
Tuschke, A., 551n24
21st Century Business  
Insights, 109, 224, 371
Tyler, B., 60n6, 90n2, 490n32
U
Un, C. A., 422n31
United Nations, 6, 54
United States et al v. AT&T Inc. 
et al, 362n5
Unruh, G., 576n34
USA Today, 172n19
US Commerce Department, 
211
Useem, M., 575n1
US Trade Representative, 
263n27
US Treasury Department, 54
Usunier, J., 90n7
V
Vaaler, P., 231n12, 309n20
Vaara, E., 393n45, 423n40
Vafeas, N., 576n10
Vahlne, J., 31n19, 334n2
Valdelamar, D., 91n18
Valentini, G., 309n17, 393n41
Valor Económico, 276–278
Vander Vegt, G., 91n18
Van de Vliert, E., 91n18
Van Ees, H., 551n41
Van Essen, M., 551n49
Van Fenema, P., 116n10
Vanhaverbeke, W., 422n25
Van Hoorn, A., 76
Van Iddekinge, C., 117n26
Van Oosterhout, J., 551n49
Van Rompuy, 242
Van Swaaij, Michael, 428–430
Vardi, Yossi, 295
Varghese, Thomas, 510
Vassolo, R., 362n10
Vasudeva, G., 393n34
Vegt, G., 422n19
Vekselberg, Viktor, 452–454
Venkataraman, S., 308nn1-2
Venohr, B., 176
Venzin, M., 116n12
Verbeke, A., 328, 335n36
Verlegh, P., 490n16
Vernon, R., 151, 172n6,  
202n20
Very, P., 551n48
Vilsack, Tom, 270
Vishny, R., 61n26
Vishwanath, V., 490n8
Vissa, B., 61n15
Vliert, E., 422n19
Vogel, D., 576n42
Voigt, A., 393n44
Volberda, H., 308n1, 422n31
Volosovych, V., 202n16
Von Glinow, M., 61n22, 116n10, 
520n49
Voorhees, C., 392n12
Vora, D., 423n39, 519n6, 
520n44
Vorhies, D., 491nn35, 45
Vroom, G., 335n9, 363n22
Vuegelers, R., 422n20
Vyas, D., 393n51
W
Waddock, S., 576n12, 577n43
Wade, J., 551n26
Wagner, S., 490n24
Wakabayashi, M., 520n11
Wakeman, S., 445
Waldman, D., 576n21
Walker, K., 445
Wall Street Journal, 129, 
207, 231n18, 275, 383, 
393n43, 421
Walters, B., 550nn18, 21
Wan, W., 334n5
Wang, C., 551n30
Wang, Cher, 108–109, 202n22
Wang, D., 31n15, 60n2, 72, 
309n40, 422n18, 520n43
Wang, H., 576n41, 577n45
Wang, J., 451
Wang, L., 393n48
Warhurst, A., 451
Washington Post, 142
Wasko, M., 422n28
Watanabe, Kenichi, 390
Watanabe, W., 202n16
Watson, A., 91n26
Wealth of Nations, The, 47, 
145–146, 339, 482
Weaver, G., 91n19
Webb, A., 459n7
Webb, J., 309n39
Weber, Max, 82
Wei, S., 91n28, 263n35
Wei, Y., 202n22
Wei, Z., 117n13
Weigelt, C., 116, 116n10
Weiner, R., 61n25, 231n14
Weingart, L., 520n46
Weinterfeldt, D. J., 130
Weiss, J., 79
Welbourne, T., 551n25
Welch, D., 499, 508
Welch, J., 23, 506, 514, 
520n28, 577n51
Welch, L., 335n33
Welch, S., 23, 514, 520n28, 
577n51
Weller, W., 490n29
Wellington, F., 577n50
West, J., 422n25
West, M., 91n38
Westphal, J., 550nn20-21, 
551n46
Wezel, F., 335n13
White, C., 423n43
White, R., 309n21
Whyman, P., 263n9
Wiersema, M., 335n35, 
551nn27, 46
Wilkins, M., 201n5
Wilkinson, T., 335n26
Williams, C., 423n40, 575n1
Williamson, O., 37, 60n11, 91n40
Wiltbank, R., 363n23
Wincent, J., 308n7, 309n14
Wind, J., 363n25
Wiseman, R., 551nn24-25
Withers, M., 551n29
Witt, M., 90n1
Witty, A., 422n21
Woehr, D., 61n21
Woldu, H., 90n1, 125,  
263n30
Wolf, J., 422n6
Wong, E., 576n38
Wongtada, N., 130
Woo, C. Y., 348
Woo, J., 335n24
Worcke, A., 30n4
World Bank, 67, 82, 91n34, 
171, 290–292
World Commission on  
Environment and  
Development, 576n6
World Economic Outlook, 6
World Factbook, The, 178
World Investment Report, 
2009, 201n6
World Investment Report, 
2011, 6, 54, 194, 
201nn2-3, 202n7
World Trade Organization, 
144–145, 238, 263n1, 
263n2
Wright, M., 8, 31n7, 60n13, 
308n3, 309n22, 392n16
Wright, P., 521n55, 550n21
Wrights, R., 479
Wu, C., 263n3
Wu, J., 520n42
X
Xia, J., 335n25, 392n5
Xie, E., 490n30
Xie, F., 551n30
Xu, C., 91n38
Xu, D., 263n3, 335n13, 
393n33, 423n39
Y
Yakova, N., 91n18, 335n35, 
490n1, 520n50
Yalcinkaya, G., 490n35
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

616	
Name Index 
Yamakawa, M., 309n32
Yamakawa, Y., 31n16,  
60n8, 308
Yamin, M., 202n21
Yan, D., 31n5, 382
Yan, T., 491n36
Yanadori, Y., 520n21
Yang, G., 91n18
Yang, H., 393n37, 393n39, 
422n12
Yang, Q., 422n27
Yang, X., 61n33
Yang, Z., 61n49, 491n46
Yarbrough, B. V., 161, 231n15
Yarbrough, R. M., 161, 231n15
Yeaple, S., 172n4, 335n11
Yeh, K., 309nn22, 31
Yeltsin, Boris, 33–34, 49
Yeniyurt, S., 490n9
Yergin, D., 31n23
Yeung, A., 521n53
Yeung, P. E., 550n21
Yildiz, H., 334n2
Yim, B., 263n3
Yim, C., 490n10
Yin, X., 392n1
Yip, G., 382
Yip, P., 335n16
Yiu, D., 30n4
Yi Zhao, 438–444
York, A., 116n9, 309n26, 
335nn28-29, 490n26
Yoshikawa, T., 551nn31,  
40, 55
Young, M., 362, 382, 455–458 
531, 533, 550n16
Young, S., 202n21
Yu, T., 362n11, 363n26
Yun, S., 520n12
Z
Zaheer, S., 91n47, 117n14, 
334n8
Zahra, G., 309n33
Zahra, S., 308n6, 309n33
Zajac, E., 393nn33, 48
Zald, M., 577n53
Zaleski, Mark, 428–430
Zander, L., 90n7, 309n36
Zanoni, P., 519n6
Zellmer-Bruhn, M., 422n30, 
520n47
Zeman, Allan, 361
Zemsky, P., 117n19
Zeng, Y., 130
Zestos, G., 263n8
Zhang, G., 576n38
Zhang, J., 422n12
Zhang, S., 533, 550n19
Zhang, X., 551n26
Zhang, Y., 362n4, 520n43, 
551nn27, 46
Zhao, J. H., 91n26
Zhao, X., 550n3
Zhao, Yi, 440, 445
Zhou, C., 393n33
Zhou, J., 91n26
Zhou, K., 491n51
Zhou, N., 61n49, 491n45–46, 
520n39
Zhou, Y., 116n9, 335n28, 
490n26
Zhuang, G., 61n49, 491n46
Ziedonis, R., 445
Zimmerman, A., 61n30,  
128–129, 130
Zollo, M., 393nn34, 41
Zona, F., 551n34
Zong Qinghou, 292–293
Zoogah, D., 125, 392n20, 
520n44
Zou, H., 335n27
Zou, J., 334n8
Zou, S., 392n9, 393n34, 
423n43
Zuniga-Vincente, J., 202n11
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A
ABB, 225, 230, 403, 415
ABC, 349
Abu Dhabi Investment 
Authority, 53
Accel Parners, 428–429
Access, 452
Acer, 115
Acopio, 59–60
Advantech, 115
Aerolineas Argentinas, 201
Aerospatiale-Matra, 134, 
493–494
AFL-CIO, 506
Aguila, 468
Ahava, 351
AIG, 51
Airbus, 102, 141–142, 150, 
152–153, 156, 162,  
312, 337–338, 402,  
405, 472, 482
Air France, 337
Alaska Permanent Fund, 53
Alberta Heritage Fund, 53
Alcaltel-Lucent, 315, 384, 
476–477, 511
Alfa, 452
Alliant Techsystems, 295
Alrossa, 449–450
Alstom, 63
Amana Growth Fund, 287–288
Amanah, 320
Amana Income Fund, 287–288
Amana Mutual Funds Trust, 
287–288
Amazon, 107, 114–116,  
435–437
AmBev, 380
AMD, 355, 512
American Airlines, 343, 369
American Honda Motors, 96
Ameristeel, 380
Amersham, 189–190
Amtrak, 333–334
Anglo American, 419–420, 
446–451
Anheuser-Busch, 355, 380
Anheuser-Busch InBev,  
467–468, 483
Apollo Tyres, 311–312
Apple, 11, 108–109, 115,  
318, 348, 407, 473–474, 
497, 543
Applied Materials, 512
Arab League, 42
Asian Paints, 351–352
Astalift, 94
Organization Index
617
Asus, 115
AT&T, 315, 341, 356, 369, 473
Aviation Industry of China 
(AVIC II), 134
Avon Products, 401–402, 501
Azul Airline, 134, 293–294, 301
B
BAA Corporation, 189
BAE, 370
BAE Systems, 189, 327
Baidu, 137, 302, 371
Banco de Investimentos 
Garantia, 380–381
Banco do Brasil, 277–278
Bank of America, 39, 383, 523
Bank of China, 299–300
Bank of England, 541
Barclay Capital, 390–391
Barclays Bank, 421
Barnes & Noble, 435–437
Bath and Body Works, 105
Bayer CropScience, 413–414
Bayer Group, 413–414
Bayer HealthCare, 413–414
Bayer MaterialScience (BMS), 
413–414
BBC, 102
BB&T bank, 37
Bear Stearns, 390
Beijing Automotive, 275
BenQ, 106, 115
Berkshire Hathaway, 523
Best Price Stores, 272
Bharti, 272
Bharti Airtel, 311
Bharti Wal-Mart Private 
Limited, 369
BHP Billiton, 449
Bird, 352
Bistro, The, 373
Blackwater, 293, 431–434
Bloomberg, 311
Bloomberg Businessweek, 
469–471
BMW, 81, 86, 175–177,  
179–181, 188, 189,  
317, 384, 506
BNDES, 134
Boeing, 99, 102, 115, 141–142, 
152–153, 162, 164, 295, 
312, 337–338, 374, 405, 
476, 477, 482–483, 493
Bombardier, 134, 396
Booz & Company, 549
Bordeaux Shippers, 206
Brahma Beer, 467
Bridgestone Tires, 416
Bristol-Myers Squibb, 194
British Airways (BA), 337,  
347, 369
British Association of Private 
Security Companies  
(BAPSC), 431, 433–434
British East India Company, 19
British Petroleum (BP), 22, 
42, 184–186, 327, 406, 
452–454, 561, 564
British Telecom, 327
Budweiser, 467–468
Bundesbank, 215
Burger King, 380, 563
Business Software Alliance 
(BSA), 128
C
Cadbury, 189
Calvin Klein, 102
Canon, 93–94
Cargill, 270
Carrefour, 33, 105, 480
CASA, 493–494
Cascade Field, 380
Castle Lager, 468
CBS, 349
C&D Aerospace, 133–134
CDB Leasing Co., 134
Cellebrations, 205
Central Intelligence Agency 
(CIA), 569
Central Selling Organization 
(CSO), 446–451
CFM International, 373
Checkpoint, 295
Chery Automobile Company, 456
Chevron, 102, 193, 413
China Development Bank,  
134, 154
China Investment  
Corporation, 53
Chinalco, 193, 329, 382
Chiquita, 89–90
Chrysler, 102, 319, 383, 470
Cisco, 33, 318–319, 347, 351, 
404, 413
Citibank, 320
Citibank Islamic Bank, 320
Citicorp, 288
Citigroup, 51, 66, 79, 219–220, 
318–319, 390, 406, 
413, 523
Ciudade del Este, 128–129
CNN, 349
CNOOC, 193, 329, 382
Coalition Provisional Authority 
(CPA), 432–433
Coca-Cola, 15–16, 124–137, 
188, 313–314, 351, 355, 
397, 406–407, 468,  
469, 472
Committee on Foreign 
Investment in the United 
States (CFIUS), 53–54
Compal, 106
Compaq, 108
Compassion in World  
Farming, 554
ConocoPhillips, 42–43
Continental Tire, 175–176
Coors Beer, 68, 472
CopyV, 295
Corporate Business  
Academy, 494
Corus Group, 382
Credit Suisse, 390
D
Daimler-Benz (Mercedes), 175, 
221, 317, 383–384, 506
DaimlerChrysler, 368,  
383–385
Danone, 33, 189, 377–378
DASA, 493–494
Dassault, 134
De Beers, 342, 446–451, 477
Deere & Company, 3–4, 9,  
16, 224
Dell, 11, 106, 407, 415, 474
Del Monte, 90, 399
Deutsche Bank, 219, 288, 390
Deutsche Telekom (DT),  
356, 369
DHL, 99, 163, 330, 475
Diamond Trading Company 
(DTC), 446–451
Digital Sky Technologies, 
429–430
Disney, 129, 327, 360–362, 
395–396, 399–400
Dole, 90
Dow Chemical, 36, 115–116, 
403, 514, 568, 570
Dow Jones, 529–530
DP World, 329, 383
Drive Train Systems 
International, 456–457
Dropbox, 428
Dubai Ports World (DP  
World), 193
Duke Energy, 564–565
Dunlop Tyres, 312
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

618	
Organization Index
E
East Dawning, 371–372
Eastman Kodak Company, 
93–95, 101, 106, 111
Economist, 102
Edelman, 558
ELEB, 133–134
Electrolux, 406
Eli Lilly, 378, 385
Embraer Airlines, 128–132
EMI, 319
Emirates Airlines, 337–338, 347
eModeration, 102, 293
ENI, 42–43, 193
Enron, 36, 78, 532, 548, 561
Epson, 318
Ericsson, 315, 318–319, 475
Ermenegildo Zegna, 488
ESCO, 182
ESPN, 102
Essar Group, 311–312
EthicalOil.org, 90
Etihad Airlines, 338, 347
European Aeronautic Defence 
and Space (EADS), 134, 
221, 312, 402, 493–494
European Central Bank, 278
Evercore Partners, 396
Export-Import Bank (Ex-Im 
Bank), 142
ExxonMobil, 42, 224, 413
F
Facebook, 292, 307, 371, 
429–430, 473
FedEx, 296, 318, 475,  
480–481, 483–484, 512
Feng-GUI, 295
Fiat, 275, 421
Financial Times, 372
Firefox/Mozilla, 371
Firestone Tires, 81, 416
First Solar, 154
Flextronics, 106, 415
Fomento Economico Mexicano, 
468
Fooducate, 295
Ford Motor Company, 68,  
80–81, 115–116, 179, 187, 
189, 354, 397, 402, 406, 
410, 416, 469, 565
Foreign Stewardship Council, 
277–278, 566–567
ForestEthics, 90
FORTIS, 128–129
Fosfertil, 380
Foxconn, 11, 99, 106,  
108, 474
Fox News, 349
Freedom House, 33
FTSE 100 Index, 553
Fujifilm, 93–95
Fujitsu, 315
G
Galanz, 481
Galeries Lafayette, 489
Gap, 17, 478
GardaWorld, 433–434
GAZ, 274–275
Gazprom, 42
GE Capital, 523–526
Geely, 329, 367, 384, 455–458
Gem Diamonds, 449
General Electric (GE), 9–10, 
115, 189–190, 319, 343, 
355, 373, 376, 410, 413, 
502, 523–524, 526, 560
General Motors (GM), 51,  
102, 167, 183, 274–275, 
307–308, 316, 318–319, 
351, 354, 472, 476, 528, 
565
Gerdau, 380
Gillette, 346
Global Crossing, 532
Global Strategy Group, 
497–498
Gmarket, 429
Godreh Consumer Products, 
311
Gol Airline, 293
Goldman Sachs, 390, 497,  
523
Goodyear Tire, 133–134, 479
Google Corporation, 108–109, 
137, 307, 318, 329, 371, 
412–413, 438, 560
Google Ireland, 412
GP Investmentos, 380–381
Grant Thornton, 311
Greenpeace, 102, 554, 563
Greyhound, 318–319, 333–334
Groupon, 428–429
GSK, 406, 410
Gucci, 327
Guinness, 468
H
Häagen-Dasz, 327, 410, 473
Haier, 350, 481
Hainan Airlines, 16
Halliburton, 431
Hang Seng index, 47
Harrods, 489
Heineken, 467–468
Heritage Foundation, 311
Hess, 42–43
Hewlett-Packard (HP), 11, 33, 
106, 315, 385, 407, 410, 
413, 472, 507, 512
Hilton Worldwide, 460–463
Hitachi, 497, 563
H&M, 17
Home Depot, 566, 570
Honda, 16, 188, 318–319, 354, 
455, 501
Honda Aircraft Company,  
Inc., 96
Honeywell, 355, 386
Hong Kong Disneyland, 327, 
360–362, 395
Hong Kong Stock Exchange, 
526
Hon Hai, 106, 108
Hormel, 270
HSBC, 44, 102, 288, 320, 
419–421
Huawei, 106–109, 115, 315, 
347, 351, 383, 408,  
438–444, 440
Huiyuan, 355
Hyundai, 110, 188, 319, 455, 
506
I
IBM, 76, 99, 101, 103, 106, 
111, 225, 296, 348, 374, 
385–386, 404, 407, 413, 
415, 419–420, 480, 511, 
560, 565
ICUC Moderation, 102, 293
IKEA, 33, 105, 303, 326
InBev, 355, 380, 467–468
Index Ventures, 428
Indian Institute of Management 
(IIM), 70
Inditex, 17–18
Infosys, 99, 105, 545
Intel, 33, 102, 191, 295, 354, 
497, 560
Interbrand, 398–399
InterDigital, 438–444
International Anticounterfeiting 
Coalition (IACC), 128
International Center for 
Settlement of Invest-
ment Disputes (ICSID), 
126–127, 201
International Monetary Fund 
(IMF), 6, 51, 216–218, 246
International Peace Operations 
Association (IPOA), 431, 
433–434
International Standards 
Organization (ISO), 565
International Trade 
Administration, 345–346
International Trade 
Commission, 345–346
ITC, 438
ITT, 569
J
Jacob’s Creek, 205
Jaguar, 329, 382
JBS-Friboi, 380
JBS SA, 270
J. D. Power, 110
JetBlue, 293, 301
Jobek do Brasil, 276–278
Johnson & Johnson, 413, 560
JP Morgan Chase, 318–319, 
390, 514, 523
K
Karuturi Global, 312
Kawasaki, 133–134
Kcell, 367
Kentucky Fried Chicken, 355, 
371–372, 469
Kia Motors, 188, 400
Kikkoman, 398–399, 410
Kimberly Diamond Group,  
449
Kinkos, 484
Kinky, 311
KLM, 337
Komatsu, 354
Kraft, 189, 563
KupiVip, 429
L
Land Rover, 329, 382
Lego, 102, 104
Lehman Brothers, 40, 55, 374, 
380, 383–384, 390–391
Leisure Business Advisors, 395
Lenovo, 11, 101, 115, 374, 386, 
406–407, 419, 420, 503
Levi Strauss, 397
Lev Leviev Group, 449
LG, 115, 407
Li and Fung, 478
Limited Brands, 105
Lindeman’s, 205
Li Ning, 473
Little Sheep Hot Pot, 355
Lockheed Martin, 405, 493
Logitech, 302–303
Lojas Americanas, 380–381
London Stock Exchange (LSE), 
525–526, 543, 553
L’Oreal, 317
Lowe’s, 566, 570
Lucent, 476–477
Lufthansa, 337
LVMH Louis Vuitton Moët 
Hennesy, 105, 205, 483, 
488–489
M
Magna, 274–275
Maharaja Mac, 469
Mahindra & Mahindra (M&M), 
3–4, 7, 9, 16
Mahindra USA (MUSA), 3–4
Mail Boxes Etc., 483
mail.ru Group, 429–430
Manganese Bronze Holdings, 
456–457
Manpower, 99, 507
Marathon, 42–43
Marks & Spencer, 478,  
553–554, 566–567
Matsushita, 77, 318, 408
Maxipuke, 473
McCurry Pan, 469
McDonald’s, 20, 44, 208, 322, 
325, 348–349, 371–372, 
373, 396, 469, 482
McGraw-Hill, 5
McKinsey & Co., 311, 497
Megabus, 292, 318–319, 
333–334
Mercedes-Benz, 384
MeroMobile, 366
Merrill Lynch, 39, 55, 383
Messier-Dowty, 477
Metallurgical Corporation of 
China, 318–319
Michelin, 406
Microsoft, 16, 108–109, 
136–137, 158, 319, 322, 
325, 350, 353–355, 371, 
383, 385, 413, 415, 440
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Organization Index	
619
Micula, 126
Military Professional 
Resources, Inc., 431
Miller Beer, 368
Minor Group, 301
Mirabilis, 295
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, 
476, 477
Mitsubishi Motors, 77
Molson, 102
Mopac, 229
Morgan Stanley, 53,  
390, 523
Morris Air, 301
Motion Picture Association 
(MPA), 129
Motorola, 109, 352, 376
Motorola Mobility, 438
Motorola Solutions (MSI), 440
MSI, 115
MSNBC, 349
MTV, 102, 397, 400, 469
N
Nanjing Auto, 189
NASDAQ, 302, 525–526, 545, 
548–549
National Consumer Council, 
554
National Development  
Reform Commission 
(China), 137
National Oil Corporation, 42
National Public Radio, 102
NATO, 42
Naver, 328–329
NBC, 349
Ncell, 366
NEC, 318, 325
Nestlé, 33, 102, 225, 230,  
560, 563
Netscape, 319, 350, 355
Neumann, 175
News Corporation, 349, 
419–420, 529–531
New York Stock Exchange 
(NYSE), 525–526, 543, 
548–549
New York Times, 512
Nigerian National Petroleum 
Corporation (NNPC), 
184–186
Nike, 81, 99, 272, 415, 478, 
557, 564
Nikon, 93–94
Nippon Shuppan Hanbai, 
435–437
Nissan, 318–319, 406,  
455, 502
Nokia, 106, 109, 272, 352, 371, 
406, 438, 475
Nokia Siemens Networks 
(NSN), 440
Nomura, 374, 380, 383–384, 
390–391, 419–420, 467
Noriba, 320
Northrop Grumman, 312, 374
Novartis, 230, 407
NYSE Euronext, 39, 421
O
Occidental Petroleum, 42, 194
Ocean Park (Hong Kong), 
360–362
Old Mutual, 419–420
Olympia, 473
OMV, 42
One World, 325, 370
Opel, 274–275, 329
Opel Trust, 274–275
Opera Software, 355
Oprah, 102
Oracle, 351, 385, 408
Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Develop-
ment (OECD), 530
Overseas Private Investment 
Corporation (OPIC), 142
Ozon.ru, 429
P
Palm, 108, 415
Panasonic, 497
Paris Disneyland, 327, 
395–396, 474
Parmalat, 561
Pasadena Refinery, 380
PDVSA, 193
Pearl River Piano Group 
(PRPG), 156, 321–324, 
326–328
Pearson Prentice-Hall, 5
Penfolds, 205
People’s Bank of China, 223
PepsiCo, 16, 33, 124, 188, 
313–314, 351, 406, 413
Petrobras, 380
Peugeot, 319
Pfizer, 316, 407, 413
Philips, 408, 416, 475
Pilgrim’s Pride, 380
Pizza Company, The, 182, 301
Pizza Hut, 182, 301, 322, 324, 
355, 371–372
Portman Ritz-Carlton hotel, 
509, 512
Prentice-Hall, 5
Pricewaterhouse Cooper 
(PwC), 101, 413
Procter & Gamble, 311,  
413, 473
PwC Hong Kong, 413
PwC India, 413
PwC International Limited,  
413
Q
Qatar Airways, 338, 347
R
Radio Corporation of America 
(RCA), 106
Rainforest Alliance, 90
Ranbaxy, 378
Raytheon, 295, 315, 374
Reliance Group, 272–273
Renault, 406, 502
Renova, 452
Repsol, 42, 126–127, 200–201
RHJ International, 275
RIM, 371
Rio Tinto, 193, 329, 382, 449
Ritmüller, 323–324, 327
Roche, 230
Rolls-Royce, 483
Rosneft, 453, 454
Rover Group, 189
Royal Ahold, 561
Royal Bank of Scotland  
(RBS), 528
Royal Dutch, 193
Ryanair, 16, 243, 347
S
SABMiller, 368, 419–420, 
467–468
Sabre, 193
Sabre Travel Network, 374
Samsung, 93–94, 109, 115, 
180, 351, 407–408, 440, 
496–498
Samsung C&T Corporation, 
497–498
Samsung Electronics 
Corporation (SEC), 
497–498
Samsung Heavy Industries, 497
Samsung Life Insurance, 497
Santander, 370
SAP, 296, 351, 408
Saturna Investment Trust, 
287–288
Satyam, 413, 545
Scotiabank, 102
Seaboard, 270
Sea Cucumber, 473
Seagate Technology, 39, 421
Seattle Coffee, 301
Seven-Eleven Japan, 477
Shanghai Disney Resort, 
395–396
Shanghai Volkswagen, 325
Sharp, 497
Shell, 42, 568–569
Sheraton, 66
Sherbank, 274, 329
Shine Group, 530
Shiseido, 410
Siemens, 77, 126, 315,  
476–477, 495, 509, 565
Sinar Mas, 563
Singapore Airlines, 473
Sinopec, 22, 42, 371–372
Skoda, 352
Skol Beer, 467
Skype, 383, 411, 428
SkyTeam, 370
Small Business Administration 
(SBA), 142
Smithfield, 270
Snecma, 134, 373, 376
Society for Human Resource 
Management, 514
Software Information  
Industry Association 
(SIIA), 128
Solyndra, 154
Sonaca, 133–134
Sony, 93–94, 115, 318, 397, 
406–408, 497
Sony Ericsson, 102, 325, 
415, 475
South African Brewery, 368
Southwest Airlines, 16, 347
South-Western Cengage 
Learning, 5
Stagecoach Group, 333–334
Standard Chartered, 421
Standard & Poor, 36
Star Alliance, 325, 370
Starbucks, 102, 105, 182, 272, 
301, 326, 348–349, 401, 
409, 480–481, 564
Statoil, 42
Steinway, 323
Stern GmbH & Co. KG, 276
STMicroelectronics, 315
Subway, 301
Suntech, 154
Swatch, 230
Swiss Re, 564–565
T
Taco Bell, 470
TAG Heuer, 229
Taj Mahal Palace Hotel, 510
TAM Airline, 293
Tata Corporation, 188–189, 
272, 329, 382, 387
TCL, 106, 352, 481
Telia-Sonera, 365–368
Tetra Pak, 421
Texas Instruments (TI),  
315, 322, 325–326
Thompson-CSF, 134
Thomson, 106
3G Capital, 380
3M, 224, 226
Tiger Global Management, 
428–430
Time Warner, 349
T-Mobile, 341, 356, 369
TNK-BP, 372, 452–454
Tohan, 435–437
Tokyo Disneyland, 327, 474
Toshiba, 115, 325, 376, 497
Total, 193
Toyota, 16, 183, 188,  
318–319, 351, 354,  
455, 473, 506, 565
Trans Hex, 449
Travelocity, 193
Treasury Wine Estates, 205
Trina, 154
Trump Holdings, 36
Tura, 311
Twitter, 473
Tyco, 532
U
Unilever, 33, 311, 318, 400, 402, 
407, 510, 560, 563, 570
Union Bank of Switzerland 
(UBS), 219, 288, 320, 390
United Airlines, 66
United Colors of Benetton, 105
United Fruit Company, 89–90
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

620	
Organization Index 
V
Vale, 380
Vauxhall cars, 274–275
Veritas, 428
Verizon, 315
Victoria’s Secret, 105
Videocon Industries, 311
ViewSonic, 440
Village Roadshow, 395
Virgin Group, 102, 293
Vivendi, 126
Vkontakte, 292, 429–430
Volkswagen, 183–184, 188, 
319, 352, 470
Voltran, 380
Volvo, 329, 367, 384,  
455–458
W
Wahaha, 293, 377–378
Wal-Mart, 21–22, 105, 143, 
180, 182, 272, 356, 369, 
398, 480, 481, 506, 560
WEG, 380
Wells Fargo, 523
Wendy’s, 469
WestJet, 301
White Elephant, 77, 473
White Plains, 380
Whole Foods, 564
WIkipedia, 102
Wintershall, 42
Wipro, 105
Woolworths, 272
World Bank, 51, 201, 216
WorldCom, 548, 561
World Intellectual Property 
Organization (WIPO), 128
World Trade Organization 
(WTO), 33, 46, 144–145, 
163, 201, 270–271
Wrigley, 161
X
Xerox, 318
Xe Services LLC, 293, 433–434
Y
Yahoo!, 371
Yamaha, 323–324
Yandex, 430
Yellow Tail, 205
Yingli, 154
Yokogawa Hewlett-Packard, 
410
YPF, 194, 200–201
Yum! Brands, 355, 371–372
Z
Zain, 311
Zara, 16–18, 105, 475
Zest Group, 380
Zett Meyer, 229
Zhejiang Geely Holding, 455
ZTE, 438
United Nations Economic Com-
mission for Latin America 
and the Caribbean, 212
Univision, 470–471
Unocal, 193, 329, 382
UPS, 475, 484
US Agency for International 
Development (USAID), 
142
US Agriculture Department, 
89–90, 142
US Commerce Department, 
142
US Energy Department, 142
US Fish and Wildlife Service, 
573–574
US Justice Department, 90
US Trade Representative, 128, 
142, 270–271, 283
US Treasury Department,  
142, 215
US-China Business  
Council, 167
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A
absolute advantage, 
international trade 
and, 146–148
absorptive capacity, 411–412
Abu Dabi, 337–338, 347
accomodative strategy, 
563–564
ethical challenges and, 81
accountability
private military companies, 
431–434
state-owned enterpriese, 47, 
49–52
acquisition premium, 374
acquisitions. See also mergers
alliances vs., 384–386
cross-border acquisitions, 368
defined, 367
emerging markets case 
study, 365–367
Geely Volvo case study, 
455–458
Huawei case study, 441–444
institution-based view of, 
368–370
by Japanese firms, 399
motives for, 379–382
Nomura-Lehman case study, 
390–391
performance of, 383–384
rarity, 374
resource-based view of, 
373–374
strategic fit, 374, 383–384
success guidelines for, 387
symptoms of failure, 
383–384
value, 373–734
adaptability, supply chain 
management, 476–477
administrative policies, 161
advertising
institution-based view of, 
478–480
online vs. offline, 473–474
Africa
Coca-Cola in, 124–137
currency fluctuations in, 
223–224
foreign market entry in, 
318–319
Indian companies in, 
311–313
informal economy in, 49
outward foreign direct 
investment from, 38
Subject Index
621
regional economic integration 
in, 252
aftermath phase, alliance 
dissolution, 376–378
agency costs, 528–529
agency problems, 528–529
agency relationship, 528
agency theory, 528
governance mechanisms 
and, 536
agents
defined, 528
opportunistic vs. managerial 
stewards, 543
agglomeration
foreign direct investment 
and, 183–184
foreign market entry and, 
315
research and development 
globalization, 410
agility, in supply chain 
management, 475
agriculture
Brazilian comparative 
advantage in, 170–171
country-of-origin labeling, 
270–271
declines in, 482
Doha Round and, 239–240
strategic trade policy and, 
153–154
aircraft industry
export competitiveness and, 
141–142
foreign market entry, 312–313
strategic trade theory and, 
152–154
aircraft industy, European 
Union and, 243–244
airline industry
alliances and acquisitions in, 
369–370
Brazilian case study, 128–132
emerging markets and, 
337–338
marketing vs. relationship 
orientation in, 482–483
prisoner’s dilemma in, 340
small and medium-sized 
enterprises in, 294
state-owned enterprises, 
131–134
alignment, supply chain 
management, 477–478
alliances
acquisitions vs., 384–386
corporate marriage and 
divorce, 377–378
Danone-Wahaha case, 
377–378
emerging markets case 
study, 365–367
evolution and dissolution, 
376–378
formation of, 374–376
institution-based view, 
368–370
performance of, 378–379
success guidelines  
for, 386
“American exceptionalism,” 
64–65
American movie industry
counterfeiting and piracy and, 
128–129
diamond theory of 
international trade 
and, 155–156
amusement parks case 
study, 395–396, 399–400
Andean Community, 241, 
249–250
Android technology, 
108–109, 440–444
Anna Karenina (Tolstoy), 373
antidumping policies
Australia-New Zealand Closer 
Economic Relations Trade 
Agreement (ANZCERTA/
CER) and, 250–251
competition vs., 353
foreign market entry 
and, 321–324
free trade agreements 
and, 281–282
international competition and, 
345–346
international trade and, 162
MNE management principles 
and, 416
pricing practices and, 472
anti-failure bias, bankruptcies 
and, 307
anti-globalization movement, 
18–19, 239
antisubsidy remedies, 
free trade agreements 
and, 281–282
antitrust policies
alliances and acquisitions, 
369–370
competitive dynamics vs., 
353–356
concentration ratio and, 341
De Beers case study, 449–451
domestic competition 
and, 343–344
laws and, 339
trade wars and, 355–356
apartheid, corporate 
social responsibilty 
and, 569
appreciation, defined, 206
Arab Spring, 42
Argentina
binding arbitation awards 
and, 126–127
foreign direct investment 
in, 199–201
regional economic integration 
and, 250
ASEAN-China Free Trade 
Agreement (ACFTA), 251
ASEAN Free Trade Area 
(AFTA), 251
“Asian economic miracle,” 
82–83
Asia-Pacific Economic 
Cooperation (APEC), 
251–252
Asia-Pacific region
Chinese entrepreneurship 
in, 302
currency crisis in, 221–222
IMF loans in, 216–217
regional economic integration 
in, 250–252
assembly line manufacturing, 
482
asset, foreignness as, 326–327
Association of Southeast Asian 
Nations (ASEAN), 251
attacks, competitive dynamics 
and, 350
Australia
Chinese automobiles in, 
456–457
currency rate in, 205–207, 
212–213
import quotas in, 160–162
regional economic integration 
in, 250–252
wine industry in, 205–207
Australia-New Zealand Closer 
Economic Relations Trade 
Agreement (ANZCERTA/
CER), 250–251
automobile industry, Geely 
Volvo acquisition case, 
455–458
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

622	
Subject Index
awareness
competitive dynamics and, 
350
in cultural intelligence, 85
B
bailouts
EU challenges concerning, 
245–248
GE Capital case, 523–524
moral hazard of, 51–52
balance of payments
defined, 210
foreign exchange rates and, 
210–213
balance of trade, 144
balance sheet compensation 
approach, expatriate 
compensation, 502–504
Banana Republics, 89–90
bandwagon effect
alliances and acquisitions 
and, 370
currency fluctuations, 214
Bangalore, 316
Bangladesh, microfinancing 
in, 297
bankruptcies, growth of, 
307–308
base of pyramid (BOP)
direct selling and, 28–30
in global economics, 9–10
“Battle of Seattle,” 239
beer production, emerging 
markets and, 467–468
Beijing Consensus, 52
Belgium, EU origins and, 
242–243
below cost selling, antidumping 
policies and, 353
benchmarking, 97–100
management savvy and, 
110–111
beneficiation agreements, 
De Beers case study, 
448–451
best fit, human resources 
management and, 511
best practices, human 
resources management 
and, 511
beverage industry case study, 
124–125
bid rate, 219
Big Mac Index, 208–210
big picture perspective, 
555–556
bilateral investment treaties 
(BITs), 126–127
bilateral trade agreements, 
EU-Korea FTA case study, 
279–282
binding arbitration, 126–127
black box components, 
alliances and, 376–377
black market economies, 47
Blue Ocean strategy, 
competitive dynamics 
and, 350
boards of directors, 532–534
Boeing vs. Airbus, 141–142
Bolivia, nationalization of 
oil in, 195
bondholders, 525
bonds, defined, 525
bond yields, Greek economic 
crisis and, 261–262
book retailing, Japanese case 
study, 435–437
boomerang unemployment, 
514
born global firms, 298
small and medium-sized 
enterprises as, 302–303
Botswana, diamond cartels in, 
446–451
bounded rationality, 39–40
“branch factory” economy, 
189–190
branding agreements, joint 
ventures and, 457–458
branding strategies, China 
tourism case study, 
461–463
Brazil
AB InBev market penetration 
in, 467–468
competitive advantage in, 
170–171
Cuba and, 60
currency rate in, 212–213, 220
de facto reserve currency 
policy and, 223
direct selling in, 29–30
economic structure in, 8
foreign direct investment by, 
194–195
foreign exchange challenges 
in, 276–278
IMF loans in, 216
mergers and acquisitions in, 
380–381
regional economic integration 
and, 250
Russian economy compared 
with, 33–34
small and medium-sized 
enterprises in, 294
state-owned enterprises in, 
131–134
tax revenues in, 39
venture capitalism in,  
296–297
“Brazil cost,” 171, 277–278
Bretton Woods system, 
213–218, 221
BRIC countries (Brazil, Russia, 
India and China), 7
host-country nationals 
from, 502
IMF and, 218
multinational enterprises in, 
22, 39–40
BRICET (BRIC+Eastern Europe 
and Turkey), 7
BRICM (BRIC+Mexico), 7
BRICS (BRIC+South Africa), 7
British Petroleum oil spill, 561
British Virgin Islands, as tax 
haven, 194–195
Brunei, Asian regional economic 
integration and, 252
build-operate-transfer (BOT) 
agreement
foreign market entry and, 
324–326
free trade agreements and, 
281–282
Bulgaria, 243
bureaucracy
in European Union, 245–248
regional integration and 
differences in, 234
Burundi
institutions and 
entrepreneurship in, 290
per capita income in, 48
business process outsourcing 
(BPO), 105–106
C
CAFTA (United States-
Dominican Republic-
Central America Free 
Trade Agreement), 250
Canada
Asian regional economic 
integration and, 251–252
Cuba and, 60
currency rate in, 212–213
international trade and, 145
Latin American regional 
economic integration and, 
250
NAFTA impact in, 249
sovereign wealth funds in, 53
US trade with, 163,  
270–271
capabilities
in alliances, 375–376
competitive dynamics and, 
350
defined, 95–96
international trade and, 
164–166
relational (collaborative) 
capability, 372–373
value chain analysis, 96–100
VRIO framework, 100–104
capacity to punish, competition 
and, 341
capital costs, reduction of, 
525–526
capital flight, currency 
fluctuations, 214
capitalism
corporate governance and, 
539–542
private ownership and, 50–52
capital outflow, foreign direct 
investment and, 188, 190
capital round-tripping, 313
captive sourcing, 99–100
foreign direct investment vs., 
193
career development
for expatriates, 500–501
for host country 
nationals, 502
for repatriates, 502
cartels
De Beers case study, 
446–451
defined, 339
price leaders and, 342
causal ambiguity, 103
Cayman Islands, as tax haven, 
194–195
centers of excellence, 400
Central and Eastern 
Europe (CEE)
debt crises in, 246–248
definitions of, 73–74
EU membership, 
126–127, 246
German FDI in, 175–176
offshoring to, 107, 109
Central and Eastern Europe 
(CEE) countries
debt crises in, 246–248
EU membership, 126–127, 
246
IMF loans in, 217
offshoring to, 107, 109
state-owned enterprises in, 
50–51
CEO (chief executive officer)
defined, 530
duality, 532
Chapter 11 bankruptcy 
organization, 
entrepreneurship and, 308
“cheap dollar” policy, 222–224
chief executive officer 
(CEO), 528
Chile
Asian regional economic 
integration and, 252
currency rate in, 212–213
China
acquisitions by, 381–382
African business 
enterprises, 311
African currency fluctuations 
and, 224
antidumping laws and, 
345–346, 356
Antimonopoly Law in, 
355–356
Asian regional economic 
integration and, 251–252
auto market in, 455–458
Coca-Cola in, 124
Cuba and, 60
currency hedging by,  
224–225
currency rate in, 208–210, 213
Disney resorts in, 395–396
economic structure in, 8, 
47, 49
entrepreneurship and, 302
ethnocentrism in, 64–65
export competitiveness of, 
141, 143, 253–256, 476
foreign direct investment by, 
193–195
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Subject Index	
623
foreign direct investment in, 
187
foreign liability vs. asset in, 
326–327
Geely Volvo acquisition in, 
455–458
host-country nationals 
compensation in, 
504–505
imports into, 143
inpatriation in, 512
intellectual piracy in, 46
job migration to, 476
luxury goods marketing in, 
488–489
management compensation 
in, 508–509
manufacturing in, 482
marketing vs. relationship 
orientation in, 482–483
market institutions program 
in, 49
Microsoft in, 136–137
MNE strategy and structure 
in, 404, 405–407
NAFTA and competition 
from, 249
offshoring to, 107
outside directors in, 533
privatization of industry in, 
51–52
restrictions on foreign 
retailers in, 480
Russian economy compared 
with, 33–34
social stratification in, 69
solar industry in, 154
Special Drawing Rights and, 
223–224
tax revenue in, 39
tourism market in, 460–463
unemployment in, 513–514
US trade deficit with, 
165–166, 206–208
venture capitalism in,  
296–297
Volkswagen plants in, 184
WTO membership for, 
253–256
“China Price,” 156
“China Threat,” 193–195
civilizations, culture and, 71–72
civil law, 43–44
“clash of civilizations” thesis, 
71–72
clean (free) float, 213
climate change, corporate 
social responsibility, 565
cluster approach to culture, 
71–72, 77
co-design policy, Brazilian 
Embraer case study, 
133–134
co-marketing, foreign market 
entry and, 324–326
codes of conduct
corporate social responsibility 
and, 562–564
development of, 78
private military companies, 
433–434
codetermination, corporate 
governance and, 539
cognitive pillar, 36
corporate social responsibility 
and, 566
mergers and acquisitions 
and, 370
collaborative capability, 
alliances and, 372–373
collectivism
culture of, 74–76
global business and, 16
human resources 
management and, 
518–519
opportunism vs., 81, 83–84
collusion
alliances with competitors as, 
369–370
competition vs., 340–343
defined, 339
global dynamics and,  
339–343
Japanese view of, 344
collusive price setting, 344
Colombia, Andean Community 
and, 250
colonial links, foreign market 
entry and, 317
command economy, 47
commoditization
offshoring and, 107–109
value chain analysis, 98–100
commodity boom, Latin 
American currency rates 
and, 212–213
common denominator, gold 
standard as, 214
common law, 43–44
corporate governance and 
finance and, 539
foreign market entry and, 317
common market, defined, 241
Commonwealth of Independent 
States (CIS), 313
communication barriers, 
knowledge management 
and, 411–412
communist totalitarianism, 41
in Cuba, 59–60
economic structure under, 47
comparative advantage
Brazilian case study, 170–171
classical theories vs. real-world 
conditions, 164–166
international trade and, 
148–150
variations in, 166–167
compensation
expatriates, 502–504, 
508–509
human resources 
management and, 
502–505
international premium, 12
pay cuts vs. force reductions, 
512
principal-agent conflicts, 
528–530
competition
alliances with, 369–370
antidumping vs., 353
domestic and international, 
343–346
formal institutions governing 
international competition, 
345–346
global dynamics, 339–343
industry characteristics and, 
340–343
policy, 343–344
private military companies, 
432–434
competitive advantage
foreign direct investment 
and, 188, 190
free trade and, 163–164
Greek economic crisis and 
loss of, 260–262
Huawei case study, 438–444
management savvy and, 111
value-added resources, 
101–102
competitive dynamics, 338
antitrust policy vs., 353–356
attacks and counterattacks 
in, 350
cooperation and collusion 
and, 339–343
Huawei case study, 438–444
imitability and, 347
institution-based view, 343
local firms vs. MNEs, 351–352
management savvy and, 
353–358
Ocean Park vs. Disneyland 
case study, 360–362
organization and, 347
rarity and, 347
resource-based view of, 
346–349
resource similarity and, 
348–349
value and, 346–347
war and peace and, 339
competitive intelligence/
counterintelligence, 
tips on, 357
competitor analysis, 338
complementary assets, 104
compromise, strategic alliances 
and, 367
concentrated ownership and 
control, 527
concentration ratio, defined, 
340–341
conduct. See codes of conduct
“conflict diamonds,” 449–451
conflicts
principal-agent, 528–530
principal-principal, 
529–531, 539
Confucianism, 82–83
consumers
luxury goods marketing to, 
488–489
market segmentation 
and, 471
price and, 471–472
protection of, 163
contagion effect, 188
container shipping, 479
contender strategy, competitive 
dynamics, 352
context approach to culture, 
70–71, 77
contracts
foreign market entry and, 
321–324
non-equity mode of entry 
and, 367
contractual (non-equity-base) 
alliances, 367
Brazilian Embraer case study, 
133–134
control
in alliances, 376
majority joint ventures as, 
385–386
Convention on Combatting the 
Bribery of Foreign Public 
Officials, 80
cooperation
competitive dynamics and, 
350–351
global dynamics and,  
339–343
Copehagen Accord, 569
Copenhagen Climate 
Summit, 240
copyright, 46
motion picture counterfeiting 
and, 128–129
core competencies, 96
outsourcing and, 99–100
corporate bankruptcies, 
307–308
corporate control
global perspective, 536–538
market for, 535–536
in MNEs, 413–414
corporate governance
defined, 524
ethical dilemmas in, 548–550
formal institutions, 538–539
global convergence vs. 
divergence, 543–544
informal institutions, 
539–542
institutional framework, 
538–542
opportunistic agents vs. 
managerial stewards,  
543
resource-based view, 
542–543
tripod of, 524
corporate imperialism, in 
MNEs, 406–407
corporate social responsibility 
(CSR), 89–90
active vs. inactive 
engagement, 568–569
Brazilian case study, 277–278
case study, 553–555
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

624	
Subject Index 
cross-listing of shares, 
525–526, 544
cross-market retaliation, 343
cross-shareholding, 367
“crossvergence,” 83
CSR-economic performance 
puzzle, 567–568
Cuba
economic system in, 47
emerging economy in, 59–60
foreign direct investment  
in, 187
cultural convergence vs. 
divergence, 81, 83
globalization and, 397
cultural distance, 317
cultural diversity, EADS case 
study, 493–495
cultural intelligence, principles 
of, 84–86
culture
cluster approach to, 71–72, 77
context approach to, 
70–71, 77
cross-border mergers and 
acquisitions and, 384
defined, 65
differences in, 70–72
economic development and, 
48–49
education and, 69–70
emerging markets and role 
of, 63–64, 395–396
export competitiveness 
and, 142
Geely-Volvo acquisition case, 
457–458
global business and, 77
Hofstede’s dimension 
approach to, 74–77
marketing strategies and,  
470
performance appraisal issues 
and, 505
currency board, 221–222
currency exchange
in Africa, 224
Big Mac Index, 208–210
Brazilian case study, 276–278
Bretton Woods system 
and, 214
euro zone and, 243–244
examples of, 207
export competitiveness 
and, 142
foreign exchange rates and, 
206, 218–221
foreign market entry and, 314
gold standard and, 214
investor psychology and, 
213–214
management savvy and, 
225–226
post-Bretton Woods system 
and, 215–218
productivity and balance of 
payments, 210–213
regional integration and, 233
currency hedging
defined, 219
not hedging vs., 224–225
currency risk
defined, 220
management of, 225–226
currency swaps
by China, 223–224
defined, 219
current account deficit, 
211–213
customer focus structure, in 
MNEs, 415
customs union, defined, 241
Cyprus, 243
Czech Republic
binding arbitration 
agreements in, 126–127
EU membership, 246
D
Dallas, Texas, 315
deadweight costs, international 
trade and, 158–160
debt, defined, 525
de facto currency reserves, 
222–224
default, defined, 525
defender strategy, competitive 
dynamics and, 351–352
defensive strategy, 562–566
deficit spending
euro zone and, 244
Greek economic crisis and, 
261–262
moral hazard of, 217–218
democracy
defined, 40–41
economic development 
and, 49
in Russia, 33–34
Democratic Republic of Congo, 
48, 448
demonstration effect, foreign 
direct investment 
and, 188
Denmark, 48
refusal of euro adoption,  
241
depreciation, currency, 206
deterrence of boards of 
directors, 533
developed economies
backlash against FDI in, 
193–195
clasification, 7
emerging economies 
comparisons, 5–6
offshoring as threat to, 
107–109
product life cycle theory and, 
151–152
developing nations
emerging economy MNEs 
in, 317
foreign direct investment in, 
193–195
labor relations in, 506
product life cycle theory and, 
151–152
development
defined, 500
for host-country 
nationals, 502
for repatriates, 501–502
diamond cartels, 446–451
diamond theory of international 
trade, 155–156
dictatorships, 41
diffused ownership, 527
digital technology, 93–94
dimension approach to culture, 
74–76, 82
direct exports
foreign market entry and, 
321–324
small and medium-sized 
enterprises, 299–300
direct monitoring and control, in 
alliances, 376
direct ownership advantages, 
foreign direct investment 
and, 181
direct selling
base of pyramid and, 28–30
by expatriate families, 
501–502
dirty (managed) float, 213
discrimination
antidumping policies, 
345–346
against foreign firms, 
313–314
MNEs human resource 
management and, 
507–509
regional economic integration 
and, 253
disloyalty, marketing and supply 
chain management and, 
480–481
dispute resolution
free trade agreements, 282
global economic integration 
and, 236–237
regional economic integration 
and, 240–241
WTO mechanisms for, 
238–239
dissemination risks, 181–182
distribution channels, 
marketing and, 474–476
diversity, in MNE management, 
406–407
Dodd-Frank law of 2010, 
37, 529
dodger strategy, competitive 
dynamics, 352
Doha, Qatar, 338–339
Doha Round, 239–241, 256, 
279–282
Doi Moi (Vietnamese market 
liberalization policy), 
66–67
Doing Business, 290–292,  
294
De Beers case study, 
449–451
defined, 554–555
free market capitalism vs., 
557–561
institution-based view of, 
561–566
management savvy and, 
569–570
race to the bottom vs. race to 
the top, 568
resource-based view, 
566–568
shared value creation and, 
559–560
stakeholder perspective, 
555–556
wolf management policies 
case, 573–574
corruption
country rankings, 80
ethics and, 79–80
in Russia, 33–34
cost of capital, 525–526
cost pressures
of localization strategy, 400
MNEs and, 396–397
costs
deadweight, 158–160
opportunity, 150
sunk, 192
transaction, 37–38, 83–84, 
184–185, 298–299
counterattacks, competitive 
dynamics and, 350
counterfeiting, 46
of motion pictures, 128–129
counterintelligence, 357
country-level capabilities, 
international trade and, 
164–166
country (regional) managers, in 
MNEs, 401
country-of-origin effect, 
326–327
marketing and, 472–474
country of origin labeling 
(COOL), 270–271
crawling bands, 213
creative destruction, 
entrepreneurship and, 
303–304
cross-border capabilities, 
domestic resources vs., 
105
cross-border mergers and 
acquisitions, 368
by China and India, 381–382
Geely Volvo acquisition, 
455–458
integration difficulties, 384
cross-cultural literacy, 85
expatriate failure and selection 
and role of, 499–500
cross-licensing agreements, 
440–444
corporate social responsibility 
(CSR) (cont.)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Subject Index	
625
domestic markets
diamond theory of 
international trade 
and, 155–156
foreign market entry and, 
318–319, 322–324
promotion in, 472–474
small and medium-sized 
enterprises, 300–301
domestic resources, 
international capabilities 
vs., 105
downstream vertical foreign 
direct investment, 177
DP World case study, 329, 383
DR-CAFTA, 142
Dubai, 315, 347
Dubai International Airport 
(DXB), 337–338, 347
Dubai World Central-Al Maktoun 
International (DWC) 
Airport, 338–339, 347
due diligence, mergers and 
acquisitions and, 370
dumping, international 
competition and, 345–346
duty drawbacks, free trade 
agreements and, 280–282
dynamic capabilities view, 
95–96
E
Eastern values
cultural convergence vs. 
divergence and, 81, 83
Western values vs., 81–82
economic development
drivers of, 48–49
in Russia, 33–34
Western vs. Eastern 
values, 82
economic freedom, 47
“economic governance” 
ideology, EU bailouts and, 
245–248
economic systems, 47–48
economic union
defined, 241–242
EU as example of, 
242–243, 245
Economist, 469–471, 480–481
education, cultural importance 
of, 69–70
efficiency, competition policy 
and, 344
efficiency-seeking firms, 
locations for, 315–317
Egypt, revolution in, 42
electricity, institutions and 
entrepreneurship and, 
290–292
Embraer Airlines case study, 
128–132
emerging economies
alliances and acquisitions in, 
369–370
clasification, 7
contributions of, 5–6
country groupings, 11–12
defined, 5
domestic competition in, 352
market orientation in,  
482–483
MNEs from, 317
MNE strategy and structure 
concerning, 404
mortgage loans and, 225
offshoring to, 100, 106–109
reverse innovation and, 9–10
taxation in, 39–40
typology of, 8
emerging markets
AB InBev case study, 
467–468
acquisitions by China and 
India, 381–382
alliances and acquisitions, 
365–367, 371–372
antitrust laws and, 355–356
Argentina case study, 
199–201
Brazilian 3G Capital case 
study, 380–381
case study, 3–4
in Cuba, 59–60
cultural barriers and, 
63–64, 65
defined, 5
Disney case study, 395–396
Emirates airlines, 337–338
free market capitalism 
and, 558
human resources 
management in, 497–498
India’s entry into Africa, 
311–313
in Latin America, 212–213
in Russia, 33–34
sovereign wealth funds and, 
53–54
Vietnam, 66–67
empire building, in MNEs, 414
Employee Free Choice Act,  
506
Endangered Species Act, 574
end-to-end design, supply 
chain management and, 
477–478
English proficiency, 
globalization and, 66–68
enterprise resource planning 
(ERP), in MNEs, 408
entrepreneurs
defined, 289
private military companies 
and, 431–434
entrepreneurship
corporate bankruptcy and, 
307–308
in Cuba, 60
defined, 289
financing for, 296–297
growth and, 293–295
innovation and, 295–296
institution-based view of, 
15–16, 290–292
internationalization of, 
298–301
management savvy and, 
303–304
resource-based view of, 
292–293
in Russia, 33–34
traits vs. institutions and, 
301–302
transaction costs and, 
298–299
entry barriers, collusion and, 
341–342
entry modes
alliances and acquisitions, 
369–370
in foreign markets, 320–326
environmental issues
diamond industry and, 
449–451
free trade and, 163
equity, defined, 525
equity-based alliances, 367
performance of, 378–379
equity modes, foreign market 
entry, 320–326
Estonia, EU membership, 246
ethanol production, 171
ethical imperialism, 78–79
ethical relativism, 78
ethics
in Chiquita case study, 89–90
corporate governance and, 
548–550
corruption and, 79–80
De Beers case study, 
446–451
definition and impact, 78
foreign direct investment 
and, 194–195, 199–201
Hyundai case study, 110
IMF lending and moral 
hazard, 217–218
Latin American emerging 
economies and currency 
rates, 212–213
in Libya case study, 42–43
London case study,  
541–542
norms and, 80–81
overseas management of, 
78–79
principal-principal conflicts, 
529–530
shared value creation and, 
559–560
strategic responses to 
challenges, 80–81
ethnocentrism, 64–65
staffing decisions based on, 
495–497
“EU à la carte” ideology, 248
Eurasia, emerging markets in, 
365–367
euro currency
currency hedging and, 
224–225
depreciation of, 220–221
European debt crisis and, 
246–248
euro zone, creation of, 
243–244
foreign market entry and, 
314
forward rate of, 219
Greek economic crisis and, 
260–262
independent monetary 
policies and, 241
introduction of, 243–244
regional integration and, 233
Swiss franc vs., 225
Europe
debt crisis in, 246–248
state-owned enterprises in, 
50–51
European Coal and Steel 
Community (ECSC), 242
European Community (EC), 242
European Council, 243
European Economic 
Community (EEC), 242
European Stability Mechanism 
(ESM), 261–262
European Union (EU)
antitrust policies, 355–356
challenges for, 244–248
current status of, 243–244
expansion of, 246–248
government-firm disputes in, 
126–127
Greek bailout and, 216, 
245–248, 261–262
Korean free trade agreement, 
279–282
origin and evolution, 242–243
regional economic integration 
and, 242–248, 253
regional integration and, 
233–234
Russia compared with,  
33–34
US beef import ban in, 163
exchange rates. See  
currency exchange; 
foreign exchange
exit-based mechanisms, 
534–536
exit strategies, small and 
medium-sized enterprises, 
301
expatriates (expats)
colonial roots of, 508–509
compensation for, 502–504
conditions for, 12
cultural differences and, 
63–64
defined, 495
EADS case study, 493–495
failure and selection issues, 
498–500
inpatriation vs., 511–512
in Libya, 42–43
performance appraisal of, 505
role in MNEs of, 498
training for, 500–501
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

626	
Subject Index 
expatriation
defined, 495
inpatriation vs., 511–512
explicit collusion, 339
explicit knowledge
licensing vs. FDI and, 182
in MNEs, 409
export intermediaries, small 
and medium-sized 
enterprises and,  
300–301
exports
country-of-origin labeling and, 
270–271
defined, 143
dollar fluctuations and, 223
foreign exchange rates and, 
205–208
foreign market entry and, 
321–324
Geely case study, 456–458
from Japan, 476
licensing vs. FDI and, 
181–182
NAFTA and, 248–249
small and medium-sized 
enterprises, 299–300
Swiss currency and, 229–230
US competitiveness in, 
141–143
expropriation
foreign direct investment 
and, 192, 193–195
principal-principal 
conflicts, 530
extender strategy, competitive 
dynamics, 351–352
external environment, 
resource-based view of 
global business and, 16
external governance 
mechanisms, 535–537
external relationships, MNE 
structure and, 405–407
Exxon Valdez oil spill, 561
F
face-to-face discussions, 234
knowledge transfer and, 
411–412
factor endowments, 150
diamond theory of 
international trade and, 
155–156
location acquisition and 
neutralization, 183–184
fairness, competition policy 
and, 344
familiarity, mutual forbearance 
and, 343
family ownership, 527–528
in Indian retail sector, 
272–273
principal-principal conflicts, 
529–530
Federal Reserve Act, 37
femininity, 75
managerial behavior and, 77
financial companies
foreign exchange market 
strategies, 218–220
Islamic investment principles 
and, 287–289
financing
capital cost reduction, 
525–526
defined, 524
equity and debt, 525
ethical dilemmas in, 548–550
formal institutional 
frameworks, 538–539
GE Capital case study, 
523–524
informal institutional 
frameworks, 539–542
London case study, 541–542
resource-based view, 
542–543
of start-up companies, 
296–297
firm behavior, institution-based 
view of, 38–40
firm-specific resources, 16
De Beers case study, 
447–451
location acquisition and 
neutralization, 183–184
first-mover advantages, 
152–154
in alliances, 378
foreign market entry,  
318–319
fixed exchange rates, 213, 
221–222
Flexible Credit Line (FCL) (IMF), 
217–218
floating (flexible) exchange rate, 
213, 221–222
force majeure, 36
foreign aid, productivity and 
balance of payments and, 
211–213
foreign central banks, post-
Bretton Woods system 
and, 215–218
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 
(FCPA), 79–80
foreign direct investment (FDI)
alliances and acquisitions 
and, 369–370, 379–382
Argentina case study, 
199–201
Brazilian case study, 278
in BRIC countries, 7
captive sourcing, 99–100
Chinese investment in Africa, 
224
corruption as barrier to, 79–80
in Cuba, 59–60
defined, 3–4
efficiency-seeking firms 
and, 316
facilitation vs. confrontation 
of, 193–195
fixed exchange rates and, 
221–222
flow, 177–178
flow and stock in, 177–179
foreign exchange market and, 
218–219
German strategies in, 175–176
global economic integration 
and, 235–236
home countries’ costs and 
benefits, 190–192
host countries’ costs and 
benefits, 127–128, 
187–188
in India, 15–16, 272–273
inflow, 177–178
internalization and, 184
in Japan, 16
licensing vs., 181–182
local content requirements 
and, 161
location and, 183–184
make-or-buy decision making 
and, 476–477
management savvy and, 
195–196, 274–275
market failure and, 184–186
mergers and acquisitions 
and, 368
MNE engagement in, 
180–181
MNE vs. non-MNE activity, 
179–181
outflow, 178–179
outsourcing vs., 192–193
politics and, 186–187
productivity and balance of 
payments, 210–213
real-world circumstances 
and, 186–190
research and development 
globalization, 410
Russian firms in, 313–314
small and medium-sized 
enterprises, 299–301
sovereign wealth funds, 
53–54
stock, 178
terminology of, 176–180
turnkey projects and,  
324–326
in United Kingdom, 189–190
foreign exchange market
Brazilian case study, 276–278
defined, 218–219
dollars as percentage of, 222
foreign exchange rates. See 
also currency exchange
Bretton Woods system 
and, 214
defined, 206
determinants of, 207–214
euro zone and, 243–244
financial companies’ 
strategies for, 218–220
fixed vs. floating rates, 
221–222
floating and fixed rate 
policies, 213
gold standard and, 214
interest rates and money 
supply, 210
international monetary 
system development and, 
214–218
investor psychology and, 
213–214
management savvy and, 
225–226
non-financial companies’ 
strategies for, 220–221
post-Bretton Woods system 
and, 215–218
productivity and balance of 
payments, 210–213
relative price differences and 
purchasing power parity, 
208–210
strategies for management 
of, 218–221
supply and demand and, 
206–207
wine industry case study, 
205–207
foreign market entry
cultural/institutional 
issues, 317
foreignness as liability vs. 
asset, 326–327
global vs. regional geographic 
diversification, 327–328
Indian case study, 311–313
institution-based view, 314, 
329–330
liability of foreignness and, 
312–314
location-specific advantages, 
315–317
management savvy for, 
329–330
Megabus case study,  
333–334
modes of entry, 320–326
old-line vs. emerging MNEs, 
328–329
resource-based view, 314, 
329–330
scale of, 320
strategic goals, 315–317
timing of, 318–319
foreignness
as asset, 326–327
liability of, 16, 312–314, 
326–327
foreign-owned firms, 13–14
foreign policy, free trade 
and, 163
foreign portfolio investment 
(FPI), 176–177
corporate governance 
and, 540
direct ownership and, 181
foresight, development of, 111
formal institutions
alliances and acquisitions, 
369–370
corporate finance and 
governance, 538–539
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Subject Index	
627
corporate social 
responsibility, 562–566
De Beers case study, 
448–451
defined, 35
domestic competition and, 
343–344
entrepreneurship and, 290
export competitiveness 
and, 142
foreign market entry and, 
312–314
government-firm disputes in 
EU and, 126–127
human resources 
management, 507–509
international competition, 
345–346
management savvy and, 
54–55
marketing and supply chain 
management and, 
483–485
mergers and acquisitions, 
386–387
MNE structure and,  
405–407
supply chain management 
and, 478–480
Fortune Global 500, 22, 
316, 327
forward contracts
currency hedging and, 
224–225
defined, 219
forward discount, 219
forward premium, 219
forward transactions, 219
“four freedoms of movement,” 
in European Union, 
245–248
“Four Tigers,” 19–20, 82–83
France
defense industry in, 163
EADS case study and, 
493–495
economic patriotism in, 187
EU origins and, 242, 245
international trade and, 145
franchising
foreign market entry and, 
324–326
small and medium-sized 
enterprises, 299–301
free market capitalism, 51–52
corporate social responsibility 
and, 557–561
foreign direct investment 
and, 186–187
free rider behavior
euro zone and, 244
Greek economic crisis and, 
261–262
late-mover advantages 
and, 319
free trade
absolute advantage and, 
146–148
classical economic theories 
and, 163–164, 164–166
Doha Round and, 239–240
economic arguments against, 
162
Latin American economic 
integration and, 249–250
political arguments against, 
162–163
regional economic integration 
and, 240–241
free trade agreements 
(FTAs), 142
EU-Korea FTA case study, 
279–282
free trade area (FTA), 
defined, 241
Free Trade Area of the 
Americas (FTAA), 250
Fukushima nuclear power 
meltdown, 561
G
game theory, 339–340
General Agreement on Tariffs 
and Trade (GATT), 256
creation of, 237
defined, 235
dispute resolution 
mechanisms in, 238
multilateral trading system, 
236–237
General Agreement on Trade in 
Services (GATS), 238
generally accepted accounting 
principles (GAAP), 545
international competition and, 
345–346
Geneva Convention, 432–434
geocentric staffing decisions, 
495–497
geographic area structure, in 
MNEs, 401–402
geography
Brazilian comparative 
advantage and, 170–171
economic development and, 
48–49
emerging markets and, 
337–338
foreign direct investment 
and, 183–184
foreign market entry and, 315
offshoring and onshoring 
and, 100
Germany
advertising restrictions in, 
479–480
bankruptcy laws in,  
307–308
currency rates in, 213, 215
EADS case study and, 
493–495
EU bailouts and, 245–248
EU origins and, 242
export declines in, 141, 143, 
166–167, 175–176,  
253–254, 476
foreign direct investment 
strategy and, 175–176
GM-Opel partnership and, 
274–275
Greek economic crisis and, 
261–262
imports into, 143
labor relations with MNEs 
from, 506
Glass-Steagall law, 37
global account structure, in 
MNEs, 415
global brands, 461–463
global business
culture and, 77
defined, 3–5
globalization and, 21–25
institution-based view of, 
38–40
questions facing, 10–11
resource-based view, 109–111
unified framework for, 14
global convergence and 
divergence, corporate 
governance and, 544
global diversification, foreign 
market entry and,  
327–328
global economic integration
acquisitions and, 383–384
barriers and incentives 
for, 253
Bretton Woods system 
and, 214
defined, 234
economic benefits of, 
236–237
evolution of, 234–235
management savvy and, 
256–257
political benefits, 235–236
global economic pyramid, 8–9
global economy, survey of, 
21–25
globalization
cultural convergence and,  
397
defined, 18
EU expansion and, 247–248
future debate on, 22–23
language and, 66
national governments and, 
412–413
opinions concerning, 24
pendulum view of, 19–20
perspectives on, 18–19
regionalization vs., 327–328
global matrix structure, 
402–403, 415
global product division 
structure, 401–402, 404
global standardization strategy, 
400, 404
knowledge management and, 
409–410
staffing approaches and, 
496–497
global sustainability, 555–556
global system for mobile 
communications 
(GSM), 366
global value chain, 11
global virtual teams, 411
GLOBE (Global Leadership and 
Organizational Behavior 
Effectiveness) clusters, 
71–72
going public, in alliances, 378
going rate compensation 
approach, expatriate 
compensation, 502–503
gold standard, 214
governance mechanisms, 
534–536
government. See also formal 
institutions
alliances and acquisitions, 
369–370
corporate finance and 
governance, 538–539
corporate social 
responsibility, 562–566
De Beers case study, 
448–451
defined, 35
domestic competition and, 
343–344
entrepreneurship and, 290
export competitiveness 
and, 142
foreign market entry and, 
312–314
government-firm disputes in 
EU and, 126–127
human resources 
management, 507–509
international competition, 
345–346
management savvy and, 
54–55
marketing and supply chain 
management and, 
483–485
mergers and acquisitions, 
386–387
MNE structure and,  
405–407
supply chain management 
and, 478–480
government-sponsored 
enterprises (GSEs), 51–52
gray market, 38–39
Great Britain. See United 
Kingdom
Great Depression, 20, 50
contraction of world trade 
during, 235
currency rates during, 214
global economic integration 
and, 234–235
Great Recession, 20
dollar fluctuations and, 
223–224
EU challenges and, 246–248
export competitiveness 
and, 141–142
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

628	
Subject Index 
foreign direct investment 
and, 176
free market capitalism 
and, 559
human resource 
management in, 513–514
international trade and, 
163–164
luxury goods marketing in, 
488–489
protectionism and, 236
Greece
debt crisis in, 20–21, 
246–248, 261–262
EU loans to, 216, 245–248
greenfield operations, foreign 
market entry and,  
321–326
gross domestic product (GDP)
BRIC countries, 7
defined, 5–6
EU contries’ contributions 
to, 246
international trade growth 
and, 143–145
of Russia, 33–34
state-owned enterprises and, 
50–51
venture capital as percentage 
of, 296–297
gross national income (GNI), 
defined, 6
gross national product (GNP), 
defined, 6
Group of 20 (G-20), 11–12, 218
growth, entrepreneurship and, 
293–295
guanxi (Chinese personal 
relationships), 55, 483
H
harvest strategies, small and 
medium-sized enterprises, 
301
“haven currency,” Swiss franc 
as, 229–230
headquarters relocation by 
MNEs, case study of, 
419–421
Hecksher-Ohlin theory, 150
diamond theory of 
international trade and, 
155–156
herd mentality
mergers and acquisitions 
and, 381–382
norms and, 36
heteroarchical structure, EADS 
case study, 494
hierarchical structure, EADS 
case study, 494
high-context cultures, 70–71
hire-back practices, 514
Hispanic market, strategies for 
targeting, 470
HIV/AIDS disaster, diamond 
industry and, 449–451
Hofstede’s dimensions of 
culture, 74–77
home countries
foreign direct investment 
costs and benefits in, 
190–192
labor relations in, 505–506
MNE executives from, 
406–407
MNE headquarters relocation 
in, 419–421
MNE management savvy 
and, 416
product market conditions in, 
124–137
home-country nationals. See 
parent-country nationals 
(PCNs)
home replication strategy
knowledge management and, 
409–410
MNE management savvy 
and, 416
for MNEs, 397–398, 400–401
parent-country nationals and, 
507–509
staffing approachs and, 
496–497
homogeneous products, 
collusion and, 341
Hong Kong
Chinese currency 
transactions in, 223–224
currency rates in, 222
economic freedom in, 47
foreign direct investment 
by, 194–195
international business in, 
15–16
horizontal foreign direct 
investment, 177
hospitality industry, China 
tourism case study, 
460–463
hostage taking, alliances 
and, 376–377
host countries
corporate social responsibility 
in, 568–569
De Beers case study, 
448–451
foreign direct investment costs 
and benefits, 187–188
local responsiveness 
pressures in, 396–397
MNE executives from, 
406–407
MNE headquarters relocation 
to, 419–421
MNE management savvy 
and, 416
MNE structure and strategies 
and, 405–407
subsidiary restructuring and, 
274–275
host-country nationals (HCNs)
best fit vs. best practices 
concerning, 511
compensation for, 503–505
defined, 495
human resources 
management and, 
507–509
labor relations and, 506
performance appraisal of, 505
polycentric staffing approach 
and, 496
stereotyping concerning, 
508–509
training and development 
for, 502
hubris, acquisitions and, 
379–382, 383–384
human resource management 
(HRM)
best fit vs. best practice,  
511
compensation and 
performance appraisal, 
502–505
defined, 494
EADS case stduy, 493–495
expatriate failure and 
selection, 498–500
five “Cs” of, 513–515
institution-based view of, 
506–509
international blunders in, 508
labor relations and, 505–506
management savvy and, 
513–515
pay cuts vs. force reductions, 
512
repatriate training, 501–502
resource-based view, 506, 
509–511
staffing, 495–500
training and development 
issues, 500–502
human rights, ethics and, 79
Hungary
economic system in, 47
EU membership, 246
foreign direct investment 
incentives in, 126–127
IMF loans in, 216
MNE strategy and structure 
in, 405–407
venture capitalism in, 296–297
Huntington civilizations, 71–72
hypercompetitiveness, 
antidumping policies 
and, 353
I
Iceland
IMF loans in, 216
Schengen zone and, 243
imitability
acquisitions, 374
alliances and, 373
competitive dynamics 
and, 347
corporate social responsibility 
and, 567
entrepreneurship and, 293
in human resource 
management, 509–511
management savvy and, 
110–111
in MNEs, 408
VRIO framework, 103
immigration, EU bailouts and 
restrictions on, 246
imperialism, foreign direct 
investment and, 
186–187
implicit knowledge, licensing 
vs. FDI and, 182
import quotas, international 
trade and, 160–162
imports
ban on US beef imports, 163, 
313
country-of-origin labeling and, 
270–271
defined, 143
foreign exchange rates and, 
205–208
Geely case study, 456–458
NAFTA and, 248–249
small and medium-sized 
enterprises, 299–300
import tariffs, international 
trade and, 158–160
inbound logistics, marketing 
and, 474–476
income gap, free market 
capitalism vs. corporate 
social responsiblity and, 
560–561
independent directors, 533
India
acquisitions by, 381–382
advertising restrictions in, 
479–480
African market penetration 
by, 311–314
caste system in, 68–69
comparative advantage and 
international trade in, 
164–166
economic structure in, 8
education in, 70
host-country nationals 
compensation in, 505
international competition and, 
345–346
microfinancing in, 297
MNEs in, 396
offshoring to, 105–106
research and development 
contracts in, 325–326
retail FDI in, 272–273
soft drink market in, 124
unemployment in, 513–514
indirect exports
foreign market entry and, 
321–324
small and medium-sized 
enterprises and,  
300–301
individualism, 74
opportunism vs., 81, 83–84
Great Recession (cont.)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Subject Index	
629
individual-level capabilities, 
international trade and, 
164–166
Indonesia
IMF loans in, 216–217
import quotas in, 160–162
industrial policy, 115–116
Industrial Revolution, 49
industry norms, deviation  
from, 17–18
infant industry argument 
against free trade, 162
inflation, foreign exchange 
rates and, 210
informal flexible matrix, in 
MNEs, 408
informal institutions, 35
alliances and acquisitions 
and, 370
corporate finance and 
governance, 539–542
corporate social 
responsibility, 562–566
debates concerning, 81–82
export competitiveness 
and, 142
firm behavior and, 39–40
foreign market entry and, 
312–314
Greek economic crisis and, 
260–262
human resource 
management, 507–509
management savvy and, 
54–55
marketing and supply chain 
management and, 480
mergers and acquisitions, 
386–387
MNE structure and, 405–407
origins of, 64–65
information asymmetries, 529
information technology 
infrastructure, in 
MNEs, 409
in-groups, opportunism vs. 
individualism/collectivism, 
84
initial public offerings (IPOs), 37
by state-owned 
enterprises, 52
initiation, in alliances, 377–378
innovation
entrepreneurship and, 
295–296
open innovation model, 411
in services, 482
transnational strategy and, 
400–401
innovation-seeking investment, 
315–317
inpatriation, expatriation vs., 
511–512
inside directors, 532
institutional constraints, in 
alliances, 376
institutional distance, foreign 
market entry and, 317
institutional framework
defined, 35
transaction costs, 38
institutional traditions, in 
Russia, 35
institution-based view
alliances and acquisitions, 
368–370
antitrust policies and, 355–356
competitive dynamics 
and, 343
corporate finance and 
governance, 538–542
corporate social 
responsibility, 561–566
cross-border mergers and 
acquisitions, 382
cultural differences and, 64
entrepreneurship and, 2, 
303–304
foreign market entry, 314, 
329–330
global business, 15–16, 38–40
government-firm disputes in 
EU and, 126–127
human resources 
management, 506–509
intellectual property, 46
management savvy and, 
54–55
of marketing and supply chain 
management, 478–480
marketing vs. relationship 
orientation and, 483
MNE management, 415–416
MNE strategy and structure 
and, 404–407
motion picture counterfeiting 
and, 128–129
OLI advantages and, 181
of Russia, 35
institutions. See formal and 
informal institutions
domestic and international 
competition and, 343–346
economic development  
and, 48–49
entrepreneurship and, 
290–292, 301–302
ethics and respect for, 79
foreign exchange rates and, 
225–226
international trade and, 145
role of, 36
in Russia, 35
instrumental perspective, 
corporate social 
responsibility and, 
563–564
instutions, De Beers case 
study, 448–451
intangible resources and 
capabilities
defined, 95–96
imitability of, 103
integration-responsiveness 
framework, multinational 
enterprises and, 396–404
intellectual property, defined, 
45–46
intellectual property rights 
(IPR), 45–46, 136–137
Doha Round and, 239–240
economic development 
and, 49
free trade agreements and, 
281–282
GATT agreement concerning, 
237
Huawei case study, 438–444
Microsoft in China and, 
136–137
interaction
competition and, 339
mutual forbearance and,  
343
interest rates, foreign exchange 
rates and, 210
intermediaries, foreign market 
entry and, 324
internalization
foreign direct investment 
and, 180–181, 184
market imperfection and, 185
internal (voice-based) 
mechanisms, 534–537
internal relationships
MNE management savvy 
and, 416
MNE structure and, 405–407
international assets, acquisition 
of, 383–384
international business (IB)
Brazilian Embraer case study, 
134
defined, 3–4
domestic resources vs. inter-
national capabilities, 105
foreign market entry and, 312
small and medium-sized 
enterprises, 288–289, 
298–301
stage model of, 302–303
international capabilities, 
domestic resources 
vs., 105
International Center for 
Settlement of Investment 
Disputes (ICSID), 126–127
international division structure, 
MNE use of, 401
international entrepreneurship, 
defined, 289
international lending, IMF role 
in, 216–218
International Monetary 
Fund (IMF)
criticism of, 217–218
establishment of, 216–218
European bailouts and, 
246–248
Greek bailout and, 216,  
245–248, 261–262
international monetary system, 
evolution of, 214–218
international new ventures, 298
international premium, 12
international trade
absolute advantage and, 
146–148
classical theories vs. real-
world conditions,  
164–166
corporate governance 
and, 540
country-of-origin labeling and, 
270–271
economic arguments against, 
162
economic development and, 
143–145
European Union and, 
243–244
euro zone and, 243–244
evaluation of theories 
concerning, 156–158
export competitiveness 
and, 143
foreign market entry and,  
314
GDP and growth in, 143–145
global economic integration 
and, 235–236
leading trading nations, 144
management savvy and, 
166–167
mercantilism and, 146
national competitive 
advantage and, 155–156
political arguments against, 
162–163
productivity and balance 
of payments and,  
210–213
product life cycle theory and, 
150–152
real-world conditions in, 
158–163
resource mobility and, 
156–158
strategic trade theory, 
152–154
theories of, 145–158
WTO impact on, 253–256
Internet
book retailing and, 435–437
moderators on, 102
Russian Wikimart case study 
and, 428–430
investment barriers, foreign 
market entry and, 314
investor psychology
currency rates and, 213–214
Islamic investment principles 
and, 287–289
Iran, Islamic law in, 44
Ireland, Schengen Agreement 
and, 243
Islamic law, 44
investment and, 287–289
Islamic values, 82
ISO 9000 quality management 
systems, 480
ISO 14001 standard, 568
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

630	
Subject Index 
Israel
competitive dynamics in, 
351–352
diamond industry in, 342, 
447–451
small and medium-sized 
enterprises in, 295–296
Italy
EU origins and, 242, 244
intellectual piracy in, 46
Libyan crisis and, 42–43
J
Japan
bankruptcy laws in, 307–308
bookselling in, 435–437
competition policy in, 344
cultural context in, 71
earthquake and supply chain 
disruption in, 476–477
entrepreneurship in, 290
expatriate failure and 
selection in, 499–500
export competitiveness of, 
141–142, 476
free market capitalism in, 558
human resources 
management in, 507–509
international business in, 16
labor relations with MNEs 
from, 506
lack of natural resources in, 48
luxury goods marketing in, 
488–489
MNEs in, 406–407
Nomura-Lehman acquisition 
and, 390–391
regional economic integration 
and, 251–252
tariff barriers in, 158–160
voluntary export restraints 
in, 161
Jewish law, 44
jobs
foreign direct investment 
and, 189–190
NAFTA impact on, 248–249
joint payoffs, prisoner’s 
dilemma and, 340
joint ventures (JVs)
alliances and acquisitions 
and, 369–370
Brazilian Embraer case study, 
133–134
defined, 183
foreign market entry and, 
325–326
in Indian retail sector, 
272–273
majority vs. minority, 384–386
TNK-BP case study, 452–454
just-in-time inventory and 
delivery, 476
trust and, 477–478
K
Keystone Pipeline, 90
Kimberly Process, 449–451
Kindle, offshore manufacturing 
of, 114–116
knowledge management
in MNEs, 408–410
problems and solutions in, 
410–412
knowledge spillovers, foreign 
direct investment and, 
183–184
Korea, human resources 
management in, 497–498
KORUS free trade 
agreement, 142
Kuwait, sovereign wealth funds 
created by, 53
Kyoto Protocol, 569
L
labor costs, foreign direct 
investment and, 175–176
labor relations
for MNEs, 505–506
pay cuts vs. force reductions, 
512
laissez faire economic 
theory, 47
absolute advantage and, 
146–148
language
culture and, 65–68
expatriate failure and 
selection and role of, 
499–500
expatriate training in,  
500–501
foreign market entry and,  
317
globalization and, 23
old-line vs. emerging MNEs 
and training in, 329
regional integration and role 
of, 233–234
large-scale foreign market 
entry, 320
late-mover advantages, 
foreign market entry and, 
318–319
Latin America
anti-MNE actions in, 195
emerging economies and 
currency rates in, 212–213
foreign market entry 
from, 315
offshoring to, 109
regional economic integration 
in, 249–250
soft drink market in, 124
US Hispanics from, 470
Latvia, EU membership, 246
leadership structure, 532
lead innovation nations, 
product life cycle theory 
and, 151–152
lean manufacturing, 476
learning
alliance performance and, 
378–379
Huawei case study, 438–444
old-line vs. emerging MNEs 
and, 328–329
learning by doing, in alliances, 
375–376
learning race, alliances and, 372
legal systems, global business 
and, 43–44
“Lego” view of 
organization, 104
letter of credit (L/C), small and 
medium-sized enterprises, 
299–300
leverage
Huawei case study, 438–444
old-line vs. emerging MNEs 
and, 328–329
leveraged buyouts (LBOs), 
535–536
liability of foreignness, 16, 
312–314, 326–327
liberalization, alliances and 
acquisitions and, 369–370
Libya, 433–434
political risk in, 42
licensing
foreign direct investment vs., 
181–182
foreign market entry and, 
324–326
small and medium-sized 
enterprises, 299–301
lingua franca, 65–66, 73–74
linkage
Huawei case study, 438–444
old-line vs. emerging MNEs 
and, 328–329
Linux software, 136–137
Lisbon Treaty, 243
Lithuania, EU membership, 246
LLL (linkage, leverage, and 
learning) framework, 329
Huawei case study, 438–444
old-line vs. emerging MNEs, 
328–329
local content requirements, 161
local firms, competitive 
dynamics and, 351–352
localization (multidomestic) 
strategy, 398–400
knowledge management and, 
409–410
marketing and, 468–471
staffing approaches and, 
496–497
“local plus” compensation 
packages, 509
local responsiveness, MNEs and 
pressure for, 396–397
local tradition, ethics and 
respect for, 79
location
acquisition and neutralization 
of, 183–184
cultural/institutional issues 
in foreign market entry 
and, 317
foreign direct investment 
and, 180–184
foreign market entry, 315–317
free trade competitiveness 
and, 166–167
London, corporate governance 
in, 541–542
long-term orientation, 76
De Beers case study, 
447–451
managerial behavior and, 77
low-context cultures, 70–71
Luxembourg, EU origins 
and, 242
M
Maastricht Treaty, 242–243
macroeconomic policies, euro 
zone and, 244
make-or-buy decision making, 
476–477
Malaysia
Asian regional economic 
integration and, 252
job migration to, 476
management control rights, 
foreign direct investment 
and, 177
management savvy
acquisitions and, 379–382
competitive dynamics and 
antidumping, 353–358
corporate governance and 
finance and, 544–545
corporate social 
responsibility, 569–570
cultural intelligence and, 
84–86
economic integration and, 
256–257
entrepreneurship and, 
303–304
foreign direct investment 
and, 195–196
foreign exchange rates and, 
225–226
foreign market entry,  
329–330
global matrix structure of 
MNEs and, 402–403
human resources 
management, 513–515
institution-based view and, 
54–55
international trade and, 
166–167
marketing and supply chain 
management, 483–485
mergers and acquisitions, 
386–387
for MNEs, 415–416
resource-based view, 
109–111
managerial human capital, 543
managerial motives, mergers 
and acquisitions and, 
381–384
managers, defined, 528–532
manufacturing
declines in, 482
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Subject Index	
631
free trade agreements and, 
280–282
marketing and supply chain 
management and, 
481–482
maquiladora factories, 248–249
market-based strategies, in 
developed economies, 40
market commonality, 342
market dynamism, 344
market economy, 47–48
market failure, foreign direct 
investment, 184–186
market imperfections, 
foreign direct 
investment and, 181, 
184–186
marketing
China tourism case study, 
460–463
defined, 468
distribution to supply chain 
management, 474–475
institution-based view, 
478–480
international blunders in,  
473, 484
of luxury goods, 488–489
management savvy and, 
483–485
manufacturing vs. services, 
481–482
place, 474–475
price, 471–472
principles of, 468–474
product, 468–471
promotion, 472–474
supply chain management 
savvy, 475–476
market orientation, relationship 
orientation vs., 482–483
market-seeking firms, locations 
for, 315–317
market segmentation, 
defined, 471
Marxism, of foreign direct 
investment and, 186–187
masculinity, 75
managerial behavior and, 77
mass media, Russian image 
in, 35
meals, cultural differences 
concerning, 63–64
mercantilism, international 
trade and, 146–147
merchandise (goods), 
international trade 
and, 143
Mercosur, 249–250
merger mania, 385
mergers
cross-border mergers, 368
defined, 367
institution-based view of, 
369–370
by Japanese firms, 399
resource-based view of, 
370–374
Mexico
Asian regional economic 
integration and, 251–252
IMF loans to, 216
NAFTA and, 248–249
soft drink market in, 124
tax revenue in, 39
US Hispanics from, 470
Miami, Florida, 315
microfinancing, 
entrepreneurship and, 
296–297
micro institutions, 
entrepreneurship 
and, 302
micro-macro link, 412
“middle-of-the-road” ethics 
principles, 79
cultural convergence vs. 
divergence and, 83
mid-range emerging 
economies, 8
mixed economy, 47
modes of entry. See entry 
modes
monetary policies, euro zone 
and, 243–244
monetary union, 242
money supply, foreign 
exchange rates and, 210
moral hazard, 51–52
IMF lending and, 217–218
mortgage loans, currency 
fluctuations and, 225
motion picture counterfeiting, 
128–129
motivation, competitive 
dynamics and, 350
multi-brand stores, 272–273
Multifibre Arrangement (MFA), 
237, 257
multilateral trading system, 
236–237
Doha Round and, 240
EU-Korea FTA case study, 
279–282
multimarket competition, 342
multinational enterprises 
(MNEs)
acquisitions by, 381–382
compensation for expatriates 
in, 502–504
competitive dynamics and, 
347–348
corporate control vs. subsidiary 
initiatives, 413–414
corporate social 
responsibilities, 555–556
corporate social responsibility 
and, 568–570
cost reduction and local 
responsiveness 
pressures, 396–397
in Cuba, 60
customer-focused dimensions 
vs. integration, 
responsiveness and 
learning, 415
defined, 3–4
direct selling by, 28–30
Disney case study, 395–396
equity/non-equity modes of 
foreign market entry and, 
320–326
expatriate failure and 
selection, 498–500
expatriate’s role in, 498
expatriate training, 500–501
expatriation vs. inpatriation 
at, 511–512
expropriation and 
nationalization of, 194–195
foreign direct investment 
and, 176, 179–181
foreign market entry by, 
316–317
free market capitalism 
and, 559
global economic pyramid and, 
9, 21–25
global/regional 
economic integration  
and, 257
global standardization 
strategy of, 400
global vs. regional 
diversification of, 327–328
headquarters relocations by, 
419–421
home replication strategy of, 
397–398
host countries’ costs and 
benefits, 187–188, 
190–192
host country incentives and, 
126–127
host-country nationals 
compensation in, 504–505
institution-based view of, 
404–407
internalization and, 184
joint venture equity and, 
385–386
knowledge management in, 
408–412
labor relations at, 505–506
local firms vs., 351–352
localization (multidomestic) 
strategy, 398–400
management savvy for, 
415–416
market failure and, 185–186
marketing and supply chain 
management in, 481
market segmentation 
and, 471
in Middle East, 42–43
NAFTA and, 249
nationalization of, 186–187
nongovernmental 
organizations and, 23–24
old-line vs. emerging MNEs, 
328–329
organizational structures, 
401–403
perspectives on, 18–19
productivity and balance of 
payments and, 210–213
product marketing and, 
468–471
research and development 
globalization, 410
resource-based view of, 404, 
407–408
in Russia, 313–314
semiglobalization and, 21
single MNE vs. multiple 
national companies, 
412–413
social stratification and, 69
staffing issues for, 495–500
standardization vs. 
localization, 468–471
strategies and structures, 
396–404
Swiss currency rates and, 230
taxation of, 39
third-party logistics and, 478
transnational strategy of, 
400–401
Muslim population
EU expansion and concern 
over, 246–248
Islamic investment principles 
and, 287–289
mutual forbearance, 342–343
competitive dynamics and, 
347–348
mutually assured destruction 
(MAD), alliances and, 377
MyPlate dietary guidelines, 
89–90
N
NAFTA (North American Free 
Trade Agreement), 142
labor relations and, 506
regional economic integration 
and, 248–249
national companies, MNEs as, 
412–413
national competitive advantage, 
international trade and, 
155–156
national culture, 65
EADS case study, 493–495
nationalism
acquisitions and, 383–384
alliance performance and, 
378–379
nationality of executives, in 
MNEs, 406–407
nationalization, foreign direct 
investment and, 193–195
national security, free trade 
and, 162–163
natural resource-seeking 
firms, locations for, 
315–317
nearshoring, German 
practice of, 176
negative perspective, corporate 
social responsibility and, 
563–564
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

632	
Subject Index 
Netherlands
binding arbitration 
agreements in, 126–127
EU origins and, 242
net losses, tariff barriers and, 
158–160
new trade theory, 172n.7
New York Convention of 1958, 
126–127
New Zealand, Asian regional 
economic integration and, 
250–252
Nieuwe Waterweg (New 
Channel) (Rotterdam), 479
Nigeria, 568–569
“9/11” attacks, 239, 271
non-discrimination, multilateral 
trading system, 236–237
non-equity modes, foreign 
market entry, 320–326
non-financial companies, 
foreign exchange market 
strategies, 220–221
non-intervention principle, 
corporate social 
responsibility vs., 568–569
non-resident firms, gross 
national product, 6
non-shareholder stakeholders, 
555
nongovernmental organizations 
(NGOs), 128
corporate social responsibility 
and, 556, 566–567
defined, 23–24
nontariff barriers (NTBs)
free trade agreements and, 
280–282
GATT agreement and, 237
international trade and, 
160–162
normative pillars, 35–36
corporate social responsibility 
and, 566
norms, 36
for boards of directors, 533
corporate governance and, 
539–542
ethical challenges and,  
80–81
export competitiveness 
and, 142
MNEs human resource 
management and, 
507–509
North Korea
economic system in, 47
foreign direct investment  
in, 187
Norway
per capita income in, 48
refusal of EU 
membership, 241
Schengen zone and, 243
stage model of 
entrepreneurship in, 303
“not invented here” syndrome, 
411–412
O
obesity, soft drink consumption 
and, 124–125
obsolescing bargain, foreign 
direct investment, 192
Occupy London, 541–542
Occupy Wall Street,  
541–542
OECD, international competi-
tion studies, 345–346
offer rate, 219
offline advertising, 473–474
offshoring
defined, 99–100
foreign direct investment vs., 
193
resource-based view, 
105–109
oil industry, in Libya, 42–43
OLI (ownership, location, 
and internationalization) 
advantages
foreign direct investment 
and, 180–181
foreign market entry and, 
320–321
old-line vs. emerging MNEs, 
328–329
oligarchs, 452–454
in Russia, 34
oligopoly, defined, 184
online advertising, 473–474
online shopping
marketing and supply chain 
management and, 
483–485
Russian Wikimart case study 
and, 428–430
onshoring, defined, 99–100
open innovation model, 411
opportunism, 38
in alliances, 372–374
alliances and, 376–377
foreign direct investment 
and, 185
individualism/collectivism vs., 
81, 83–84
opportunity costs, theory of 
comparative advantage 
and, 150
options, alliances as, 372
organization
acquisitions, 374
alliances and, 373
competitive dynamics 
and, 347
corporate social responsibility 
and, 567
entrepreneurship and, 293
in human resource 
management, 509–511
marketing and supply chain 
management and, 481
of MNEs, 401–404, 408
VRIO framework, 
 103–104
organizational culture, in MNEs, 
408
organizational fit, 
acquisitions, 374
original brand manufacturers 
(OBMs), 106–109, 115
original design manufacturers 
(ODMs), 106–109, 115
original equipment 
manufacturers (OEMs), 
106–109, 115
global account structure and, 
415
outflow, foreign direct 
investment, 178–179
out-groups, opportunism vs. 
individualism/collectivism, 
84
outside (independent) 
directors, 532
outsourcing, 115–116
defined, 99
emerging economies and, 
13–14
foreign direct investment vs., 
192–193
international trade and, 
164–166
Kindle case study, 114–116
private military companies 
and, 431–434
resource-based view, 
105–109
third-party logistics and, 478
value chain analysis, 97–100
outward foreign direct 
investment (OFDI), 33–34
acquisitions and, 381–382
in Africa, 38
China and, 194–195
overseas management, ethics 
and, 78–79
ownership
advantages, foreign direct 
investment and, 180–182
China structure for, 460–463
concentrated vs. diffuse, 527
defined, 526–527
family ownership, 527–528
P
Paraguay
intellectual piracy in, 46
regional economic integration 
and, 250
parent-country nationals 
(PCNs)
compensation for, 503
defined, 495
ethnocentric staffing 
approach and, 495–496
human resource 
management and, 
507–509
partially owned subsidiaries, 
foreign market entry and, 
322–324
partner councils, supply 
chain management and, 
477–478
partner opportunism, alliances 
and, 372–374
patents
competitive dynamics and, 
346–347
defined, 45
Huawei case study,  
438–444
trolling for, 441–444
pay cuts
cultural attitudes concerning, 
518–519
layoffs vs., 512
pegged currency rate
defined, 213
gold standard and, 214
problems with, 221–222
pendulum view of globalization, 
19–20
performance
human resource 
management and 
appraisal of, 502–505
marketing vs. relationship 
orientation and, 483
personal computer (PC) 
production
international trade and, 
151–152
outsourcing of, 115–116
Peru
Andean Community and,  
250
Asian regional economic 
integration and, 252
currency rate in, 212–213
Philippines
offshoring to, 107
prices in, 208
phytosanitary measures, free 
trade agreements and, 
281–282
“PIGS” (Portugal, Ireland/Italy, 
Greece and Spain) debt 
crisis, 20–21
bailout proposals for, 262
EU assistance for, 246
piracy, 46, 433–434
of software, 136–137
place, marketing and, 474–476
Plaza Accord of 1985, 222
plurilateral agreements, 
281–282
Poland
economic system in, 47
EU membership, 233–235, 
246
political systems
defined, 40
democracy, 40–41
European Union as,  
245–248
totalitarianism, 41
political union, defined, 242
politics
corporate governance and, 
538–539
firm behavior and, 41
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Subject Index	
633
foreign direct investment 
and, 186–187
free trade opposition and, 
162–163, 166–167
global economic integration 
and, 235–236
in Libya case study, 42–43
regional economic integration 
and, 240–241
tariff barriers and, 158–160
uncertainty and, 36
“pollution haven” hypothesis, 
corporate social 
responsibility, 568
polycentric staffing decisions, 
495–497
post-Bretton Woods system, 
215–218
pound (British currency), 
managed float of, 213
power, alignment of supply 
chain and, 477–478
power distance, 74
pragmatic nationalism, foreign 
direct investment and,  
187
predatory pricing, 344
premature return of expatriates, 
498–499
price elasticity, 471–472
price fixing in book industry, 
435–437
prices
collusive price setting, 344
De Beers case study, 342
defined, 341
euro zone and, 244
marketing and, 471–472
“one size fits all” prices, 
136–137
predatory pricing, 344
primary stakeholder groups, 
556–557
principal-agent conflicts, 
528, 531
reduction of, 539
principal-principal conflicts, 
529–531, 539
principals, defined, 528
prisoner’s dilemma, 339–340
private equity, market for, 
535–536
Wikimart start-up case, 
428–430
private military companies 
(PMCs), 431–434
private ownership, economic 
development and, 49–52
private property ownership, 
economic development 
and, 34
private remittances, productivity 
and balance of payments 
and, 211–213
privatization, emergence 
of, 50–52
proactive strategy, 564–566
procurement
free trade agreements and, 
281–282
supply chain management 
and, 480
productivity
foreign exchange rates and, 
210–213
Greek economic crisis and 
loss of, 260–262
product life cycle, 115,  
156–158
international trade and, 
150–152
product positioning, Geely case 
study, 456–458
products and services, 
marketing and, 468–471
promotion, marketing and, 
472–474
property rights
economic development  
and, 49
global business and, 45
proprietary technology, 
alliances and, 376–377
protectionism
antitrust laws and, 355–356
in Brazil, 170–171
economic arguments against, 
162
foreign direct investment 
vs., 187
foreign market entry and, 
321–324, 330
NAFTA and, 249
Protestantism, capitalism  
and, 82
psychological contract, for 
repatriates, 501–502
punishment, competition  
and, 341
punitive duties, WTO 
imposition of, 239
purchasing power parity (PPP)
BRIC countries, 7
defined, 5–7
foreign exchange rates, 
208–210
investor psychology and, 
213–214
in Russia, 33–34
Q
Qaddafi, Moamar, 42–43
quantitative easing, 278
foreign exchange rates 
and, 210
Quebec separatism, 41
quota system, IMF 
contributions, 216
R
radical view, of foreign direct 
investment, 186–187
radio frequency identification 
(RFID) tags, 481
rarity
acquisitions, 374
competitive dynamics 
and, 347
corporate social 
responsibility, 566–567
entrepreneurship and, 
292–293
in human resource 
management, 509–511
marketing and supply chain 
management and, 
480–481
in MNEs, 408
principles of, 100–104
rational behavior, institution-
based view of global 
business and, 38–40
reactive strategy, 562–566
real options
in alliances, 372, 376
minority joint ventures as, 
385–386
reciprocity
alliances and, 376–377
multinational strategy 
and structure, 404, 
405–407
reduction in force (RIF)
cultural attitudes concerning, 
518–519
pay cuts vs., 512
regional diversification, 
foreign market entry 
and, 327–328
regional economic integration
acquisitions and, 383–384
in Africa, 252
Asia Pacific region, 250–252
barriers and incentives 
for, 253
case study, 233–234
defined, 234
in Europe, 242–248
in Latin America, 249–250
management savvy and, 
256–257
in North America, 248–249
pros and cons of, 240–241
types of, 241–242
regional trade agreements, 
EU-Korea FTA case study, 
279–282
regulatory pillars, 35
corporate social responsibility 
and, 566
ethics and compliance 
with, 81
reinsurance, 565
related transactions, 
expropriation, 530
relational (collaborative) 
capability, 372–373
alliance performance and, 
378–379
relationship orientation, 
482–483
relative price differences, 
foreign exchange rates, 
208–210
religion
EU expansion and role of,  
246
global business and, 68
repatriation, development for, 
501–502
research and development
foreign market entry and, 
324–326
Geely case study, 456–458
Huawei case study, 441–444
multinational enterprises  
and, 410
reserve currencies, 223–224
“reservoir of good will,” ethics 
and, 78
resident firms, gross domestic 
product and, 6
resource-based view
acquisitions and, 373–374
competitive dynamics, 343, 
346–349
corporate governance and 
financing, 542–543
corporate social 
responsibility, 566–568
domestic vs. international 
capabilities, 104–105
entrepreneurship and, 
292–293
foreign exchange 
strategies and, 
220–221, 225
foreign market entry, 314, 
329–330
global business, 16, 93–94, 
109–111
human resources 
management, 506, 
509–511
licensing vs. FDI and, 182
mergers and acquisitions, 
370–374
MNE management, 415–416
MNE strategy and structure 
and, 404, 407–408
offshoring vs. not offshoring, 
105–109
principles of, 94–96
resource mobility, international 
trade and, 156–158
resources
defined, 94–95
value chain analysis, 96–100
VRIO framework, 100–104
resource similarity, 348–349
retail sector
foreign direct investment 
restrictions in, 479–480
in India, foreign direct 
investment in, 272–273
luxury goods marketing in, 
488–489
return on assets (ROA), human 
resources management 
and, 513–515
reverse innovation, 9–10
right-wing totalitarianism, 41
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

634	
Subject Index 
risk management, 20–21
Brazilian Embraer case study, 
133–134
currency risk and, 225
Romania, 243
foreign direct investment 
incentives in, 126–127
Ronen and Shenkar clusters, 
71–72
Rotterdam, Netherlands, 479
rule of law
economic development 
and, 34
regional economic integration 
and, 240–241
rule of origin concessions, free 
trade agreements and, 
280–282
rules of the game. See 
institutions
Russia
alliances in, 372
de facto reserve currency 
policy and, 223
economic structure in, 8, 49
economic system in, 47
emerging markets in, 33–34
entrepreneurship in, 290–292
foreign direct investment by, 
194–195
foreign market entry by, 
313–314
IMF loans to, 216
informal institutions in, 
39–40, 55
innovation-seeking firms in, 
316–317
intellectual piracy in, 46
mafia in, 207–208
marketing vs. relationship 
orientation in, 483
outside directors in, 533
outward foreign direct 
investment in, 38
research and development 
contracts in, 325–326
TNK-BP joint venture, 
452–454
Wikimart startup in, 428–430
WTO membership sought 
by, 256
S
Saihan system, 437
sanitary measures, free trade 
agreements and,  
281–282
Santiago Principles, 54
Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) Act, 37, 
539, 542–543, 548–550
Saudi Arabia
cultural differences in, 63–64
Islamic law in, 44
theocratic totalitarianism 
in, 41
scale of entry, in foreign 
markets, 320
scenario planning, 20–21
Schengen Agreement, 233, 
243–244, 245
secondary stakeholder groups, 
556–557
self-regulation, private 
military companies, 
433–434
semiglobalization, 21
separation of ownership 
and control, 527
serial entrepreneurs, 301–302
service industries
export competitiveness 
in, 141
growth of, 482
international trade and, 143, 
164–166, 280–282
marketing and supply chain 
management and, 
481–482
severance arrangements, 
layoffs and, 513–514
Shanghai, China, foreign direct 
investment in, 316
shared capabilities, in alliances, 
375–376
shared value, creation of, 
559–560
shareholder capitalism, 536, 
539–542
corporate social responsibility 
and, 557–559
shareholders
defined, 525
expropriation, 530
sharia law, investment 
principles based on, 
287–289
Sherman Act, 339, 354
shipping, third-party logistics 
in, 479
“shrimp-turtle” import 
case, 163
Sierra Leone, institutions and 
entrepreneurship in, 290
signaling, competitive 
dynamics and, 350–351
Silicon Valley, 316
simplification, as MNE 
strategy, 415
simultaneous production 
migration, 152
Singapore
Asian regional economic 
integration and, 252
MNE strategy and structure 
in, 405–407
nontariff barriers in, 161–162
single-brand shops, 272–273
skills development, cultural 
intelligence and, 85
Skype, 411–412
Slovakia, EU membership, 246
Slovenia, EU membership, 246
small and medium-sized 
enterprises (SMEs)
domestic markets and, 
300–301
entrpreneurship and, 289
foreign market entry 
strategies, 299–300
globalization and, 288–289
growth of, 293–295
innovation in, 295–296
internationalization of, 
298–301
management savvy and, 
303–304
slow internationalizers vs. 
“born global” startups, 
302–303
small-scale foreign market 
entry, 320
Social Accountability 8000 
standard, 89–90
social capital, 412
social complexity, 104
socialism, state-owned 
enterprises and, 50–52
social issue participation, 566
social mobility
defined, 68
education and, 70
social networks, advertising on, 
473–474
social responsibility, free trade 
and, 163
social stratification
defined, 68–69
education and, 69–70
social structure, defined, 68–69
SOEs. See state-owned 
enterprises
solar industry, 115
strategic trade theory 
and, 154
solutions-based structure for 
MNEs, 415
South Africa, apartheid in, 569
South America. See Latin 
America
South Korea
economic structure in, 8, 49
EU free trade agreement 
with, 279–282
foreign liability vs. asset in, 
326–327
IMF loans in, 216–217
international trade and, 145
Internet operations in, 
328–329
sovereignty, foreign direct 
investment and, 188, 190
sovereign wealth funds 
(SWFs), 52–54
Soviet Union
Cuba and, 59–60
manufacturing in, 482
Spain
Cuba and, 60
FDI in Argentina by, 199–201
Special Drawing Rights (SDRs), 
218, 223–224
specialization, theory of 
absolute advantage and, 
146–148
Special System of Clearance 
and Custody (SELIC), 
276–278
spot transactions, defined,  
219
spouses, expatriate failure 
and selection and role of, 
499–500
spread (currency trading), 
219–220
Stability and Growth Pact 
(SGP), 261–262
staffing
ethnocentric, polycentric, and 
geocentric approachs, 
495–497
human resource 
management, 495–500
stage-by-stage production 
migration, 152
stage models
foreign market entry and, 317
small and medium-sized 
enterprises as, 302–303
stakeholders
defined, 554–555
firm perspective, 555–556
in mergers and acquisitions, 
383–384
primary and secondary 
groups, 556–557
proactive strategies and, 
565–566
standardization
global strategy for, 400, 404
knowledge management and, 
409–410
marketing and, 468–471
in promotion, 472–474
start-up companies
financing for, 296–297
innovation in, 295–296
Russian Wikimart case study, 
428–430
state-owned enterprises 
(SOEs), 47, 49–52, 61n.41
in China, 533
corporate governance 
and, 545
cross-border mergers and 
acquisitions, 382
in Cuba, 59–60
defined, 528
governance mechanisms, 
537
Statute of Monopolies, 49
stereotyping, in human 
resources management, 
508–509
stewardship theory, 543
stimulus packages, IMF loans 
as, 217–218
strategic alliances
advantages and 
disadvantages, 370–371
defined, 367
resource-based view, 
370–374
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Subject Index	
635
strategic fit, acquisitions, 374, 
383–384
strategic goals
foreign market entry and, 
317, 330
multinational strategy and 
structure, 404
strategic hedging
defined, 220
limitations of, 226
strategic investment, 367
strategic trade policy, 153–154
strategic trade theory, 
156–158, 172n.7
international trade and, 
152–154
subprime mortgage  
crisis, 246
subsidiaries
foreign market entry and, 
322–324
initiatives, in MNEs, 413–414
restructuring in host country 
of, 274–275
subsidies
Brazilian comparative 
advantage case study 
and, 171
Doha Round and, 239–240
international trade and, 
160–162
strategic trade policy and, 
152–154
sunk costs, foreign direct 
investment and, 192
supply and demand
De Beers case study, 
447–451
foreign exchange 
transactions, 206–208
price elasticity and, 471–472
supply chain
adaptability in, 476–477
agility in, 475–476
alignment in, 477–478
Brazilian Embraer case study, 
133–134
defined, 468
management savvy and, 
483–485
manufacturing vs. services, 
481–482
shocks to, 475–476
supply chain management, 468
institution-based view, 
478–480
marketing and, 474–476
sustainable capitalism, 555–556
sweatshops, ethics and, 81
Sweden
economic system in, 47
free market capitalism in, 558
refusal of euro adoption, 241
Switzerland
banking system, 207–208
cultural differences in 
emerging markets 
and, 63–64
currency rate in, 212, 225, 
229–230
prices in, 208
refusal of EU 
membership, 241
Schengen zone and, 243
SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, 
opportunities, threats) 
analysis, 94
benchmarking in, 97–100
management savvy 
and, 109–111
value chain analysis and, 100
VRIO and, 100–104
synergistic motives, 
acquisitions and, 379–384
T
tacit collusion, 339
tacit knowledge
licensing vs. FDI and, 182
in MNEs, 409, 412
Taiwan, economic structure 
in, 49
tangible resources and 
capabilities
defined, 95–96
imitability of, 103
target exchange rates, 213
tariff barriers, international 
trade and, 158–160
tariffs
export competitiveness 
and, 142
NAFTA and role of, 248–249
taxation
in Brazil, 39
foreign market entry and,  
317
multinational enterprises and, 
412–413
in Russia, 34
of soft drinks, 124
technical ability, expatriate 
failure and selection and 
role of, 499–500
technical barriers to trade, free 
trade agreements and, 
281–282
technology spillover, foreign 
direct investment and, 
187–188
telecom industry, 472
alliances and acquisitions in, 
365–367
television, competitive 
dynamics in, 349
Temporary Liquidity 
Guarantee Program 
(TLGP), 523
Thailand
currency crisis in, 221
IMF loans in, 216–217
theocratic law, 43–44
theocratic totalitarianism, 41
theory of absolute 
advantage, 146–148, 
156–158
theory of comparative 
advantage, 148–150, 
156–158
theory of national 
competitive advantage, 
155–156, 156–158
think global, act local 
management strategy, 
MNEs and, 416
third-country nationals (TCNs)
compensation for, 503
defined, 495
human resources 
management and, 
507–509
MNE executives as, 406–407
staffing approaches and, 
496–497
third parties, foreign market 
entry and, 324
third-party logistics, supply 
chain management and, 
477–479
“three Cs” of FDI, 191–192
top management team 
(TMT), 528
total cost of ownership, 472
totalitarianism
economic development 
and, 49
global business and, 41–43
tourism, currency 
fluctuations and, 229–230
“Toyota Way,” 411–412
trade deficit, 143, 163–164
dollar fluctuations and, 223
productivity and balance of 
payments and, 210–213
trade embargoes, 163
trademarks, 46
Trade-Related Aspects of 
Intellectual Property 
Rights (TRIPS), 46, 128, 
238, 281–282
trade surplus, 143, 163–164
Bretton Woods system 
and, 214
productivity and balance of 
payments and, 210–213
trade wars, antitrust laws and, 
355–356
training
defined, 500
for expatriates, 500–501
for host-country 
nationals, 502
“traits” entrepreneurs,  
301–302
transaction costs, 37–38
entrepreneurship and, 
298–299
foreign direct investment, 
184–185
opportunism vs. 
individualism/collectivism, 
83–84
transnational strategy, 
400–401
knowledge management and, 
409–410
Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), 
251–252
transportation hubs, third-party 
logistics and, 479
travel industry, China 
tourism case study, 
460–463
Treaty of Rome, 242, 245
triad, in global economics, 9
tribal totalitarianism, 41
triple bottom line, 557
trust
alignment of supply chain 
and, 477–478
defined, 339
Tunisia, revolution in, 42
tunneling, 530, 544
Turkey
EU membership, 246
IMF loans in, 216–217
turnkey projects, foreign market 
entry and, 324–326
two-stage decision model, 
value chain analysis, 
97–100
U
Ukraine
IMF loans in, 216
intellectual piracy in, 46
marketing vs. relationship 
orientation in, 483
uncertainty avoidance
culture and, 75–76
institutions and, 36
managerial behavior and, 77
uncoupling, in alliances, 378
UN Declaration of 
Human Rights, 569
unemployment
foreign direct investment 
and, 189–190
in Great Recession, 513–514
Union for Foreign Affairs and 
Security Policy, 243
Union of South American 
Nations (USAN/UNASUR), 
250
unions, MNE relations with, 
505–506
United Arab Emirates (UAE)
FDI in US by, 193
free market capitalism in, 558
United Kingdom
EU origins and, 245
foreign direct investment 
in, 189–190
free market capitalism in,  
558
manufacturing in, 166–167
MNEs in, 405
refusal of euro adoption, 241
Schengen Agreement 
and, 243
service exports of, 141
social stratification in, 69
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

636	
Subject Index 
state-owned enterprises 
in, 50–51
United States
antitrust laws in, 354–356
Asian regional economic 
integration and, 251–252
China trade with, 253–256
competition policy in, 344
deficits in, 211–218, 222–224
economic system in, 47
export competitiveness 
of, 141–143, 476
free market capitalism in, 558
imports into, 143
Latin American regional 
economic integration  
and, 250
as lead innovation nation, 
151–152
MNE strategy and 
structure in, 405–407
NAFTA impact in,  
248–249
solar industry in, 154
sovereign wealth funds in, 53
trade deficit with China, 
165–166, 206–208
trade with Canada, 163, 
270–271
United States-Dominican 
Republic-Central America 
Free Trade Agreement 
(CAFTA), 250
unmet business objectives, 
expatriate failure and, 499
upstream vertical foreign direct 
investment, 177
Uruguay, regional 
economic integration  
and, 250
Uruguay Round, 237
US Agency for International 
Development (USAID), 142
US Agriculture Department, 
89–90, 142
US Commerce 
Department, 142
US dollars
balance of payments and 
value of, 210–213
Bretton Woods system 
and, 214
euro forward rate and, 219
fixed vs. floating 
exchange rates and, 
221–222
foreign exchange transactions 
in, 206–208
Latina American purchases 
of, 212–213
managed float of, 213
money supply and value 
of, 210
post-Bretton Woods 
system and, 215–218
strong vs. weak dollar, 
222–224
US Energy Department, 142
US Fish and Wildlife Service, 
573–574
US International Revenue 
Service, 412–413
US Justice Department, 90
US Trade Representative, 128, 
142, 270–271, 283
US Treasury bonds, Chinese 
holdings of, 223–224
US Treasury Department, 142, 
215
US-China Strategic and 
Economic Dialogue, 
53–54
V
value
acquisitions, 373–374
alliances and, 370–371
competitive dynamics and, 
346–347
corporate social 
responsibility, 566–568
entrepreneurship and, 
292–293
export competitiveness 
and, 141–142
in human resource 
management, 509–511
marketing and supply 
chain management, 
480–481
in MNEs, 408
in VRIO framework, 101–102
value chain analysis, 96–100
outsourcing, 97–100
supply chain and, 474–476
Venezuela
Cuba and, 59–60
regional economic integration 
and, 250
venture capitalists (VCs), 
start-up financing and, 
296–297
vertical foreign 
direct investment, 
177–178
Viagra, 316
Vickers Commission, 542
video conference, 234
videoconferencing, 411–412
Viet Kieu (overseas 
Vietnamese), 66–67
Vietnam
Asian regional 
economic integration and, 
252
cultural differences in, 66–67
economic system in, 47
WTO membership, 256
voice-based mechanisms, 
534–536
voluntary activities, corporate 
social responsibility 
and, 565–566, 568, 
569–570
voluntary export restraint, 
international trade and, 
160–162
VRIO (value, rarity, 
imitability, organization) 
framework
acquisitions and, 373–374
competitive dynamics, 
346–349
corporate finance and 
governance, 543
corporate social 
responsibility, 566–568
defined, 94
entrepreneurship and, 
292–293
foreign direct investment 
and, 180–181
foreign market entry 
and, 314
human resource 
management, 509–511
international trade and, 145
management savvy and, 
109–111
marketing and supply 
chain management, 
480–481
mergers and acquisitions 
and, 370–374
multinational enterprises and, 
407–408
principles of, 100–104
W
“Wal-Mart effect,” 273
war, competitive dynamics 
and, 339
Washington Consensus, 51–52
Western values
cultural convergence 
vs. divergence and, 81, 83
Eastern values vs., 81–82
whistleblowers
layoff protection for, 514
norms and, 36
wholly owned subsidiaries 
(WOSs)
alliances and acquisitions 
and, 369–370
foreign market entry and, 
322–326
TNK-BP joint venture case, 
452–454
Wikimart start-up case,  
428–430
wine industry, foreign exchange 
rates and, 205–207
“winner’s curse,” mergers and 
acquisitions and, 381–382
win-win game
foreign direct investment 
and, 186–187
international trade and, 
145–147
“wolf” culture of Huawei, 408, 
438–444
wolf management policies, 
corporate social 
responsibility and, 
573–574
World Bank, establishment 
of, 216
World Trade Organization (WTO)
antidumping laws and, 346
creation of, 235
dispute resolution 
mechanisms, 236–237, 
238–239, 282
free trade agreements 
and, 279–282
history of, 237–238
viability of, 253–256
worldwide (global) 
mandate, 400
Y
Yellowstone National Park, 
573–574
yen (Japanese currency), 222
managed float of, 213
regional economic  
integration and,  
251–252
yuan (Chinese currency)
currency hedging 
and, 224–225
free float of, 213
international  
convertibility of,  
223–224
undervaluation of,  
208–210
US dollar vs., 222–224
Z
Zaire, 342
zero-sum game,  
mercantilism as, 147
United Kingdom (cont.)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

