
W a l t e r  A e r t s
P e t e r  W a l t o n
Global Financial 
Accounting and Reporting: 
Principles and Analysis
Australia  Brazil  Japan  Korea  Mexico  Singapore  Spain  United Kingdom  United States
T h i r d  E D I T I O N

Global Financial Accounting and Reporting: 
Principles and Analysis 3rd Edition
Walter Aerts and Peter Walton 
Publishing Director: Linden Harris
Publisher: Andrew Ashwin
Commissioning Editor: Annabel Ainscow
Editorial Assistant: Lauren Darby
Project Editor: Alison Cooke
Production Controller: Eyvett Davis
Marketing Manager: Anne Renton
Typesetter: S4Carlisle Publishing Services
Cover design: Adam Renvoize
Printed in China by RR Donnelley
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 – 15 14 13
© 2013 Cengage Learning EMEA
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright 
herein may be reproduced, transmitted, stored or used in any form or by 
any means graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited to 
photocopying, recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, Web distribution, 
­information networks, or information storage and retrieval systems, except 
as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright 
Act, or applicable copyright law of another jurisdiction, without the prior 
written permission of the publisher.
While the publisher has taken all reasonable care in the preparation of 
this book, the publisher makes no representation, express or implied, with 
regard to the accuracy of the information contained in this book and cannot 
accept any legal responsibility or liability for any errors or omissions from 
the book or the consequences thereof.
Products and services that are referred to in this book may be either 
trademarks and/or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The 
publishers and author/s make no claim to these trademarks. The publisher 
does not endorse, and accepts no responsibility or ­liability for, incorrect or 
defamatory content contained in hyperlinked ­material.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN: 978-1-4080-6286-9
Cengage Learning EMEA 
Cheriton House, North Way, Andover, Hampshire, SP10 5BE, United Kingdom
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson Education 
Ltd.
For your lifelong learning solutions, visit  
www.cengage.co.uk
Purchase your next print book, e-book or e-chapter at 
www.cengagebrain.com
For product information and technology assistance, contact  
emea.info@cengage.com.
For permission to use material from this text or product,  
and for permission queries,  
email emea.permissions@cengage.com..

Chapter 2  Accounting and accountants
III
III
Preface  X
Acknowledgements  XI
Structure of the book  XII
Walk-through tour  XIV
Part 1 The accounting and business environment  1
	 1	 Financial reporting and regulation  2
	 2	 Accounting and accountants  29
Part 2 Basic financial statements  57
	 3	 Measurement concepts and the balance sheet equation  58
	 4	 Accruals accounting  98
	 5	 Non-current assets and depreciation  131
	 6	 Refining the accounting system  165
	 7	 Preparing financial statements  197
Part 3 An introduction to financial statement analysis  215
	 8	 A framework for interpretation  216
	 9	 Financial statement analysis I  231
	10	 Statement of cash flows  261
Part 4 The financial statements of multinational companies  291
	11	 The annual report  292
	12	 Consolidated financial statements  306
	13	 Operating segments and foreign operations  344
	14	 Issues in financial reporting by multinationals  379
	15	 International taxation  412
	16	 Auditing and corporate governance  429
Part 5 Advanced financial statement analysis  449
	17	 Financial statement analysis II  450
	18	 IFRS and the future  484
Further reading  492
Glossary  495
Index  504
b r i e f  c o n t e n t s

IV
Preface  X
Acknowledgements  XI
Structure of the book  XII
Walk-through tour  XIV
1	 Financial reporting and regulation  2
	
Introduction  2
	
Using this book  3
	
Annual financial statements  4
	
Uses of financial statements  6
	
Accounting choices  10
	
Qualitative characteristics  12
	
Accounting regulation  14
	
International Financial Reporting Standards  20
	
Summary  28
	
Discussion questions  28
2	 Accounting and accountants  29
	
Introduction  29
	
Accounting function  30
	
Accounting database  34
	
Recording transactions  34
	
Organization of data within the general ledger  36
	
Control and audit  38
	
The accounting profession  52
	
Summary  55
	
Discussion questions  55
3	 Measurement concepts and the balance sheet equation  58
	
Introduction  59
	
The balance sheet does not purport to show what the company is worth  60
Part 1  The accounting and business environment  1
Part 2  Basic financial statements  57
c o n t e n t s

V
contents
	
Company characteristics affecting financial reporting behaviour  60
	
Content of financial statements  64
	
The basics of accounting measurement  70
	
Generally accepted accounting principles  71
	
Conventional measurement bases  76
	
Accounting for transactions  80
The IASB definition and recognition criteria for elements of  
the statement of financial position and the statement of profit or loss  89
	
Summary  94
	
Discussion Questions  94
	
Assignments  94
4	 Accruals accounting  98
	
Introduction  99
	
Accruals basis of accounting  99
	
Credit transactions  101
	
Recognition of revenue  105
	
Period costs  108
	
Inventories and profit measurement  109
	
Inventory accounting techniques  115
	
Net realizable value  117
	
Accruals and the working capital cycle  118
	
Summary  120
	
Discussion Questions  120
	
Appendices  120
	
Assignments  126
5	 Non-current assets and depreciation  131
	
Introduction  132
	
General valuation principles of non-current assets  133
	
Expensing non-current assets  136
	
Accounting for depreciation  144
	
Specific valuation principles by type of non-current assets  149
	
Intangible assets  149
	
Tangible assets  155
	
Investments  159
	
Summary  160
	
Discussion Questions  161
	
Assignments  161
6	 Refining the accounting system  165
	
Introduction  166
	
Accruals and deferrals of expenses and revenues  166
	
Provisions  172
	
Asset impairment  178
	
Bad debts and doubtful debts  185
	
Hidden reserves  187

VI
contents
	
Summary  192
	
Discussion Questions  192
	
Assignments  193
7	 Preparing financial statements  197
	
Constructing financial statements  197
	
Accounting adjustments  205
	
Uses of financial statements  208
	
Summary  209
	
Assignments  209
8	 A framework for interpretation  216
	
Introduction   217
	
Financial structure  218
	
Sources of finance  220
	
Dividend policy  223
	
Working capital management  224
	
Performance measurement  228
	
Summary  229
	
Discussion Questions  230
9	 Financial statement analysis I  231
	
Introduction  231
	
The purpose of analysis  232
	
Traditional analysis  234
	
Tools of analysis  236
	
Management performance ratios  241
	
Financial strength ratios  247
	
Analyzing financial statements  250
	
Summary  254
	
Assignments  255
10	Statement of cash flows  261
	
Introduction  262
	
Usefulness of cash flow information  262
	
Cash flow cycles  263
	
Format and structure of the statement of cash flows  264
	
Cash flows from investing and financing activities  266
	
Cash flows from operating activities  270
	
Direct method for reporting operating cash flows  274
	
Constructing a statement of cash flows 1  277
	
Disposal of long-term assets  279
Part 3  An introduction to financial statement analysis  215

VII
contents
	
Constructing a statement of cash flows 2  281
	
Interpretation  284
	
Presentational differences  286
	
Summary  287
	
Discussion questions  287
	
Assignments  287
11	The annual report  292
	
Introduction  292
	
The corporate report  294
	
Publicity document  297
	
Statement of comprehensive income  298
	
Analyzing the annual report  304
	
Summary  305
	
Discussion questions  305
12	Consolidated financial statements  306
	
Introduction  307
	
Rationale for consolidated financial statements  311
	
Control as the basis for consolidation  313
	
Consolidation basics  314
	
Acquisition method  316
	
Goodwill and its subsequent measurement  321
	
Non-controlling interest  324
	
Consolidated statement of profit or loss  325
	
Associates and joint arrangements  329
	
Disclosure requirements  335
	
Summary  336
	
Discussion questions  337
	
Assignments  337
13	Operating segments and foreign operations  344
	
Introduction  345
	
Stock exchange requirements  345
	
Segment reporting  346
	
Foreign currency transactions and foreign operations  356
	
Primary translation – translating foreign currency transactions in the  
functional currency  359
	
Secondary translation – translating foreign currency financial statements in a 
group’s presentation currency  362
Part 4  The financial statements of multinational 
companies  291

VIII
contents
	
Alternative accounting methods for secondary translation  364
	
Functional currency and type of foreign operation	
370
	
Hedging a net investment in a foreign operation	373
	
Summary  374
	
Discussion Questions  375
	
Assignments  375
14	Issues in financial reporting by multinationals  379
	
Introduction  380
	
Values in accounting  380
	
Measurement attributes  383
	
The IASB’s mixed-attribute model  388
	
Financial instruments  389
	
Investment property and agriculture  392
	
Pension obligations  395
	
Provisions  399
	
Post reporting period events  401
	
Discontinued operations  403
	
Environmental disclosures  404
	
Intellectual capital  408
	
Summary  409
	
Discussion Questions  409
	
Assignments  410
15	International taxation  412
	
Introduction  413
	
Corporate income tax and dividends  414
	
Deferred taxation  416
	
International taxation  424
	
Transfer pricing  425
	
Tax havens  427
	
Summary  427
	
Discussion Questions  428
16	Auditing and corporate governance  429
	
Corporate governance  430
	
Statutory audit  437
	
Issues in international audit  438
	
Auditor independence  439
	
Internal control and risk management  441
	
Audit committee  445
	
Summary  447
	
Discussion questions  447

IX
contents
17	Financial statement analysis II  450
	
Introduction  450
	
Investor relations  451
	
Income smoothing  452
	
Why earnings fluctuate  453
	
Professional analysts  457
	
Quality of earnings  460
	
Analytical techniques  463
	
Strategic ratio analysis  466
	
Shareholder value  473
	
Summary  475
	
Assignments  476
18	IFRS and the future  484
	
Introduction  484
	
Strategic evolution  485
	
The IASB’s first decade  487
	
The 2007 financial crisis  489
	
The next five years  490
	
Summary  491
Further reading  492
Glossary  495
Index  504
Part 5  Advanced financial statement analysis   449

X
This book was conceived as a support for courses whose objective is to provide 
students with a working understanding of financial statements and the meaning 
of accounting numbers. Our intention is to place reporting in its business context, 
and to make it clear to managers how accounting reflects their work. We also aim 
to teach the conceptual foundation of accounting and how this translates into the 
financial statements of businesses. The book is aimed at future users of accounting 
information–managers and analysts – not at future auditors or accountants.
The book is sited emphatically in an intuitive approach to understanding 
accounting and concerns itself with the underlying logic of the corporate ac-
counting system and its exploitation in the financial statements. It is not a book-
keeping course and we have used a spreadsheet for double entry, rather than 
T-accounts or debits and credits, since we believe that the latter are technically 
unnecessary and are practically an obstacle to non-specialists.
The book does not situate itself in an individual national context. It uses Inter-
national Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) as its basis, and reflects, therefore, 
the rules followed by nearly all European listed companies and by an increasing 
number of Asian, African and American (non-US) companies. We also try to keep 
up with current IFRS terminology (e.g. statement of financial position, statement 
of profit or loss (and other comprehensive income)) in order to be consistent with 
the IFRS extracts used in our book.
Walter Aerts
Peter Walton
P R E F A C E

XI
This book has evolved out of teaching materials drawn from a wide range of 
teaching experiences in Belgium, France, Switzerland, the UK and the USA. As a 
result many people, students and colleagues, have influenced the content indi-
rectly, and we are grateful for their help and advice over the years. We should also 
like to thank Brendan George, Annabel Ainscow, Lauren Darby and Alison Cooke 
for their support and commitment in producing a new edition, as well as the rest 
of the publishing team at Cengage Learning.
The text contains quotations from published material and we should like to 
thank the following for permission to use these: Trustees of the IASC Foundation, 
Association of Chartered Certified Accountants (Accounting & Business), the In-
ternational Federation of Accountants, the United Nations Conference on Trade 
and Development, the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Develop-
ment, the US Securities and Exchange Commission and the Institute of Chartered  
Accountants in England and Wales. We also thank the many companies whose 
financial statements have supplied illustrative material.
Reviewer Acknowledgements
The publishers and author team would like to thank the following academics for 
their review comments which have helped shape this new edition of the book:
Chris Coles – University of Glasgow
Claus Koss – Fachhochschule Regensburg
Blain Lambert – Fontys International School of Business Economics, Venlo
Eileen Roddy – ESCP-EAP European School of Management
Mark Whittington – University of Aberdeen
Eugene Apakoh – Royal Docks Business School
a c k n o w l e d g E m e n t s

XII
S t r u c t u r e  o f  t h e  b o o k
The aim of this book is to provide a complete companion to financial reporting 
that will take business students with no knowledge of accounting through the 
mechanics of how financial records are structured through to being able to under-
stand and analyze published consolidated financial statements. However, this is 
not to say that every course will want to devote as much time to financial report-
ing as this would take. The book is therefore structured into what we believe are 
separable building blocks.
Part One covers material that is often not taught as such in a course on ac-
counting and financial statement analysis. It is about the environment within 
which financial reporting takes place – how it is regulated, what an accounting 
department in a company does, how the accounting records are checked. It also 
includes the main material on the International Accounting Standards Board. We 
think this is useful background, not least because students come to the course 
with different previous exposure to accounting and pre-conceptions as to what it 
is. However, it can be dispensed with, or can be set as pre-course reading.
Part Two is the core introduction to financial accounting. We examine the ba-
sic accounting techniques used by a reasonably simple individual company and 
the preparation of annual financial statements from the accounting database. 
This presentation is based on using worksheets to show what is happening in 
the company’s accounting database, rather than the formal book-keeping tech-
niques which involve the famous debits and credits. Most courses require this 
fundamental knowledge of the accounting equation, the iteration between the 
Statement of Profit or Loss (Income Statement) and the Statement of Financial 
Position (Balance Sheet) and accruals accounting.
Part Three then provides a discussion about how financial statements are inter-
preted. Chapter 8 provides a thumbnail sketch of some of the finance theory that 
informs interpretation. Most accounting books do not contain such a chapter but 
we have included it on the basis that accounting is often taught before finance 
in an MBA or management course and this may help students get to grips with 
the purposes of analysis as opposed merely to the techniques. It can easily be 
dispensed with. Chapter 9 contains the basic material on accounting ratios, and 
Chapter 10 introduces the Statement of Cash Flows as a statement that analyses 
the changes in opening and closing financial position. In our view Parts Two and 
Three constitute a basic introduction to accounting for non-financial managers.
However, we are aware that most sets of published financial statements that 
a manager will want to review are likely to be consolidated financial statements, 
and our preference in our own teaching is to include some material, however lim-
ited, on group accounts. In Part Four, we show how groups of companies prepare 
consolidated financial statements to enable them to present a worldwide picture 
of their economic situation. Chapter 11 provides a little contextual analysis about 
the annual reports of multinational companies and their use and introduces the 

XIII
Structure of the book
Statement of Comprehensive Income. Chapter 12 provides the basics of how a 
consolidation is done.
A course could certainly stop there, but we provide two chapters with further 
technical issues. Chapter 13 aims to show that the consolidated statements are a 
confection of statements drawn up in different currencies and dealing with dif-
ferent activities. The chapter addresses segment reporting and foreign currency 
translation issues. Chapter 14 analyzes a selection of current technical issues, in-
cluding a discussion of fair value and financial instruments. We think this may go 
beyond what some teachers are aiming to achieve at entry level but we also think 
students may find it useful to have such a discussion. Chapters 15 and 16 are of-
fered in the general spirit of trying to address all major issues that intersect with 
financial reporting in order to provide a complete guide for the non-financial 
manager. Again, many courses may not want to spend time on this, but on the 
other hand the student who buys and keeps the book will be able to refer back to 
it should the need arise.
Part Five goes further into techniques of financial statements analysis and re-
views those such as Z scores, shareholder value and growth calculations. It could 
be dropped entirely or be taught with Chapter 9. The final chapter takes a look 
at the changing priorities of the IASB since its inception and analyses the likely 
changes in standards up to 2015.

XIV
W A L K - T H R O U G H  T O U R
Standards These reproduce extracts from the International  
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and other sources of infor-
mation published by the IASB.
PART 1  THE ACCOUNTING AND BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT
12
the existing Framework document, while removing the parts that they replaced. It 
now refers to this document as the Conceptual Framework.
STANDARDS
IASB CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK (extracts)
Usefulness of Financial Reporting in Assessing Cash Flow Prospects
OB3. Decisions by existing and potential investors about buying, selling or 
holding equity and debt instruments depend on the returns that they expect 
from an investment in those instruments, for example dividends, principal 
and interest payments or market price increases. Similarly, decisions by exist-
ing and potential lenders and other creditors about providing loans and other 
forms of credit depend on the principal and interest payments or other returns 
that they expect. Investors’, lenders’ and other creditors’ expectations about 
the returns depend on their assessment of the amount, timing and uncertainty 
of (the prospects for) future net cash inﬂ ows to the entity. Consequently, exist-
ing and potential investors, lenders and other creditors need information to 
help them assess the prospects for future net cash inﬂ ows to an entity.
Usefulness of Financial Reporting in Assessing Stewardship
OB4. To assess an entity’s prospects for future net cash inﬂ ows, existing and 
potential investors, lenders and other creditors need information about the 
resources of the entity, claims against the entity, and how efﬁ ciently and ef-
fectively the entity’s management and governing board have discharged their 
responsibilities to use the entity’s resources. Examples of such responsibili-
ties include protecting the entity’s resources from unfavourable effects of eco-
nomic factors such as price and technological changes and ensuring that the 
entity complies with applicable laws, regulations and contractual provisions. 
Information about management’s discharge of its responsibilities is also use-
ful for decisions by existing investors, lenders and other creditors who have 
the right to vote on or otherwise inﬂ uence management’s actions.
Source: IASB, Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting: The objective 
of general purpose ﬁ nancial reporting issued September 2010
Qualitative characteristics are the attributes of ﬁ nancial information that un-
derpin the decision-usefulness of ﬁ nancial reporting. Making these explicit does 
not, however, necessarily make it any easier for preparers and auditors to make 
accounting policy choices. It does, however, provide a framework for discussion 
and evaluation.
Fundamental versus enhancing characteristics
As we have seen, the IASB’s conceptual framework says that decision-usefulness 
is the over-riding characteristic that is necessary in ﬁ nancial reporting. Chapter 
Qualitative characteristics
Between the lines These highlight additional 
discussion points throughout the text.
SIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Intellectual capital
Intellectual capital is a relatively new and enigmatic concept, relating primarily 
to the intangible, highly mutable assets of the ﬁ rm or, as some have put it, the 
‘brain power’ of the organization. This brain power accounts for an increasing 
proportion of the capital in traditional industries and forms the backbone of 
the rapidly growing technology and knowledge-intensive sectors in the global 
economy.
Microsoft is used as the example of the hidden value of these intangible as-
sets of the ﬁ rm. In 1996 Microsoft’s market value was 11.2 times its tangible asset 
value. This ‘missing’ value to a large degree represents the market’s estima-
tion of Microsoft’s stock of intellectual capital that is not captured in its ﬁ nancial 
statements.
This is not the exception but rather the rule in ﬁ nancial reporting and il-
lustrates one of the major limitations of the current ﬁ nancial reporting model. 
The Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants concludes that accounting for 
intellectual capital will require developing accounting measures that can differ-
entiate between ﬁ rms in which intellectual capital is appreciating versus ﬁ rms 
in which it is depreciating, and measures that will show the long run return in 
investment in people skills, information bases and the technological capabili-
BETWEEN THE LINES
Company reports These are extracted from 
the reports of well-known companies that report 
in IFRS GAAP to give a concrete, real-world 
dimension to the text.
CHAPTER 5  NON-CURRENT ASSETS A
COMPANY REPORT
AGFA – INTANGIBLE ASSETS (extract)
Signiﬁ cant accounting policies
(H) Intangible Assets
Intangible assets with indeﬁ nite useful lives, such as trademarks, are stated at 
cost less accumulated impairment losses. Intangible assets with indeﬁ nite use-
ful lives are not amortized. Instead, they are tested for impairment annually and 
whenever there is an indication that the intangible asset may be impaired.
Intangible assets with ﬁ nite useful lives are stated at cost less accumulated 
amortization and impairment losses.
Intangible assets with ﬁ nite useful lives, such as acquired technology and 
customer relationships are amortized on a straight-line basis over their esti-
mated useful lives, generally for periods ranging from 3 to 20 years.
In accordance with IFRS 3 Business Combinations, if an intangible asset is 
acquired in a business combination, the cost of that intangible asset is its fair 
value at the acquisition date. The fair value of an intangible asset reﬂ ects mar-
ket expectations about the probability that the future economic beneﬁ ts em-
bodied in the asset will ﬂ ow to the entity.
Chapter/part openers  
Describe the contents of the chapter in outline and how it fits 
into the ‘big picture’.
2
This chapter lays out the structure of the book, and the approach it takes to mastering 
accounting information. The ﬁ rst step is a review of what ﬁ nancial information is for 
and how it is controlled by governments, the stock exchanges and other institutions. 
It introduces International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) as the main technical 
reference in this book.
C H A P T E R  1
Financial reporting and regulation
I Introduction
I Using this book
I Annual ﬁ nancial statements
I Uses of ﬁ nancial statements
I Accounting choices
I Qualitative characteristics
I Accounting regulation
I International Financial Reporting Standards
I Summary
I Discussion questions
Chapter Structure
The ultimate objective of this book is to enable you to use ﬁ nancial accounting 
information effectively. Accounting reports are the only way currently available 
of getting a picture of what a company is doing, how it is structured and so on. 
Introduction

XV
Summary  Each chapter ends with a comprehensive sum-
mary that provides a thorough recap of issues in each chapter, 
helping you to assess your understanding and revise key 
content.
Assignment Questions These appear in some 
chapters and test the application of principles covered – 
the answers are provided on the password-protected part 
of the website.
CHAPTER 7  PREPARING FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
211
Summary
In this chapter we have demonstrated the technique used to prepare annual ﬁ -
nancial statements from the ledger. This involves extracting a trial balance and 
then using that as a working paper in which we incorporate adjustments for rev-
enues and expenses that fall either side of the year end. The objective is to assign 
revenue and expense to the appropriate year. We have also discussed how differ-
ent capital structures are treated in the ﬁ nancial statements.
Assignments
The following questions have answers on the lecturer side of the website at 
www.cengage.co.uk/walton_aerts2
1. The trial balance of Arénières Inc. at 31 December 20X4 was:
    €
Land
82 100
Buildings (at cost)
120 000
Accumulated depreciation buildings
–36 000
Equipment (at cost)
89 500
Accumulated depreciation equipment
–53 700
Bank account
83 200
Trade receivables
91 300
Inventory at 1 January
214 300
Share capital
100 000
Reserves
185 600
7 per cent debenture
50 000
Trade payables
184 800
Sales
942 700
Purchases
–398 100
Salaries
–343 600
Other operating expenses
–102 200
Interest expense
–3 500
Interim dividend
–25 000
The following additional information is provided:
 
(a) The closing inventory at 31 December 20X4 was €216 300.
 
(b) No depreciation has been provided for 20X4. The company assumes zero 
residual values and uses the following straight-line rates: buildings 2 per 
cent and equipment 20 per cent.
 
(c) The audit fee for 20X4 is expected to be €20 000.
Worked examples    
These clearly apply the principles covered in the book to illustrate 
the meaning clearly.
PART 2  BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
200
future periods and deferring revenues received but yet unearned at reporting 
date. (The information for this in a practical situation comes from examin-
ing individual ledger accounts to check the periods covered by payments/
receipts, and examining payments/receipts after the balance sheet date.)
 
3. Charging annual depreciation: Debiting the operating expenses and credit-
ing accumulated depreciation (or amortization) to reﬂ ect the expensing of 
long-term assets consumed during the year.
 
4. Updating provisions: Adjusting existing provisions for uses and reversals and 
adding new provisions.
 
5. Reviewing assets for potential impairment: If an impairment test evidences an 
impairment loss, the asset value will be decreased (credited) while the im-
pairment loss will be accounted for in the statement of proﬁ t or loss as an 
operating expense (debiting an expense account).
The easiest way to see what happens in practice is if we now take an example, and 
work through the adjustments individually.
Worked example
The trial balance of Mornington Crescent Emporium SA as at 31 December 20X1 
was as follows:
Mornington Crescent Emporium SA
Trial balance as at 31 December 20X1
   €
Assets
Land
30 000
Equipment (at cost)
15 000
Accumulated depreciation
–4 500
Inventory at 1 January X1
13 250
Trade receivables
23 000
Bank
18 560
95 310
Financing
Share capital
50 000
Retained proﬁ ts
10 500
Trade payables
16 850
Sales
193 000
Purchases
–145 000
Salaries and wages
–15 325
Rent
–10 000
Insurance
–2 500
Legal and professional expenses
–1 250
Telephone
–345
Light and heat
–620
95 310
PART 1  THE ACCOUNTING AND BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT
28
Summary
The object of this chapter was to start to explain the environment of account-
ing. It has looked at the main ﬁ nancial statements published by companies and 
discussed the framework through which these are regulated. It has noted that 
governments need to regulate accounting to ensure the efﬁ cient running of the 
economy and the ﬁ nancial markets in particular, since business relies heavily on 
accurate information about other businesses. Government also wants to collect 
taxes and accounting is linked directly with the calculation of taxable proﬁ ts. 
Apart from this, there are other bodies with an interest, notably stock exchanges, 
specialist standard-setting agencies and bodies organized by the accounting pro-
fession or industry sectors.
In the international ﬁ eld there is a strong movement towards the use of In-
ternational Financial Reporting Standards which are promulgated by the IASB. 
These enable company reports to be compared across national boundaries and 
help smooth management decision-making in the context of global business.
Discussion Questions
www.cengage.co.uk/walton_aerts2
1. What are the annual ﬁ nancial statements of a company?
2. Contrast broadly the regulatory traditions in continental Europe as opposed 
to the anglophone countries.
3. Are the ﬁ nancial accounting requirements of entities in the public sector 
 different from those of business in the private sector?
4. Compare and contrast the different types of accounting regulation that exist.
5. How is the IASB’s organizational setting structured?
6. Explain the potential trade-off between relevance and veriﬁ ability.
7. Explain what is meant by relevance, faithful representation and 
 comparability and how they make ﬁ nancial information useful.
Discussion Questions  These appear in some 
chapters and help to reinforce and test your knowledge 
and understanding providing a basis for group discus-
sions and activities.
PART 2  BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
162
Summary
In this chapter we ﬁ rst looked at the question – central to proﬁ t measurement – 
of the treatment of the costs of using up the company’s productive capacity. We 
have seen that where an asset has a determinable life within the company, the cost 
of using up the asset must be allocated over this life, and impacts upon the es-
timate of proﬁ t for each accounting period. We have seen that there are several 
conventional bases for measuring depreciation and these do not necessarily reﬂ ect 
their economic consumption when there are tax considerations involved. We have 
noted that the depreciation charge reduces proﬁ t but does not cause any cash ﬂ ow, 
thereby introducing another systematic difference between proﬁ t and cash ﬂ ow on 
a period-to-period basis. When a long-term asset is disposed of, both gross acquisi-
tion value and accumulated depreciation are offset against disposal proceeds and a 
gain or loss on disposal is included in the statement of proﬁ t or loss.
We have also considered the accounting treatment and valuation speciﬁ cs of the 
main long-term asset categories. Speciﬁ c recognition and measurement rules with 
regard to intangible assets, tangible assets and investments have been reviewed.
Discussion Questions
1. Contrast the accounting consequences of ﬁ nancing the acquisition of a 
building through a bank loan or as a ﬁ nance lease.
2. What is included in the acquisition cost of a long-term tangible asset? Give 
examples of at least four costs that would be included in the acquisition cost 
of a new production line.
3. Discuss the recognition rules for research and development costs.
4. Under what conditions will the disposal of a long-term tangible asset lead to 
a loss? How will the sale affect the ﬁ nancial statements?
5. What are the most common causes of the depreciation of a long-term tan-
gible asset?
Assignments
The following questions have answers on the lecturer side of the website at 
www.cengagelearning.co.uk/walton_aerts2
1. Proﬁ t forecasts
 
A company is considering investing in a project with a ﬁ ve-year useful life. 
The project involves paying €75 000 for a licence to manufacture a new prod-
uct and equipping a production line at a cost of €300 000. The product is ex-
pected to have a useful life of ﬁ ve years only, and at the expiry of that time 
the production line will be sold and should yield a salvage value of €50 000. 
In order to launch the product the company plans a three-month advertising 
campaign which will cost €100 000.
 
Assuming that in each year the expected sales are €1 000 000 and expenses 
other than those detailed above are €800 000, draw up two alternative 
WALK-THROUGH TOUR

XVI
digital support resources
Global Financial Accounting and Reporting

P A R T  O N E
The accounting and 
business environment
This first section of the book is intended to provide context and background to the 
world in which financial reporting takes place. Many management students may 
never previously have come across accounting nor have any idea of the structures 
within which it takes place. This section tries to provide background information that 
should help students understand the subject better in a real world setting. Chapter 1 
introduces financial statements and the institutional framework within which 
International Financial Reporting Standards are developed. Chapter 2 talks about 
accountants and their different functions.

2
This chapter lays out the structure of the book, and the approach it takes to mastering 
accounting information. The first step is a review of what financial information is for 
and how it is controlled by governments, the stock exchanges and other institutions. 
It introduces International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) as the main technical 
reference in this book.
C H A P T E R   1
Financial reporting and regulation
n	 Introduction
n	 Using this book
n	 Annual financial statements
n	 Uses of financial statements
n	 Accounting choices
n	 Qualitative characteristics
n	 Accounting regulation
n	 International Financial Reporting Standards
n	 Summary
n	 Discussion questions
Chapter Structure
The ultimate objective of this book is to enable you to use financial accounting 
information effectively. Accounting reports are the only way currently available 
of getting a picture of what a company is doing, how it is structured and so on. 
Introduction

Chapter 1  Financial reporting and regulation
3
Photographs can show you the company’s physical locations and, if it manufactures 
or sells physical products, what these look like. Words can describe the company 
and its products, but only accounting data can tell you about a company’s profit-
ability, its size and its financial structure in a format which is more or less compa-
rable with other companies and carries with it an assurance that this is the whole of 
the company, warts and all, that you are looking at, not just the good-looking parts.
Financial accounting is intimately linked with business and, as Karl Marx was 
the first to point out, business cannot exist, except in very primitive forms, without 
accounting. Accounting data make the business visible, measure its progress and 
make it possible to manage the business and understand it. Accounting enables 
the business to work in many locations, directed by a central team. Multinational 
companies can only work because accounting is there to control what is going on 
in distant places, to monitor this and to provide information back to centre.
If you look at developing countries and those in transition to a market econ-
omy, the lack of accounting skills and of reliable and independent auditors to 
verify data and ensure that resources are used as intended are major obstacles to 
economic progress.
On the whole, most managers meet accounting in the form of financial re-
ports, and are rarely concerned with the day-to-day running of the accounting 
department. However, they do interface with this in areas such as salaries, ex-
pense refunds, authorizing payment of invoices and so on. Financial reports and 
understanding them are the central issue in this book, although we will certainly 
pass by the accounting department to see what is going on there, as well as re-
view audit, both internal and external. We will focus also on published financial 
reports. The calculation and dissemination of internal reports is itself a long and 
complicated subject, usually dealt with as management accounting or managerial 
accounting, and calling for adaptation of standard accounting data for internal 
purposes. In order to understand that, you need to know about standard account-
ing data, and that is the purpose of this book. What you learn here will enable 
you to understand the annual financial statements published by companies 
but also the basis of most internal reports as well, since they use the same source 
data. Externally disseminated financial statements have to be drawn up by ref-
erence to a set of accounting rules (sometimes referred to as a ‘comprehensive 
basis of accounting’). This book focuses on the rules issued by the International 
Accounting Standards Board (IASB) which are used by listed companies in many 
countries in the world, including the European Union.
The book is organized to take you into the accounting world in a series of steps; 
these do not involve your learning how to be an accountant. In Part One, we will 
look at the environment within which financial reporting takes place – how it is 
regulated, what an accounting department in a company does, how the account-
ing records are checked. In Part Two, we will go on to examine basic accounting 
techniques used by a reasonably simple individual company and the preparation 
of annual financial statements from the accounting database. This presentation 
will be based on using worksheets to show what is happening in the company’s 
accounting database, rather than the formal book-keeping techniques which in-
volve the famous debits and credits. Part Three will then discuss how financial 
statements are interpreted.
Using this book

Part 1  The accounting and business environment
4
We then move on to look at larger companies. In Part Four, we see how groups 
of companies prepare consolidated financial statements to enable them to 
present a worldwide picture of their economic situation. We will then go on to 
consider related issues of international taxation, auditing, corporate governance 
and dissemination of information to stock exchanges. Part Five will come back 
to financial statement analysis and review more sophisticated techniques such 
as growth calculations, integrated ratio analysis, shareholder value and Z scores.
While the structure of the book has been designed to lead you logically through 
a potential minefield as comfortably as possible, you can, of course, choose to 
omit some chapters. Our intention is not merely to teach you to understand the 
nature of accounting information but also to enable you to understand the inter-
actions between accounting and management in a wider sense and to see how 
intimately accounting links with the life of the company, both internally and in 
helping manage relations with the outside environment in which the company 
operates.
All commercial companies produce annual financial statements (also known as the 
annual report, the annual accounts). Generally these have to be filed with the 
government, either centrally or in regional offices, and they have to be sent to 
shareholders. In many countries the government file is available to the public, so 
the financial statements are in effect public and available to competitors or cus-
tomers or suppliers, and are regularly consulted by these. Equally there are credit 
information companies, such as Dun & Bradstreet, Standard & Poor’s or Moody’s 
Corporation, which collect financial information and sell it to interested parties.
Many small companies do not like this exposure, but large companies gener-
ally welcome it and indeed publish the data widely, including on their websites. 
Large companies are well aware that this is the only independently confirmed 
information on the company which is widely available, and is a major tool in 
engendering confidence in those with whom the company wishes to do business.
The annual financial statements typically consist of the following elements:
	
n	 The statement of profit or loss (also referred to as ‘income statement’ or ‘profit 
and loss account’) reports on the revenue, costs and profit of the com-
pany for the year and consequently is the main performance indicator as 
far as profitability is concerned. The IASB has recently enlarged the scope 
of this financial performance statement and now calls it the ‘statement of 
comprehensive income’ (which is also described as the ‘statement of profit 
or loss and other comprehensive income’ referring to its two components).
	
n	 The balance sheet (the IASB terminology is ‘statement of financial 
­position’) gives a picture at a given moment – the last day of the finan-
cial year – of how the company has been financed and how that money 
has been invested in productive capacity (plant, buildings, computers, 
­inventories etc.).
	
n	 The notes to the accounts (in North America these are called ‘footnotes’) 
can be anything from two or three pages to 40 or 50 – the notes provide 
­detailed analysis of some of the figures in the Statements of Financial 
­Position and Comprehensive Income, such as the dates when loans fall 
Annual financial statements

Chapter 1  Financial reporting and regulation
5
due for repayment, or the different constituents of the total inventory. 
­Importantly, the notes also contain a statement of the accounting 
­policies followed by the company. They are increasingly a means of  
conveying non-accounting information, such as contingent environmental 
liabilities, to interested outsiders. The notes are subject to audit.
	
n	 The statement of cash flows is an analysis of the main cash movements 
through the company in the previous 12 months – cash created by the 
company through profitable operations, cash spent on acquiring new 
­capacity, cash repaid to lenders and new borrowings. This statement is 
obligatory in most developed countries but not all.
	
n	 The statement of changes in equity is now, under IFRS, a separate report which 
details dividend payments, issues of capital and other transactions that 
change equity, including the net profit (net income) for the year.
	
n	 The audit report is the statement by the independent auditors of their opin-
ion on the other statements.
For a large multinational, these reports are usually bundled together with a lot 
of voluntary disclosures about group activities. Typically the published ‘annual 
report’ of a company will start with a chairman’s statement, thanking the man-
agement team and saying what a good (usually, but just occasionally bad or indif-
ferent) year it has been and so on. This is followed by many pages of photographs 
of managers, products and plant, as well as lots of charts, graphs and other data 
which show how individual divisions in the group have behaved. None of this 
data is subject to independent checking – but it is nonetheless very useful infor-
mation which no one should neglect. It very often gives a more detailed picture 
of the deeds behind the numbers, and helps an analyst get a feel for the company.
We will discuss corporate governance issues in more detail in another chap-
ter, but between the operating information and the hard accounting information, 
many companies put in disclosures, which stock exchanges and other regula-
tors have encouraged or even made mandatory, about company policy in what 
are perceived as key areas – above all, future prospects, but also things like the 
company’s continuing viability, the risks that it faces, the nature of the control 
systems which enable the management to believe that they know what is going 
on in the company worldwide, and how the company deals with sensitive issues 
such as relations between the management and the auditors, and the award of 
salary increases to senior management.
If you’ve never seen the hard copy of a company’s annual report, you should 
have a look at one and preferably several. Generally all you need do is go to the 
company’s website and follow a link to ‘investors’ or ‘investor relations’. In most 
cases the full annual report is directly downloadable from the company website.
It may have occurred to you that publishing the annual report is an extremely 
expensive business – it is. Aside from the cost of creating the financial statements 
in the first place and indeed having them audited, the cost of producing the 
photo-graphs, artwork and analytical copy, plus running them past your company 
lawyers and your public relations advisers, is very high before you even get into 
the cost of printing probably several million copies and having translations made 
if, like many multinationals, your report is available in several languages. Inter-
nally the annual report will involve the accounting managers, the legal and com-
pany secretarial specialists, the investor relations staff and public relations – apart 
from the chief executive, chairman and the board. Also note that companies try  

Part 1  The accounting and business environment
6
to publish their annual report as soon as possible after the financial year end – 
companies listed in the US often aim at six to eight weeks after the year end. 
More than 12 weeks is unusual, and the EU specifies a maximum of four months 
for listed companies.
It is a standard question to ask who uses company financial statements. Broadly, 
very many people inside and outside the company look at these documents – as 
we have said already, they constitute the only performance indicator that is pub-
licly available and independently verified. So we can be confident that they are 
used. What no one has been able to prove incontestably is how financial data 
are integrated into decision-making and how different accounting scenarios in-
fluence users. Accounting data is, or should be, only one of several sources of 
information about a company and its future prospects. They are concerned with 
past performance which is not in all circumstances a guide to future performance. 
Many people prefer to let a specialist (a broker, financial analyst or financial jour-
nalist) look at the data and then provide an opinion.
The IASB – of whom more later – says the following:
Uses of financial statements
While usefulness for decision-making as an objective of financial statements 
makes sense, it needs to be put into context. There are two major different tradi-
tions in accounting which affect not only how accounting is regulated but also 
how it is done and how it is used. These are the Anglo-Saxon tradition and the 
continental European tradition, and we will need to come back to these ideas 
time and again to explain how accounting works.
Anglo-Saxon accounting
The IASB statement owes more to the Anglo-Saxon than to the continental tradi-
tion of accounting. Anglo-Saxon is the term widely used, but ‘anglophone’ would 
be more appropriate. In this tradition, countries (US, UK, Australia, Canada, New 
Zealand, etc.) had in the early twentieth century no free-standing accounting reg-
ulations on their statute book (although they had criminal laws, tax laws, etc.). 
Instead businesses were left to work out their own accounting rules (but along-
side disclosure requirements enshrined in company or stock exchange law), and 
STANDARDs
IASB CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK (extracts)
The objective of general purpose financial reporting is to provide financial in-
formation about the reporting entity that is useful to present and potential 
equity investors, lenders, and other creditors in making decisions about pro-
viding resources to the entity.
Source: IASB, Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting: 
The objective of General Purpose Financial Reporting, para OB2, issued September 2010

Chapter 1  Financial reporting and regulation
7
this often took place alongside the development of a powerful accounting profes-
sion. You could call this a market solution – to the extent that companies need to 
­communicate understandably, such as to raise finance, they use understandable 
common measures, but no one obliges them to do so.
What has then happened is that the government has reinforced the market 
from time to time, so that the legal obligation to provide information has 
grown over time. The regulations have generally been made heavier following 
on from some market abuse – such as the Enron frauds in the US or, further back, 
historically the Wall Street crash of 1929. This last was blamed on adventurous 
accounting, and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), which is the 
world’s leading stock market regulator, was created by the US government as a 
response.
Accounting regulation in the anglophone countries is a function of the legal 
vehicle used, not a function of the kind of activity carried on by the business (al-
though there are often special rules for banks and insurance companies, which we 
do not address in this book). So if you are a US company that wants to be listed 
on the New York Stock Exchange, you will need to meet stringent SEC accounting 
requirements, but if you want to run the same business with no public offering of 
shares, there are hardly any formal accounting requirements which apply in the 
US. Similarly, if you want to constitute your business as a public limited company 
(plc – not necessarily listed on the London Stock Exchange) in the UK, you will 
have to comply with many corporate accounting rules, but if you constitute it as 
a partnership, there are no statutory requirements for accounting.
STANDARDS
IASB CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK (extracts)
Users of financial statements
OB5. Many existing and potential investors, lenders and other creditors can-
not require reporting entities to provide information directly to them and must 
rely on general purpose financial reports for much of the financial information 
they need. Consequently, they are the primary users to whom general pur-
pose financial reports are directed.
OB10 Other parties, such as regulators and members of the public other 
than investors, lenders and other creditors, may also find general purpose 
financial reports useful. However, these reports are not primarily directed to 
these other groups.
Source: IASB, Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting: 
The objective of General Purpose Financial Reporting, issued September 2010
In an Anglo-Saxon accounting context, the financial statements are tradition-
ally a function of the financing of the company. They derive from the Industrial 
Revolution when technology first transformed business and entrepreneurs started 
looking for vehicles through which they could raise capital to start industrial 
ventures. Prior to the Industrial Revolution most business investment was made 
by owner-managers and was inevitably relatively small scale. But from this point 

Part 1  The accounting and business environment
8
on, the managers of companies were less and less often the source of finance for 
those companies, and financial reports developed as a means of informing out-
side ­financiers (shareholders principally but also banks) as to what had been done 
with their money. We have the start of a split between management and capi-
tal: professional managers started to run ‘companies’ in which several investors, 
eventually many, had put money.
The annual accounts were a necessary means of informing the investors (share-
holders) and creating an atmosphere of confidence, which in turn would encour-
age investors to reward the managers – in conditions of uncertainty, the investors 
would reduce the reward to managers because they could not be sure that it had 
been earned. At the same time, the idea of independent audit developed as a 
means of increasing the degree of confidence which shareholders might have in 
the financial statements. In more recent times, companies have simply extended 
this principle to customers, suppliers, staff and the general public, as these have 
become more sophisticated in their understanding of financial data.
Continental Europe
The continental European accounting tradition has its roots much earlier in busi-
ness history than Anglo-Saxon accounting. The main model for European systems 
started out in 1673 as a French government statute (known as the ‘Savary Ordon-
nance’), which was borrowed by other countries in this form or in its later form as 
part of Napoleon’s Commercial Code (1807). The French required all businesses 
(in whatever legal form, but companies as such were rare at that time) to calculate 
an annual ‘inventory’ – in effect a statement of financial position (balance sheet). 
The French model was subsequently borrowed by many countries, one way and 
another, and in particular by Belgium, Spain, Germany and Italy (this is not to sug-
gest that accounting regulation in those countries is still exactly the same now – 
regulation is constantly evolving).
The main reason for its introduction in France is believed to have been govern-
ment regulation of the economy. The government was concerned at the large num-
ber of business bankruptcies. Apart from causing people to lose money, bankruptcies 
also damage confidence in the market, and this, you will appreciate, is essential if the 
market is to function correctly. Government concern to strengthen the operation of 
the market, and thus the national economy, is often a key trigger of regulation.
The effect in continental Europe has been to create a tradition where all busi-
nesses are subject to accounting rules (with extra rules for limited liability compa-
nies and listed ones), and where accounting regulation is primarily the concern of 
the government rather than the accounting profession or companies themselves. 
This remains broadly the case in these countries still.
Link with taxation
These different historical roots can probably also explain another important 
aspect of accounting regulation – the link between measuring performance for 
shareholders and measuring profits for tax purposes. This link is looser in Anglo-
Saxon countries than in continental European ones. In the United Kingdom, in-
come tax was introduced first in 1799 – well before there was any accounting 
regulation as such. There grew up a tradition, therefore, where measurement 

Chapter 1  Financial reporting and regulation
9
of profit for tax purposes was seen as a legal matter, with its own statutes and 
jurisprudence which were separate from company regulation. In continental Eu-
rope, however, income taxes were mostly introduced in the early 20th century 
(Germany was a little ahead of this) but well after the introduction of accounting 
regulation by the State. Not surprisingly, measurement of profit for tax purposes 
became closely intertwined with other accounting needs, and the formal link 
between reporting to the tax authorities and reporting to shareholders is much 
closer than in Anglo-Saxon jurisdictions.
It should be said that the relationship between these two reporting streams is 
constantly evolving, and that the widespread use of consolidated accounts has 
introduced a new element into the equation. Consolidated financial statements 
(or consolidated accounts) are produced by large groups of companies for their 
shareholders. They consist, as we shall see later, of aggregate figures for all the 
individual companies making up the group. Tax assessment is done only through 
the individual companies, and the group financial statements therefore have no 
tax implications. This means that larger companies, at least, are able to separate 
out to some degree the measurement of profit for tax purposes, and the measure-
ment of economic performance for shareholders and others. You will appreciate 
that in theory there should perhaps be no difference between the two concepts, 
but in practice governments distort economic behaviour through taxation, partly 
to counter tax avoidance and partly to give companies incentives to behave in a 
way that the government wishes to encourage (e.g. installing environmentally 
friendly processes, maintaining employment).
This usually means that tax considerations enter into company strategic 
choices (or should – individual companies differ quite widely in the extent to 
which they integrate tax into their planning) and also play a significant role in 
accounting regulation. For example, tax rules may well fix maximum limits on 
some expenses, and this will encourage companies to charge the maximum 
in their accounts. The rules may also refuse to accept other types of expendi-
ture as a deduction from taxable profits, with the consequence that compa-
nies restrict some kinds of activity. We will look at this later in Chapter 15, on 
taxation.
The extent to which taxation impacts upon company accounting is not only 
a function of the regulatory environment, but also depends on the ownership 
of the company, which is in turn an issue frequently linked to size. Many small 
and medium-sized companies do not operate as a group of companies and their 
ownership is in the hands of the managers, or of a family. This may mean that the 
shareholders do not depend upon the annual financial statements as their only 
source of information about the company – they work in the company, or they  
can ask or even just go along and have a look.
This means that there is no point in producing sophisticated economic 
measurements for the shareholders. Annual financial statements of small and 
medium-sized companies are consequently influenced most heavily by tax con-
siderations – reducing the profit in order to reduce tax becomes the main objec-
tive in making accounting choices. This may also mean that managers of small 
companies have only a hazy idea of their profitability, because they believe the 
reported figure to be artificially low as a result of tax manipulations yet have no 
means of knowing the extent of the difference. This is not particularly useful for 
management decision-making!

Part 1  The accounting and business environment
10
Some people come to accounting believing that it is a set of precise measure-
ment rules which permit the exact measurement of company profit and the 
value of the company. In fact accounting rules are anything but precise, the 
measurement of profit can never be anything but an estimate and the accounts 
do not under any circumstances show what a company is ‘worth’ (we should 
also bear in mind that value is a subjective notion and must always be defined 
when used – for example, the value of something as between buyer and seller is 
usually different, there are different calculation bases such as economic value, 
cost, etc.).
You will soon appreciate as you go through this book that accounting mea-
surement is full of choices. We can distinguish between three types of encounter 
between choice and rules:
	
1.	The rules are quite specific and there is no choice (maybe the law specifies 
what must be done, or an accounting standard).
	
2.	There are accounting rules, but we have freedom to make a choice between 
two or more alternative sets of rules, each of which is acceptable to regula-
tors (the most common case).
	
3.	There are no rules so we must decide for ourselves how to deal with a prob-
lem (maybe by reference to what other people in the same line of business 
generally do, or after consultation with our auditors).
The existence of these choices is something that makes accounting comparisons 
difficult within the same jurisdiction, and also leads to different accounting rules 
Accounting choices
COMPANY REPORT
THE NESTLÉ GROUP
Consolidated financial statements (overview)
n	
Principal exchange rates
n	
Consolidated income statement for the year ended 31 December 2011
n	
Consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the year ended 
31 December 2011
n	
Consolidated balance sheet as at 31 December 2011
n	
Consolidated cash flow statement for the year ended 31 December 2011
n	
Consolidated statement of changes in equity for the year ended 31 December 
2011
n	
Notes
n	
Report of the Statutory Auditor on the Consolidated Financial Statements
n	
Financial information – five year review
n	
Companies of the Nestlé Group
Source: Nestlé Group, Consolidated Financial Statements 2011 (Nestlé website)

Chapter 1  Financial reporting and regulation
11
being used in different countries. Companies are generally required, therefore, to 
state clearly in their annual financial statements what choices they have made in 
key areas. Large companies typically have several pages devoted to ‘accounting 
principles’ alongside their financial statements.
The variability of accounting principles is often criticized by the financial press, 
and it is one reason why those who design MBA courses insist upon a significant 
accounting component in the degree. As we advance through the accounting ter-
ritory we will highlight areas where there are choices and show how these impact 
measurement.
Profit as estimate
The ‘real’ profit of a company can only be measured absolutely when the com-
pany has ceased operations, all the company resources have been sold, its debts 
have been paid off and all its money has been distributed to its owners.
To illustrate, suppose a company builds a factory, equips it with sophis-
ticated machinery and then uses it to manufacture a product which it sells. 
Say the factory and equipment cost €100m, and the factory closes down after 
ten years and is sold for €10m; we can say that, in addition to raw materials, 
staffing, power and so on, the company had a net infrastructure cost of €90m 
(€100m to set up, less final exit receipt of €10m) for the factory, which should 
be taken into account in measuring profit for each of the ten years in which 
the factory was operating. We only know this net cost for sure when the factory 
has been sold (when the residual value of the factory facilities is realized). 
If, though, we ignore the cost of the factory in measuring profit in the years 
when the factory is operating, we will be overstating the profit. Overstating the 
profit will mislead those who lend to or invest in the firm, and potentially lead 
to paying out too much in tax and dividends so that the company eventually 
fails. To avoid this we are obliged to include an estimate of this expense, so the 
annual profit during those years is necessarily based in part on an unprovable 
estimate.
IASB’s conceptual framework
The IASB’s conceptual framework is a high level document that sets out the 
objectives of financial information, its qualitative characteristics, the elements 
that make up financial statements and issues of this kind. In its original form 
it was issued in 1989 as the Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of 
Financial Statements. It is currently being revised as a joint project with the 
US standard-setter, the Financial Accounting Standards Board and re-issued as 
the Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting. The revision is unlikely to 
be completed for several years, but the IASB is aiming to bring in to force in-
dividual chapters as they are completed. Chapters One and Three, which we 
cite here, have been published in final form but other chapters are still being 
worked on.
We should also say that although the revision process is long, for most of the 
chapters this only involves some fine-tuning of what existed beforehand. More 
time is being spent developing areas that were not covered adequately or at all 
in either the IASB’s or the FASB’s original frameworks on issues such as measure-
ment and the reporting entity. In 2010 the IASB added the new chapters to 

Part 1  The accounting and business environment
12
the existing Framework document, while removing the parts that they replaced. It 
now refers to this document as the Conceptual Framework.
STANDARDS
IASB CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK (extracts)
Usefulness of Financial Reporting in Assessing Cash Flow Prospects
OB3. Decisions by existing and potential investors about buying, selling or 
holding equity and debt instruments depend on the returns that they expect 
from an investment in those instruments, for example dividends, principal 
and interest payments or market price increases. Similarly, decisions by exist-
ing and potential lenders and other creditors about providing loans and other 
forms of credit depend on the principal and interest payments or other returns 
that they expect. Investors’, lenders’ and other creditors’ expectations about 
the returns depend on their assessment of the amount, timing and uncertainty 
of (the prospects for) future net cash inflows to the entity. Consequently, exist-
ing and potential investors, lenders and other creditors need information to 
help them assess the prospects for future net cash inflows to an entity.
Usefulness of Financial Reporting in Assessing Stewardship
OB4. To assess an entity’s prospects for future net cash inflows, existing and 
potential investors, lenders and other creditors need information about the 
resources of the entity, claims against the entity, and how efficiently and ef-
fectively the entity’s management and governing board have discharged their 
responsibilities to use the entity’s resources. Examples of such responsibili-
ties include protecting the entity’s resources from unfavourable effects of eco-
nomic factors such as price and technological changes and ensuring that the 
entity complies with applicable laws, regulations and contractual provisions. 
Information about management’s discharge of its responsibilities is also use-
ful for decisions by existing investors, lenders and other creditors who have 
the right to vote on or otherwise influence management’s actions.
Source: IASB, Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting: 
The objective of General Purpose Financial Reporting, issued September 2010
Qualitative characteristics are the attributes of financial information that under-
pin the decision-usefulness of financial reporting. Making these explicit does  
not, however, necessarily make it any easier for preparers and auditors to make 
accounting policy choices. It does, however, provide a framework for discussion 
and evaluation.
Fundamental versus enhancing characteristics
As we have seen, the IASB’s conceptual framework says that decision-usefulness 
is the over-riding characteristic that is necessary in financial reporting. Chapter 
Qualitative characteristics

Chapter 1  Financial reporting and regulation
13
Three of the conceptual framework addresses ‘qualitative characteristics’ (see 
­Figure 1.1).
The qualitative characteristics of useful financial information  . . . identify the 
types of information that are likely to be most useful to the existing and potential 
investors, lenders and other creditors for making decisions about the reporting 
entity on the basis of information in its financial report, The Conceptual Framework 
for Financial Reporting: Qualitative Characteristics of Useful Financial Information,  
issued September 2010. The document goes on to state that the fundamental quali-
tative characteristics are relevance and faithful representation.
The conceptual framework adds that information is relevant if it is capable 
of making a difference in the decisions of capital providers. It says that relevant 
information could have predictive value if it helps form expectations of the future. 
It has confirmatory value if it confirms or changes expectations of the future made 
in the past.
Financial reports represent economic phenomena in words and numbers. To 
be useful, financial information must not only represent relevant phenomena, 
but it must also faithfully represent the phenomena that it purports to represent. 
To be a perfectly faithful representation, a depiction would have three charac-
teristics. It would be complete, neutral and free from error. Of course, perfection is 
seldom, if ever, achievable. The Board’s objective is to maximize these qualities to 
the extent possible.
The IASB conceptual framework identifies four ‘enhancing’ qualities. These are 
comparability, verifiability, timeliness and understandability.
There is a conundrum in accounting which is that the most reliable informa-
tion (meaning information that is not subject to uncertainty) is necessarily old 
information, since all the facts can be established incontrovertibly only after 
the elapse of some time. Of this, the most relevant information is that which 
concerns the immediate past because we use it to understand what we need to 
improve or change in managing the future. Relevant information is timely and 
has predictive or feedback value. To be useful, accounting information should 
Fundamental QC
• Relevance
 Complete
 Neutral
 Free from
 material error
Pervasive constraints
Enhancing QC
• Verifiability
• Comparability
• Understandability
• Timeliness
• Cost versus benefits
• Faithful representation
Figure 1.1
Qualitative 
characteristics

Part 1  The accounting and business environment
14
be both verifiable and relevant. Timely information is likely to include estimates 
and other uncertainties and this creates a tension. Some would argue that timely 
information is most useful for prediction, whereas verifiable, certain, data is most 
useful for stewardship purposes (i.e. judging performance retrospectively). People 
drawing up financial statements will sometimes have to make accounting choices 
that will engender trade-offs between both of these qualities.
There are a number of issues we can draw from the analysis of financial infor-
mation contained in the conceptual framework. The financial statements should 
depict economic phenomena, but they should do so irrespective of the legal 
form. Another way to put this is that substance takes precedence over form in 
reporting under IFRS. We’ll see later how this impacts upon financial statements. 
Another issue is that information must be capable of changing a decision, and 
this requirement is more fundamental than verifiability. Again we will see later 
how estimates of the future form part of the financial reporting process. It is bet-
ter from the perspective of investor decision-making to publish data based on 
management’s best estimate than to wait for uncertain outcomes to be resolved.
You may have an image of accounting as a process of tracking numbers, re-
cording them then summarizing them; a world where there is no uncertainty and 
no drama. Some accounting is like that, but preparing financial statements often 
involves very difficult judgments and many estimates of future outcomes. It is a 
risky business, as the SEC’s compliance division will confirm.
The existence of choices in accounting is one very good reason to have regula-
tion. Of course, choice is not of itself necessarily a bad thing: it is only a problem 
in accounting where some people use accounting choice to deceive others. This 
explains why governments become involved in accounting regulation. As tax 
collectors they naturally want reliable figures for (taxable) income. As manag-
ers of the national economy they want that economy to function efficiently and 
produce wealth. The economy’s functioning, and particularly that of the capital 
markets, is at least slowed down – if not stalled entirely – if investors, customers 
and suppliers do not know whether they can rely on the financial statements of 
companies with which they wish to do business. Investors either do not invest or 
demand much higher returns to compensate for the uncertainty, clients may go 
elsewhere or be prepared to pay only a low price, while suppliers may refuse to 
supply on credit. If the financial stability of a company cannot be judged reliably, 
others are reluctant to deal with it.
This leads to another argument which is that, given that the markets cease 
to function without reliable information, market pressures surely will force 
competitive companies to adopt reliable, comparable accounting in order to re-
duce financing costs and help business relations generally. This argument is also 
valid, and is supported by the way in which many large companies in the past 
have voluntarily adopted international accounting standards for their group  
financial statements and use an international audit firm to attest the validity of 
these. However, the market is not necessarily that efficient, and there are failures 
which in part derive from unclear accounting causing people to make wrong 
decisions.
Accounting regulation

Chapter 1  Financial reporting and regulation
15
The world functions on a complex mixture of regulation and market forces. 
Given that this book is intended to be used outside of any one specific legal envi-
ronment, we propose to present below the different types of regulation which are 
to be found. You should note that regulation can exist at an international level 
(for example International Financial Reporting Standards), at a regional 
level (for example European Union directives and regulations) and at a national 
level. International managers should make a note that there will be a different 
mix of regulators in different countries and they may need to familiarize them-
selves with the local situation.
Types of regulation
It may be worth pointing out that the reasons why a change in regulation takes 
place are a fruitful field of research in accounting. The model that we will use 
here suggests that, starting from an equilibrium position where there is no obvi-
ous pressure for change, there is a cycle:
	
1.	equilibrium
	
2.	shock (which destroys the equilibrium)
	
3.	search for an acceptable solution
	
4.	articulation of regulation
	
5.	new equilibrium
	
6.	unexpected consequences of the change.
The shock to the system could come from any one of a multitude of sources. Indi-
vidual financial scandals have in the past been a common source of disequilibrium 
(the Enron failure brought about significant changes in American and European 
regulation), but other possibilities are economic changes such as the introduction 
of new techniques (e.g. derivatives and financial instruments generally),  
legal changes in the national economy (e.g. joining the European Union, moving 
from a communist regime to a market economy), economic phenomena (such as 
the sub-prime crisis and the credit crunch that followed) and so on. The search 
for a solution often involves seeking consensus, which will involve different peo-
ple on different issues, leading to some inconsistencies in regulation. The method of 
articulating the solution is also subject to local cultural differences – some countries 
prefer legal regulation, others like codes of best practice and so on. The result of 
all this is that accounting rules are different in different countries in some of their 
details, even if the main lines tend to converge.
We would distinguish the following types of regulatory body:
	
n	 government – for economic management
	
n	 government – for tax purposes
	
n	 stock exchange
	
n	 private sector body
	
n	 professional accountants
	
n	 specialist industry organizations.
We should also point out that the regulation of the financial statements of banks 
and insurance companies, while typically linked to that of commercial compa-
nies, is nonetheless usually subject to separate rules, because governments wish to 

Part 1  The accounting and business environment
16
control the financial health of banks much more closely than that of commercial 
companies, and impose limits on their activities based on balance sheet figures. This 
book does not address the financial statements of banks and insurance companies.
Government
As we have discussed, the government is interested in the efficient functioning 
of the economy, and this leads to regulation designed to ensure that the markets 
can operate as far as possible free from fraud and misrepresentation. This form of 
regulation may be articulated through laws which address accounting, through 
commercial codes and also government regulatory agencies. An example of this 
kind of approach would be France, where there are laws governing accounting 
but also government-sponsored committees which operate under the aegis of the 
Ministry of Finance and issue detailed regulations on specific accounting issues.
The government is also active in regulating accounting for tax purposes. This 
is often done through individual measures contained in annual finance laws or 
similar instruments. In some countries jurisprudence, the decisions of tax courts 
on specific cases, can also be very important in determining some accounting is-
sues. This is notably the case in Germany and to a lesser extent in the UK.
The stock exchange usually regulates the financial information that has to be 
provided by companies listed on it. In some countries there is a government regu-
lator that does this, such as the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) in the 
US, while the exchange itself is run by private sector bodies. In other countries 
there is no split between those who run the stock exchange on a day-to-day basis 
(generally the members of the exchange) and those who regulate admission to it. 
This is the case, for example, in Switzerland, where the private sector regulates 
listed companies (although subject to a limited legal framework). In the EU there 
has been a move to establish national regulators that are separate from the stock 
exchange. These are co-ordinated through the European Securities and Markets 
Authority (ESMA).
Private sector
In most countries there is some input into accounting best practice from the pri-
vate sector in the form of standard-setting committees of one kind or another. In 
the US, although the SEC controls listings on the various stock exchanges, and 
is therefore responsible for specifying what accounting rules they should use, in 
practice it leaves the task of writing detailed rules (accounting standards) to a 
private sector body, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB). The FASB 
is financed by a levy on companies that are registered with the SEC and is a free-
standing body without any special rights other than those it derives from the 
SEC’s endorsement of its standards.
This is typical of the modern form of detailed rule-making – the rules do not 
have to go through a long drawn-out statutory process, and can be changed at 
any time if they appear to be ineffective or become irrelevant. The flexibility and 
rapidity of this form and the high level of technicality of its pronouncements 
are the major argument for using a private sector body rather than relying solely 
on statutes or government agencies, where accounting regulation would have to 
compete for parliamentary time with other important issues and be debated by 
those with no knowledge of accounting.

Chapter 1  Financial reporting and regulation
17
In many countries that have this kind of private sector regulatory body, it de-
veloped from advisory committees run by the accounting profession, and most 
developed professional accounting bodies have technical committees which 
make recommendations as to best practice. Such a committee may be the only 
private sector source of national standards in a particular country but, even so, it 
does not necessarily command the automatic acceptance of its pronouncements. 
An example would be the technical committee of the Ordre des Experts Compta-
bles in France.
Another source of private sector rules is industry associations. Their activity var-
ies very much from sector to sector and country to country, but sometimes such 
organizations agree special rules which apply to their members and are intended to 
address accounting for transactions which are specific to their industry, or lead to 
a higher comparability in presentation or valuation of balance sheet and profit or 
loss items. Evidently such arrangements are voluntary but in some countries they 
may also be endorsed by official regulatory committees – the UK standard-setter 
approves ‘statements of recommended practice’ which are prepared by industry 
groups such as banks or insurers, and France’s Autorité des Normes Comptables 
confirms industry-specific applications of its accounting plan.
Different combinations of these kinds of regulatory organizations exist in each 
developed country, and the diverse sources of regulation are one reason why ex-
pert local advice is needed.
International
Apart from the national regulators, there are also international bodies which pro-
vide important rules. The most well known is the International Accounting Stan-
dards Board (IASB). The IASB is the world’s leading accounting standard-setter. 
Since 2002 when its standards were adopted by the European Commission for 
use by all listed companies in Europe (from 2005) there has been a rush in all ma-
jor and many minor economies to use its standards. The IASB itself says that its 
standards are either compulsory or allowed in more than 100 countries. Australia 
and South Africa also moved to IFRS in 2005, followed shortly afterwards by New 
Zealand. Canada, Korea and Brazil moved in 2011. China issues its own standards 
modelled closely on IFRS, Japan allows companies to adopt IFRS voluntarily and 
may make this compulsory soon. IFRS are accepted by the SEC as the equivalent 
of US Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP), and the SEC is consider-
ing whether to allow US companies the option to use IFRS instead.
What is the big attraction? Well, if we look at the European Commission’s deci-
sion in issuing the Regulation 2002/1608, the main issue was that a fundamental 
objective of the EU is to create a single market with no barriers to movement 
within it. The Commission perceived that the slightly different financial report-
ing in each member state was an obstacle to the free flow of capital. If inves-
tors could compare one company with another, irrespective of where the parent 
company’s main office was based, they could invest more efficiently and compa-
nies could raise finance more easily.
A second issue with the Commission was that if IFRS were widely used outside 
the EU, this would also make it much easier for European companies to raise 
money on markets outside Europe. The big prize was access to the US markets. 
When the Commission made its decision, non-US companies using IFRS but listed 
on an American stock exchange had to provide additional information, including 

Part 1  The accounting and business environment
18
a reconciliation of their equity and earnings to what they would have been under 
US GAAP. In 2007 AXA, the European insurer, told the SEC that it estimated that 
preparing this cost them $20m a year, not including internal staff time. One of 
the IASB’s objectives from the start was to achieve parity with US GAAP and this 
happened in 2007. From 2008, companies using IFRS as issued by the IASB have 
not needed to provide this expensive reconciliation.
Generically then, we can say that using IFRS means that companies can be 
directly compared with each other, irrespective of national origins. This should 
help the investor make better choices. It also helps companies to get more expo-
sure than they otherwise would. They can more easily be listed on different stock 
exchanges and their financial statements are directly comparable. Using IFRS is 
part of participating in a global investment market.
One piece of background we should also mention concerns how the stan-
dards are labelled. You will see later in the book that some are called International  
Financial Reporting Standards while others are called International Accounting 
Standards (IAS). The explanation is history. The IASB was originally named the In-
ternational Accounting Standards Committee (IASC). The IASC was launched in 
1973 by the accounting profession as a recognition that there was much diversity 
in accounting rules and that the globalization of commerce meant that some of 
this diversity should be removed. The IASC gradually became accepted as an inter-
national source of best practice. In 2001, the IASC was replaced by the IASB. The 
IASC rules were called International Accounting Standards (IAS). Pronouncements 
issued by the IASB (since 2001) are known as International Financial Reporting 
Standards (IFRS). The IAS issued by the former IASC remain in effect unless and 
until the IASB amends or replaces them. The term ‘IFRS’ should be understood to 
include both the older IAS and the more recent IASB standards. We shall use IFRS 
as the main source of reference in this book and discuss them in more detail below.
Just to add to the problem, there are also things known as Interpretations. 
These have the same force as IFRS, and are included in the generic term IFRS. 
They are issued by a special body, now the IFRS Interpretations Committee, but 
previously the International Financial Reporting Interpretations Committee 
­(IFRIC), and prior to 2002 the Standards Interpretations Committee (SIC). The In-
terpretations Committee receives queries as to how IFRS should be applied in cir-
cumstances that are not specifically covered by a standard, or is asked to resolve 
apparent conflicts between standards.
For regulators a problem is that some jurisdictions have been tempted to mod-
ify IFRS slightly when adopting them. This results in there being slightly different 
versions in use. Notably the European Union modified IAS 39 on financial instru-
ments. EU companies have to state that they use ‘IFRS as endorsed by the EU’ (or 
a similar formula). The SEC only accepts the original IFRS as a substitute for US 
GAAP when used by a foreign issuer.
There are no other bodies writing international accounting standards for pri-
vate sector companies, but we should mention that the United Nations supports 
an intergovernmental working group devoted to accounting and auditing issues 
at the corporate level. This takes place under the auspices of the UN Conference 
on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) and is called the Intergovernmental Work-
ing Group of Experts on International Standards of Accounting and Reporting 
(ISAR for short). The ISAR group commissions research reports into current ac-
counting problems. These are debated at an annual conference and recommen-
dations are made to help governments develop their regulatory and professional 
structures. ISAR supports the IASB and helps involve governments, particularly 

Chapter 1  Financial reporting and regulation
19
of developing countries, in discussions about the utility and implementation of 
IASB standards.
There is also an international representative of the accounting profession: the 
International Federation of Accountants (IFAC), based in New York. We will come 
back to it in Chapter 2, on the accounting profession. It has committees which 
publish recommendations on auditing, education and other matters. It issues 
auditing standards through its International Auditing and Assurance Standards 
Board, and these are increasingly being used in Europe to give uniform audit 
alongside international accounting standards. However, the IFAC also hosts the 
International Public Sector Accounting Standards Board (IPSASB) which focuses 
on the accounting and financial reporting needs of national, regional and local 
governments, related governmental agencies and the constituencies they serve.
Public sector
This is probably a good point to mention that accounting in the public sector is 
generally very different from that in the private sector, although governments are 
beginning to turn to private sector techniques. Basically, private sector account-
ing is concerned with measuring profit and the financial position of and related 
sources of finance for an enterprise. It produces annual reports which are in effect 
a series of interim reports on a business which is intended to have long or lim-
itless time horizons.
Public sector accounting on the other hand has traditionally had short hori-
zons where the object is primarily to explain what has been done with the money 
available to spend in any one year. Reports typically focus on a particular source 
of revenue (e.g. government grants for road improvement) and explain how 
it has been spent, or on a particular activity (e.g. primary school education). Any 
particular public sector unit, say a municipality or a government ministry, does 
not therefore present a single coherent report on its activities for the year, but 
rather a whole series of individual reports. Equally, the public sector makes little 
or no distinction between short-term (sometimes known as current) and long-
term (sometimes called capital) expenditure – money in one particular year might 
be spent on building one hospital, and other money on paying the running costs 
of another hospital, but for traditional public sector accounting these are just two 
‘funds’ like any others. The hospital is in effect treated as a current year expense 
and does not appear on any kind of government ‘balance sheet’ as an asset.
In the 1990s the desire for performance evaluation measures in the public sec-
tor caused a number of countries, led by New Zealand, to move towards private 
sector techniques where long-lived purchases remain on the books, and where 
‘revenues’ are determined or, to put it another way, outputs are assigned financial 
values, so that the efficiency of the use of resources can be measured. It would 
be a mistake to think that such a revolution in public sector accounting will be 
either widespread or rapid. First, it involves a desire on the part of government for 
transparency in their financial dealings, which is not something too many gov-
ernments necessarily see as a policy objective. Second, the change-over involves 
massive re-education, not only of accounting staff but also all those who use  
financial information, and also a complete reform of accounting systems, which 
is both costly and time-consuming.
For the moment it would be better to think of public sector accounting as a 
different subject from that of the private sector (and one which will not be taken 
further in this book), although changes can be expected. The International Public 

Part 1  The accounting and business environment
20
Sector Accounting Standards Board (IPSASB) of IFAC plays an important catalyst 
role by issuing and promoting benchmark guidance, conducting educational 
and research programmes, and facilitating the exchange of information among 
­accountants and those who work in the public sector. It develops International 
Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) for financial reporting by govern-
ments and other public sector entities. In general, IFRS are used as the starting 
point in developing these standards.
The International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), established by the IASB, 
are increasingly recognized as a mature and rigorous set of rules for the prepara-
tion of the financial statements of many large and multinational companies and 
are accepted by most security market authorities. IFRS are also used as the basis 
for national accounting requirements (partially or in full) or as an international 
benchmark for countries which develop their own requirements.
The IASB is a private sector body and is not responsible to any governmental 
organization.
The IASB’s objectives are set out in a constitution, the ultimate goal being the 
development and rigorous application of a single set of global accounting stan-
dards, which will produce high-quality financial information to help participants 
in the world’s capital markets to make economic decisions. The IASB has, how-
ever, no enforcement authority.
Table 1.1 gives an overview of the IFRS as of January 2012. The table comprises 
both the main standards (IAS and IFRS) and the interpretations of the successive 
Interpretations Committees. We will refer to these IASB rules in this text in chap-
ters covering the appropriate topic.
International Financial Reporting Standards
Conceptual Framework
CF
Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial 
­Statements (being progressively replaced by the joint Conceptual Frame-
work for Financial Reporting)
Main standards
IAS 1
Presentation of Financial Statements
IAS 2
Inventories
IAS 7
Statement of Cash Flows
IAS 8
Accounting Policies, Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors
IAS 10
Events after the Reporting Period
IAS 11
Construction Contracts
IAS 12
Income Taxes
IAS 14
Segment Reporting
IAS 16
Property, Plant and Equipment
IAS 17
Leases
IAS 18
Revenue
Table 1.1
List of IASB 
pronouncements 
as of  
January 2012

Chapter 1  Financial reporting and regulation
21
IAS 19
Employee Benefits
IAS 20
Accounting for Government Grants and Disclosure of Government 
Assistance
IAS 21
The Effects of Changes in Foreign Exchange Rates
IAS 23
Borrowing Costs
IAS 24
Related Party Disclosures
IAS 26
Accounting and Reporting by Retirement Benefit Plans
IAS 27
Separate Financial Statements
IAS 28
Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures
IAS 29
Financial Reporting in Hyperinflationary Economies
IAS 30
Disclosure in the Financial Statements of Banks and Similar  
Financial Institutions
IAS 32
Financial Instruments: Disclosure and Presentation
IAS 33
Earnings per Share
IAS 34
Interim Financial Reporting
IAS 36
Impairment of Assets
IAS 37
Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets
IAS 38
Intangible Assets
IAS 39
Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement
IAS 40
Investment Property
IAS 41
Agriculture
IFRS 1
First-time Adoption of International Financial Reporting Standards
IFRS 2
Share-based Payment
IFRS 3
Business Combinations
IFRS 4
Insurance Contracts
IFRS 5
Non-current Assets Held for Sale and Discontinued Operations
IFRS 6
Exploration for and Evaluation of Mineral Resources
IFRS 7
Financial Instruments: Disclosures
IFRS 8
Operating Segments
IFRS 9
Financial Instruments
IFRS 10
Consolidated Financial Statements
IFRS 11
Joint Arrangements
IFRS 12
Disclosures of Interests in Other Entities
IFRS 13
Fair Value Measurement
Interpretations
SIC 7
Introduction of the Euro (IAS 21)
SIC 10
Government Assistance – No Specific Relation to Operating ­Activities 
(IAS 20)
SIC 13
Jointly Controlled Entities – Non-Monetary Contributions By ­Venturers 
(IAS 31)
SIC 15
Operating Leases – Incentives (IAS 17)
SIC 25
Income Taxes – Changes in the Tax Status of an Enterprise or its 
­Shareholders IAS (12)
SIC 27
Evaluating the Substance of Transactions involving the Legal Form of a 
Lease
SIC 29
Disclosure – Service Concession Arrangements
SIC 31
Revenue – Barter Transactions Involving Services
SIC 32
Intangible Assets – Web Site Costs

Part 1  The accounting and business environment
22
IFRIC 1
Changes in Existing Decommissioning, Restoration and Similar 
Liabilities
IFRIC 2
Members’ Shares in Co-operative Entities and Similar Instruments
IFRIC 4
Determining Whether an Arrangement contains a Lease
IFRIC 5
Rights to Interests arising from Decommissioning, Restoration and En-
vironmental Rehabilitation Funds
IFRIC 6
Liabilities arising from Participating in a Specific Market – Waste Elec-
trical and Electronic Equipment
IFRIC 7
Applying the Restatement Approach under IAS 29 Financial Reporting 
in Hyperinflationary Economies
IFRIC 10
Interim Financial Reporting and Impairment
IFRIC 12
Service Concession Arrangements
IFRIC 13
Customer Loyalty Programmes
IFRIC 14  
IAS 19
The Limit on a Defined Benefit Asset, Minimum Funding Requirements 
and their Interaction
IFRIC 15
Agreements for the Construction of Real Estate
IFRIC 16
Hedges of a Net Investment in a Foreign Operation
IFRIC 17
Distributions of Non-cash Assets to Owners
IFRIC 18
Transfers of Assets from Customers
IFRIC 19
Extinguishing Financial Liabilities with Equity Instruments
The structure of the IASB
The IASB operates under the IFRS Foundation (IFRSF), an independent organiza-
tion with 22 trustees representing all regions of the world and all groups interested 
in corporate financial reporting. The IFRS Foundation raises funds and has over-
sight of the IASB. The Trustees are subject in their turn to the oversight of the IFRS 
Monitoring Board. The Monitoring Board consists of representatives of the world’s 
capital markets and is intended to provide additional public accountability to the 
organization.
The current IASB structure has the following components:
	
n	 the IFRS Monitoring Board
	
n	 the Trustees of the IFRS Foundation (IFRSF)
	
n	 the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB)
	
n	 the IFRS Advisory Council and
	
n	 the IFRS Interpretations Committee.
The structure of the IASB is outlined in Figure 1.2.
The trustees appoint the Board members (as well as the members of the In-
terpretations Committee and the Advisory Council), exercise oversight and raise 
the funds needed. As an organization of an international scope, the geographical 
balance of the trustees is a sensitive issue. The current geographical balance is 
as follows: six from North America, six from Europe, six from the Asia/Oceania 
region and four from any area, subject to establishing overall geographical bal-
ance. There is also an appropriate balance to the professional backgrounds of the 

Chapter 1  Financial reporting and regulation
23
trustees, which include auditors, preparers, users, academics and other officials 
serving the public interest. Two will normally be senior partners of prominent 
international accounting firms.
All the appointments made by the Trustees are subject to the approval of the 
Monitoring Board. The Monitoring Board was created in 2009 and includes rep-
resentatives of the SEC, European Commission, International Organization of Se-
curities Commissions (two members), and the Japanese Financial Services Agency. 
The Basel Committee (bank supervisors) has observer status. The Monitoring 
Board is likely to be expanded from 2012 to include stock exchange representa-
tives from emerging markets.
The IASB has sole responsibility for setting accounting standards. It develops 
and issues International Financial Reporting Standards and approves interpreta-
tions developed by the IFRS Interpretations Committee. It comprises 16 board 
members, each with one vote. The primary qualification criterion for member-
ship is technical expertise. There is a balance of professional backgrounds (audi-
tors, preparers, users and academics). Since 2009 there has been a geographical 
requirement in addition to that of technical expertise.
Although the IASB has full discretion over its technical agenda, it would 
normally form working groups or other forms of specialist advisory groups to 
give advice on major projects. It can outsource detailed research or other work 
to national standard-setters. A key element of its strategy has been to converge 
its standards with those of the United States. This process involves significant 
change to US rules as well as an evolution of IASB rules.
The IFRS Interpretations Committee complements the formal standard-setting 
process of the board. It reviews, within the context of existing International Fi-
nancial Reporting Standards and the IASB Framework, accounting issues that are 
likely to receive divergent or unacceptable treatment in the absence of authori-
tative guidance, and issues interpretations on these matters. Normally, the In-
terpretations Committee addresses issues of reasonably widespread importance, 
and not issues of concern to only a small set of enterprises. Its Interpretations are 
submitted to the IASB for approval.
IFRS Advisory
Council
IFRS Foundation
Trustees
International Accounting
Standards Board
Technical staff
IFRS  Interpretations
Committee
Monitoring Board
Figure 1.2
The structure of 
the IASB

Part 1  The accounting and business environment
24
The IFRS Advisory Council provides a forum for organizations and individuals 
with an interest in international financial reporting to participate in the standard-
setting process. The board has to consult the Advisory Council on major projects, 
agenda decisions and work priorities. The Advisory Council is expected to meet 
three times a year at meetings open to the public.
Standard-setting due process
The IASB’s standard-setting procedures have to ensure that resulting International 
Financial Reporting Standards (including Interpretations) are of high quality and 
are developed only after giving IASB’s constituencies opportunities to make their 
views known at several points in the standard-setting due process.
The process for the development of a standard would normally involve the­ 
­following steps (see also Figure 1.3):
	
n	 A project proposal emerges after an idea coming from board members, the 
Advisory Council, national standard-setters or others. A formal proposal is 
discussed with the trustees and the Advisory Council and has to satisfy sev-
eral criteria before being voted on by the IASB.
	
n	 During the early stages of a project, the IASB may establish an advisory 
committee, or working group, to give advice on the issues arising in the 
project. The IASB may commission research by national standard-setters 
or others. Consultation with the working group and the IFRS Advisory 
­Council occurs throughout the project.
	
n	 The IASB may develop and publish discussion documents for public com-
ment. Over time it has become accepted practice that the IASB does routinely 
issue what it calls a ‘preliminary views’ discussion paper on all but minor 
­projects. (Constituents perceive that they can have greater input at the discus-
sion document stage, whereas the exposure draft of the standard represents 
pretty much the IASB’s decision as to what the final standard should be.)
Research
Review of
comments
Effective
date
National
standard-
setters 
Others
Review of
comments
9–15 months
9–15 months
6–18 months
Discussion
paper
Exposure
draft
New IFRS
Figure 1.3
Standard-
setting due 
process of the 
IASB

Chapter 1  Financial reporting and regulation
25
	
n	 Following the receipt and review of comments, the IASB would develop 
and publish an Exposure Draft for public comment.
	
n	 Following the receipt and review of comments, the IASB would issue a final 
International Financial Reporting Standard.
Publication of an exposure draft, a main standard or an Interpretation requires 
approval by ten of the 16 members of the board. A full-blown due process in-
cluding a preliminary views paper would likely take at least four years and often 
considerably more. When the IASB publishes a standard, it also publishes a ‘basis 
for conclusions’ to explain publicly how it reached its conclusions (including dis-
senting opinions) and to give background information that may help users of the 
standards to apply them in practice.
IFRS in Europe
Since 2005 all listed companies have had to use IFRS (apart from a few exceptions 
which came on stream in 2007). Historically, however, European accounting stan-
dards were established through company law directives, which aim at harmonizing 
company law across member states. Table 1.2 provides an overview of the main 
developments regarding financial accounting and reporting rules in the European 
Union. Accounting rules are stipulated in the Fourth and the Seventh Company 
Law Directive (which are also referred to as the Fourth and the Seventh Account-
ing Directives). The Fourth Directive (1978) comprises the accounting rules for the 
preparation and presentation of financial statements of individual legal entities (in-
dividual accounts). The Seventh Directive (1983) sets the ground rules for the prep-
aration and presentation of the financial statements of a company as an economic 
entity, usually a group of individual but economically interdependent legal entities 
(group or consolidated accounts). Member states were required to incorporate these 
directives into national legal requirements. Although this succeeded in achieving 
a considerable degree of comparability between financial statements prepared in 
different member states, many differences remain. This is due to the fact that the 
accounting rules of the directives are not very detailed (only minimum rules which 
may be strengthened by national requirements), do not cover all relevant topics 
(for example foreign currency translation issues or deferred taxation) or leave 
choices to member states (alternative rules giving member states options).
Sometimes the harmonization effects of the directives are counteracted by dis-
cretionary national requirements. Instead of reinforcing the European accounting 
standards, the European Commission decided in 1995 on an accounting strategy 
change by adhering to the IASB standards to strengthen European reporting re-
quirements. In June 2000, the European Commission proposed the requirement of 
the use of IFRS for the consolidated financial statements of all European listed com-
panies. This proposal culminated in the IAS Regulation (2202/1608) in June 2002.
IFRS are, however, not automatically applicable in the EU when issued by the 
IASB. An endorsement mechanism has been installed to ensure that the IFRS 
conforms with EU public policy concerns and meet the needs of European listed 
companies. The endorsement mechanism relies on a two-tier structure: a regula-
tory level (the Accounting Regulatory Committee, ARC) and an expert level (the 
European Financial Reporting Advisory Group, EFRAG). ARC decides whether to 
recommend to the European Commission that it should adopt or reject a stan-
dard for application in the EU. EFRAG advises the European Commission on the 

Part 1  The accounting and business environment
26
technical assessment of individual IFRS for application in the EU. Additionally, 
EFRAG is expected to play a proactive role in interacting with the IASB.
1978
Fourth Company Law Directive (individual financial 
statements)
1983
Seventh Company Law Directive (consolidated financial 
statements)
1995
Decision on new accounting strategy (adhering to IAS instead 
of further development of specific European accounting rules)
2000
Announcement of plan to require IAS for consolidated finan-
cial statements of listed companies by 2005
2001
Fair Value Directive [requiring/allowing for fair value 
­measurement of specific balance sheet items (mainly financial 
instruments)]
2002
IAS Regulation
2003
Modernization Directive (reflecting IFRS developments in the 
Fourth and Seventh Directive)
2005/2007
IFRS mandatory for listed companies in European Union
2011 Proposal to replace Fourth & Seventh Directives
Table 1.2
Financial  
reporting in 
the European 
Union – main 
developments
Meanwhile, initiatives were taken in 2001 (Fair Value Directive) and in 2003 
(Modernization Directive) to amend the Fourth and Seventh Company Law 
­Directives in order to eliminate incompatibilities between European accounting 
rules and IFRS and to set a level playing field between European companies that 
apply IFRS and those that do not. The Commission proposed in 2011 to modern-
ize and merge the Fourth and Seventh Directives.
Individual financial 
statements
Group/consolidated  
financial statements
Listed companies
Member state option
IFRS mandatory
Unlisted companies
Member state option
Member state option
Table 1.3
Effects of the  
IAS Regulation 
(EU)
The IAS Regulation applies only to listed companies, and the Commission left 
to member states the decision as to whether to extend IFRS to non-listed compa-
nies. Most states allow unlisted companies a choice, although Germany requires 
national GAAP for all individual company statements and for the group state-
ments of unlisted companies. This situation is likely to evolve in different ways. 
National rules are likely to change to become more like IFRS anyway. The IASB has 
issued in 2009 an IFRS for Small and Medium-sized entities. This is a simplified form 
of IFRS that is intended for use with companies in which there is no ‘public inter-
est’ (primarily are not listed on a public stock exchange). The Commission will 
not require adoption of this standard by member states, and different Member 

Chapter 1  Financial reporting and regulation
27
States view it with differing degrees of enthusiasm. The UK plans to adapt it for 
use by medium-sized private companies.
As mentioned above, a particular issue that impacts European companies is 
that the EU has not in fact endorsed all the IFRS as issued by the IASB. As a result 
of pressure from French banks, the Accounting Regulatory Committee ‘carved 
out’ part of IAS 39 on the measurement of financial instruments. In stating the 
basis on which their accounts are prepared, European listed companies are re-
quired to specify that they have followed ‘IFRS as endorsed by the EU’.
This creates a number of problems, not least with the US. The SEC has ap-
proved for use in the US without a reconciliation only IFRS as issued by the 
IASB. To qualify as equivalent to US GAAP the company must state that it fol-
lows IFRS as issued by the IASB, and the audit report must confirm this. UK com-
panies are quite relaxed about this, they just say that their statements comply 
with IFRS as endorsed by the EU and IFRS as issued by the IASB, and they do not 
apply the EU carve out (which mostly only affects banks anyway). Their auditors 
confirm this. However, other member states are not always comfortable with 
this solution.
IFRS worldwide
As discussed above, a number of developed and developing countries have al-
ready moved to IFRS or are intending to do so. In addition to countries that adopt 
directly a number of states have standards that derive from IFRS. Hong Kong and 
the Philippines have adopted national standards that are identical to IFRS, includ-
ing all accounting options, but in some cases effective dates and transition are 
different. In the case of Hong Kong, companies that are based in Hong Kong but 
incorporated in another country are permitted to issue IFRS financial statements 
rather than Hong Kong GAAP statements. Singapore has adopted nearly all IFRS, 
but has made changes to the recognition and measurement principles in sev-
eral IFRS when adopting them as Singapore standards.
In South Africa IFRS are mandatory for all domestic listed companies. In ­Japan 
listed foreign companies can use IFRS (or any other national GAAP for that mat-
ter), but domestic companies are not allowed to use IFRS. Canada, Brazil and 
South Korea have adopted IFRS. Japan has a convergence programme with the 
IASB and is planning to move to IFRS.
China is still in a stage of developing a representative set of national account-
ing standards. Most accounting standards published to date are similar to the cor-
responding IFRS.
Since October 2002, the FASB and the IASB have been committed to the con-
vergence of US rules and IFRS. Different initiatives have been taken, such as a 
short-term convergence project aimed at removing a variety of individual differ-
ences between US GAAP and IFRS, joint projects on significant accounting issues 
such as business combinations, revenue recognition and leasing. However, be-
cause of the volume of differences and the complex nature of some issues, the 
FASB anticipates that many differences between US and IFRS standards will persist 
well into the future. The present convergence programme is expected to end in 
2013, with joint work after that likely to depend on the SEC’s decision whether or 
not to adopt IFRS.

Part 1  The accounting and business environment
28
Summary
The objective of this chapter was to start to explain the environment of account-
ing. It has looked at the main financial statements published by companies and 
discussed the framework through which these are regulated. It has noted that 
governments need to regulate accounting to ensure the efficient running of the 
economy and the financial markets in particular, since business relies heavily on 
accurate information about other businesses. Government also wants to collect 
taxes and accounting is linked directly with the calculation of taxable profits. 
Apart from this, there are other bodies with an interest, notably stock exchanges, 
specialist standard-setting agencies and bodies organized by the accounting pro-
fession or industry sectors.
In the international field there is a strong movement towards the use of In-
ternational Financial Reporting Standards which are promulgated by the IASB. 
These enable company reports to be compared across national boundaries and 
help smooth management decision-making in the context of global business.
Discussion Questions
1.	 What are the annual financial statements of a company?
2.	 Contrast broadly the regulatory traditions in continental Europe as opposed 
to the anglophone countries.
3.	 Are the financial accounting requirements of entities in the public sector 
­different from those of business in the private sector?
4.	 Compare and contrast the different types of accounting regulation that exist.
5.	 How is the IASB’s organizational setting structured?
6.	 Explain the potential trade-off between relevance and verifiability.
7.	 Explain what is meant by relevance, faithful representation and 
­comparability and how they make financial information useful.

29
This chapter discusses the work of the company accounting department and the system 
called ‘internal control’ which is used to provide reasonable assurance regarding the 
reliability of the corporate financial statements. It will also introduce independent 
accountants and the auditing profession, as well as discussing the external audit.
Accounting and accountants
C H A P T E R   2
n	 Introduction
n	 Accounting function
n	 Accounting database
n	 Recording transactions
n	 Organization of data within the general ledger
n	 Control and audit
n	 The accounting profession
n	 Summary
n	 Discussion questions
Chapter Structure
We are going to start off this chapter by looking at the accounting system within 
a company and how it maintains its records. If you want just to be able to read 
financial statements, you may prefer not to learn about the processes through 
which the data in them are collected. On the other hand, a successful manager in 
Introduction

Part 1  The accounting and business environment
30
a multinational is bound to have responsibility at some point for a free-standing 
operating unit and therefore for oversight of its accounting system. In addition, 
understanding where the information comes from is always going to help under-
stand the information itself, and this is of course true of that provided by finan-
cial statements.
This chapter introduces the systems such as internal control and internal 
audit that are there to safeguard the company’s assets and underpin the accu-
racy of the records. It then looks at the audit performed by external indepen-
dent ­accountants and introduces the wider field of corporate governance. A more 
­detailed review of audit, internal control and corporate governance is to be found 
in Chapter 16.
All businesses need a financial accounting system that tracks all the economic 
transactions that the business undertakes, records them logically in a database, 
and provides reporting tools to communicate information useful to decision 
makers. This system is a prime resource of the business and should provide:
	
n	 controls to ensure that only legitimate expenses are paid;
	
n	 systems to ensure that debts to suppliers are well tracked and paid when 
due;
	
n	 systems to calculate salary payments to employees and deduct social 
­security and other charges;
	
n	 controls to ensure that all customers are correctly invoiced, and that 
­customers in turn pay what they owe;
	
n	 controls to safeguard the company’s assets;
	
n	 information to management on a regular basis to enable them to run the 
business efficiently;
	
n	 information to the authorities to support payment of taxes;
	
n	 information to shareholders on the health of the company and to help 
­determine dividends;
	
n	 information and measurements to others with whom the company has 
performance-related contracts (debt covenants, employee bonus schemes, 
joint ventures, franchises, licences, etc.);
	
n	 information to those who lend money to the company and to suppliers;
	
n	 information that represents the company to all outside interests and all 
stakeholders.
Notice that while the first six objectives are wholly internal to the operation of 
the company, the other five involve providing information to those who are 
­external to the company. We could describe the first six functions as being those 
of financial control and the others as those of financial reporting.
The accounting department of a company needs to meet these objectives, and 
this is mostly done through feeding the company’s database, and then using the 
aggregate data to prepare reports about the company’s activities. The nature of 
Accounting function

Chapter 2  Accounting and accountants
31
the accounting department will vary enormously depending upon the size of 
the company. A very small business may simply use a part-time book-keeper 
to process transactions and maintain the database, or use an outside account-
ing firm to do this. The largest global groups will have enormous accounting 
­departments in each operating unit, together with a large head office unit to 
gather together data from throughout the group. In an international group, the 
management of the group is controlled mostly through uniform accounting 
systems which involve subsidiaries in sending data regularly to head office (or 
via regional offices) to enable central and regional management to know what 
is happening. In this sense it would be impossible to manage an international 
group without accounting.
Usually such a group will have an internal accounting manual which lays out 
the procedures to be followed in accounting for typical transactions in order to 
ensure a uniform treatment of operations worldwide, without which manage-
ment would have difficulty in interpreting the accounting information. The ac-
counting manual may run to several volumes and is usually available in several 
languages.
In fact global companies have problems because national accounting rules 
differ from country to country. The national rules should normally be followed 
for tax purposes, so the group has to have a reporting system which is capa-
ble of delivering uniform data worldwide for management purposes and for 
the group financial statements, while also providing potentially different data 
in each country to suit local tax requirements. This is one of the reasons that 
large ­companies welcome worldwide convergence on IFRS. Potentially, group 
accounts and individual company accounts can use exactly the same rules. Too 
much should not be made of the existing differences, since they centre on one 
or two areas of accounting and generally, therefore, the transition from one set 
of ­accounts to the other is not that complicated. At the same time, this is a 
­problem that multinationals have to address, and one that is costly in terms 
of hiring professionals to deal with it. Very often a multinational will choose 
to have uniform internal systems, and then ask its accounting advisers in 
each country, who are familiar with the subtleties of the local regulations, to 
­liaise with the local tax officials and prepare a revised set of accounts for local 
­reporting purposes (see Figure 2.1).
Different companies have different needs – in a large, publicly held company 
the shareholders will usually be remote from the management, whereas in a 
small, family company, the managers are often also major shareholders. We 
will generally assume that the typical company we are dealing with is a large 
multinational, but will point out differences for smaller businesses as we go 
along. In this case, a small, family business will often want to keep informa-
tion secret, while a multinational will generally be keen to give information 
­(accounting reports are normally on the group’s website).
Between the lines

Part 1  The accounting and business environment
32
In principle the company’s accounting function should provide systems that 
capture all the transactions that the company undertakes. The main categories of 
this are:
	
n	 sales
	
n	 purchases
	
n	 payroll
	
n	 treasury
	
n	 investment in long-term capacity.
These transactions involve an interaction with other departments, and the exact 
split of responsibility between the accounting function and the operating depart-
ment will vary according to the nature of the business and the technology used.
In the sales area, there are many combinations possible. In a hotel, for exam-
ple, the reception desk (‘front office’) generally also operates customer billing and 
cash collection, and then passes the transactions on to the accounting function 
(‘back office’). In retailing, very often sales representatives call on retailers and 
take orders in person. The sales person then transmits the order to the company 
where the system captures it as an instruction to the warehouse and a linked in-
struction to the accounting department to issue an invoice. Increasingly compa-
nies are enabling their customers to access their intranet to place orders directly 
into the company system, which are then, through the computer, translated into 
delivery instructions and an invoice.
The accounting department will normally have a data file for each customer, 
will control credit levels and will send out monthly statements of account to the 
customer and track payment when that is due. The issue of credit control is oc-
casionally a problematic one which gives liaison difficulties between account-
ing staff and sales staff. The accounting department will want to make sure that 
where credit is given, the customer does pay the bills in due course. The sales 
department on the other hand wants to sell as many units as possible, and easy 
credit helps them to do this, so they may be less demanding in their assessments 
of creditworthiness.
Figure 2.1
Group 
reporting flows
Germany
France
Subsidiaries
Local tax
accounts
Group
financial
statements
Parent
holding
company
Uniform
accounting
rules
Italy
Netherlands

Chapter 2  Accounting and accountants
33
The capture of purchases has its own problems. Here the company will of-
ten have a system of purchase orders or requisitions where a manager with au-
thority to purchase supplies must sign a requisition, a copy of which goes to 
the ­accounting department to alert them to the fact that a purchase is in hand. 
Later, when the goods are received, a delivery document is sent to the accounting 
­department and then the invoice. The accounting department marries all these 
together and puts them into the system. The supplier data file is then checked 
with the monthly statement sent by the supplier to ensure that all invoices have 
been recorded.
Finally the account is authorized and paid. In a small company this is rela-
tively straightforward, but in a big operation it can be very complicated and the 
potential for error is considerable. This explains why there are specialist compa-
nies who review purchases, particularly for large stores, and often recover large 
amounts of money. Equally, this explains the success of scams where a fraudster 
sends out invoices for small sums for, say, listing in an internet directory, and 
some large companies will pay the invoice, although no order was ever placed 
and the directory does not exist.
The payroll is usually a specialist function within accounting. It calls for 
special knowledge in that in many countries the employer is responsible for 
deducting social security charges from the employee, sometimes the employ-
ee’s income tax is deducted by the employer, and then there may be pension 
schemes and other voluntary schemes, such as savings or membership of a staff 
social club, to which the employee contributes. This means that each employee’s 
pay file is individual and probably quite complex. Small companies will often 
subcontract this function to an accounting firm or a specialist service company. 
The possibilities for error are considerable, and where government deductions 
are involved, there may be fines for making mistakes. The accounting involved 
is also quite complex in that the company deducts money from the individual’s 
pay packet and then has to pay this to government departments, pension funds 
and so on.
The treasury function is one where all the others meet up: treasury controls all 
the receipts and payments into the company’s bank accounts, as well as any cash 
tills that might exist (company accountants do not like cash floating around). 
Evidently this is the area where authorizations are most stringently required and 
also where accurate coding of transactions is essential. The treasury unit works 
very closely with the company’s bankers. Accessing the bank’s accounting system 
in real time, the treasury knows exactly how much money is in each of the com-
pany’s accounts at the close of banking business and then lends out any surplus, 
perhaps on the overnight market (yes, you can lend money just overnight, pro-
vided you have enough of it to do so in large quantities).
The accounting system is organized with separate data files for each bank ac-
count, so that the company’s information can be checked directly against the 
statement put out by the bank. This provides a regular control on the accuracy 
of the company’s records – all charges and revenues that have gone through the 
bank should also be in the company’s records. The company regularly (ideally at 
least once a month) prepares a ‘bank reconciliation’. This is a document which 
compares the balance on the bank account as seen by the bank, with the bal-
ance on the corresponding data file within the company. These two will rarely 
agree because of time lags in transactions going through the bank account, but 
the differences can and must be identified as a check on the accuracy of both 

Part 1  The accounting and business environment
34
sets of records (in a large company this can involve cross-checking hundreds of 
transactions). One way of conducting a fraud is to make payments without enter-
ing them in the company’s accounting records. These payments will show up as 
differences on the bank reconciliation, but if nobody reviews the reconciliation, 
they will stay outside the company records.
You can see that the accounting unit has a quite complex set of tasks and objec-
tives. Its prime function is to capture information for the company and to ensure 
that customers pay their bills and that suppliers are paid – it is a service function 
to help the company to operate efficiently. However, most company frauds are 
going to involve obtaining money via the accounting department, so the staff 
and systems have to be organized to prevent this. Therefore they may seem less 
than keen on giving a service and rather too inclined to demand bits of paper, 
and signatures, which appear to be obstacles to the free running of the company.
Coming back to the central issue of accumulating information, a company’s  
financial accounting system is organized to provide data for a central database 
(the general ledger) which is then used as the source of information used by man-
agement internally and for external reporting purposes. The accounting database 
normally looks as shown in Figure 2.2.
Accounting database
Other business
expenses
Register of amounts
owed to suppliers
Bank account
cash in and out
Register of debts
owed by clients
Purchase of 
long-term assets
GENERAL
LEDGER
Reports to management
 and outsiders
Sale of goods
to clients
Finance from
shareholders and banks
Goods received
from suppliers
Salaries and
social changes
Figure 2.2
The financial 
accounting 
database
Information flows into the database through several layers of processing which 
summarize and resummarize individual transactions to build up to aggregates for 
the year’s activities (Figure 2.3).
Recording transactions

Chapter 2  Accounting and accountants
35
Journals are used to build up the periodic summaries and feed aggregated data 
into the general ledger. The general ledger is then used as a source for the prepara-
tion of a periodic statement of profit or loss (or income statement) and a statement 
of financial position (or balance sheet). This kind of approach was particularly 
useful when all entries in the database were made by hand, and is still used even 
though virtually all systems in companies are computerized. The essential idea is 
that while aggregated data are needed in the ledger, to enable management sum-
maries to be prepared, the system must be capable of being interrogated to con-
firm that a particular transaction has or has not taken place, so it must be possible 
later to go from the monthly figure in the ledger, for example, back through the 
journals to the individual transaction. This is both because accounting depart-
ments have regularly to deal with queries, and because the transactions are sub-
ject to checking by internal or external auditors. There must be what is called an 
‘audit trail’ to show the links and provide evidence that the initial transaction was 
authorized. Computerized systems may very well carry out the intermediate stage 
between the individual transaction (known as a ‘prime entry’ in the trade) and 
the ledger total. Once the first entry has been keyed in, the system will organize a 
batch of similar transactions and ‘post’ this to the ledger, but it is normally orga-
nized also to provide a printout of each batch, which becomes the bridge between 
prime entry and ledger. Of course, there could be several intermediate levels.
Some decisions have to be taken as to what level of detail is going to be useful 
within an accounting system. At one extreme an accounting system might record 
every single transaction separately so that its annual profit and loss account is a 
detailed list of every transaction that has taken place over the year. At the other 
extreme the profit and loss account could be one figure representing the net dif-
ference (profit or loss) of the whole year’s revenues and expenses.
The exact point at which one makes a decision about the degree of detail to 
be kept will vary with the specific circumstances of each company, its size and 
the nature of the business being carried out. However, as guidelines, the final re-
cords should obviously, as a minimum, keep information aggregated for a whole 
accounting year on each of the separate categories (of the statement of profit or 
loss and statement of financial position) which will appear in the annual finan-
cial statements. Normally, though, the database will be much more detailed. It 
will need to be capable of delivering information about each individual operating 
unit within a company, so that an analysis which shows the profitability of each 
unit for management purposes can be produced without difficulty. This informa-
tion is aggregated for the purposes of the published financial statements.
Figure 2.3
Building 
aggregates
Daily transactions (invoices, payments, receipts, expense notes, etc.)
Summaries prepared by week (or month)
and by type of transaction
Total entered into
general ledger

Part 1  The accounting and business environment
36
The precise form taken by the general ledger and the journals, and the clas-
sification of items, will vary from one system to another. In some countries (e.g. 
France, Belgium, Greece, Spain) there is a State-mandated system, generally 
known as a chart of accounts or accounting plan. In other countries (e.g. Germany, 
Switzerland, Austria) there are widely used standard charts whose adoption is vol-
untary. Generally anglophone countries do not use standard charts of this kind, 
but large companies with uniform systems worldwide must develop in effect their 
own chart of accounts. A nationally standardized chart has certain advantages in 
terms of staff training, lower audit costs and cheaper software, but has typically 
been rejected by anglophone professions as being too restrictive.
In large companies the system may well be partitioned to enable the major 
operations (sales, purchases, treasury and payroll) to operate independently of 
each other – with links to the central ledger to ensure the integrity of the sys-
tem. In this way the specialist functions can operate dedicated systems which not 
only maintain the ledger but issue invoices or bank transfers, issue monthly state-
ments to customers, provide analysis of outstanding items, etc.
XBRL (eXtensible Business Reporting Language) is set to revolutionize account-
ing data handling and reporting in this context. Instead of treating accounting 
information as a block of text, XBRL provides an identifying tag for each indi-
vidual item of information, such as individual accounts in a chart of accounts. 
These tags are computer readable and enable automated processing of accounting 
and related business information by computer software. The specific tags of indi-
vidual data items are defined in taxonomies. These function as dictionaries. Dif-
ferent taxonomies can coexist and be linked for reporting purposes. This offers a 
viable solution to link IFRS and national reporting taxonomies. Indeed, national 
jurisdictions may need their own taxonomies (like a standard chart of accounts 
and specific reporting formats) to reflect their local accounting regulations, but 
XBRL could automatically convert them in a generally accepted IFRS taxonomy. 
Once the appropriate XBRL taxonomies are established and the data are gathered 
accordingly, different types of reports using varying subsets of the data can be 
produced with minimum effort. The accounting department could, for example, 
quickly and reliably generate internal management reports, financial statements 
for publication, tax and other regulatory filings, as well as credit reports for lend-
ers. XBRL would remove time-consuming and error-prone data-handling pro-
cesses and improve data accuracy through automated data checks.
The IASB has developed an IFRS taxonomy which it updates regularly. The SEC 
encourages companies to file XBRL tagged data and offers free software to help 
­investors manipulate the tagged data. An investor can, for example, compare 
sales in different companies by using this kind of system. They can in effect con-
struct their own analysts’ reports comparing companies in the same field.
When the data about the accounting transactions of the company reach the gen-
eral ledger they will be stored according to a system which has been in existence 
for hundreds of years: the double-entry system. The first written account of the 
system appeared in 1494 (by Luca Pacioli) and the fact that the system is still in 
use today will give you some idea of its practical effectiveness.
Organization of data within the general ledger

Chapter 2  Accounting and accountants
37
First, the general ledger is organized into a series of ‘accounts’ – data files – 
each of which is used to record transactions of a particular type. For example, if 
your business is selling books, you would need one account in which to record 
sales, another to record the cost of the books sold and a series of accounts to 
­record the various different types of expense incurred in the business (advertising, 
rent of premises, heat, etc.), as well as accounts for financing and investments 
in property, inventory, etc. (This is the minimum – if more analysis were useful, 
then more accounts would be used.)
Each account within the general ledger is organized in a particular way. The 
account has two columns for figures and some space to write in explanatory 
­remarks and cross-referencing details. The left-hand column is always referred to 
as the debit column and the right-hand column is called the credit column (there 
seems to be no satisfactory explanation for the derivation of these words). Debit 
and credit are also used as verbs, so one says ‘debit insurance expense’ to mean 
a figure should be entered into the left-hand column of the insurance expense 
account. In formal, manual book-keeping there are no plus or minus signs; the 
value of an account is the difference between the debit and credit columns, and 
can be either a debit balance (more left hand than right) or a credit balance (more 
right hand than left).
A traditional manual ledger account would look as shown in Figure 2.4.
Debit
Ref.
Credit
Narrative
Date
Account number:
Account name:
Figure 2.4
Layout of a 
manual ledger 
account
A computerized printout often preserves the same format, but may also pro-
vide a running balance perhaps in a third column out to the right, or elsewhere 
on the printout.
The exact form in which the accounts are kept is not of essential interest for 
our purposes – what is important is how the figures are arrived at and what they 
mean, rather than the detail of the methodology of the data file. However, one 
normally comes across accounting statements, notably one’s bank statement, 
from time to time, and knowledge of the notation system is useful to that extent. 
An example of a personal bank statement is shown in Figure 2.5.
If you were looking at a financial accounting textbook intended for accoun-
tants, then the whole of the discussion of accounting rules and techniques would 
involve notation involving debits and credits – making entries in left-hand and 
right-hand columns. This notation system is largely redundant for our purposes, 
and we will use non-specialist signs and tools such as worksheets to explain what 
is going on. Since you are not going to run an accounting system, a detailed 
knowledge of the notation is not useful and tends to divert attention from the 
reality of what is actually going on.

Part 1  The accounting and business environment
38
The accounting system, as we have seen, fulfils a number of different functions, 
being both an information system and a security or control system. In both cases 
it is essential that the system is efficient and effective. Without an effective sys-
tem, central management (a), do not know reliably what is going on in the com-
pany, and (b) cannot safeguard the shareholders’ interests. In recent years, this 
issue has come to be seen as more and more important – the well-known corpo-
rate embarrassments, such as the fall of Barings Bank, the large loss at the French 
Société Générale and the reporting problems of Royal Ahold, would almost cer-
tainly not have been possible with tighter systems – in the jargon, tighter internal 
control. Public concern has grown to the point where many companies publish a 
statement in their annual report to the effect that the directors are satisfied that 
they have in place an adequate system of internal control. One of the main objec-
tives of the internal control system is to ensure the integrity of the information 
system and the security of the company’s assets. In that sense it is heavily relied 
upon by external auditors in assessing the viability of the company’s records. In 
this section we will take a closer look at how a system of internal control operates 
and its links, through internal audit, to the external audit.
Internal control
Internal control has recently become more important because of the focus on 
corporate governance and the demands this places on boards of directors and ex-
ecutives to implement and demonstrate control over business operations. One of 
the most authoritative definitions of internal control comes from COSO (Report 
of the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission).
Control and audit
170709
260709
270709
Balance brought forward
Receipt IIM
Credit card settlement
348.00
3 074.50
1 791.65
In your favour
In our favour
Credit = in your favour
Debit = in our favour
Balance
Narrative
Date
Compte privé
Genève
CREDIT SUISSE
2 726.50
1 282.85
280709
300709
90809
Receipt DIP
Monthly payments
Cash – ATM
3 700.70
5 171.85
500.00
8 872.55
7 589.70
4 671.85
160809
Cash – ATM
500.00
4 171.85
Figure 2.5
Example of a 
personal bank 
statement

Chapter 2  Accounting and accountants
39
Defining internal control
The COSO definition of internal control has become widely accepted and is 
­referred to in other international control frameworks as well. According to COSO, 
internal control is broadly defined as a process, established, operated and moni-
tored by those charged with governance and management of a company (board 
of directors, management and other personnel) to provide reasonable assurance 
regarding the achievement of objectives in the following categories:
	
n	 the effectiveness and efficiency of the company’s operations
	
n	 the reliability of its financial reporting and
	
n	 its compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
As a process, internal control goes beyond policies and procedures and also 
­includes factors such as corporate culture, systems and organizational structures. 
The COSO definition underscores the importance of the relationship of control 
and objectives. Without objectives, talking about control is meaningless. From a 
broad managerial perspective, the COSO report identifies three categories of con-
trol objectives. The first category addresses a company’s basic business concerns, 
including performance and profitability goals and safeguarding of resources  
(basically an efficiency concern). The second relates to the preparation of reliable 
financial statements and related financial data derived from such statements. The 
third deals with complying with those laws and regulations to which the com-
pany is subject. Within the COSO framework financial reporting concerns are a 
basic objective of a system of internal control although not an exclusive one.
Internal control: system components
According to COSO, a system of internal control consists of five interrelated 
components:
	
n	 control environment – attributes of the people conducting the company’s 
activities and the environment in which they operate, influencing overall 
control consciousness;
	
n	 risk assessment – identification and analysis of relevant risks as a basis for 
determining ways to manage those risks;
	
n	 control activities – policies and procedures established and executed that en-
able management’s directives to be carried out;
	
n	 information and communication – identification, capture and exchange of 
information for the conduct and control of operations in a form and time-
frame that enables people to carry out their responsibilities;
	
n	 monitoring – assessing of performance of internal control over time and 
making modifications as conditions change.
These five interrelated components are relevant for each internal control objective. 
For example, accurate financial reporting builds on a supportive control environ-
ment with a strong ethical commitment of corporate management, identification 
of relevant threats and exposures (erroneous record-keeping, unacceptable account-
ing rules, unrecognized fraud and embezzlement of assets, loss or theft of data, etc.), 
efficient information gathering and processing routines and appropriate control 
policies and procedures to manage financial reporting risks (good document design, 
accounting manuals, organizational measures, checks and balances, etc.).

Part 1  The accounting and business environment
40
STANDARDs
COSO – COMPONENTS OF A SYSTEM OF INTERNAL CONTROL 
(extracts)
Control environment
The control environment sets the tone of an organization, influencing the 
control consciousness of its people. It is the foundation for all other com-
ponents of internal control, providing discipline and structure. Control 
­environment factors include the integrity, ethical values and competence 
of the entity’s people; management’s philosophy and operating style; the 
way management assigns authority and responsibility, and organizes and 
develops its people; and the attention and direction provided by the board 
of directors.
Risk assessment
Every entity faces a variety of risks from external and internal sources that 
must be assessed. A precondition to risk assessment is establishment of 
­objectives, linked at different levels and internally consistent. Risk assess-
ment is the identification and analysis of relevant risks to achievement of the 
­objectives, forming a basis for determining how the risks should be managed. 
­Because economic, industry, regulatory and operating conditions will con-
tinue to change, mechanisms are needed to identify and deal with the special 
risks associated with change.
Control activities
Control activities are the policies and procedures that help ensure manage-
ment directives are carried out. They help ensure that necessary actions are 
taken to address risks to achievement of the entity’s objectives. Control activi-
ties occur throughout the organization, at all levels and in all functions. They 
include a range of activities as diverse as approvals, authorizations, verifica-
tions, reconciliations, reviews of operating performance, security of assets 
and segregation of duties.
Information and communication
Pertinent information must be identified, captured and communicated in 
a form and timeframe that enable people to carry out their responsibilities. 
Information systems produce reports, containing operational, financial and 
compliance-related information, that make it possible to run and control the 
business. They deal not only with internally generated data, but also informa-
tion about external events, activities and conditions necessary to informed 
business decision-making and external reporting. Effective communication 
also must occur in a broader sense, flowing down, across and up the orga-
nization. All personnel must receive a clear message from top management 
that control responsibilities must be taken seriously. They must understand 
their own role in the internal control system, as well as how individual activi-
ties relate to the work of others. They must have a means of communicating 
significant information upstream. There also needs to be effective commu-
nication with external parties, such as customers, suppliers, regulators and 
shareholders.

Chapter 2  Accounting and accountants
41
The internal control system is intertwined with a company’s operating 
­activities and exists for fundamental business reasons (see objectives to be accom-
plished by the system). Internal control is most effective when controls are built 
into the company’s infrastructure and are a part of the essence of the company’s 
operations: internal control should become part of the company’s DNA. ‘Built 
in’ controls support quality and empowerment initiatives, avoid unnecessary 
costs and enable quick response to changing conditions. From this perspective, 
an ­accounting information system functions as an integral part of an internal 
control system and is thus more than a bundle of coordinated information flows. 
In fact, accounting information flows are intertwined with risk assessment pro-
cesses, hierarchical and horizontal (between different functional departments) 
communication routines and specific control activities to ensure both the valid-
ity, completeness and accuracy of financial reports and the integrity of the re-
sources they report on.
Control activities
Control activities usually involve a policy component and a procedures component. 
A policy establishes what should be done, while procedures are the actions to 
implement procedures. For example, a policy might call for a creditworthiness 
review before a customer order is formally accepted. The procedure is the actual 
credit check, performed in a timely manner and with attention given to the fac-
tors set forth in the policy, such as financial guarantees, the payment history of 
the client and the balances of outstanding orders and sales invoices due.
A common and useful way to classify control activities is in relation to the 
timing of their occurrence – preventive, detective and corrective controls. Preventive 
controls are policies and procedures designed to prevent an error or fraud from 
occurring. For example, a creditworthiness check on new customer orders pre-
vents shipping goods and recognizing receivables in the balance sheet for which 
no full payment will be received. Preventive financial controls, such as validation 
and edit checks on the input of transactions before they are recorded, will pre-
vent material misstatements in accounting records, whether by error or fraud, 
from occurring during transaction processing in the accounting system. Detective 
controls are policies and procedures that are designed to detect errors or fraud 
that might preclude the achievement of specific business or process objectives. 
Monitoring
Internal control systems need to be monitored – a process that assesses the 
quality of the system’s performance over time. This is accomplished through 
ongoing monitoring activities, separate evaluations or a combination of the 
two. Ongoing monitoring occurs in the course of operations. It includes regu-
lar management and supervisory activities, and other actions personnel take 
in performing their duties. The scope and frequency of separate evaluations 
will depend primarily on an assessment of risks and the effectiveness of on-
going monitoring procedures. Internal control deficiencies should be reported 
upstream, with serious matters reported to top management and the board.
Source: COSO, Internal Control – Integrated Framework, Executive Summary

Part 1  The accounting and business environment
42
Detective financial controls will be built into the accounting system to spot mate-
rial misstatements that may occur in processing transactions. Corrective controls 
are usually linked to detective ones and aim at correcting problems in a timely 
manner.
Strong preventive controls are essential to support the effectiveness of infor-
mation and control systems. In an accounting system that processes a high vol-
ume of transactions, a lack of preventive controls on the input of transactions 
before they are recorded can render detective and corrective controls ineffective 
in detecting and correcting errors in a timely manner. Preventive controls can 
take a myriad of forms. Within the context of an accounting information sys-
tem they can be programmed validity and edit checks, file transmission controls, 
­automated posting to ledgers and automated summary checks and reports. These 
types of preventive application controls are usually accompanied by preventive 
control measures of an organizational nature, such as an appropriate system of 
delegation and accountability, linked with a structure of formal approvals and 
what is known as ‘separation of functions’.
While all of the accounting transactions are centralized ultimately on the gen-
eral ledger, it is good management practice to split up the way the transactions are 
initiated, recorded and processed into different functional units, partly to allow 
for the development of specialist skills (division of labour) and partly to provide 
an environment where fraud becomes difficult. This is known as separation of func-
tions or as segregation of duties. It calls for the separation of the four basic func-
tions of transaction processing:
	
n	 authorizing transactions
	
n	 executing transactions
	
n	 recording transactions and
	
n	 safeguarding resources resulting from consummating transactions.
A simple example would be that where a payment has to be made, the payment is 
authorized by one person, the cheque drawn by another person, the cheque signed 
by a third and the general ledger entry made by a fourth. Each person is responsible 
for ensuring that they process nothing which is not correctly supported by docu-
ments and authorizations, and therefore in theory at least four people would need 
to be in collusion for a fraudulent payment to be made without a significant risk of 
detection. Equally, at least four people should have checked that the transaction is 
valid and has been correctly categorized. Separation of functions is a nice example 
of an efficient preventive control, in the sense that it simultaneously supports dif-
ferent types of control objectives: safeguarding of assets, ensuring the validity, com-
pleteness and accuracy of recorded information and compliance checking.
Separation of functions is obviously easier in a large company than in a small 
one, and it also has the effect of increasing the costs of each transaction. There 
is therefore a difficult trade-off between the costs and the level of assurance. But 
even in small companies with only a few employees it is usually possible to assign 
responsibilities in a way that achieves the necessary checks and balances. Alterna-
tively, oversight of incompatible activities by the general manager can substitute 
functional diversification. Recall the payments example. In small companies it 
is not uncommon that the general manager is the only person authorized to ap-
prove outgoing payments and that monthly (or daily) bank statements are to be 
delivered unopened directly to him or her for review of outgoing payments.

Chapter 2  Accounting and accountants
43
There is, however, the psychological problem that people get used to routines 
and after a while do not check effectively. Indeed, in a system where everyone 
knows there are five other people checking the transaction, each link in the chain 
may start to rely on someone else doing the job properly, leading to a general fail-
ure. This is one of the reasons why monitoring activities, involving assessment by 
appropriate personnel of the design and operation of controls on a timely basis, is 
a necessary component of an effective internal control system.
Even with strong preventive controls, detective and corrective controls remain 
necessary. The internal control system will typically include routine checks such 
as inspection of the monthly bank reconciliation and outstanding customer and 
supplier accounts, all of which provide areas where fraudulent items can be kept 
outside the system but also where company records can to an extent be checked 
against the records of outside organizations with which the company deals. Many 
companies keep asset registers where lists of computers and desks and so on (to 
say nothing of cars, plant, etc.) are maintained and these should be checked pe-
riodically against the physical existence of these items. Equally, where staff have 
access to large quantities of goods (supermarket staff, factory workers, etc.) it is 
usual to have security systems that control what goods the employees are taking 
in and out of the business.
It should be clear, however, that a good system of internal control can pro-
vide only reasonable (not absolute) assurance regarding the achievement of the 
major control objectives, including the effectiveness of the accounting and re-
porting systems. Each system of internal control has its inherent limitations. In-
ternal control heavily relies on human judgement in decision-making and this 
can be faulty. Control activities are bound by cost–benefit considerations due to 
resource constraints and they can break down as a result of a simple error or mis-
take. ­Internal controls can always be circumvented through the collusion of two 
or more people. Additionally, management usually has the ability to override the 
internal controls if that suits their personal interests better.
The US Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002 (commonly referred to as SOX) made exec-
utive management responsible not just for establishing, evaluating and ­assessing 
over time the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting and disclo-
sure, but also for periodically asserting its effectiveness (see Chapter 16 for further 
details). In the EU, no equivalent of the SOX requirements on internal control 
currently exists. As to accounting system specifications, the Fourth and Seventh 
Why should you check goods being taken in to a company? It is not always rel-
evant, but a sophisticated fraud is easy to operate in something like a bar where 
the barman takes in, for example, a bottle of whisky then, when a customer asks 
for a measure of whisky, the barman serves the customer from his private inven-
tory and keeps the money. This way the customer is not cheated and the bar owner 
does not necessarily have any idea anything is wrong. The barman is robbing the 
business by using its infrastructure, but the main internal controls generally focus 
on the relationship between the value of sales and the value of the liquor con-
sumed, and the barman is circumventing these controls by bringing in liquor.
Between the lines

Part 1  The accounting and business environment
44
Company Law Directives implicitly require companies to maintain accounting 
records enabling them to prepare financial statements, but explicit requirements 
on form and content of the accounting records and related controls are left to 
national legislation. This has led to divergent national requirements in European 
countries, but none has legal requirements comparable to the SOX requirements 
to publicly disclose conclusions regarding the effectiveness of internal control 
with regard to financial reporting.
Internal audit
Most large companies have an internal audit department. The primary task of 
internal auditors should be to examine and evaluate the adequacy and effective-
ness of the company’s internal control system and the quality of performance in 
carrying out assigned responsibilities. In fact, the internal audit function can be 
considered to be part of the monitoring component of the internal control sys-
tem. It should be stressed, however, that the primary responsibility for establish-
ing and maintaining the internal control system does not belong to the internal 
audit function but to the CEO, along with key management personnel. The 
internal audit function’s primary responsibility is to evaluate the effectiveness of 
internal control and thus contribute to ongoing effectiveness.
One of the key issues for a proper functioning of an internal audit function is 
its independence: the internal audit department should be independent of the ac-
tivities they audit. The independence of the audit department should be ­assured 
through their organizational position and authority within the company and 
through recognition of their objectivity. Of crucial importance is their reporting 
line: it is generally recommended that internal auditors report directly to either 
the (audit committee of the) board of directors, the CEO or a committee of top 
corporate executives.
The scope of internal auditing potentially covers all activities within the com-
pany. In some companies, internal auditors are heavily involved with operational 
controls, such as periodically monitoring production quality, testing the timeli-
ness of shipments to customers or evaluating the efficiency of production pro-
cesses (operational internal audit). In other companies the internal audit function 
will focus primarily on compliance and financial reporting issues (financial inter-
nal audit). So, in practice, the scope of the activities of the internal auditors tends 
to vary considerably, depending on the company’s management.
Typically (and we will focus now on responsibilities of the internal auditors 
that are related to financial reporting) the department consists of a team of sev-
eral people whose job is to visit the group’s different sites and check whether 
accounting policies and procedures (usually documented in a policies and proce-
dures manual) and related controls are being followed correctly and remain effec-
tive. Partly the task is psychological: if people know that at any time in the year 
the internal audit department may call in to check the accounting transactions 
and see whether the procedures in the group manual have been followed, they 
are encouraged to apply the procedures more thoroughly and anyone who was 
contemplating fraud is discouraged . . . the internal audit department thus acts as 
a preventive control measure.
The internal audit department can help create a culture within the company that 
says the accounting function has a vital role to play and that members of it are val-
ued for their technical knowledge and their skill in handling the sometimes difficult 

Chapter 2  Accounting and accountants
45
interpersonal situations that can arise. Equally, this department can provide impor-
tant feedback about application problems to those who design and maintain the 
procedures. A difficulty in operating group-wide systems is that not all operating 
units are the same size (and therefore may have quite different accounting struc-
tures and personnel) and not all have the same type of operations.
By way of example of the problems that can arise when trying to instal uni-
form systems, here is an actual example taken from a group which had both 
electronics and entertainment interests. Within the entertainment division was 
a subgroup which ran London theatres and produced live theatrical shows. The 
head office internal audit department was conducting an exercise to fix levels 
of expenditure authority within operating units, as part of the internal control 
structure. They said that the chief executive of this subgroup could sign contracts 
only up to an individual value of £500 000. Beyond that he should seek author-
ity from the chief executive of the entertainment division. The chief accountant 
of the theatrical subgroup said this was not possible because the group did not 
know the value of many contracts which were signed. The internal audit man-
ager was dumbfounded – how could the chief executive sign contracts without 
knowing their value? Should he not be replaced at once (and maybe the chief 
accountant too)?
The chief accountant explained that theatre contracts in the West End of 
London are usually open-ended. They provide for a minimum weekly rental 
(generally against a percentage of sales) and, as long as this is exceeded, the 
contract can run indefinitely. Indeed, the object of the exercise is to find a 
single production that could potentially run for years. So while the minimum 
weekly rental might be (say) £50 000, the show could run for two or three years, 
or only two or three weeks, so the value of the contract could be anything from 
£200 000 to £20m or more. The internal audit manager then understood, but 
pointed out that the chief executive of the worldwide group could only sign 
contracts up to £10m without the approval of the board of directors. In the 
end, they agreed to write a special authority for the theatre subgroup, based on 
maximum weekly figures.
Getting the ‘control environment’ right is a very tricky problem in a large 
group. Ideally you want the accounting departments of the different units to 
be efficient and useful contributors to the team, who are willing to provide a 
high quality of service to help with the efficient running of the unit. On the 
other hand, the integrity of the group system and the necessity to provide inputs 
whose justification can be demonstrated, if necessary years after the event in a 
tax ­investigation, demand that accounting staff insist on the presentation of the  
appropriate paperwork and the required authorizations. Accounting staff in re-
mote subsidiaries sometimes have a particularly difficult time since they have a 
line responsibility to the chief executive of their subsidiary, but a functional re-
sponsibility to the head office accounting managers. Locally employed staff, par-
ticularly in areas where unemployment is high, may fear losing their job if they 
upset the local chief executive, and may therefore not apply systems correctly.
The internal audit team should make frequent but unscheduled visits to 
­subsidiaries to make spot checks on recent transactions but also to reinforce the 
local accounting unit if there are problems. The internal audit team should have 
a reporting responsibility within the head office, and not to local managers, 
­although of course they should discuss local problems with operational manage-
ment on site.

Part 1  The accounting and business environment
46
It follows from this that working in internal audit is not a particularly easy job. 
It is necessary to have a wide knowledge of the group’s operations and information 
systems. A great deal of time is spent away from home visiting remote subsidiar-
ies and often either working in foreign languages or with people who are obliged 
to use their second or third language, and who, of course, have different cultural 
backgrounds and therefore different understandings about their role and respon-
sibilities. People in either accounting or operational roles often resent also what 
they perceive as an intrusion from head office, without understanding that with-
out ­effective accounting systems the group cannot continue to exist for very long.
The Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA) has played a major role in the devel-
opment of the internal auditing profession. Established in the US in 1941, the 
IIA has grown into a highly respected international organization and has taken 
a leadership role in providing professional guidance for internal auditors. The 
IIA establishes ethical and practice standards, provides education and promotes 
professionalism through its worldwide network. It sponsors a certification pro-
gramme leading to the designation of Certified Internal Auditor (CIA) for those 
who meet the examination and experience requirements. The IAA’s Standards for 
the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing are divided in attribute standards 
for the internal auditor and the internal audit department and performance stan-
dards for the performance and reporting of internal audit activities.
External audit
In most jurisdictions the financial statements of medium and large companies must 
be submitted to an independent audit. This is often referred to as statutory audit 
and is usually carried out by independent firms of auditors. Audit has evolved dif-
ferently in different countries, and the object of the audit is not uniform. In some 
countries, the auditor has a quasi-legal role to check for the legality of the com-
pany’s activities and its annual statements, whereas in other countries the auditor is 
checking the accounts on behalf of the shareholders. In both cases the audit firm is 
usually appointed in fact by the management of the company, but the responsibil-
ity both for keeping accounts and for preparing the annual financial statements is 
that of the management of the company, not that of the external auditors.
The external auditor expresses an opinion on the representational fairness of 
the financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting prin-
ciples. While the company’s system of internal control should provide reasonable 
assurance regarding the reliability of financial statements, the external auditor 
STANDARDs
DEFINING INTERNAL AUDITING
Internal auditing is an independent, objective assurance and consulting activ-
ity designed to add value and improve an organization’s operations. It helps 
an organization accomplish its objectives by bringing a systematic, disci-
plined approach to evaluate and improve the effectiveness of risk manage-
ment, control and governance processes.
Source: Institute of Internal Auditors (www.theiia.org)

Chapter 2  Accounting and accountants
47
STANDARDs
INSTITUTE OF INTERNAL AUDITORS: STANDARDS FOR THE 
­PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE OF AUDITING
Attribute standards
1000 Purpose, Authority, and Responsibility.  The purpose, authority and 
­responsibility of the internal audit activity should be formally defined in a 
charter, consistent with the Standards, and approved by the board.
1100 Independence and Objectivity.  The internal audit activity should be inde-
pendent, and internal auditors should be objective in performing their work.
1200 Proficiency and Due Professional Care.  Engagements should be per-
formed with proficiency and due professional care.
1300 Quality Assurance and Improvement Program.  The chief audit executive 
should develop and maintain a quality assurance and improvement program that 
covers all aspects of the internal audit activity and continuously monitors its effec-
tiveness. The program should be designed to help the internal auditing activity add 
value and improve the organization’s operations and to provide assurance that the 
internal audit activity is in conformity with the Standards and the Code of Ethics.
Performance standards
2000 Managing the Internal Audit Activity.  The chief audit executive should effec-
tively manage the internal audit activity to ensure it adds value to the organization.
2100 Nature of Work.  The internal audit activity evaluates and contributes to 
the improvement of risk management, control, and governance systems.
2200 Engagement Planning.  Internal auditors should develop and record a 
plan for each engagement.
2300 Performing the Engagement.  Internal auditors should identify, analyze, 
evaluate and record sufficient information to achieve the engagement’s objectives.
2400 Communicating Results.  Internal auditors should communicate the 
­engagement results promptly.
2500 Monitoring Progress.  The chief audit executive should establish and 
maintain a system to monitor the disposition of results communicated to 
management.
2600 Management’s Acceptance of Risks.  When the chief audit executive be-
lieves that senior management has accepted a level of residual risk that is 
unacceptable to the organization, the chief audit executive should discuss the 
matter with senior management. If the decision regarding residual risk is not 
resolved, the chief audit executive and senior management should report the 
matter to the board for resolution.
Source: Institute of Internal Auditors, 2007 (www.theiia.org)

Part 1  The accounting and business environment
48
brings the assurance to a higher level. It is, however, not the responsibility of 
the external auditors to detect fraud. While external auditors should certainly re-
port fraud if they spot it and they will normally comment on the adequacy of 
the internal control system to prevent fraud, their job is not to search for fraud, 
even if many people think that it is. In a modern multinational, the management 
are looking to the statutory auditor to provide reassurance to outside stakehold-
ers that the financial statements of the company are a valid representation of 
the company’s financial position and performance. This is part of the very broad 
role played by financial statements, and the fact that the information is indepen-
dently verified is probably one reason why the role is so broad.
Nearly all multinationals have their financial statements audited by one of the 
four international audit networks which dominate the business:
	
n	 PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC)
	
n	 KPMG
	
n	 Ernst & Young
	
n	 Deloitte.
These four firms are probably better known than many of their clients and one of 
their logos on the audit report (published within the financial statements) carries 
a high level of reassurance to users in general and the capital markets in particu-
lar. As a consequence, any company with ambitions is likely to use one of these 
firms. In addition, they have worldwide networks and are capable of delivering 
an audit anywhere in the world. This is quite important in that the multinational 
generally prefers to have a single firm responsible for all its subsidiaries, not least 
because this reduces the risk of lack of coordination between countries. This tends 
to reinforce the dominant position of the ‘Big Four’, as they are known, since 
other audit firms cannot offer the global service.
The basic statutory audit consists of two tasks:
	
1.	to check that the accounting database effectively picks up all the ­company’s 
activities and is correct;
	
2.	to check that the financial statements drawn up from it are a correct repre-
sentation of what is in the accounting database, use appropriate accounting 
policies and are a reasonable representation of the company’s real state (but 
this last aspect may not always be part of local audit requirements).
The audit firm maintains a master file on the company and in this is collated all 
the relevant information necessary for the annual audit. This includes items left 
outstanding from the previous audit for subsequent management action and an 
analysis of the company’s systems. When starting a new audit, the first require-
ment is to check the accuracy of the systems chart. Having established the current 
system and internal controls in place, the next step is to check how well these 
work. This is done by sampling the transactions of a particular (short) period. If 
this checking reveals that the internal control system is correctly applied, the au-
ditor can go on to carry out verifications of things like inventory valuations, bank 
reconciliations (comparing the client’s bank records with the statements provided 
by the bank), customer accounts, supplier accounts and so on. Only if the internal 
control system is thought to be ineffective will more detailed checking be done.
Once satisfied with the database, the auditor looks at the financial statements 
and the interpretation of the database which has been made in these. The nature 

Chapter 2  Accounting and accountants
49
of the company’s business does not necessarily change every year, so there need 
not be any queries at this point, but as new transactions appear, so there may well 
be disagreement about how these are represented. Such disagreements are usually 
resolved more or less amicably between the audit staff and the chief accountant, 
but occasionally there can be substantial disagreement – usually because a change 
in treatment would diminish profits (we will be looking at cases throughout this 
book). In such circumstances things can be very tense and large companies have 
been known to bring in legal opinion, or consult another firm of auditors, when 
trying to insist on their view of the financial statements. The auditor can, in some 
countries, even be replaced, but this generally sends a bad signal to the market. 
The auditor’s only threat is to refuse to sign the audit report at all (very extreme) 
or (more normally) to say that they will be obliged to include a reservation in 
their audit report which details the matter in dispute.
Although the auditor signs a public report, there is also usually a private report 
which is given to the management, and is known as a management letter. This, 
­unlike the published report, does not follow any prescribed formula but rather 
comments on the audit findings for the year, highlights potential areas of weak-
ness and makes recommendations. This is something which the following year’s 
audit will revisit to see what action has been taken.
The conduct of the audit is regulated in three ways. Firstly, the statutory audit, 
by definition, is mandated by a government statute (such as a company law or 
a commercial code) which will prescribe the objects of the audit and normally 
specify whether client confidentiality applies or not. In the second place there 
will normally be a national professional association for auditors which will pro-
vide detailed audit regulations. Finally the audit firm itself will have its own in-
ternal procedures which all its staff follow – for reasons of efficiency and also to 
enable the firm’s management to assess the degree of risk in the audit and similar 
issues.
The audit firm has a potentially difficult relationship with its client because, 
on the one hand, the outside world depends upon the rigour of the audit firm to 
ensure that the company maintains proper accounts and gives adequate reports 
while, on the other, the audit firm is in effect appointed by the management, 
must negotiate with the management and, in many countries, hopes to be able 
to sell supplementary services such as tax advice and management consultancy to 
the audit client. This problem is part of the issue of auditor independence. Regula-
tors are concerned that, since auditors are at the front line of corporate regula-
tion, they should be independent of management and provide an appropriate 
control on management. Other aspects of the independence issue include restric-
tions on employment of former audit firm employees by the client and the neces-
sity of auditor partner rotation over time.
Companies listed on the US stock markets are obliged to appoint an audit com-
mittee whose members liaise with the statutory auditors. The Sarbanes–Oxley Act 
requires that all members of the audit committee are independent. The company 
should also disclose whether or not the audit committee includes at least one 
member who is a financial expert. The idea is that this committee provides a 
knowledgeable forum free from the influence of operating management where 
shareholder representatives can discuss audit problems. SOX even requires that 
the audit committee appoint the firm of external auditors. The role of the audit 
committee is growing in a context where society is becoming more and more 
concerned with corporate governance issues.

Part 1  The accounting and business environment
50
COMPANY REPORT
NESTLÉ
Report of the Statutory Auditor on the Consolidated Financial Statements to the 
General Meeting of Nestlé S.A.
As statutory auditor, we have audited the consolidated financial statements (in-
come statement, statement of comprehensive income, balance sheet, cash flow 
statement, statement of changes in equity and notes on pages 46 to 115) of the 
Nestlé Group for the year ended 31 December 2011.
Board of Directors’ responsibility
The Board of Directors is responsible for the preparation and fair presenta-
tion of the consolidated financial statements in accordance with International 
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and the requirements of Swiss law. This 
responsibility includes designing, implementing and maintaining an internal 
control system relevant to the preparation and fair presentation of consolidated 
financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to 
fraud or error. The Board of Directors is further responsible for selecting and ap-
plying appropriate accounting policies and making accounting estimates that 
are reasonable in the circumstances.
Auditor’s responsibility
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial 
statements based on our audit. We conducted our audit in accordance with 
Swiss law and Swiss Auditing Standards as well as International Standards on 
Auditing. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain 
reasonable assurance whether the consolidated financial statements are free 
from material misstatement. 
An audit involves performing procedures to obtain audit evidence about the 
amounts and disclosures in the consolidated financial statements. The proce-
dures selected depend on the auditor’s judgment, including the assessment 
of the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial statements, 
whether due to fraud or error. In making those risk assessments, the auditor 
considers the internal control system relevant to the entity’s preparation and 
fair presentation of the consolidated financial statements in order to design 
audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the 
purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the entity’s internal 
control system. An audit also includes evaluating the appropriateness of the ac-
counting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates made, 
as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial 
statements. We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient 
and appropriate to provide a basis for our audit opinion.
Opinion
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements for the year ended 31 
­December 2011 give a true and fair view of the financial position, the results of 
operations and the cash flows in accordance with International Financial Re-
porting Standards (IFRS) and comply with Swiss law.

Chapter 2  Accounting and accountants
51
Report on other legal requirements
We confirm that we meet the legal requirements on licensing according to the 
Auditor Oversight Act (AOA) and independence (article 728 CO and article 11 
AOA) and that there are no circumstances incompatible with our independence. 
In accordance with article 728a paragraph 1 item 3 CO and Swiss Auditing 
Standard 890, we confirm that an internal control system exists, which has 
been designed for the preparation of consolidated financial statements accord-
ing to the instructions of the Board of Directors. 
We recommend that the consolidated financial statements submitted to you 
be approved.
KPMG SA
Geneva, 15 February 2012
Source: Nestlé, Financial Statements, 2011
Corporate governance
In recent years, more and more government and shareholder attention has been 
given to the question of how management’s freedom of action may be limited by 
outside interests – a topic known as corporate governance. Corporate governance 
issues arise whenever ownership of a company is separated from its management. 
There are many issues in this area which cause concern to investors and govern-
ments. Abuses by management are not necessarily widespread, but sometimes the 
remuneration of top executives seems out of all proportion to the effort put in; 
sometimes managers are either implicated in or unaware of frauds taking place 
within the company, or indeed of risk-taking by middle management. Some com-
pany bosses are thought to be able to operate virtually as dictators, with no effec-
tive monitoring of their activity within the company.
Criticism in this area, articulated for example in the financial press, has pro-
duced a number of different outcomes. At a general level, most companies are not 
insensitive to the views of the outside world and make at least a token response by 
disclosing in their annual report some details of their activities in sensitive areas. 
Notably, companies are increasingly making voluntary disclosures about their inter- 
action with the environment, their involvement with their employees and the 
wider community, and their policy on issues such as the use of child labour by sub-
contractors. In addition, institutional investors such as insurance companies and 
pension funds increasingly provide a checklist of corporate governance matters to 
the directors of the companies in which they plan to invest. Only if the board can 
satisfy them on these points will they go ahead and make an investment.
Many countries have specific rules, regulations and public guidance on corpo-
rate governance. Governance regimes tend to differ due to historical, economic 
and cultural influences. However, with the emergence of global markets national 
governance structures came under greater public scrutiny and these pressures re-
sulted in a number of government or quasi-official reports (Viénot I and II in 
France, Cromme in Germany, from Cadbury to Higgs in the UK, OECD) and, 
more recently, in somewhat converging codes of conduct in most countries which 
tend to recommend the installation of supplementary controls on management 
and the distancing of management from the audit. The first plank of such an 

Part 1  The accounting and business environment
52
approach calls for companies to appoint a chairman who is not also the chief 
executive, and for the board to include ‘non-executive’ or independent directors 
who can bring experience and independence to the boardroom. The non-execu-
tive directors, aside from normal board meetings, are then called upon to form at 
least two key committees: the compensation committee (which fixes executives’ 
pay packages) and the audit committee. The audit committee should provide a 
forum where external and internal auditors can discuss audit issues without line 
management being present. Sometimes there exists a third committee, the nomi-
nation committee, charged with the responsibility of proposing to the board any 
new executive or non-executive directors. It is generally recommended that a ma-
jority of the nomination committee members are non-executive directors.
The basic idea is that the non-executive directors have no role in the day-to-
day running of the company, but are there to safeguard investors’ interests and to 
provide ethical controls. Of course, for this to work, the individuals must be expe-
rienced in business matters and be willing to take a strong line within the board. It 
is not clear that this always works, not least because appointment of ­non-executive 
directors generally falls to the chairman or chief executive. However, in principle, 
the non-executives should be in a position to determine what is a fair pay pack-
age for senior executives by reference to market conditions. Equally, they should 
provide some protection for staff who wish to express concerns in the context of 
internal controls and audit. A frequently encountered problem in large companies 
is that even if staff are aware that some fraud or abuse is taking place, they are re-
luctant to report it because they fear that no action will be taken but their position 
will be made untenable. The existence of an audit committee should make it pos-
sible for staff to raise issues which are passed up the audit chain and not discussed 
with operational management until an investigation has taken place.
In some countries, notably Germany and the Netherlands, large companies 
have a two-tier board system where a management board runs the company on 
a day-to-day basis, but this reports to a supervisory board. The supervisory board 
represents investors and staff, receives regular reports on corporate activity and 
can replace the management board if they wish.
In the US, the Sarbanes–Oxley Act has been the main initiative to strengthen 
corporate governance after the Enron collapse. The SOX created the Public Com-
pany Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB), strengthened auditor independence 
rules, increased accountability of company officers and directors, mandated top 
management to take responsibility for the company’s internal control system, 
­enhanced the quality of financial reporting and considerably increased white-
collar crime penalties. We will come back to these developments in Chapter 16.
In Europe, the European Commission plans to modernize company law and 
enhance corporate governance. In October 2004, the European Commission for-
mally established the European Corporate Governance forum to encourage the 
coordination and convergence of national codes of corporate governance through 
regular high-level meetings.
It is worth spending a few moments to look at the accounting profession as 
such. In the anglophone world we tend to use the terms ‘accountant’ and 
The accounting profession

Chapter 2  Accounting and accountants
53
‘auditor’ interchangeably, and we tend not to distinguish very clearly between 
those people who operate independent public accounting firms and those who 
work for companies or in the public sector. Not the least reason for this is that 
there is no clear worldwide definition of what an accountant does and, indeed, 
the training and licensing arrangements and type of work done vary somewhat 
from country to country. For our purposes we will distinguish between the fol-
lowing categories:
	
1.	independent auditor
	
2.	independent accountant
	
3.	company accountant.
Independent auditors are specialists who work in audit firms and are licensed 
­either directly or indirectly by the government to carry out the statutory audit 
(i.e. independent audit required by company law) of large companies. An indi-
vidual who works in this way has generally completed a university degree and 
then studied for professional exams. These exams are typically under the super-
vision of a professional organization (e.g. American Institute of Certified Public 
Accountants) and a candidate must also spend at least three years as a student 
in a public auditing firm. In some countries, such as the UK, success in the pro-
fessional examination, allied with the necessary practical experience, confers 
an auditing licence automatically and this is issued by the professional body. 
In other countries (e.g. Germany) the auditor must register with a government 
­supervisory body.
In fact many auditors leave public practice fairly early in their careers, either 
to undertake wider management careers or to work full time for a company. 
In anglophone countries, such accountants may well remain members of their 
professional body, but in many continental European countries, membership 
is linked to public practice and anyone leaving public practice leaves their pro-
fessional body at the same time. This leads to professional bodies being quite 
­different in size and nature. The Institut der Wirtschaftsprüfer (the only body for 
auditors of public companies in Germany) has approximately 18 000 members, 
while the Association of Chartered Certified Accountants (one of four bodies in 
the UK whose members may work as auditors) has more than 100 000 members.
The precise nature of the audit and the relationship between auditor and cli-
ent vary from place to place. In France, the auditor has a public responsibility to 
report to the public prosecutor any evidence of a client’s failure to comply with 
the law discovered during the audit. However, in most countries the company’s 
information must be kept confidential by the auditor. There are also differences as 
to what the auditor is commenting on in the audit report – sometimes it is sim-
ply conformity with local accounting rules, while sometimes the auditor is saying 
that the image of the company given by the annual financial statements is not 
misleading. This difference is quite important since the user of the financial state-
ments is being offered a different level of reassurance about the information.
It is relatively rare for audit firms to offer only an audit service, although 
France and Germany in particular say that the auditor, for reasons of indepen-
dence, may only provide audit services to an audit client, even if they may  
offer other services to non-audit clients. Anglo-Saxon audit firms generally used 
to offer a wide range of consulting services to their audit clients and, indeed, 
provision of the audit was seen by some as the means of access to selling a wide 
range of consulting services. The Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002 put a stop to these  

Part 1  The accounting and business environment
54
practices, by prohibiting audit firms from providing a wide range of non-audit 
services to audit clients.
Independent accountants are a related branch of the profession. In some countries a 
network of firms has developed which offer accounting services to (generally small) 
businesses. In France there are, for example, the Experts Comptables, in Germany 
the Steuerberater and in the Netherlands the ­Accountant-Administratieconsulent. 
These firms specifically do not offer statutory audit for large companies and their 
principal role is in providing the accounting function for companies that are  
either too small to have an in-house service or that prefer to outsource the func-
tion. They may also provide tax and general business advice.
Company accountant, on the other hand, is a function not necessarily cov-
ered by any professional organization, and indeed many company accoun-
tants do not have any specific accounting training. At the management end of 
company accounting, the larger companies tend to engage former auditors or 
others with specialized professional training to run their accounting function. 
However, it is commonplace in both North America and continental Europe 
for people to study business at university, perhaps with an accounting spe-
cialization, and then go directly into a company and work in the accounting, 
internal audit and finance areas, building up a store of practical experience in 
that way.
Professional accounting bodies exist in most countries, but their nature 
may vary quite a lot depending on the nature of the economy within which 
they operate. In the developed world, the standards of professional exams for 
auditors are comparable, and indeed in the European Union are the subject 
of a harmonization statute (Eighth EC Company Law Directive), but in the 
developing world and in countries in transition to a market economy this is 
not necessarily so. Not all professional bodies have examination requirements 
for entry and not all are independent associations. For example, the Chinese 
­Institute of Certified Public Accountants is an agency of the Chinese Ministry 
of Finance.
There are some regional bodies to which national bodies may belong, such as 
the Fédération des Experts Comptables Européens (European Accountants’ Fed-
eration) or the Confederation of Asian and Pacific Accountants (CAPA). ­Finally 
there is, at a world level, the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC) 
which represents the profession worldwide and issues auditing standards and 
public sector accounting standards, as well as providing guidance on education 
and ethical matters.

Chapter 2  Accounting and accountants
55
Summary
In this chapter we have looked at the functioning of the company accounting 
unit and seen that its objectives are to provide accurate financial data about the 
company but also to provide controls which prevent the possibility of fraud. 
The company runs a permanent accounting database into which all transactions 
are recorded, processed and summarized, and from which one may at any point 
produce reports about the company’s performance and financial position. The 
processing of transactions follows the same principles irrespective of whether it 
is computerized or not, but computerized accounting information systems are 
widespread and permit efficient accounting and sophisticated analysis.
In larger companies the accounting information system is an integral part of a 
‘system of internal control’ which operates to safeguard assets, improve the reli-
ability of accounting data, ensure compliance with applicable laws and contractual 
obligations and promote operational efficiencies. This system of internal control is 
usually backed up by an ‘internal audit’ function: dedicated staff checking that in-
ternal controls are applied and remain effective. Finally all public companies, and 
many private ones, are subject to independent audit by external auditors. These 
professionals also rely upon the internal control system and run sample checks on 
it in order to form an opinion on the accuracy of the company’s financial records. 
They also give an opinion on the validity of the annual financial statements.
The external audit is a major part of a wider system of corporate governance, 
through which investors and other interested parties aim to monitor and control 
the behaviour of corporate managers, a subject which we will revisit later in the 
book. This involves the use of disclosures, adhesion to codes of behaviour and the 
use of board members who represent investor interests. The term ‘accountant’ or 
‘auditor’ is used fairly freely and there are a number of professional structures and 
education patterns which occur in different countries. Generally, statutory audi-
tors must be licensed by government and have completed suitable professional 
training and minimum periods of internship.
Discussion Questions
1.	 What are the objectives which a company’s accounting department should 
be aiming to achieve?
2.	 How is the company’s accounting database organized and from where does it 
get its data?
3.	 How does the COSO report approach a ‘system of internal control’?
4.	 Explain the difference between preventive, detective and corrective controls.
5.	 What is the relationship between internal control and internal audit?
6.	 What is the purpose of external audit, and who carries this out?


P A R T  T W O
Basic financial statements
Part  Two goes through the main techniques which are used to prepare the basic 
financial statements – the statement of profit or loss (income statement/profit  
and loss account) and the statement of financial position (balance sheet) – of 
individual companies. These are the basic building blocks of financial reporting.

58
Chapter 3 introduces two of the main financial statements. It then goes on to explain 
the basic assumptions and conventions which are applied to financial accounting 
and which therefore provide the framework that both limits and informs accounting 
information. The chapter introduces the balance sheet equation, which represents 
the fundamental logic on which accounting is based. We will end this chapter with a 
closer look at how the IASB defines the content of the basic elements of a statement 
of financial position and profit and loss account.
C H A P T E R   3
Measurement concepts  
and the balance sheet equation
n	 Introduction
n	 The balance sheet does not purport to show what the company 
is worth
n	 Company characteristics affecting financial reporting behaviour
n	 Content of financial statements
n	 The basics of accounting measurement
n	 Generally accepted accounting principles
n	 Conventional measurement bases
n	 Accounting for transactions
n	 The IASB definition and recognition criteria for elements of the 
statement of financial position and the statement of profit or loss
Chapter Structure

Chapter 3  Measurement concepts and the balance sheet equation
59
In general terms the annual financial statements produced by a business for exter-
nal consumption (also known as the annual accounts, annual report) are the single 
public source of economic data on the company and they represent a prime form 
of communication between the company and its external stakeholders. The state-
ments of larger companies are usually subject to verification by external experts 
(auditors) and are made available to shareholders. They form the starting point for 
tax assessment. They are usually of prime interest to all main business partners: 
banks, other lenders, suppliers of goods and services, major customers. They are of-
ten, particularly in large companies, an important device used to monitor contracts 
(bank covenants, profit shares in joint ventures, employee bonuses, royalties).
In most European jurisdictions there is a requirement for the financial statements 
to be filed at a public registry so that, even if the company does not provide a copy 
of the financial statements directly to an interested party, access to them is still 
available (for example, in the UK there is a single government office which holds 
all company files; in Belgium they are held by the Banque Nationale de ­Belgique, 
but in Switzerland access is restricted; while in Germany many small and medium-
sized companies deliberately do not file their financial statements – the fine is mini-
mal). In the US, however, there is no filing system for private companies.
Listed companies also put their financial statements on their website (in html 
or pdf format) and generally make physical copies of their annual report available 
to anyone who cares to ask for it – indeed, they see it as a major public relations 
document – while small, privately owned companies will give up information 
only when the law or their business interest decrees it.
Historically, the balance sheet and the statement of profit or loss have been 
the key financial statements, even though a modern corporation is now expected 
to publish a balance sheet (statement of financial position), statement of profit 
or loss and other comprehensive income (statement of comprehensive income), 
statement of changes in equity, statement of cash flows and notes to the accounts. 
The statement of profit or loss is undergoing a period of change and the IASB pre-
fers to refer to a ‘statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income’ 
(or, alternatively, ‘statement of comprehensive income’). This includes not only 
the results of operations, but also changes in economic values (reported as ‘other 
comprehensive income’). We will deal with that in Part Four of this book, and 
for the time being will refer only to the statement of profit or loss. Indeed, at this 
point in the book we will concentrate only on the balance sheet and the profit 
and loss account, since these are at the heart of the reporting system.
The statement of profit or loss sets out the result of the company’s business op-
erations for the accounting period (revenues less expenses for the period), while 
the balance sheet shows, at a given date, the company’s financial position: what 
economic resources (assets) such as factories, equipment, inventory, cash and so 
on the company owns or controls and where the company’s finance comes from 
(banks, shareholders, etc. – liabilities and equity).
Introduction
n	 Summary
n	 Discussion questions
n	 Assignments

Part 2  Basic financial statements
60
This issue crops up from time to time in MBA courses and is obviously a key 
question if one’s main interest in looking at the annual financial statements is to 
form an opinion on the economic health and prospects of the company. Usually, 
when we ask what a company is ‘worth’, this means what would we have to pay 
to acquire the company and this in turn is linked to the value of the future ben-
efits which one would gain by buying the company. If Company X will deliver a 
dividend (or net positive cash flow) of €10 000 a year for ten years, a first estimate 
of its total value over ten years is €100 000. Since, if you buy the company, you 
cannot enjoy all the benefits at once, you would normally be willing to pay less 
than €100 000 for it – you would deduct a discount to factor in the time value of 
money and the riskiness of the estimated cash flows. The price agreed is a com-
promise between the value to the purchaser and what the seller is willing to sell 
for. In fact, takeover situations typically arise because Company A believes that it 
can reorganize Company X (maybe there are savings to be made by combining 
operations) and deliver more than €10 000 a year from it. In this case the owners 
of Company X will value it on the basis of €10 000 a year but Company A will 
make a bid at a higher price, so there is a basis for a deal.
The point is that company value, from a market perspective, is (a) based on 
future earnings and (b) these earnings may well be different in different situations. 
Financial statements give certain economic information about a company’s past 
activities, drawn up according to a fairly flexible set of rules. They give partial 
information, and anyone wanting to make serious use of the statements needs to 
know (a) what are the rules, (b) to what extent are they flexible, and (c) how this 
impacts upon interpretation of the information.
On top of that, anyone looking across national boundaries needs to know 
whether the company uses IFRS and its figures are comparable with other compa-
nies internationally, or whether it is using national accounting principles. If the 
latter is the case, one needs to know how the rules differ from one jurisdiction 
to another, where different flexibilities arise and so forth (which is much more 
complicated and is one reason why companies prefer IFRS). Once the analyst has 
decoded the accounting information, then he or she can make a forecast of fu-
ture earnings from that information about past performance (and related external  
factors) and come to a view about the company’s worth.
The balance sheet does not purport to show what 
the company is worth
Company characteristics affecting financial reporting 
behaviour
This brings us to another major point: while the bulk of accounting rules for com-
mercial companies are the same in all developed countries, there are differences 
at a detailed level from one country to another (as discussed in Chapter 1). Also, 
the way the rules are applied may differ from one company to another within the 
same country. While the way companies record and track their transactions in 
their accounting systems does not vary substantially, the way these are presented 
in annual financial statements may be subject to significant variations. The rush 

Chapter 3  Measurement concepts and the balance sheet equation
61
to use IFRS for listed companies is motivated by a desire to get away from the un-
certainties caused by national differences.
However, differences in the accounting rule base used are not the only source 
of difference in financial statements. Looking first at businesses within one coun-
try, there are many differences which impact upon reporting, such as the nature 
of their ownership, their objectives, their legal form and their size.
Nature of ownership
Most European market economies are in fact mixed economies, with a large slice 
of activity in the hands of commercial companies but also with a significant ele-
ment owned by the State. Where a business is owned by the State, its management 
may have different objectives from those of an ordinary commercial concern, for 
example, it may not be politically acceptable to show too much profit or the gov-
ernment may want to fatten the company up for privatization. State-owned enter-
prises may not operate under the same regulations as private sector firms.
In the private sector it is easy to see two extremes: the large, multinational 
company listed on several stock exchanges and the small company owned en-
tirely by its chief executive. A company whose securities are traded on the capital 
markets has a major concern in terms of maintaining the buoyancy of the share 
price and this is likely to lead the company either to release good news as soon as 
possible and hide bad news as long as possible, or to make an attempt to smooth 
profits so that the company appears to go from one successful year to another in 
a reliable progression. For these companies the capital market is a privileged user 
of their financial information and the rules are likely to be applied by such com-
panies in ways that will influence the market reaction. The management of the 
company and its owners are separate and distinct from each other, and the finan-
cial statements play a significant role in the conduct of that relationship.
The small company at the other extreme has no external shareholders to 
whom to report. The manager is also the main shareholder and so the reporting 
pressures are likely to be different. Such a manager might be more concerned 
about keeping reported profits as low as possible in order to reduce tax liability. 
Or, if it is a family company, the manager may want to keep profits low so that 
relatives will not demand high dividends and cash can be kept in the business to 
finance expansion.
These are archetypes and there exist many variants. There are, for exam-
ple, large, family-owned companies which are not listed on stock exchanges  
(e.g. ­Firmenich, Bosch, Mars). There is a particularly large number of these in 
Germany and Switzerland and this gives rise to another issue, which is the extent 
to which the community calls for businesses of significant economic size to make 
financial disclosures purely because their size may cause them to impact upon 
public interest.
Managerial objectives
The nature of a company’s ownership generally impacts upon its objectives.  
A State or other public sector entity probably has objectives other than profit gen-
eration, a listed company may want to angle towards maximizing declared short-
term profits (or not – it depends upon the culture of the capital markets where it 
operates), a privately held company might want to minimize profits in order to 

Part 2  Basic financial statements
62
minimize tax and dividends. On the other hand, a privately held company that is 
planning to be listed on the capital markets in the future might choose to maxi-
mize profits. A commercial company listed on stock exchanges (a publicly held 
company) might be looking for long-term growth and be quite willing to take low 
profits while it builds market share. So while ownership and objectives are often 
closely interlinked, this is not always the case.
STANDARD PRACTICE
IFRS – WHY GLOBAL FINANCIAL REPORTING STANDARDS FOR SMEs? 
(extracts)
BC36 Global financial reporting standards, applied consistently, enhance the 
comparability of financial information. Accounting differences can obscure 
the comparisons that investors, lenders and others make. By resulting in the 
presentation of high quality comparable financial information, high quality 
global financial reporting standards improve the efficiency of allocation and 
the pricing of capital. This benefits not only those who provide debt or equity 
capital but also those entities that seek capital because it reduces their com-
pliance costs and removes uncertainties that affect their cost of capital. Global 
standards also improve consistency in audit quality and facilitate education 
and training.
BC37 The benefits of global financial reporting standards are not limited to 
entities whose securities are traded in public capital markets. In the Board’s 
judgement, small and medium-sized entities – and those who use their finan-
cial statements – can benefit from a common set of accounting standards. 
SMEs’ financial statements that are comparable from one country to the next 
are needed for the following reasons:
(a)	 Financial institutions make loans across borders and operate multi-
nationally.­ In most jurisdictions, over half of all SMEs, including the very 
small ones, have bank loans. Bankers rely on financial statements in 
making lending decisions and in establishing terms and interest rates.
(b)	Vendors want to evaluate the financial health of buyers in other coun-
tries before they sell goods or services on credit.
(c)	 Credit rating agencies try to develop ratings uniformly across borders. 
Similarly, banks and other institutions that operate across borders often 
develop ratings in a manner similar to credit rating agencies. Reported 
financial figures are crucial to the rating process.
(d)	Many SMEs have overseas suppliers and use a supplier’s financial 
statements to assess the prospects of a viable long-term business 
relationship.
(e)	 Venture capital firms provide funding to SMEs across borders.
(f)	 Many SMEs have outside investors who are not involved in the day-to-
day management of the entity. Global accounting standards for general 
purpose financial statements and the resulting comparability are espe-
cially important when those outside investors are located in a different 
jurisdiction from the entity and when they have interests in other SMEs.
Source: IASB, IFRS for SMEs, Basis for Conclusions, July 2009

Chapter 3  Measurement concepts and the balance sheet equation
63
Nature of activity
Company activity is another variable. This is at its most obvious in regulations that 
affect banks and insurance companies. All jurisdictions have separate regulatory 
mechanisms for the accounting and disclosure requirements for financial institu-
tions. These may relate to requirements for ordinary commercial companies (the 
Fourth EC Company Law Directive – a major accounting statute of the European­ 
Union – has banking and insurance variants) but usually go beyond them because 
of the different nature of the assets and liabilities of such companies and the pro-
found effects on society of the failure of financial institutions. In this book we 
shall concentrate on the financial statements of ordinary commercial companies.
Legal form
Another significant variable in financial reporting within most countries is that of 
legal form. The major difference is generally between limited liability companies 
and entities that do not enjoy limited liability. For example, the European Fourth 
and Seventh Company Law Directives are based on legal form (and then size). Lim-
ited liability companies are those whose owners risk only the capital they put into 
a company – if the company makes a loss, the owners cannot be pursued for more 
money than they originally agreed to subscribe. Such limited liability vehicles are 
split in the Fourth EC Company Law Directive between public limited companies 
(which issue shares of equal value and may be listed on stock exchanges), such as 
the Aktiengesellschaft in Germany or the Société Anonyme in France, and private 
limited companies (Gesellschaft mit beschränkter Haftung, Société à responsabilité 
limitée, etc.) whose capital cannot be publicly traded and which do not necessarily 
issue shares as such – a Société à responsabilité limitée has ‘company parts’.
In anglophone countries, absence of limited liability may also go with absence 
of regulation in financial reporting terms. In Britain, there are large auditing and 
consultancy firms employing thousands of people and with sales running into 
millions of pounds sterling which are constituted as partnerships where partners 
are personally liable for the full amount of all debts of the partnership, but there 
is no legal obligation to publish any accounts. The Church of England is probably 
the biggest landowner in the country, but publishes no financial statements.
Company size
In continental Europe accounting regulations tend to run with the nature of the 
business (a commercial business follows the same basic accounting rules irrespec-
tive of size) but disclosures are modified according to size. The European account-
ing directives recognize four tiers of size, which are subject to change from time 
to time. The latest proposals are:
	
n	 micro-entity – must not exceed two out of the following: sales €0.7m, total 
assets €0.35m, employees ten
	
n	 small company – must not exceed two out of the following: sales €10.0m, 
total assets €5.0m, employees 50;
	
n	 medium company – must not exceed two out of the following: sales €40.0m, 
total assets €20.0m, employees 250;
	
n	 large company – any listed entity, and all that exceed medium-size criteria.

Part 2  Basic financial statements
64
The European Commission introduced the ‘micro-entity’ reliefs with a 2012 di-
rective. The Commission also announced in 2011 plans to replace the Fourth and 
Seventh Directive with a single updated directive.
Small companies may benefit from limited public disclosure and freedom from 
audit. These size criteria are built into reporting regulations within the European 
Union and outside it. There is nothing self-evidently ‘right’ about the EU’s crite-
ria, but they do give recognition to the idea that small, privately held companies 
need not disclose as much as large companies, which is a view expressed in many 
countries, even if the precise cut-off between ‘small’ and ‘not small’ is necessarily 
arbitrary.
In overall terms, it is true to say that published financial statements are 
aimed at a wide range of potential users, including (actual or potential) share-
holders, lenders, trade suppliers, tax authorities, customers, employees, etc. 
However, the company faces a need to present a different face for different 
users. It can only provide one, general-purpose set of financial statements but 
where accounting rules provide any choices (and there are many instances) 
different companies will choose measurements that give priority to different 
subsets of users. Some will maximize profit, others will minimize it and so on. 
These factors have to be considered when evaluating any particular company’s 
financial statements.
The core financial reporting process involves preparing an annual statement of 
profit or loss (or income statement) and a statement of financial position (or 
balance sheet). The statement of profit or loss brings together aggregated infor-
mation about a company’s performance during a 12-month period (most often 
the calendar year, but in some countries not necessarily that). The balance sheet 
shows the state of the company’s financial position at the end of that year. Both 
statements are usually published with comparative data from the previous year 
(Figure 3.1). The statement of profit or loss might be said to be reporting a ‘flow’ 
(business activities during a period) while the balance sheet is essentially a status 
report – a static inventory of the company’s financial position at a given moment 
(a ‘snapshot’ of an instant in time).
While the published data usually only show two years (although the Se-
curities and Exchange Commission or SEC asks for three years of income 
Content of financial statements
Statement of 
profit or loss
Statement of 
profit or loss
Statement of 
profit or loss
 20X2 
 20X3 
 20X4 
Balance
sheet
31/12/20X1
Balance
sheet
31/12/20X2
Balance
sheet
31/12/20X3
Balance
sheet
31/12/20X4
Figure 3.1
Time periods 
covered by 
the statement 
of financial 
position and 
statement of 
profit or loss

Chapter 3  Measurement concepts and the balance sheet equation
65
statements for publicly listed companies in the US), analysts need data for a 
longer time scale and therefore build up collections of annual reports or use in-
puts from commercial company data services so that they can look at five- and 
ten-year runs of data and get a wider picture of the progression of a company’s 
economic state.
Obviously, we are going to look in some detail at the content of these 
statements during this course. However, the intention here is just to intro-
duce them and you should concentrate on the broad lines and picking up the 
vocabulary.
The structure of a statement of profit or loss is as follows:
You can see that this format can be split into two different sections, of which 
the main distinctions are:
	
1.	operating result
	
2.	returns to interested parties other than the owners (providers of loan 
­finance and government).
Looking at the operating result, the approach to expenses shown in this format is 
known as the value-added approach: it shows inputs and outputs and enables the 
analyst to calculate the value added by the company in transforming raw mate-
rials into finished goods (assuming it is a manufacturing company). This is the 
most common approach in continental Europe.
The alternative approach to presenting operating data is that used more 
often in the UK and US, which splits expenses not by type of expense, but by 
the activity to which the expense was assigned (in the technical jargon we 
refer to a value-added presentation as showing expenses by nature while the 
alternative shows expenses by function). The Anglo-Saxon style of format is 
shown overleaf:
Statement of profit or loss for period 20X1
€’000
Sales
5 356
Raw materials 
1 739
Salaries and wages 
783
Depreciation 
462
External services
873
(3 857)
Profit before interest and tax
1 499
Interest
(362)
Profit before taxation
1 137
Taxation 
(384)
Profit available for shareholders
753

Part 2  Basic financial statements
66
This kind of disclosure approach involves allocating raw materials, salaries, 
depreciation and other costs against the three functional areas of cost of sales 
(manufacturing cost in this case), distribution (marketing, advertising, ware-
housing and other selling costs) and administration (accounting, legal, general 
management expenses). In our example, the expenses are being presented in one 
of two ways:
Statement of profit or loss for period 20X1
€’000
Sales
5 356
Cost of sales
(2 601)
2 755
Distribution costs 
382
Administrative expenses
874
(1256)
Profit before interest and tax
1 499
Interest
(362)
Profit before taxation
1 137
Taxation 
(384)
Profit available for shareholders
753
Nature
Function
€’000
€’000
Raw materials 
1 739 
Cost of sales 
2 601 
Salaries and wages 
783 
Distribution costs 
382 
Depreciation expense 
462 
Administrative expenses 
874 
External services 
873 
Total 
3 857
Total 
3 857
Opinions differ as to which is the more useful form for analysts. The Interna-
tional Accounting Standards Board (IASB) says there is a case for providing both. 
Some would say that showing costs by function enables a clearer comparison of 
efficiency between one company and another in the same industry. For example, 
if comparing two companies which both manufactured similar forklift trucks, you 
could compare cost of sales as a percentage of sales revenue to see who was manu-
facturing more cheaply – or who was making the largest difference (gross mar-
gin) between selling price and manufacturing cost. However, many companies 
do not have just a single product and so the opportunity for extremely precise 
comparisons does not usually occur. In addition, the allocation of expenses across 

Chapter 3  Measurement concepts and the balance sheet equation
67
functions must up to a point be subjective – if a canteen is used by both manu-
facturing and administrative staff, how much do you allocate to each ­function? 
Different companies might have different views.
In any event, this first part of the statement of profit or loss deals with a com-
pany’s operating activities and provides a basis for comparisons with other years 
and other companies, irrespective of their financial structure or other consider-
ations. The lower part of the statement of profit or loss, on the other hand, shows 
how the profit generated by the company is split up:
	
n	 interest (payment to those who have provided the company’s loan capital);
	
n	 taxation paid to government (society’s share);
	
n	 profit retained in the company (to pay dividends to shareholders and to 
finance future expansion, etc.) and which is in effect the wealth generated 
by the company in that year.
The taxation identified here is tax on profits or income and does not include el-
ements such as value-added tax (excluded from the statement of profit or loss), 
import taxes (included under relevant cost headings such as raw materials) 
and social security charges (included in personnel costs). The level of interest 
charges is a function of the degree to which the company has been financed by 
debt.
The statement of financial position presents a picture of the company’s 
­finances at the end of the financial year and the assets (factories, machinery, 
­patents, brands, etc.) which it has acquired and which have not yet been con-
sumed within the business. The presentation of information in the balance sheet 
follows precise rules, although the detail again may vary from one jurisdiction to 
another. One of two formats offered by the Fourth EC Company Law Directive is 
known as a horizontal balance sheet and this is probably the format most com-
monly used in continental Europe. This would look as follows:
Assets
Equity and liabilities
Intangible assets 
943 
Share capital 
2 455 
Tangible assets 
1 988 
Reserves 
982 
Investments
213
Retained profit
947
Non-current (or ‘fixed’) assets
3 144
Shareholders’ equity
4 384
Inventory
1 589
Provisions
520
Receivables
973
Financial liabilities
1 500
Cash at bank 
881 
Trade liabilities 
359 
Deferred charges 
176 
Total 
6 763
Total 
6 763
Some US companies use the horizontal format, but with the elements presented 
in the reverse order (note also the somewhat different US terminology):

Part 2  Basic financial statements
68
The left-hand side of the balance sheet shows the company’s assets, split 
into those which will be used up over a period of more than one year (non-
current assets or long-term assets) – typically physical plant (tangible as-
sets), patents, brand names, licences (intangible assets) and investments 
(shares or loans to other companies, often made for strategic purposes to 
cement a business relationship, investments in subsidiary companies). The 
remaining assets are usually constantly changing and are generated by the 
company’s operating activities. Inventories are being diminished every day 
as sales take place, but also are being increased as new inventory is bought 
or manufactured. Amounts due from customers (receivables) would normally 
also be changing day to day: a company will normally always have inven-
tories and receivables, but the individual items which make up the total are 
constantly changing.
The amounts stated for each asset are expressed in currency units. As such, 
they reflect only those matters that can be measured in monetary terms. The bal-
ance sheet shows the assets (and liabilities) of the business rather than of the 
individuals associated with it.
The right-hand side of the balance sheet shows the company’s financing. 
This is split into capital (which is a word to be wary of in accounting because 
it has different meanings in different contexts, but here means money put 
into the company by the owners: shares or, in the US, stock and we will call 
it equity), provisions (the company has a liability to pay something in the 
future, although the precise amount or timing may be uncertain), financial 
liabilities (loans made by banks, the financial markets, etc.) and trade liabili-
ties (in the US, payables, debts due to suppliers – of raw materials, finished 
goods, etc.).
An alternative balance sheet format is the vertical balance sheet. This shows the 
same information but presents it in a different way: liabilities are shown as a de-
duction from assets, and are split according to when they are due for payment, 
while the horizontal format shows them according to whether they are financing 
or for trade.
Assets
Liabilities and equity
Cash at bank
881 
Trade payables 
359 
Deferred charges 
176 
Debt 
1 500 
Receivables
973
Provisions
520
Inventory
1 589
Non-current Assets
Equity
Investments
213
Ordinary stock
2 455
Tangible assets
1 988
Reserves
982
Intangible assets 
943 
Retained profit 
947 
Total 
6 763
Total 
6 763

Chapter 3  Measurement concepts and the balance sheet equation
69
In a published set of financial statements, the shareholders (and other users) re-
ceive not only this information but several pages of explanatory notes which am-
plify the information and analyze certain categories such as non-current assets. 
Part of this extra detail is sometimes included in the basic statements themselves 
(‘on the face of the accounts’, as accountants would say). This additional infor-
mation is regulated and many of the insights that an analyst wants from the an-
nual financial statements are gained from a thorough review of the notes rather 
than the primary statements.
For the most part the same information is given in the balance sheet whichever 
way it is presented. The horizontal presentation gives a picture of the whole company: 
total assets and the total financing which has been used to acquire those assets. This 
is sometimes called an entity approach, treating the company as an economic whole 
and not distinguishing between different providers of finance. This is summed up as:
Assets 5 Equity and Liabilities
This contrasts with the vertical presentation which focuses on the interest of 
the owners, and is known as a proprietary approach. This second approach says 
the owners’ interest is measured by starting with the value of the assets and 
­deducting loans and other payables from this amount:
€’000
€’000
Intangibles
943
Tangible assets
1 988
Investments
213
Non-current assets
3 144
Inventories
1 589
Receivables and prepaid
1 149
Cash at bank
881
Current assets
3 619
Creditors due in less than one year
(359)
Net current assets
3 260
Creditors due in more than  
  one year
(1 500)
Provisions
(520)
4 384
Equity 
Ordinary shares
2 455
Reserves
982
Retained profits
947
4 384
The balance sheet data presented in the vertical format would look like this:

Part 2  Basic financial statements
70
Assets less Liabilities 5 Equity
What is left is the owners’ equity. This approach is often used in measuring per-
sonal wealth, but using a current market value: a family who bought a house with 
a loan might calculate (a) the current value of the house and (b) the amount of 
loan outstanding, and would arrive at the current value of their interest (equity) 
by deducting (b) from (a). Traditional accounting does not use current values, of 
course, so the value of the ‘equity’ number in the balance sheet does not equate 
to a current or market value of the company.
The IASB Conceptual Framework includes definitions of assets, liabilities and 
equity. These definitions are important because an item should meet the criteria 
contained in the definitions to be eligible as an IFRS balance sheet item. We will 
go into the details of these definitions later on in this chapter, but of specific rel-
evance here is that the IASB defines equity as the residual interest in the assets of 
a company after deducting all its liabilities.
At present neither the IASB nor the FASB prescribe the format of the financial 
statements, they specify what minimum information must be given, but not how 
it is presented. However, they did start a joint project (Financial Statement Presenta-
tion) whose aim is to provide new formats. This project has been set aside at the 
time of writing and is unlikely to be finalized any time soon (see Chapter 18).
In the next sections of this chapter we are going to review the basic accounting 
principles by which financial statements are prepared. We will do this in the fol-
lowing stages:
	
n	 a consideration of the underlying accounting assumptions and 
conventions;
	
n	 a review of the data recording process within companies;
	
n	 an analysis of the balance sheet equation;
	
n	 a practical exercise in tracking transactions using the balance sheet equation;
	
n	 preparing simple financial statements.
Some knowledge of the accounts preparation process is essential for any sensible 
interpretation of the end product: the financial statements. The reason for this is 
that the statements are today highly technical documents which make many as-
sumptions about the state of knowledge of the reader. It is quite impossible for an 
untrained reader to make much sense of the accounts; for example, just the tech-
nical terms (accruals? reserves? provisions?) immediately put the general reader at 
a disadvantage.
In fact the problems go a lot further than that. Accounting measurement does 
not purport to provide a total measurement system which gives a rounded eco-
nomic picture of the company, even if the general public is inclined to believe 
that it does. The measurement system is based on a series of conventions which 
automatically limit the information taken into it, and which then demand that 
accounts preparers use many estimates in allocating revenues and expenses to 
one year rather than another. Accounting measurement is a very subjective pro-
cess, giving a partial picture.
The basics of accounting measurement

Chapter 3  Measurement concepts and the balance sheet equation
71
In a sense the only absolutely accurate measure of profit is not available until 
the company has ceased to exist and its assets have been sold and its liabilities 
paid off – at that point you can calculate all the inputs to the business from its 
start-up to its final liquidation and arrive at a precise profit for its whole life. This, 
however, is not very useful in managing the company, and accounting is the art 
of estimating what proportion of the life profit of the company has been earned 
in a particular (usually 12-month) period. In order to arrive at this estimate the 
accountant has to make many assumptions about the future of the company and 
the uncertainties that surround it. While most accounting information is clear 
and exactly quantifiable, the profit measure also includes allocations of expenses 
(and less frequently revenues) between years. No allocation is incontestable, and 
the published profit figure is therefore an estimate, not a matter of fact, and is 
subject to correction in subsequent years.
This does not mean that the information is of no use – quite the contrary – but 
it does mean that the user needs to be clear about what exactly is the nature of 
the information given in financial statements and therefore needs to understand 
the essentials of the measurement process. It is rather like driving a car: you look 
most of the time at the road immediately ahead of you, because that is where the 
most important decisions lie. It is a convention that traffic driving in the opposite 
direction to you will use the opposite side of the road, so you need not watch that 
side so intently, even if to have a complete picture you should be looking at both 
sides, as well as behind you.
Accounting information is subject to constraints, which you need to know in 
order to interpret it, but it is also subject to estimate, which makes it flexible and 
open to manipulation.
The foundation of financial accounting consists of a set of assumptions, conven-
tions and rules referred to as Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (or GAAP). 
According to the authority which establishes the principles, different GAAP sets 
can be discerned, like European GAAP (EC Accounting Directives) and related na-
tional GAAP, US GAAP and IFRS GAAP. Although different GAAP sets have a lot of 
principles in common, significant degrees of freedom still exist. In this section we 
will focus on IFRS GAAP.
Most accounting regimes specify some general qualitative objective of account-
ing: in France this was that the accounts should be sincere and regular, while 
in Germany they should conform to the principles of good book-keeping. The 
European Fourth Company Law Directive specifies two objectives: the accounts 
should conform to GAAP and should give a true and fair view of the financial 
state of the company. IFRS, however, require that the financial statements ‘pres-
ent fairly the financial position, financial performance and cash flows’. There is a 
UK legal opinion that says for the purposes of company law the IFRS ‘fairly pres-
ent’ means the same as ‘give a true and fair view’.
The idea of a ‘true and fair view’ delete is a fundamental requirement of the 
­European Accounting Directives. It is referred to in the audit opinion and derives from 
British accounting, but there is endless discussion about what it actually means – it 
has not been defined in law or by standard-setters. The unwary reader of financial 
statements might think that it means the accounts are both true and fair, or perhaps 
that the financial statements are not misleading. This would be a dangerous position. 
Generally accepted accounting principles

Part 2  Basic financial statements
72
The safer assumption is that the term merely means that the financial statements have 
been prepared by respecting all the technical rules in force at the time of their prepa-
ration. In theory, if application of the rules does not give a clear picture (or perhaps 
would be positively misleading), further explanation should be given in the notes.
If you think about it, for financial statements to be useful and comparable, 
they need to follow some kind of generally agreed rules. However, as soon as you 
start to measure according to pre-specified rules, you automatically limit what 
can be shown in the financial statements.
STANDARDS
STANDARDs
The IASB’s Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting
(introduced in Chapter One) specifies the following:
OB2 The objective of general purpose financial reporting is to provide finan-
cial information about the reporting entity that is useful to present and poten-
tial equity investors, lenders and other creditors in making decisions about 
providing resources to the entity. Those decisions involve buying, selling or 
holding equity and debt instruments, and providing or settling loans and 
other forms of credit.
Source: IASB Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, 
Chapter One The Objective of Financial Reporting September 2010
For our purposes, you should be sceptical as to whether the existence of the true 
and fair view principle improves the quality of financial statements, and rely rather 
more heavily on the other European Fourth Directive requirement that the finan-
cial statements should use generally accepted accounting principles. The auditor’s 
report will normally confirm that these have been followed. In the US, the expres-
sion ‘present fairly in accordance with GAAP’ is to be interpreted in this sense.
The IASB rules actually confirm this pragmatic view. According to IFRS, the 
general objective of financial statements is to give a fair presentation of the 
(changes in) financial position and performance of a company. The old IASB 
Framework suggested that fair presentation could also be referred to as giving ‘a 
true and fair view’, but IAS 1, Presentation of Financial Statements, puts forward the 
main premise that the application of IFRS, with additional disclosure if necessary, 
is presumed to result in financial statements reflecting a fair presentation. Only 
in extremely rare circumstances in which management concludes that compli-
ance with IFRS requirements would be so misleading that it would conflict with 
the objective of financial statements, is a rebuttal of the basic full compliance as-
sumption justified.
At a more applied level, financial accounting follows some key basic conven-
tions, which can be found in the Fourth Company Law Directive:
	
n	 consistency
	
n	 accrual basis: accruals and related matching
	
n	 prudence
	
n	 going concern.

Chapter 3  Measurement concepts and the balance sheet equation
73
While prudence is a primary measurement convention in the European Fourth 
Directive, its application in IFRS is much more debated. The earlier standards 
(IAS) will often reflect it but the IASB tends to the view, set out in the revised joint 
Conceptual Framework and cited above, that accounting information should be 
neutral.
STANDARD
IAS 1-Presentation of Financial Statements (extracts)
Fair presentation and compliance with IFRSs
15 Financial statements shall present fairly the financial position, financial 
performance and cash flows of an entity. Fair presentation requires the faith-
ful representation of the effects of transactions, other events and conditions in 
accordance with the definitions and recognition criteria for assets, liabilities,  
income and expenses set out in the Framework. The application of IFRSs,  
with additional disclosure when necessary, is presumed to result in financial 
statements that achieve a fair presentation.
Source: IAS 1, Presentation of Financial Statements
The significance of these conventions is not conveyed merely by reciting what 
is understood by them – that is something which comes out in the context of 
looking at their application to particular accounting problems. However, we need 
to start somewhere, so we will look at the meaning of these conventions as ap-
plied to financial reporting.
Consistency
Consistency is fairly straightforward. It means that accounting measurement 
practices should be used by a company consistently both from one year to an-
other, and within the same year in relation to similar transactions. It could be 
argued that from an analyst’s point of view, consistency is the most important 
characteristic needed in financial accounting. If the analyst is looking to put to-
gether several years’ data to produce a forecast of future performance, each year 
needs to be prepared on a basis consistent with that in the other years. For predic-
tive purposes the rate and direction of change of the indicators is more important 
than their absolute values, so a set of indicators, even if only partial in terms of 
the overall economic picture, if it is produced consistently will provide useful 
information.
The extent to which financial statements actually are consistent is open to 
question. Most jurisdictions require companies to explain any change in account-
ing methods in the notes to the accounts and to provide, where a change takes 
place, alternative figures showing the effects of the change. However, there is of-
ten a grey area between changing estimates or assumptions upon which alloca-
tions were based and actually changing the accounting method.
For example, suppose it has been assumed that a certain piece of plant, costing 
€10m, will last for ten years and therefore its cost should be allocated against profits 
on the basis of €1m a year. After four years the company decides that the plant will 

Part 2  Basic financial statements
74
really last 20 years, so the annual charge goes down from €1m to €0.375m (spread-
ing the remaining book value of €6m over the remaining useful life of 16 years). 
The retrospective annual charge of €0.5m goes further down to a prospective an-
nual charge of €0.375m, since €4m have already been expensed in the first three 
years, while only €2m was appropriate under the new estimate. Generally this ma-
noeuvre would not be classified as a change in accounting policy, but only a change 
in estimates, and would not call for any explanation in the notes, even though the 
profit in year five (and the following years) is inflated by the adjustment.
Consistency evidently has an important presentational dimension as well. IAS 
1, Presentation of Financial Statements, para 45, explicitly states that the presenta-
tion and classification of items in financial statements should be retained from 
one accounting period to the next. However, a significant change in the nature or 
scope of the operations of the company (for example through an acquisition, dis-
posal or reorganization of operations) may justify a presentational change. In that 
case comparative information must also be adapted on a consistent basis. Consis-
tency in measurement is only covered indirectly in the IASB rules, where the IASB 
Conceptual Framework extends the qualitative characteristic of comparability to 
recognition and measurement issues.
Accrual basis
Accruals is the name of the approach which distinguishes accounting from a simple 
record of cash transactions. The accruals convention is that accounting aims to mea-
sure business transactions at the time they take place, rather than when cash changes 
hands. For example, a department store offers credit to its regular customers and is 
given credit by its suppliers. Suppose that the store agrees to take a special consignment 
of video cameras from a manufacturer. The cameras are delivered on 15 December. 
The store runs a special advertising campaign at 1 January. You go into the store on 10 
January and buy a camera, charging it to your account. On 31 January the store pays its 
camera supplier, and bills you. You settle your account on 26 February (see Figure 3.2).
Transactions:
15 December: delivery by supplier to store
10 January: you buy camera
31 January: store pays supplier
26 February: you pay store
Under a simple cash recording system there would be an inventory purchase 
on 31 January and a sale on 26 February, and yet we know that you actually went 
into the store and took the goods on 10 January. The accruals convention is that 
transactions are recorded as they take place, not only when there is cash involved. 
So the accruals system would log the incoming inventory on 15 ­December, the 
sale on 10 January and so on. The accruals basis of accounting leads to fi-
nancial statements that reflect not only information of past transactions involv-
ing the payment and receipt of cash but also of obligations to pay cash in the 
future (arising when the new inventory is accounted for) and of resources that 
represent cash to be received in the future (recording a receivable when the sale is 
recognized on 10 January).
Figure 3.2
Sequence 
of trade 
transactions

Chapter 3  Measurement concepts and the balance sheet equation
75
This brings us to the related convention of matching. This says that all costs 
and revenues associated with a particular transaction should be brought together 
when the sale takes place. This means that, in our example, when the store buys 
the inventory of cameras, they are treated as an asset (an item of value owned 
by the company) and shown in the balance sheet as inventory (not taken to the 
statement of profit or loss account as an expense). Only when the individual cam-
era is sold does it move from being inventory to being an expense. Otherwise in 
the example the expense would fall into December and the related revenue into 
January. If the store’s financial year ended on 31 December, this would cause the 
first year’s profit to be reduced and the second year’s to be inflated. The matching 
convention requires us to put both revenue and expense in the same financial pe-
riod (the one where the revenue was earned – see the section below on prudence).
In the example it is clear when each transaction takes place and there is no am-
biguity about any of the transactions. However, there can be problems in this kind 
of area. For example, what if the camera turns out to be faulty and you return it, 
demanding your money back? Should the store not account for any sale until suf-
ficient time has elapsed to be sure that the customer is satisfied? Ambiguities and 
uncertainties bring about conflicts with the next convention, that of prudence.
Prudence
Basically the prudence convention requires that revenues are only recognized in 
the accounts when they are certain, while expenses should be recognized if they 
are probable. Related to this, revenues should only be recognized when realized, 
that is, when these are sufficiently concrete to be in cash or a form near to cash 
(an agreement to pay on which the company can go to court). Unrecoverable ex-
penses, though, should be recognized even if not yet realized – for example, you 
have spent €5000 working on a contract to design software for a client and you 
hear that the client may be having financial difficulties. Matching would require 
that you carry the costs forward (as a current asset) until you can invoice the 
client, but a prudent view would be to treat the work as a loss because the client’s 
situation is open to question. This also has the effect of diminishing current year 
profit (and therefore tax), with the possibility of higher profit the following year. 
Tax management is mostly about deferring tax payments for as long as possible 
rather than escaping them altogether. While everyone would like to escape tax, 
if the accounts are accurate this is generally not possible (outside sophisticated, 
often cross-border, sets of linked companies, etc.) and the tax manager’s objective 
is to defer tax as long as possible and thereby conserve the company’s cash and 
reduce its financing needs.
At a theoretical level, there is a clear conflict between the application of match-
ing and that of prudence, and the extent to which the one has priority over the 
other is one of the major differences in the application of accounting between 
one jurisdiction and another. Germany and Switzerland are famous for very pru-
dent accounting (anticipating expenses, building secret reserves), while the UK 
is equally so for giving priority to the matching convention (deferring expenses, 
building hidden losses …).
At a practical level, the degree to which prudence is given a priority has also 
something to do with tax regulations. In the UK, tax rules only allow the recogni-
tion of an expense when that expense has become concrete – a prudent anticipa-
tion of an expense is disregarded for tax purposes, with the result that a company 

Part 2  Basic financial statements
76
that follows very prudent accounting also appears to pay proportionately higher 
taxes. In France or Germany some anticipation of expenses in the form of provi-
sions is acceptable for tax, provided that it appears in the company accounts, 
thereby encouraging companies to be prudent in their accounting because that 
defers their taxes.
In the IASB Framework the meaning of prudence is restricted to an attitude of 
caution in the exercise of judgements when these are needed to arrive at estimates 
under conditions of uncertainty such that assets or income are not overstated 
and liabilities or expenses understated. In the negative sense, the IASB warns that 
prudence should not lead to ‘income smoothing’, for example through the cre-
ation of undervalued assets or excessive provisions, because these practices lead 
to financial statements which are not neutral and, therefore, would not have the 
quality of reliability and representational faithfulness.
Going concern
The going concern convention specifies that in preparing the financial statements 
it is assumed that the company will continue in business for the foreseeable fu-
ture. This is a critical assumption because much of accrual accounting measure-
ment is based on allocating expenses over different future time periods, as we 
have already touched upon. If the business is unlikely to be there in the future, 
this approach is not valid and prudence would require many items to be written 
off at once as valueless. This is, of course, often a bone of contention with audi-
tors when a company whose financial statements they have signed then goes out 
of business a few months later. People who have relied on the financial state-
ments find the figures become meaningless when the company is no longer in 
business. The going concern assumption is used to justify the valuation proce-
dures and is therefore a major assumption which should be considered by anyone 
analyzing the financial statements.
In fact, IAS 1, Presentation of Financial Statements, paras 25/26, requires man-
agement to make an assessment of the company’s ability to continue as a going 
concern when it prepares the financial statements. If management is aware of 
material uncertainties related to events or conditions that may cast significant 
doubt upon the company’s ability to continue as a going concern, those uncer-
tainties have to be disclosed. If one concludes that the going concern basis is no 
longer appropriate, this would have a fundamental impact on the carrying value 
of assets and liabilities. These would have to be revised considering the need to 
liquidate or curtail significantly the scale of the company’s operations.
The US does not have an equivalent management statement. However, the 
standard-setter is working on a rule requiring a company to present assets and li-
abilities on a liquidation basis if it thinks the going concern is in question.
The observation that the balance sheet as a status report of the company’s fi-
nancial position is not a good representation of company value is intrinsically 
linked with two measurement principles which still dominate current account-
ing practice: the historical cost principle and the monetary measuring unit 
convention.
Conventional measurement bases

Chapter 3  Measurement concepts and the balance sheet equation
77
Historical cost
Financial accounting, as currently practised, is still mainly based on historical cost, 
i.e. the past cost needed to acquire an asset on the date of acquisition (the cash-
equivalent acquisition cost). In essence financial accounting works by tracking 
and recording all transactions of a company which have a financial value (book-
keeping) and then categorizing these transactions into different classes (account-
ing) such as assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses. The categorizing process usually 
involves allocating the effect of transactions to different time periods.
As we have seen, financial accounting takes a starting statement of financial 
position (the balance sheet at the beginning of a year) and during the course of the 
year all financial transactions are recorded and classified. The classification will in-
volve a first choice between the statement of profit or loss (revenues and expenses 
from operating activities during the year) and the closing balance sheet (state-
ment of items owned and items owed to third parties). Thus the closing wealth is 
a summary of the effect of financial transactions of the year past rather than any 
independent valuation. The statement of profit or loss is a summary of business 
operations, whose net effect will be to increase or decrease the ending wealth.
The relationship between the statement of profit or loss and the statement 
of financial position is one that you will need to think about as you progress 
through the book. Under a pure historical cost regime, the statement of profit or 
loss is the key document where revenues and expenses are stated, while the bal-
ance sheet value of assets is a residual of the profit measurement process. From 
this are deducted claims by third parties (liabilities) and what is left is equity.
This is a long way from an independent measure of value in an economic sense. 
For example, imagine that you bought shares in a listed company, say IBM, on 1 Jan-
uary for €50 000. During the year you receive dividend payments of €1000. Under 
historical cost accounting, you have made a profit of €1000 for the year, and your 
ending balance sheet will show assets of €50 000 (investment) and €1000 (cash). 
However, it might be that the stock exchange valued your shares on 31 December 
at €55 000. Using market value as the measurement criterion, you are worth €56 000 
(investment and cash) and your gain for the year is €6000. Different measurement 
rules give different results, and historical cost accounting uses initial cost as the fun-
damental measurement criterion and only takes in ‘realized’ revenues – i.e. where 
cash or a reliable undertaking to pay cash has been obtained. In the example, the 
€5000 gain in market value has not been realized – the shares have not been sold – 
so historical cost accounting disregards the gain. Of course, if you sold your shares at 
the end of the year, the gain would be part of your profit for the year – in the jargon 
the gain had been realized and could therefore be ‘recognized’.
The big advantage of historical cost accounting is that historical cost is rela-
tively easy to determine and can be verified. The main disadvantage is that subse-
quent to the date of acquisition, the continued reporting of historical cost based 
values does not reflect any changes in market value.
IASB rules (and US GAAP for that matter) are not based exclusively on the his-
torical cost principle. In fact, carrying amounts in an IFRS balance sheet are 
a mixture of historical costs, market values, net realizable values and discounted 
present values. That is why the measurement model underlying an IFRS balance 
sheet is often referred to as a mixed-attribute model. The mixture of different types 
of value makes the relationship between the statement of profit or loss and the bal-
ance sheet less straightforward than suggested following the historical cost model.

Part 2  Basic financial statements
78
Fair value
In IFRS the most commonly used measurement basis other than historical cost is 
called fair value. This is a term that is used in business to mean current market 
value. The IASB has defined it more specifically as a current sale price (IFRS 13, 
Fair Value Measurement – we discuss this in detail in Chapter 14). Often it is used 
in accounting where there is no observable monetary transaction from which the 
historical cost can be taken. This is the case in barter transactions, for example, 
which are not uncommon in international trade. A company might offer to ex-
change so many litres of palm oil against so many tractors. How would you ac-
count for this in the books? You would have to look at fair value – what is the 
market value of that many litres of palm oil or that many tractors?
It is used in a similar way to allocate between different components of a trans-
action. If you sell a new car with three years’ free servicing, you have to allo-
cate the price between the two components, the car itself and the three years’ 
services.
Under IFRS, fair value is primarily used as a measurement basis for financial 
assets and liabilities. The argument is that, as with the IBM shares above, if there 
is a ready market on which such assets and liabilities can be sold, it is better infor-
mation to reflect those values in the statement of financial position. Historically 
the reason fair value accounting was introduced is that organizations were hold-
ing financial instruments whose risks and value they did not understand. They 
notched up sudden unexpected losses. Fair value is designed to protect against 
hidden losses and inform about hidden profits.
Fair value is not typically used for physical assets under normal circumstances. 
Companies mostly hold physical assets so that they can use them in the business, 
and their market value is less significant than their ability to generate cash flows 
from being used in the business. Financial assets and liabilities are not used in the 
same way, and are very near to being cash flows.
In Part Two of this book where we are dealing with the financial statements of 
relatively simple companies, the only financial instruments we will account for 
will be amounts due from customers (receivables) and amounts owed to suppli-
ers (payables) or bank loans. In most cases these would be at historical cost under 
IFRS and so we will not re-visit fair value until Part Four of the book.
Monetary measurement unit
Financial accounting will record transactions as far as they can be expressed in 
monetary terms. Most transactions carried out by a company involve money, and 
therefore can be translated into money values easily, especially if the historical 
cost principle is applied. The use of money values to record business transactions 
has the advantage that money provides a common denominator by means of 
which heterogeneous facts and relationships can be expressed as numbers that 
can be added and subtracted. In fact, financial accounting uses money values to 
attach labels to economic events. The event of you buying a laptop computer be-
comes in accounting terms (from your perspective):
Assets:
Computers 1 €900
Cash – €900

Chapter 3  Measurement concepts and the balance sheet equation
79
So the physical item, the specific laptop with its specific design and operating 
characteristics, becomes asset €900.00.
While at a personal level you might regard the purchase as an ‘expense’, from 
an economic perspective, you presumably bought it in order to use it over a 
longer period (let’s say over a three-year period), therefore it has a utility for you 
in the future and remains part of your wealth during that period. You have sim-
ply chosen to convert a cash asset into a computer asset, and under a historical 
cost convention we say that the initial accounting value of the computer is its 
cost value. Subsequently, the computer will gradually become an expense as it 
is used. This is how accounting works and, when the computer has no further 
use, it should be fully expensed, but not before. This process is akin to that of 
language in tying word labels to objects and there are numerous analogies be-
tween the process of communicating by accounting and that of communicating 
by language.
The use of money and historical cost as the measurement base poses two prob-
lems: what happens to values that cannot be expressed in financial terms, and 
what happens when the value of the money itself changes?
Here too we can see the language analogy. There are some concepts that cannot 
be expressed by language, or indeed some concepts for which there is an expres-
sion in one language but not another. In accounting there are some values not 
expressed – for example, a company may spend a lot of money advertising a new 
product. If the product is successful its trade name can become quite valuable in 
itself (Coca-Cola? Nestlé?) but the future sales value of an established trade name 
does not normally appear in the balance sheet since it was not bought. Similarly, 
efficient production depends to an extent on harmonious labour relations and 
good staff training, but neither value is expressed in financial accounting. It is 
difficult to say to what extent these omissions matter, but it is necessary to bear 
them in mind when reviewing balance sheet values. The measurement bases im-
pose significant limitations on the scope of a balance sheet and a statement of 
profit or loss account. It is necessary to remember that the financial accounting 
data are organized on these measurement assumptions and values are not in any 
sense absolute, but are relative to a framework – change the framework and the 
values will change too.
The other major problem in financial accounting is that of changes in the value 
of the measuring unit – inflation. Money is expressed in terms of its value at the time 
a transaction or event is recorded. The measurement system records a trans-action at 
the nominal value in currency which is exchanged in that transaction. Subsequent 
changes in the purchasing power of the currency do not affect that amount. For ex-
ample, supposing that we were measuring physical size, we could talk about some-
thing in terms of centimetres and metres. Two metres of cloth implies exactly the 
same length of cloth today as it did in 1900, but $5.00 worth of cloth is very much 
less today than it would have been in 1900 because the purchasing power of a dol-
lar, the measuring unit, is much smaller today than it was in 1900.
This means that the values expressed in historical cost accounting may not 
always be what they appear to be. For example, supposing a bookseller buys for 
inventory a book which cost him €37.50 and retails at €55.00 in 20X1. Over 
the next three years the publishers, reflecting the inflation of prices generally, 
increase their wholesale selling price to €45.00 and the retail price to €75.00. 
If the bookseller has not sold the copy he originally bought, it will appear in 
his accounts as inventory worth €37.50 – the historical cost. But if he wanted 
to buy another copy it would now cost €45.00. The book itself is virtually the 

Part 2  Basic financial statements
80
same; it is the underlying value of the measurement unit that has changed (and 
as a consequence, if the book is sold for €75.00, it is not clear that the difference 
of €7.50 between the original inventory price and the replacement cost of the 
inventory should necessarily be treated as ‘profit’). Many attempts have been 
made to deal with this change in the underlying purchasing power of the mea-
surement unit, none so far with any lasting success.
We are now going to focus in on the logic and procedures of accounting with a 
view to establishing a simple model of how accounting works.
The balance sheet equation
One way of approaching this is to look at the company as an artificial and 
empty vehicle constructed to carry out a particular project. Finance is put into 
the vehicle and this is used to buy productive capacity (factories, warehouses, 
vehicles, computers, retail premises, offices, etc.). The production unit oper-
ates, its output is sold and profit is generated. The profit belongs to the owners 
of the company, and they will either take it out of the company as a dividend 
or leave it in as additional financing. The accounting unit must track what fi-
nance comes into the company and what is done with it and prepare periodic 
reports to the owners (Figure 3.3).
Finance
Production facility
Operations
Profit/cash
Corporate taxation
Paid to shareholders as dividend
Retained for
growth
Share capital
and borrowings/debt
Accounting for transactions
Figure 3.3
Tracking 
finance

Chapter 3  Measurement concepts and the balance sheet equation
81
The nature of the vehicle is such that, at the beginning, it can only have as 
much ‘value’ as is put into it:
Owners’ equity and Liabilities (sources of finance) 5 Assets (uses of finance)
This is called the balance sheet equation and is usually stated as:
Assets (uses of finance) 5 Owners’ equity and Liabilities (sources of finance)
In this view the left-hand side of the balance sheet equation is said to present 
the economic resources in which the company has invested the finance or 
funds available to it as of the balance sheet date. The right-hand side shows 
the sources of finance or the sources of the funds that are invested in the as-
sets. Every euro invested in the company’s assets at balance sheet date comes 
from either the company’s owners (shareholders) or from its creditors (trade 
and other creditors and lenders), and every euro thus supplied is invested in 
some asset.
Debt and equity
The sources of finance fall into two major categories: the finance put forward 
by the owners (equity), and the loans and other finance obtained from outside 
which do not attract an ownership share (liabilities/debt). The distinction be-
tween the two is that the owners take on all the risks of loss from the com-
pany’s activities and gain from all profits, while loans are made purely in return 
for interest, which must be paid before arriving at any profit for the owners.
The difference between these two categories is fundamental. The suppliers 
of a loan are entering into a financial commitment with the company where the 
return they will receive, and therefore the cost to the company, is fixed in rela-
tion to the amount borrowed. The amount borrowed must be repaid at a fixed 
date and the lenders’ risk is simply that the company may not have the means 
to repay (and bankers try to cover this kind of risk by asking for a legal link to 
company or shareholder assets – ‘security’ – in the event of default). The lend-
ers’ return is not affected by the company’s profitability, except in the extreme 
of the company ceasing to trade.
The owners, on the other hand, are the people with the last claim upon the 
company’s assets. They take the risk that the company will make a loss, but 
also reap the rewards if the company makes a profit. (The IASB talks about the 
‘risks and rewards’ of ownership.) We can then recognize two basic categories 
of sources of finance – that deriving from the owner, and that representing 
financial liabilities to outside people. The owners’ interest is variable, because 
the owners accept final responsibility (remember, assets – liabilities 5 equity).
Between the lines

Part 2  Basic financial statements
82
Any business transaction that will be recognized in the accounting system 
(we will refer to these as accounting transactions) will have a dual impact on the 
numbers in the company’s accounting records. Any accounting for a transaction 
must preserve the equilibrium between sources and uses, and will involve either a 
change in both or a reallocation within one side of the equation. This is the origin 
of the term ‘double-entry accounting’: any transaction must be reflected in (at 
least) two accounts.
Transactions which involve revenues and expenses fit in this fundamental 
equation approach, because revenues and expenses have a positive or negative 
effect on profit, and this belongs to the owners. Profit adds to the ‘equity’ part of 
the equation, while a loss will diminish the equity. By way of illustration, sale of 
inventory will diminish the inventory asset but will increase either cash or receiv-
ables assets. There will be a net change in assets, and the counterpart of this is a 
net change in equity (profit or loss).
Constructing a statement of financial position
The statement of financial position, or balance sheet, is the fundamental account-
ing statement in the sense that every accounting transaction can be analyzed ac-
cording to its dual impact on the balance sheet. Let us take a practical example to 
illustrate how that works out. We will do this using a simple spreadsheet, and we 
will continue to use this spreadsheet as a means of analyzing accounting trans-
actions. As indicated before, this is not how a book-keeper or accounting soft-
ware would make the entries; it does, though, reproduce the principles behind 
the book-keeping, which are what are important. It is intended to simplify the 
learning process and put emphasis on the substance of the process rather than 
the form.
Note that the spreadsheet can have as many or as few rows as seems useful, but 
that overall it must be organized into two parts – assets and finance – and that, 
as the analysis proceeds, it is probably useful to split the assets side into ‘cash’ 
(i.e. bank account in accounting terms) and other assets, while other assets might 
equally split into short-term trading items and long-term ones (current and non-
current assets). The financing side can also usefully be split between equity and 
liabilities, with liabilities subdividing into long-term debt (non-current liabilities) 
and trading liabilities (current liabilities), and equity into initial share capital 
and profits.
Assets 5 Equity and Liabilities
(Cash 1 Current 1 Non-current) 5 (Long-term debt 1 Trading liabilities)  
                              1 (Share capital 1 Profit)
Example: supposing three friends decided to form a company (called Reliable 
Runner SA) which would sell cars. Jane put in €20 000, Alan put in €15 000 and 
Colin put in €15 000.
	
1.	The initial financing, assuming the money was paid into a bank account, 
would be accounted for by showing (a) the (historical cost) value of money 
in the bank, and (b) the (historical cost) value of the shareholders’ capital.
	
2.	Next, the company obtained a bank loan for €30 000. Let us assume that 
this money is put into the company’s bank account, so we have a similar 

Chapter 3  Measurement concepts and the balance sheet equation
83
1
2
3
4
Financial 
Position
Assets
Cash
120 000
130 000
–55 000
–18 000
7 000
115 000
115 000
Receivables
Inventory
118 000
18 000
Property
155 000
55 000
Total
150 000
130 000
0
0
80 000
Liabilities/equity
Long-term debt
130 000
30 000
Trade payables
Equity:
Share capital
120 000
50 000
115 000
115 000
Profit
Total
150 000
130 000
0
0
80 000
transaction, increase in cash assets, increase in financing, but this time it is 
debt financing. The company now has total assets, all cash, of €80000, while 
it has equity of €50000 and liabilities of €30000.
	
3.	Its next step is to buy a small office with a car lot for €55 000. Up un-
til now we have been looking at transactions which affected both sides 
of the balance sheet equation, but the new transaction will affect one 
side only. The company is exchanging one asset, cash, for another asset, 
property. The total value it owns will remain the same, but the compo-
sition of the value will be different. Reliable Runner SA now has assets 
worth €80 000 in the form of property and cash, while it has liabilities of 
€30 000 (loan from the bank) and equity of €50 000 (owners’ initial capi-
tal subscribed).
	
4.	The next move is to acquire some inventory for trading, and the company 
buys €18 000 of second-hand cars for cash (i.e. by issuing a cheque – cash is 
usually used in accounting to mean liquid funds available immediately at 
the bank, not necessarily physical cash). Here again there is a swap between 
cash assets and other forms of asset – this time a current asset, inventory. It 
is assumed in accounting that inventories (which may be goods for resale, 
but also raw materials and work in progress) will be sold in less than one 
year. Of course the longer the inventory turnover period the more financing 
is required by the company, and hence the emphasis in modern manage-
ment of ‘just in time’ inventories.

Part 2  Basic financial statements
84
The company is ready to start trading. If we drew up a balance sheet at this point 
(drawn from the company’s accounting database above) it would look like this:
Assets
Financing
Non-current assets
Equity
Property
55 000
Share capital
50 000
Current assets
Liabilities
Inventory
18 000
LT debt
30 000
Bank
7 000
80 000
80 000
Now we are ready to start trading and see what the effect of trading is on the bal-
ance sheet equation.
The owners’ interest, or equity, represents initially the finance put into 
the company by the shareholders. That finance can be increased at any time 
during the company’s life by the issue of new shares but, aside from that, it 
changes regularly as a result of the company’s trading activities. The share-
holders are the ultimate recipients of the wealth generated or lost by the 
company. They bear all the risks of the company – if the company fails they 
will lose their investment – but they are also the people who benefit if the 
company is successful.
Gains or losses can arise in two main ways: first, through the operating activi-
ties of the company (any operating profit or loss will accrue to the benefit or cost 
of shareholders); second, through changes in the underlying values of the assets. 
For example, if a company has investments, and the value of these rises, then 
the shareholders own the increase in underlying values. An important difference 
between these two types of gain is that classical accounting only recognizes gains 
when they have been validated by a sale transaction (in the jargon, the gain must 
have been realized in order to be recognized). Consequently, many companies have 
value gains in their assets which are not reflected in the balance sheet (one form 
of hidden reserve). Operating activities though, by definition, involve a series of 
completed transactions.
If we concentrate on the trading activities, it follows that as the sharehold-
ers are the ultimate recipients of any losses or profits, then trading activities 
will have the effect of increasing or decreasing the shareholders’ equity – in 
this sense, the statement of profit or loss is simply a summary of the busi-
ness transactions which have occurred during a period, and is drawn up to 
explain the net change during a period in the value of the equity. (This link-
age between the statement of profit or loss and the balance sheet is known 
as the iteration between the two, and is a central building block of financial 
reporting.)
Let us now move on to seeing how the trading transaction works in a balance 
sheet context.

Chapter 3  Measurement concepts and the balance sheet equation
85
Financial 
Position A
5
6
7
Financial 
Position B
Assets
Cash
7 000
(a) 15 000
11 750
(c)     –250
Receivables
(a)   7 000
7 000
Inventory
18 000
(b)  –4 000
(c) –5 500
112 000
20 500
Property
55 000
55 000
Total
80 000
1750
11 500
112 000
94 250
Liabilities/Equity
Long-term debt
30 000
30 000
Trade payables
112 000
12 000
Equity:
Share capital
50 000
50 000
Profit
(a) 15 000
(b) 17 000
2 250
(b)  –4 000
(b)  –5 500
(c)     –250
Total
80 000
1750
11 500
112 000
94 250
	
5.	In our example, if a car was sold for €5000 cash, we should be able to re-
cord the acquisition of a new asset (€5000 cash) and also show an increase 
in equity of €5000 (transaction 5a on the spreadsheet).
The sale increases the value of the owners’ equity and the cash received increases 
the assets of the company. However, we have so far failed to record the other 
aspect of the transaction: the fact that we have given up part of our inventory. 
We need to record the reduction of our assets by one vehicle. We have gained a 
cash asset of €5000, but we have given up a car asset, which in this case we had 
previously bought for €4000 (part of our inventory of €18 000, which amount we 
need for profit measurement purposes to have allocated across the individual cars 
concerned – which could bring in an element of subjectivity). The real effect of 
the transaction is to create a profit of €1000, and this is reflected in the accounts 
by expensing the inventory against the sale. We cancel the inventory value of the 
car sold by deducting this from the sale. In our balance sheet equation, we reduce 
inventory by €4000 and reduce profit by €4000 (transaction 5b).
This highlights the relationship between assets and expenses. When a com-
pany pays its electricity bill it is easy to see that the expenditure involved relates 
to something which has already been consumed in the business – the electrical 
energy. The payment therefore involves an immediate expense in the business 
operations of the company. It represents a value consumed. However, when a 
company makes a payment – as in the case of the acquisition of the car inven-
tory in our example – the transaction is not always an expense. The car inven-
tory represents an economic value which will be consumed in the future by 

Part 2  Basic financial statements
86
the company and remains in the balance sheet until it is consumed. And that 
is what has now happened in the case of the car sale above: an asset has been 
consumed, turned into an expense (‘expensed’) as a trading transaction by the 
company.
Many assets represent simply a store of future economic value to be consumed 
by a business. Clearly an inventory of goods for resale is going to be seen to be 
consumed relatively quickly. But in the same way, assets such as equipment are 
used up over a period, albeit several years, and are consumed in the business. 
Equally, when a company pays in advance for something like insurance or rent, 
the expenditure is made initially to acquire a future benefit. That benefit expires 
as the company moves through the time period for which it paid in advance – the 
asset becomes an expense through the economic benefits being consumed by the 
company.
We should therefore distinguish between expenditure – where the company 
simply pays out money – and the classification of that expenditure as an expense 
of an accounting period or as an asset to appear in the end-period balance sheet 
and be carried forward to become an expense in a future period.
Returning to the car example, let us also imagine that, as the new owner was 
driving away, a wing mirror fell off. The company arranged for a nearby repair 
shop to replace this and carry out one or two other minor repairs. Reliable Run-
ner SA paid the repair shop €250 for this work. That expenditure would also be an 
expense since the car has been sold (transaction 5c).
During the course of the series of transactions we have just finished describing, 
the accounting value of the company has changed several times, so any balance 
sheet which we might have drawn up would also have changed as the transac-
tions progressed. The net change in the equity over the period is, of course, the 
profit which has been made by the company during that period. Normally this 
would be analyzed in the statement of profit or loss and only the net change 
shown in the published balance sheet within equity. A company can draw up a 
statement of profit or loss as often as it wishes; most companies do this monthly 
for internal management purposes, as well as annually for official reporting to 
shareholders and tax authorities.
Credit transactions
All the transactions which we have made so far have involved an exchange of 
cash. However, in business many transactions are made on credit, with the cash 
exchange following sometime later. The accounting treatment of such transactions 
follows exactly the same ideas which we have already explored: if a business sells 
some goods on credit, it gives up one asset in exchange for another; but where the 
asset received was cash in the earlier example, in a credit transaction the asset re-
ceived will be a promise to pay. That promise or debt is just as valuable as the cash, 
as long as there is an expectation that the person who owes the debt will pay in due 
course (and why would you give credit in the first place if you were not sure you 
would be paid?). The account created is known as a receivable.
Suppose that Reliable Runner SA sells another car, this time for €7000, and 
allows the customer credit. The transaction would appear in the balance sheet 
equation as an increase in equity and an increase in a new form of current asset, a 
receivable (transaction 6a in the spreadsheet). Let us say the allocated cost of the 

Chapter 3  Measurement concepts and the balance sheet equation
87
car sold was €5500 so we have acknowledged through the balance sheet equation 
the expensing of another car from our inventory (transaction 6b).
Businesses also receive short-term credit from their suppliers – assets are pur-
chased or other expenses incurred in exchange for a promise to pay in due course. 
In essence, this is a transaction very similar to the bank loan, with the difference 
that the finance is normally available only for a short period, so would be pre-
sented differently on the balance sheet. A credit supply consists of the receipt by 
a business of goods or services against a liability to pay later. The supplier and 
the debt which is owed are described as trade creditors or trade payables.
If our company now decided that it should expand its car inventory and 
bought two more cars for €12 000 but this time on credit, the company should 
record an increase in assets – the additional car inventory, and an increase in 
financing – the short-term credit given by the supplier (transaction 7). (There is 
no limit to the number of rows which might be used – we are constrained slightly 
by the size of the printed page, but generally one would have as many rows as 
seemed useful in terms of enabling a relevant and efficient analysis of the figures 
into a statement of profit or loss and balance sheet.)
If we were to draw up a statement of profit or loss for the whole period since 
the commencement of the business, it would now look like this:
€
€
Sales
12 000
Expenses:
Cars
9 500
Repairs
250
9 750
Net profit
2 250
The statement of financial position or balance sheet at the end of the period 
would look like this:
€
€
Assets
Financing
Non-current assets
Equity
Property
55 000
Share capital 
50 000
Current assets
Profit for the year
2 250
Inventory
20 500
Liabilities
Receivables
7 000
LT debt
30 000
Bank
11 750
Trade payables
12 000
Total
94 250
Total
94 250

Part 2  Basic financial statements
88
This series of transactions represents the essence of how accounting tracks and 
reflects a company’s financing and its operations. Essentially, the balance sheet 
is a financial model of the company – but based on the money value of trans-
actions which have taken place. The statement of profit or loss is an analysis of 
the wealth-creating (or wealth diminishing!) activities of the company. The state-
ment of profit or loss can be drawn up for any period but is generally drawn up 
for one year for external reporting purposes and in businesses of any size, at least 
once a month for internal management purposes. Equally, a balance sheet, or 
statement of financial position, can be drawn up at any moment, but is published 
once a year for shareholders and others, while it is produced internally at least 
quarterly for management purposes.
The spreadsheet represents the company’s accounting database. In reality this 
will consist of potentially hundreds of ‘accounts’ – data files – which are con-
stantly being updated as the accounting department tracks the company’s trans-
actions and indeed participates in them with issuing invoices to clients, paying 
suppliers and so on. The balance sheet is in fact a highly aggregated summary 
of the data files in the accounting database and corresponds exactly with that 
database. The statement of profit or loss is also an aggregation of those data files 
which deal with the company’s operations for a specific period. They represent a 
more detailed analysis than is provided by the one-line profit entry in the state-
ment of financial position.
You can see in the above example how (a) the balance sheet is a presentation of 
the latest position in the company’s accounting database and (b) how the state-
ment of profit or loss is an analytical document which gives the detail behind the 
net change in equity over the period (but excluding any new capital introduced 
by investors or dividends paid to them).
You should also note that the increase in company cash during the trading 
period (transactions 5–7) was €4750, while the profit was €2250. This is generally 
the case in accruals accounting, since we are trying to present an economic assess-
ment and while this translates itself into cash flows in the end, there are timing 
differences. In this case we can reconcile the two as follows:
Profit as calculated
2 250
Value of inventory consumed (paid earlier)
9 500
Amount owed by credit customer  
(will be received later)
–7 000
Change in cash during this period
14 750
We will build on this model in subsequent chapters to see how it deals with 
more complex transactions and situations. But all the essentials of how account-
ing tracks company operations are contained in the above example. If you get 
stuck later on, you should always come back to this introduction to refresh your  
understanding of how accounting records company activity.

Chapter 3  Measurement concepts and the balance sheet equation
89
Having constructed a basic statement of financial position (balance sheet) and 
statement of profit or loss (income statement/profit and loss account) from a set of 
business transactions, we will now turn to some of the formal rules that the IASB 
has set to delineate the content of the building blocks of these financial statements. 
These formal rules are important as they sometimes depart from the traditional 
transactions-based view of accounting. The IASB definitions and overall recogni-
tion criteria provide the general setting to which we will refer in later chapters.
Elements of financial statements
The IASB Conceptual Framework states that financial statements portray the finan-
cial effects of transactions and other events by grouping them into broad cat-
egories according to their economic characteristics. These characteristics are the 
elements of financial statements. Five elements of financial statements are identi-
fied and defined: assets, liabilities, equity, revenues and expenses.
Assets, liabilities and equity are the elements that are directly related to the 
measurement of a company’s financial position in the balance sheet and are de-
fined as follows (para 4.4 of the IASB Conceptual Framework):
	
n	 Asset: A resource controlled by an entity as a result of past events from 
which future economic benefits are expected to flow to the entity.
	
n	 Liability: A present obligation of an entity arising from past events, the 
settlement of which is expected to result in an outflow from the entity of 
resources embodying economic benefits.
	
n	 Equity: The residual interest in the assets of an entity after deducting all its 
liabilities.
Income and expenses are the elements of financial statements that are directly re-
lated to the measurement of performance in the statement of profit or loss. These 
elements are defined as follows (para 4.25 of the IASB Conceptual Framework):
	
n	 Income: Increases in economic benefits during the accounting period in the 
form of inflows or enhancements of assets or decreases of liabilities that 
result in increases in equity, other than those relating to contributions from 
equity participants.
	
n	 Expenses: Decreases in economic benefits during the accounting period in 
the form of outflows or depletions of assets or incurrences of liabilities that 
result in decreases of equity, other than those relating to distributions to 
equity participants.
Reading through these definitions, it becomes clear that they are not independent: 
primacy is given to the definitions of assets and liabilities, whereas the concepts of 
equity, income and expenses are defined in terms of the level of or changes in assets 
and liabilities. This is known as the asset–liability approach to financial statements.
The IASB definition and recognition criteria  
for elements of the statement of financial position 
and the statement of profit or loss

Part 2  Basic financial statements
90
The IASB Framework says (para 4.6) that you should keep the substance over 
form principle in mind when assessing whether an item meets the definition of 
an asset, liability or equity: the underlying substance and economic reality of the 
item should be examined and not merely its legal form.
The bulk of the IASB standards contain specific rules with respect to these ele-
ments of financial statements. The rules are typically oriented towards three as-
pects of financial statement elements: recognition, measurement and disclosure.
	
n	 Recognition is the process of incorporating an item that meets one of the 
definitions above in the financial statements. An item may meet the defi-
nition of, for example, an asset, but fail to meet specific asset recognition 
criteria and thus be kept off the balance sheet. In other words, meeting the 
definitions is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for inclusion in the 
financial statements.
	
n	 Measurement is the process of determining the monetary units at which the 
elements of financial statements are to be recognized and carried in the bal-
ance sheet and statement of profit or loss. A variety of measurement bases 
are employed, but the dominating one is still historical cost.
	
n	 Disclosure refers to the process of additional information dissemination 
with regard to a financial statement element in the notes to the accounts.
Stage 1 – Definitions 
Does the item meet the definition of a financial statement element 
(asset, liability, equity, income, expense)? 
Stage 4 – Disclosure 
Is any (additional) mandatory or recommended information to be 
included in the notes to the accounts? 
Stage 3 – Measurement
Select the appropriate measurement base to determine the monetary
amount at which the item will be recognized and carried in the balance
sheet or income statement
Stage 2 – Recognition 
Can the item be recognized according to the generic recognition criteria 
(probability of economic benefits flow, cost or value reliably measurable)? 
Are there any specific recognition rules for the item? 
Figure 3.4
Decision stages 
for inclusion 
of an item into 
the financial 
statements

Chapter 3  Measurement concepts and the balance sheet equation
91
Although specific IASB standards may contain additional and more detailed rec-
ognition rules, at a more generic level the IASB Conceptual Framework (para 4.38) 
formulates two generally applicable recognition criteria for an item that meets 
one of the definitions of financial statement element:
	 (a)	 it is probable that any future economic benefit associated with the item 
will flow to or from the entity; and
	 (b)	the item has a cost or value that can be measured with reliability.
Hence, not all assets and liabilities should be included (recognized) in the state-
ment of financial position. For example, there may be serious doubt that the flow 
of future benefits will be effectively realized or the value of an asset may be dif-
ficult to measure.
The application of these general recognition criteria may imply considerable 
judgement. The probability assessment refers to the degree of certainty that the 
future flow of economic benefits will materialize, and should take into account 
the information available when the financial statements are prepared. In many 
cases the cost or value of an item is not readily available and must be estimated. 
The need for estimation as such does not undermine reliability as long as the esti-
mates can be reasonably justified.
Figure 3.4 summarizes the different decision stages in the process of including 
(information on) an item into the financial statements.
Assets
A company’s asset is a resource that it controls as a result of past events and from 
which future economic benefits are expected to flow to the company. Note that 
tangibility or physical substance is not an essential characteristic of an asset.
Assets arise from past transactions or past events. A company would normally 
obtain an asset through exchanges with third parties, by acquiring them in cash, 
credit or barter transactions (property, plant and equipment, inventory, in-
vestments), by selling goods or services (receivables) or by entering into arrange-
ments that provide rights to future benefits (a loan to a third party). There might 
not always be an expenditure to recognize an asset: an item may be donated to 
the company free of charge, but if the item has the capacity to generate future 
economic benefits, it meets the definition of an asset. On the other hand, incur-
ring expenditure may be indicative that future economic benefits are sought, but 
it is not conclusive proof that an asset has been acquired.
The future economic benefits embodied in an asset means the capacity to con-
tribute directly or indirectly to the company’s future net cash inflows. These ben-
efits may arise in a number of ways. Economic benefits may result from:
	
n	 the productive capacity of the asset (for example, plant and equipment);
	
n	 the ability of the asset to reduce future cash outflows (for example, renewal 
expenditure on equipment that results in future production cost savings);
	
n	 the rights incorporated in the asset to receive services in the future (for ex-
ample, prepayments);
	
n	 direct claims to cash inflows (for example, receivables and short-term 
investments);
	
n	 cash in hand, because it can be exchanged for goods and services (eco-
nomic benefits).

Part 2  Basic financial statements
92
In order to meet the definition of an asset these future benefits should be con-
trolled by the company.
Control relates to the company’s capacity to benefit exclusively from the 
benefits embodied in a particular asset. Controlling a resource means that the 
company can use it to provide goods or services, to settle financial obligations 
or make distributions to owners. Control usually arises from legal rights of 
ownership, but an item may satisfy the definition of an asset even where there 
is no legal ownership. To assess the control issue it is important to analyse 
transactions in accordance with their substance and economic reality and not 
merely their legal form. For example, the substance of business arrangements 
may give a company control over the benefits (and usually at the same time 
expose it to the risks) that are expected to flow from an asset without specific 
legal rights. A finance lease arrangement is a typical example of a situation 
where ownership and control do not coincide. Under a finance lease arrange-
ment the owner of, for example, a plant transfers the control over the future 
economic benefits of using the plant to a lessee, although he or she (the les-
sor) retains legal ownership. Likewise, possession of an asset will usually indi-
cate control but, even then, a company may hold inventory or cash as agent 
for another party and be restricted from using it in an exchange transaction, 
and hence does not control the asset.
Liabilities
A company’s liability is a present obligation arising from a past event, the settle-
ment of which will result in an outflow of economic benefits from the company.
A present obligation of a company is a present (at balance sheet date) duty or 
responsibility to act or perform in a certain way. The duty or responsibility obli-
gates the company. The obligation implies the involvement of one or more third 
parties. Most obligations are legally enforceable and arise under contractual 
arrangements for amounts borrowed (bank loans, corporate bonds), amounts 
owed for assets purchased or services obtained (trade payables). When advance 
payments have been received from third parties, there will be an obligation to 
provide goods or services. Obligations can also be imposed, such as obligations 
to pay tax, retirement benefit obligations, the obligation to restore environmen-
tally damaged sites and the obligation to pay damages under a lawsuit.
Obligations can, however, also be constructive. A constructive obligation 
is created or inferred from a company’s actions. For example, a company may 
have a policy of refunding purchases to dissatisfied customers, indicating that 
it will accept responsibility for faulty goods. The constructive obligation arises 
when the company has created a valid expectation with the customers of a rebate 
for anything faulty.
A present obligation arises from a past event known as an obligating event. 
An obligating event arises when the company has no realistic alternative to set-
tling the obligation created by the event. For example, the purchase of goods 
and the use of services of third parties is an obligating event giving rise to trade 
payables (unless paid for in advance or on delivery) or the signing of a bank loan 
contract results in an obligation to repay the loan. In these cases the obligation 
can be enforced by law. In the case of a constructive obligation to refund faulty 
goods, the obligating event arises when the goods are actually sold by the com-
pany. There is, however, no such thing as ‘voluntary’ liabilities which are not 

Chapter 3  Measurement concepts and the balance sheet equation
93
based on commitments towards third parties, such as planned expenditure on 
repairs and maintenance of plant and equipment. In that case, the company has 
the alternative to cancel or postpone the expenditure or to sell the asset before 
the repairs and maintenance take place and, thus, avoid expenditure.
The liability will lead to a sacrifice of economic benefits. The actual settlement of 
the obligation could involve the payment of cash, the transfer of other assets, the 
replacement by one obligation with another, the rendering of services etc. Uncer-
tainty about the timing and amount of the future sacrifice of economic benefits 
is allowable. Liabilities of uncertain timing or amount are known as ‘provisions’ 
(see Chapter 6).
A basic distinction is made between financial liabilities and other liabilities. 
Financial liabilities imply a contractual obligation, while the other category arises 
from statutory requirements, such as taxes or dividends payable, or from con-
structive obligations.
Equity
Equity is defined as the residual interest in the company’s assets after deducting 
its liabilities. The residual interest is the ownership interest and represents a claim 
or right to the company’s net assets. The logic of the definition of equity follows 
the balance sheet equation that assets minus liabilities equals equity. Both equity 
and liabilities represent (mutually exclusive) interests in a company’s assets, but 
­equity ranks after liabilities as a claim to those assets. This means that claims 
from liabilities must be met before a distribution can be made to equity holders in 
the event of liquidating the company.
Equity will be usually subdivided as follows:
	
n	 funds contributed by shareholders
	
n	 retained profits
	
n	 reserves representing appropriations of retained profits.
Such subcategories indicate legal or other restrictions on the ability of the com-
pany to distribute or otherwise use its equity.
Income and expenses
The IASB definitions of income and expenses rely directly on the asset–liability 
approach of financial statements. Both are defined in terms of changes in assets 
and liabilities. Income includes both revenue and gains, but these are not sep-
arately defined. Similarly, expenses embrace both expenses and losses. The sub-
categories are substantiated in a number of specific IASB standards. The main 
difference seems to be that gains and losses are presented as net amount, whereas 
revenue and expenses are usually displayed gross.
Revenue (income) that increases assets is derived from the sale of goods and 
services, fees, dividends, royalties, grants and rent, whereas gains (income) that 
increase assets may result from the disposal of assets or from a revaluation of 
specific assets. Examples of expenses that decrease assets are numerous: cost of 
goods sold (depletion of inventory), advertising costs (use of cash), depreciation 
(consumption of long-term assets) etc. Expenses may result in an increase in li-
abilities if, for example, payment is deferred. Losses that decrease assets may arise 
from the disposal of assets or from a revaluation of specific assets.

Part 2  Basic financial statements
94
Summary
In this chapter we have taken a major step forward in looking at the technical ba-
sis of accounting. This has involved looking at the basic conventions of account-
ing, particularly historical cost as the valuation base, but also conventions such as 
accruals (accounts try to record all economic events affecting the company when 
they take place, not just cash movements), matching, going concern (allocations 
of costs to future periods are only valid if we think the company is going to con-
tinue to exist) and consistency (the comparability of data is limited if the basis on 
which it is prepared changes over time).
We dealt with the accounting database and its fundamental concepts that account-
ing information records both where finance came from and what was done with it 
(the balance sheet equation) and that therefore all movements within the database 
will involve at least two changes, since they must deal with both sources and uses of 
finance (double entry). We used a spreadsheet as a model of the accounting database 
and plotted a series of transactions through it. As a result we were able to prepare a 
statement of profit or loss and a statement of financial position from the database.
Finally, we looked more closely at the IASB definitions and recognition criteria of 
the elementary building blocks of financial statements. These definitions are gov-
erned by the asset–liability approach to financial statements. In order to properly 
understand the numbers presented in the financial statements, the analyst must be 
aware of these definitions and the accompanying general recognition criteria.
Discussion Questions
1.	 Discuss the shortcomings of a statement of financial position as a proxy for 
company value.
2.	 Critically assess the usefulness of fair value as a measurement attribute.
3.	 What is the link between a functional presentation and a presentation by 
nature of the statement of profit or loss? Provide a number of examples to 
­illustrate your point.
4.	 Explain what is meant by relevance, timeliness and comparability and how 
they make financial information useful.
5.	 Elaborate the link between a statement of financial position and a statement 
of profit or loss.
6.	 Explain the difference between expenses and losses.
Assignments
The following questions have answers on the lecturer side of the  digital support 
resources for the book.
1.	 Jennifer decides that she will go into the tourist industry on Lake Geneva, 
and buy a concession to hire out canoes on the lake. She borrows CHF40 000 
from her parents and puts in CHF20 000 herself. The arrangement with the 
Canton is that she pays CHF50 000 at the start for the concession, which 

Chapter 3  Measurement concepts and the balance sheet equation
95
runs five years, but must also pay an annual rental of CHF10 000 at the end 
of the season in October.
She negotiates a deal with a canoe supplier, who sells her 20 canoes for 
CHF30 000 but agrees that she should pay CHF10 000 on delivery and the 
rest a year later.
During the season she receives CHF90 000 (cash) in canoe rentals.
Making (and specifying) whatever assumptions you wish, you are asked 
to draw up a simple statement of profit or loss for the first year and 
statement of financial position at the end of the year.
2.	 James, on completing his MBA, sees a possibility to make a profit sell-
ing computers. He has the opportunity to buy a job-lot of computers for 
€50 000, and he can buy a shop lease with two years to run for €5000 and 
pay an annual rent of €6000. He happens just to have inherited €60 000, so 
he starts a company and puts the money in as share capital.
During the first year, he sells €30 000 of computers for €45 000. During 
the second year he sells no computers at all, and at the end of the year he 
sells the remaining inventory for €1000 and liquidates the company.
	
(a)	 Calculate his accounting profit for each of the two years of operations.
	
(b)	 Explain why the assumptions made at the end of the first year led to 
the wrong profit estimate.
	
(c)	 What are the consequences of the assumptions which proved to be 
incorrect?
3.	 A&S retail shop. Andy and Stewart met at a training course for young en-
trepreneurs. They decide to set up an enterprise to run a retail store at the 
centre of a small village. Andy recently received £9000 as a donation from 
his rich aunt. He puts this money and another £3000 of his savings into the 
business as share capital. Stewart puts in £12 000 of his own savings as share 
capital as well. A local bank grants them a three-year loan of £6000. Every 
six months, they repay one-sixth of the bank loan and pay interest at a semi-
annual rate of 3 per cent. The interest is recognized on a six-month basis. 
They rent a fully equipped store with sufficient storage space. They agree to 
pay a monthly rent of £700 (to be paid at the beginning of each month). 
Andy and Stewart pay themselves a salary of £600 each at month’s end. They 
decide to use their initials to create the store’s name: A&S.
n	 To announce the opening of the store on the first of April 20X1, A&S 
launches an advertising campaign which runs during the first week of 
April. This campaign costs £1000 and is to be paid for on April 7.
n	 A&S purchases retail goods worth £7000. The supplier agrees to grant a 10 
per cent discount if A&S pays immediately on April 1.
n	 The first month turns out to be a success due to the advertising campaign. 
A&S is able to sell half its inventory for £4900.
n	 At the beginning of May, A&S purchases retail goods worth £5000 in cash.
n	 By the end of the May A&S manages to sell £3500 of goods for £5400.
n	 In the month of June, A&S decides to provide several shopping carts to 
improve customer comfort. A&S buys 20 carts for only £1200. The carts 
are delivered on June 5 and will be paid for mid-July. A&S estimates the 
expected life of the carts to be five years without any residual value.

Part 2  Basic financial statements
96
n	 In June, A&S sells £2900 of goods for £4500. A&S also buys retail goods 
for £5000 and receives a promotional quantity discount of 7 per cent. The 
goods are paid for when delivered on June 20.
n	 The availability and convenience of shopping carts attract a broader range of 
customers. In the month of July, A&S sells £4500 of retail goods for £7200.
n	 At the beginning of August, A&S buys £4800 of goods and sells £3800 
goods for £5800.
n	 Eager to expand its business, A&S responds to an increasing demand for 
more customer convenience. In order to provide a home delivery service, 
A&S buys a second-hand motor van for £15 000 on August 4. A&S 
estimates that the van will be used for five years, after which the van will 
have no residual value. A&S pays £12 000 immediately and agrees to pay 
the remaining balance before August 20X2.
n	 A&S buy retail goods for £6500 in September. A&S sells £3500 of goods 
for £5000 at the store. Furthermore, A&S delivers £750 of goods using the 
van and gets paid £1200.
n	 At the end of the month, A&S repays part of its borrowings and pays the 
interest to the bank.
n	 In October, A&S experiences a slight downturn in sales. A&S manages to 
sell only £2000 of goods for £3400 at the store and delivers £750 of goods 
to customers at home for £1200. Given this disappointing decrease in 
sales A&S buys only a minimum of goods and pays £1250.
n	 During the month of November, A&S grants promotional discounts to 
get rid of products near to their expiring dates. A&S sells in total £2400 of 
goods at a price of £2600.
n	 At the beginning of December, A&S purchases a considerable quantity of 
goods to provide for the holiday shoppers. A&S buys £8500 of goods and 
gets a 5 per cent discount for immediate payment.
n	 December turns out to be a lucrative month. A&S temporarily hires 
a student on a part-time basis to help out in the store. A&S pays the 
student £300 at the end of the month. A&S sells £6500 of goods for 
£9900 at the store. On top of that, home deliveries (with a cost of £1800) 
account for £3200 in revenue.
n	 A&S believes the owners have been working hard and rewards them with 
a new year’s bonus of £300 each.
n	 In January, A&S replenishes its inventory. A&S purchases £4000 of goods. 
In January A&S sells £3700 of goods for £6300 all together.
n	 In February, A&S decides that the store requires a portable computer for 
administration purposes. A&S buys a portable computer at a price of 
£1350. The computer is expected to last three years and to have no value 
afterwards.
n	 At the beginning of February, A&S purchases £5000 of goods. A&S sells 
£4500 of goods for £7850 at the store and another £850 of goods by 
delivery for £1500.
n	 In March, A&S relies upon an accountant’s services to help them with the 
preparation of their financial statements. A&S pays him £500. During this 
month A&S purchases another £5000 of goods and succeeds in selling 
£4600 of goods for £7900.
n	 At the end of the month, A&S repays part of its loan and pays the interest 
to the bank.

Chapter 3  Measurement concepts and the balance sheet equation
97
	
The fiscal year of A&S runs from April 1 20X1 till March 31 20X2.
	
You are asked to prepare for A&S a statement of financial position at the 
end of March 20X2 and draw up a statement of profit or loss for its first 
fiscal year.
4.	 George and Val set up a company together to trade as decorators. George owns 
a three-year-old van which he puts into the company instead of cash for share 
capital. Val puts in €2000 in cash and they agree the van is worth €2000. They 
have no premises as such. Materials are stored in their home garage or left in 
the van. In the first month of business the following transactions take place:
	
(a)	 They get an order worth €600 to decorate a small flat. The customer pays 
€300 in advance.
	
(b)	 They buy materials worth €125 on credit from Cork Building Merchants 
which are used in this job.
	
(c)	 When the job is finished the customer pays a further €100 but says they 
will have to wait another month for the balance of €200.
	
(d)	 They get an order to decorate a large house for €1200 plus materials. 
They buy €270 of materials on credit from the same builders’ merchants.
	
(e)	 At the end of the month they have done 80 per cent of the work on the 
house-painting order and they pay themselves €500 each as salary.
	
Prepare a spreadsheet to show the transactions and then draw up a 
­statement of profit or loss for the month and a statement of financial 
­position as at the end of the month.
	
Next month:
	
(f)	 They complete the house job and receive €1200 from the customer plus 
€270 for the materials.
	
(g)	 They get a job painting some shop premises – the price is €500 including 
materials. They buy materials on credit from the usual supplier for €80.
	
(h)	 They complete the job and receive €500 cash.
	
(i)	 The next contract is to decorate a flat and they agree to do the job for 
€800 plus materials. They obtain €180 of materials, but the supplier says 
that they must clear their outstanding account before he will release the 
goods. They pay what was due at the end of the previous month.
	
(j)	 The van breaks down and is repaired for €90 which is paid in cash.
	
(k)	 They complete the job and bill the customer for €980. The customer 
pays €600 and offers to pay the balance plus €20 interest if they will wait 
two months for it.
	
(l)	 They visit their first client because he hasn’t paid the €200 outstanding, but 
he is not available and a neighbour tells them that he has just gone bankrupt.
	
(m)	They do no further business that month and pay themselves €500 each 
as salary at the end of the month.
	
Update the spreadsheet and then draw up a statement of profit or loss for 
the month and a statement of financial position as at the end of the month.

98
In this chapter we go into the detail of how to apply accruals accounting in practice. 
We will look at credit transactions and the timing of transactions for accounting 
purposes in general. More specifically, we will address the issues of revenue 
recognition and of how items of inventory are transferred to the statement of profit 
or loss.
Accruals accounting
C H A P T E R  4
n	 Introduction
n	 Accruals basis of accounting
n	 Credit transactions
n	 Recognition of revenue
n	 Period costs
n	 Inventories and profit measurement
n	 Inventory accounting techniques
n	 Net realizable value
n	 Accruals and the working capital cycle
n	 Summary
n	 Discussion questions
n	 Appendices
n	 Assignments
Chapter Structure

Chapter 4  Accruals accounting
99
In the last chapter we looked at the balance sheet equation, how that works 
as the basis of the company’s accounting database and how the company’s 
transactions are captured and recorded within that database. In short, we dealt 
with the basic approach to accounting measurement. In this chapter and the 
next one, we are going to go into this in more detail with a view to reach-
ing the point where you can prepare basic financial statements, given a list-
ing from the database and information about the surrounding circumstances. 
It is important that you should know the relationship between the database 
and the financial statements which are published using its data, and that you 
should feel comfortable with the contents of the statement of financial posi-
tion ­(balance sheet) and statement of profit or loss (income statement/profit 
and loss account).
So far we have largely confined ourselves to looking at transactions in which 
goods were bought and sold for cash, but the real world of commercial trading 
includes many transactions where cash changes hands at a different moment 
from that when the item or service is provided. Also, the classification of an item 
within a company’s accounting system sometimes changes when the item is used 
up in the company’s activities. To be useful, accounting needs to capture all the 
economic events that occur in a company, when they take place, and the cash 
movement is usually only a part of the picture. The statement of profit or loss 
gives a picture of a company’s operating performance over a period of time (for 
published financial statements the relevant period is commonly one year). In es-
sence, that is a simple enough concept, but examined in detail it poses questions 
as to which transactions of a company are properly taken in as being ‘operating’ 
and which transactions belong to which accounting period. In answering this 
question, accountants may well have to make allocations of expenses and rev-
enues between different accounting periods, which brings in another subjective 
element in the preparation of financial statements.
To illustrate the point, let us imagine two cases. A company makes up its state-
ment of profit or loss for the year to 31 December.
In example (a) it takes delivery of five washing machines (cost €300 each) on 
15 December, and pays the supplier on 31 January. The machines are sold for 
€400 each during the first week of January.
In example (b) the company obtains the washing machines on 15 December, 
pays in January, but sells the machines on credit on 20 December and receives 
payment in January.
Given that the months of December and January fall into different accounting ­periods, 
how should we deal with each set of transactions as far as the statement of profit or loss 
goes?
In example (a) the washing machines were acquired by the company in 
­December, but paid for in January. Should they appear in the company’s finan-
cial statements in December or January, and in what way should they appear (in 
Introduction
Accruals basis of accounting

Part 2  basic financial statements
100
accounting terms, how should they be ‘recognized’)? Should they be recognized 
as an expense in the statement of profit or loss for the year ended in December?
In example (b) the company received the goods and made the sale in Decem-
ber, but it paid for the goods and received the money for the sale in January. If we 
tie the goods and the sale together and put them in the same statement of profit 
or loss, should they go in the December figures or the January ones?
In order to resolve the dilemma we should go back to first principles. What is 
the purpose of the information given in a company’s financial statements? The 
answer is to provide decision-useful information for investors and creditors. If we 
put the expense in one statement of profit or loss and the revenue (the sale) in 
another, we are not actually recording the profit on the transaction within one 
statement of profit or loss, so the usefulness of both statements is impaired.
The IASB Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting said the following about 
accruals:
Accrual accounting depicts the effects of transactions and other events and circum-
stances on a reporting entity’s economic resources and claims in the periods in which 
those effects occur, even if the resulting cash receipts and payments occur in a dif-
ferent period. This is important because information about a reporting entity’s eco-
nomic resources and claims and changes in its economic resources and claims during 
a period provides a better basis for assessing the entity’s past and future performance 
than information solely about cash receipts and payments during that period.
(IASB, Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, par.OB17)
Using these principles we can resolve our two examples. First, the revenue and 
the expense relating to the same business transaction should be recognized in 
the same accounting period, and that is the period when the transaction took 
place. When the washing machines were delivered the company was free to dis-
pose of them in any way it wished up until the point where a customer agreed 
to buy them. The company possessed the washing machines from the time of 
delivery, so they should be recognized at the point of delivery, and a debt was 
owed to the supplier from that time, so that too should be recognized. However, 
the company had not disposed of the machines, so they would be recognized as 
part of its wealth, an asset, up to the point of sale. They should therefore appear 
in example (a) as an asset in the statement of financial position at 31 December 
(with a corresponding liability to the supplier). In January the sale took place: 
the machines are no longer available to the company and change status from an 
asset to an expense at the moment of sale. Payment of the supplier subsequently 
can be seen as settlement of a balance sheet liability, just like the payment of any 
kind of debt.
In example (b) the customers agreed to buy the machines in December, but paid 
in January, so when did the transaction take place? The trading transaction took 
place at the moment when each customer agreed to buy the machine – ­legally the 
machine was theirs, the company selling the machine no longer had the right to 
dispose of it and the customer had a legal obligation to pay the agreed purchase 
price. In example (b) the customers did not pay until January, but this did not 

Chapter 4  Accruals accounting
101
affect the ownership rights of either party and in economic terms the deferral of 
the cash settlement is simply the selling company in effect making a loan for a 
period. The revenue from the sale relates to the moment the sale transaction took 
place, even though the cash receipt occurred at another time. In short, we can rec-
ognize a series of different states:
	
1.	The company acquires the washing machines (an asset). It could exchange an-
other asset (cash) for the machines but is allowed to defer the cash settlement 
which creates a debt to the supplier (establishes a trade payable – a liability).
	
2.	Some time later the company extinguishes the liability by payment of cash.
	
3.	The company sells the washing machines, but again, instead of taking a 
cash asset in exchange, it accepts a debt asset (a receivable – the customer’s 
promise to pay).
	
4.	Later the customer settles his debt, cancelling the receivable in the company’s 
statement of financial position in exchange for an increase in cash assets.
Of the four different elements which can be seen above, only part 3 relates to 
the statement of profit or loss, all the others are changes in balance sheet com-
ponents. In our example (b) no cash changes hands in either direction when the 
trading transaction takes place and this is a central element of profit measure-
ment through the accounting system – trading transactions are identified accord-
ing to when they objectively take place, not according to when cash changes 
hands.
In this chapter we are focusing on tracking and matching transactions in order 
to recognize them in the appropriate time period. We shall now go on to review 
how this problem is handled within the accounting system. We can break this 
down into four related areas:
	
1.	ordinary trade transactions on credit
	
2.	timing of revenue recognition
	
3.	transactions where invoicing takes place periodically after the goods or ser-
vices have been consumed and time-based expenses
	
4.	recognition of changed status where an asset is sold and therefore becomes 
an expense.
Generally speaking, credit transactions are such an integral part of day-to-day 
trading activities that the data recording system is designed to track these trans-
actions as soon as they occur. On the other hand, the other three types are fre-
quently not built into the data collection system automatically and involve the 
preparer of financial statements in adjusting the figures produced by the record-
ing system.
The purchase of goods for resale by a company, and the sale of goods by the 
company frequently take place on credit, i.e. cash settlement follows after de-
livery, often with a delay of 30 to 60 days. Any trading company as part of its 
management of cash resources, will try to obtain the maximum credit from sup-
pliers of goods and give the minimum credit to customers. Of course, the offer 
of generous credit terms is one of the weapons which can be used in marketing 
Credit transactions

Part 2  basic financial statements
102
a company’s products, and is a point of tension between financial management 
and marketing. Equally, the correct assessment of the creditworthiness of cus-
tomers is vital.
This kind of trading generally takes place in an environment where suppli-
ers and customers have a continuing relationship with each other and regularly 
trade, and is known as trading on ‘open account’. That is, a supplier company 
knows its customer well, knows the customer’s reliability as regards ultimate pay-
ment and is therefore willing to supply goods on a simple understanding that 
the customer will pay. No special agreement is necessary for credit to be given 
on any particular order; there is a continuing flow of orders, goods and payment. 
In terms of accounting, we need to consider the two separate aspects of this: the 
purchase of goods on credit and the sale of goods on credit.
Purchases on credit
When goods are purchased on credit, the company buying is gaining a new asset, 
but instead of exchanging the new inventory asset for a cash asset, the company 
is acquiring a new liability as the other half of the exchange. In terms of the bal-
ance sheet equation the supplier of the goods is making a loan (albeit very short 
term) to the company.
    Assets 5 Liabilities 1 Equity
1 Inventory 100 5 1 Payable to supplier 100
Later on, when the company settles its debt to the supplier, it will cancel the 
short-term liability with an exchange for cash:
2 Cash 100 5 2 Debt settlement 100
In the long run, the inventory asset is being acquired in exchange for a cash asset, 
but in the short run there are two stages in the transaction: (1) the acquisition of 
the asset together with a debt to the supplier, and (2) the cancellation of the debt 
against a cash payment.
The stage 1 recognition of the inventory and liability to the supplier means 
that the recording system will always be able to give an up-to-date picture of the 
amounts owed to suppliers and the amounts acquired for inventory, and will 
avoid the time delay in recognition which would occur under a system that only 
recognized cash transactions.
1
2
Final
Assets
Cash
2100
2100
Inventory
1100
1100
Liabilities
Trade payables
1100
2100
0

Chapter 4  Accruals accounting
103
In terms of operating details, of course a company usually has many suppli-
ers, and while for a picture of the company’s financial state of affairs the only 
important number would be the total owed short term to suppliers (representing 
something which it will shortly be necessary to settle in cash), for internal man-
agement purposes the company also needs to know how much is owed to each 
individual supplier.
What is often done, therefore, is that the general ledger carries an account 
which aggregates all the amounts owed to suppliers, but the company keeps a 
separate ledger which duplicates the movements on the total supplier account 
but holds a separate account for each supplier. The general ledger account then 
contains summary-level financial data, while the subsidiary ledger is used to re-
cord the detailed data for that account. The sum of all the balances of the individ-
ual accounts in a subsidiary ledger should equal the amount in the corresponding 
general ledger account. Each general ledger account that is supported by a sub-
sidiary ledger is called a control account. The total supplier account in the general 
ledger will function as a control account for a subsidiary ledger with all the details 
of the credit purchase transactions.
Suppliers who provide goods on credit are called (trade) creditors and the 
amounts owed to them (trade) payables. So this subsidiary ledger is often called 
the creditors’ ledger or accounts payable ledger. Again, although we describe this as a 
ledger, it is unlikely to be a book but rather a computer file storing the details on 
disk and displaying management information on a screen or printing a hard-copy 
analysis of balances as required.
Sales on credit
The sale of goods on credit involves exactly the same type of transaction, but 
viewed from the opposite side. A company which sells on credit similarly needs 
to recognize the sale and the debt owed to it by its customer. The credit cus-
tomer is known as a ‘debtor’ for accounting purposes, because he or she owes 
a debt to the company. The amount owed by the customer to the company is 
a ‘trade receivable’. The IASB (and US generally accepted accounting principles 
or US GAAP) uses the term ‘receivables’ to refer to this type of financial assets, 
while the EC (European Commission) Accounting Directives typically use the 
British English terminology and refer to ‘debtors’ as the corresponding balance 
sheet item.
Looking at the balance sheet equation, the company wants to recognize a sale 
(revenue which will increase the value of equity) and an asset (a receivable which 
is a claim to receive cash from the customer):
                                   Assets 5 Liabilities 1 Equity
                   1 Receivable 200 5 1 Revenue 200
Subsequently, the debtor will settle the cash owed to the company, and this be-
comes an exchange between one asset (the claim on the customer) and cash:
2 Receivable 200 1 Cash 200 5 0

Part 2  basic financial statements
104
In the general ledger a company would keep an aggregate account of all trade 
receivables, but here again the operating convenience of managing receivables is 
best served by a further subsidiary ledger in which all debtors have an individual, 
personal account. This subsidiary record is called the accounts receivable ledger or 
debtors’ ledger.
As with the recording of creditors, the system is tracking the daily transactions 
of the company and therefore reflecting properly the full current financial state 
of affairs. In other words, the significance of the accruals principle is that the 
­accounts reflect the real changes that have affected the firm’s assets, liabilities, 
revenue and expenses, even though the cash has not changed hands.
The cumulative effect of the entries in the accounts which have just been de-
scribed is that, at the reporting date, the general ledger shows the total amount 
owed to suppliers (with supporting detail in the subsidiary accounts payable 
­ledger) and the amount receivable from customers (with detail in the subsidiary 
accounts receivable ledger).
The accounts receivable ledger function within the financial accounting unit 
of a company should use the data in its subsidiary ledger to monitor the amount 
of credit given to customers and the period of credit allowed. In that sense, the 
What is a creditor?
A creditor is an individual or another company to whom the firm owes money. 
Another name for it is an account payable. Examples of creditors (or payables):
n	
Trade creditors: Suppliers of raw materials, other inventories, equipment 
and services which are purchased in the course of business for resale, for 
which payment has not yet been made.
n	
Other creditors: Amounts owing to outsiders for various other reasons, 
such as interest payable; usually routine recurring debts for services and 
supplies ancillary to trading operations.
In a statement of financial position a common distinction is that between 
amounts due for settlement within 12 months and amounts due for settlement 
in more than 12 months. Trade creditors (or trade payables) would nearly al-
ways be for settlement in substantially less than 12 months.
Between the lines
	
1
2
Final
Assets
Cash
1200
1200
Receivables
1200
2200
    0
Equity
Profit or loss
Sales
1200
1200

Chapter 4  Accruals accounting
105
data in the subsidiary ledger are useful not only in terms of constantly updating 
the picture of the company’s receivables, revenue and income but also in man-
aging credit effectively and reducing the risk of non-payment. The data in the 
accounts payable ledger similarly monitors overall trade debts and costs, but also 
permits of managing supplier accounts to take the maximum period of credit ne-
gotiated, making payments at due dates and checking supplier invoices against 
the delivery information. Both accounts receivable ledger and accounts payable 
ledger should be exploited to manage the company’s short-term finances and to 
operate internal controls.
One of the crucial internal accounting controls is that the entries on the ac-
counts in the general ledger balance with the summaries of the subsidiary ledgers. 
The balances of the so-called ‘control accounts’ in the general ledger for accounts 
receivable and accounts payable should always equal the total of the balances of 
the individual accounts in the respective subsidiary ledgers at reporting date. This 
control is crucial if the entries in the general ledger and in the subsidiary ledger 
are the result of separate inputs. Separate inputs of the same transaction data can 
be an important organizational measure to assure the validity, completeness and 
accuracy of the recording of events.
Revenue is the gross inflow of economic benefits during the period arising in the 
course of the ordinary activities of a company when these inflows result in in-
creases of shareholders’ equity. Put simply, revenue is the money value of goods 
supplied and services rendered, which is attributable to the current accounting 
period. The aggregate value for revenue in an accounting period is also described 
as ‘sales’ or ‘turnover’ (in British English). Revenue does not include amounts 
collected on behalf of third parties such as sales taxes or value added tax (VAT), 
as these do not result in increases in shareholders’ equity (recall the definition of 
income in the IASB Framework – see Chapter 3).
Revenue is recognized in the statement of profit or loss when it is ‘earned’, 
meaning that it is not sufficient merely to have a sale agreement signed, there 
has to be a certain degree of performance on the part of the supplier as well. The 
timing of the recognition of revenue is quite important under accruals account-
ing, as it triggers the matching process where revenues are matched with related 
expenses to calculate the net effect of a transaction on the profit of the period. Re-
member that correct profit measurement requires that both revenue and related 
expenses are recognized in the same period (the matching principle). This also 
implies that you need to have recognized revenue before a profit can be shown in 
the statement of profit or loss.
The primary issue in accounting for revenue is determining when the ‘earning’ 
process underlying revenue recognition can be considered complete. The proce-
dures normally adopted in practice for recognizing revenue are generally directed 
at restricting the recognition of revenue to those items that can be measured reli-
ably and represent inflows of economic benefits that can be realized with a suf-
ficient degree of certainty. Revenue recognition will take place when a critical 
event in the sales process has taken place whereby the uncertainties surround-
ing the sales transaction (estimates of cost of goods sold, selling price, additional 
Recognition of revenue

Part 2  basic financial statements
106
selling costs and the ultimate cash collection) are reduced to an acceptable level 
and the remaining uncertainties can be estimated with sufficient accuracy.
Timing of revenue recognition
Identifying when the critical event for revenue recognition occurs, is not always 
straightforward. Let us look at a typical revenue cycle for the sale of goods con-
taining the following stages:
	
1.	customer places order;
	
2.	sales order is recognized after credit approval and inventory check;
	
3.	goods ordered are shipped to customer;
	
4.	customer accepts delivery of goods;
	
5.	sales invoice is prepared and sent to customer;
	
6.	customer pays invoice.
At which stage can the earning process of revenue be considered to be complete? 
In general, revenue will be attributed to the accounting period in which goods 
are delivered to the customer or a service is rendered. In other words, revenue is 
recognized at the point of delivery of the goods or service.
IAS 18, Revenue, contains the IASB rules for revenue recognition and measure-
ment and comments on the criteria to identify the critical event that should trig-
ger revenue recognition in different types of sales arrangements. The two most 
critical criteria to identify an ‘earned’ sale of goods are (a) the company has trans-
ferred the significant risks and rewards of ownership of the goods to the buyer 
and (b) the company has no longer either managerial involvement nor effective 
control over the goods. In most cases, fulfilment of these criteria coincides with 
the transfer of legal title or the passing of possession to the buyer, which nor-
mally takes place at delivery and the signing of a delivery note by the customer. 
Revenue is not recognized when the customer places an order or when the sales 
order is formally acknowledged. Even though in some companies the amount of 
revenue that will be earned can be reliably estimated at that time, there has been 
no real performance of the contract on the part of the seller until the goods have 
been delivered to the customer. When a payment is received in advance from a 
customer (before delivery triggers revenue recognition), the company will recog-
nize it as a liability, which is the obligation to deliver goods or render services in 
the future.
In many cases it is relatively easy to determine what is the point of delivery, 
but some cases require careful thought – for example, where goods are delivered 
(or services provided) over a relatively long time period. A ship may take several 
years to build – does the ship-building company only recognize revenue when 
the ship is actually handed over to the customer? A legal case may take many 
months going through the courts – does a solicitor only recognize the revenue 
in the accounting year when the case is settled? In both examples it would be 
normal for the client to make payment in a series of instalments, but if the cash 
value of the instalments were taken to revenue, that would not be an objective 
assessment of what had been supplied or ‘earned’.
IAS 18 requires that for transactions involving the rendering of services over a lon-
ger time period (more than one accounting period), revenue should be recognized by 
reference to the stage of completion of the transaction at the reporting date, provided 

Chapter 4  Accruals accounting
107
that revenue, related costs and progress can be measured reliably. This method is 
often referred to as the ‘percentage of completion method‘’ (in contrast to the 
‘completed contract method’ which is more common under tax-sensitive accounting 
regimes). The application of the percentage of completion method in practice will of-
ten be based on a professional valuation of the amount of services performed within 
the single accounting period as a percentage of total services to be performed and us-
ing that as a base for allocating revenue, irrespective of cash payments.
Revenue versus gains
Keep in mind that revenue is only one part of income figuring in the statement 
of profit or loss (although usually by far the most important one). Income en-
compasses both revenue and gains. The IASB refers to income as an inflow of 
economic benefits during the period that result in increases in shareholders’  
equity. Revenue is income that arises in the course of the ordinary activities of 
the company. Throughout this chapter we assume that revenue is associated with 
the sale of the company’s goods and services, but the company can realize in-
come through other means. For example, if a company sells marketable securities 
(which figured on its statement of financial position as financial assets) for more 
than their book value, it realizes economic benefits that increase shareholders’ 
equity, but this is not revenue (unless the company is in the business of selling se-
curities). This type of income is called gains, to distinguish it from revenues from 
selling goods, rendering services or performing other ordinary business activities.
Similarly, decreases in economic benefits during the period that result in decreases 
of equity (except dividends or other distributions to shareholders) for reasons not 
associated with the ordinary activities of the company are referred to as ‘losses’, and 
these are sometimes distinguished from expenses. Loss of assets through natural 
disasters as well as losses arising on the disposal of non-current assets, such as build-
ings or equipment, are typical examples. While revenues and expenses are reported 
as gross amounts, gains (losses) are often reported net of related expenses (income).
COMPANY REPORT
NOKIA – REVENUE RECOGNITION (extracts)
Notes to the consolidated financial statements: 1. Accounting principles
Revenue recognition
Sales from the majority of the Group are recognized when the significant risks 
and rewards of ownership have transferred to the buyer, continuing managerial 
involvement usually associated with ownership and effective control have ceased, 
the amount of revenue can be measured reliably, it is probable that economic 
benefits associated with the transaction will flow to the Group and the costs in-
curred or to be incurred in respect of the transaction can be measured reliably. 
The Group records reductions to revenue for special pricing agreements, 
price protection and other volume based discounts. Service revenue is gener-
ally recognized on a straight line basis over the service period unless there is 
evidence that some other method better represents the stage of completion. 
License fees from usage are recognized in the period when they are reliably 
measurable, which is normally when the customer reports them to the Group.

Part 2  basic financial statements
108
In addition, sales and cost of sales from contracts involving solutions 
achieved through modification of complex telecommunications equipment are 
recognized using the percentage of completion method when the outcome of 
the contract can be estimated reliably. A contract’s outcome can be estimated 
reliably when total contract revenue and the costs to complete the contract can 
be estimated reliably, it is probable that the economic benefits associated with 
the contract will flow to the Group and the stage of contract completion can be 
measured reliably. When the Group is not able to meet those conditions, the 
policy is to recognize revenue only equal to costs incurred to date, to the extent 
that such costs are expected to be recovered.
Progress towards completion is measured by reference to cost incurred to 
date as a percentage of estimated total project costs, the cost-to-cost method.
The percentage of completion method relies on estimates of total expected 
contract revenue and costs, as well as dependable measurement of the prog-
ress made towards completing a particular project. Recognized revenues and 
profits are subject to revisions during the project in the event that the assump-
tions regarding the overall project outcome are revised. The cumulative impact 
of a revision in estimates is recorded in the period such revisions become likely 
and estimable. Losses on projects in progress are recognized in the period they 
become probable and estimable.
Source: Nokia, Annual Report, 2010
(This is an example of the note to the financial statements of Nokia that illus-
trates how it applies the accruals and matching principles as regards revenue.)
It is worth mentioning here that there are expenses which are time-based and 
not necessarily transaction-based. Some items of expense are associated with a cer-
tain accounting period even though they cannot be traced to any specific revenue 
generating transactions occurring in that period. Rent of premises is an obvious 
example where the expense is incurred irrespective of whether any physical use is 
made of the premises or not. These time-based expenses are called period costs. In 
general, they are the cost of being in business. In a retail chain, for example, the 
overhead costs of head office activities and the costs of operating the retail stores 
during the period are costs that cannot be traced directly to the specific merchan-
dise sold.
An accounting recognition issue which is closely related is the recognition 
within one accounting period of expenses which have not yet been invoiced and 
where supply is on a continuing basis, such as the supply of electricity and tele-
phone. No physical delivery takes place, and unless invoicing to the company 
using these facilities coincides exactly with the company’s accounting period 
there will be some adjustment required to ensure that this kind of expense is also 
properly allocated to the appropriate accounting period. When there is no direct 
means to connect expenses and revenues, costs should be allocated in a system-
atic way among the accounting periods in which the business benefits from the 
Period costs

Chapter 4  Accruals accounting
109
costs. However, let us first look at an area where the application of a direct cause-
and-effect relationship seems less problematic.
An important part of the routine capturing of economic transactions within 
the system and matching revenue to costs is the treatment of inventories. As 
we have seen, when a company buys goods to resell (or manufactures goods to 
sell, which we will also look at in this chapter) their value is treated as an as-
set by the company (i.e. an item which will generate future positive cash flows 
for the company). But when the goods are actually sold, this cash flow is real-
ized and the cost of the goods has to be set against it – the inventory has to be 
‘expensed’.
First we should note that in British English the term used for inventory is 
‘stock’, but in American English ‘stock’ means shares in a company – quite con-
fusing. As noted before, throughout this book we will use IASB terminology (actu-
ally a mix of British and American English) and, thus, the label inventory. Let us 
start just with an assumption that the business buys finished goods for resale, so 
that we only have one category of inventory which is not processed in any way 
by the company.
The value of this inventory has a key role to play in the measurement of profit. 
The cost of goods sold is the amount paid by the retailer to buy the goods which 
are deemed to have been sold in the current accounting period. The difference 
between the sales revenue and the cost of goods sold is known as gross profit or 
gross margin. It is an important piece of data which can be used by management 
as a test of a company’s efficiency and represents the amount available to a com-
pany to meet its operating expenses. The gross margin of two businesses of the 
same size and selling the same goods should be comparable, and any difference is 
worth investigation.
Under IFRS, IAS 2, Inventories, deals with the recognition of inventory as an as-
set, specific measurement rules and disclosures about inventories in the notes to 
the financial statements. Some types of inventories are, however, excluded from 
IAS 2 and covered by other, more specific standards, such as ‘biological assets’, 
‘agricultural produce’ at the point of ‘harvest’ and work in progress on ‘con-
struction contracts’.
Cost of goods sold
The cost of goods sold is the amount paid by the company for the goods it sold 
to customers in the accounting period. When goods are bought for resale they 
become an asset – inventory – which is subsequently expensed when the goods 
are actually sold. For profit measurement purposes a value has to be arrived at 
for the cost of the goods sold. Of course this might be done by expensing each 
item when the transaction takes place, and some systems operate that way. But, 
in practical terms, this is often not worthwhile except where the company sells a 
very small number of items of high value – say, Rolls-Royce cars, Rolex watches, 
etc. Usually the measurement may be made just as accurately in terms of the cost 
for the year (or for a month or a week) by simply calculating the value of goods 
Inventories and profit measurement

Part 2  basic financial statements
110
available for resale during the year and then deducting those which are on hand 
at the end of the year:
Inventory available at 1/1/X1
XXX
plus goods purchased during year
XXX
Goods available for resale in 20X1
XXX
less cost of inventory on hand 31/12/X1
XXX
5 Cost of goods sold during year
XXX
Within the data collection system there are various ways of handling the inven-
tory and purchases of goods for resale (or, for that matter, transfers into finished 
goods from the manufacturing process). The simplest way is to leave the open-
ing inventory account untouched and accumulate new acquisitions of goods for 
resale in a ‘purchases’ account. Logically, purchases are made to replenish inven-
tories of goods which have been sold so, in a broad sense, purchases could be 
expected to approximate to cost of goods sold over a period. At the point where 
one wants an accurate measure, one measures inventory currently on hand and 
compares this with the opening inventory value. Any difference is then adjusted 
against purchases. Supposing opening inventory was €2400, purchases during the 
period were €5000 and inventory at the end was €2600, the adjustment would be 
to reduce purchases by €200, which is the increase in inventory, and add that to 
the existing inventory figure.
A more formal way of doing things is to move the opening inventory into the 
cost of goods sold or similar account, and then remove the closing inventory at 
the end of the period. The procedures are not really something you need to worry 
about. As with many things in accounting there are several different ways of do-
ing it, and the company decides in the light of its information needs. For the 
purposes of exercises within this book, we will always use the method whereby 
the inventory remains in a separate account and is adjusted at the end of the 
measurement period.
Taking a practical example, let us say that a company started the year with 
an inventory of goods for resale which had cost €3000. During the year it re-
ceives further deliveries: April €5000, July €5000 and November €6000. The 
total value of goods available for sale in 20X1 was €19 000. Supposing that 
during the year-end stock-take it was recorded that the goods still on hand 
had an original purchase cost of €4500, the cost of goods sold figure derived 
(€14 500) will appear in the statement of profit or loss. Supposing that the 
sales revenue in this case was €25 000, the statement of profit or loss would 
then show:
€
Sales
25 000
Cost of goods sold
14 500
Gross profit
10 500

Chapter 4  Accruals accounting
111
But note that the published statement of profit or loss might also be presented:
Materials purchased
16 000
Sales
25 000
Gross profit
10 500
Increase in inventories
1 500
26 500
26 500
In terms of the company’s accounting database, the adjustment would appear as 
follows:
Closing 
balances
Inventory 
adjustment
Statement of 
profit or loss
Balance 
sheet
Assets
Inventory
3 000
11 500
4 500
Financing
Sales
25 000
25 000
Purchases
16 000
11500
14 500
Profit
10 500
Calculation of inventory value
You may be able to see at once that the question of the inventory flow and 
valuation has critical importance in determining the profit of any particular 
accounting period and has implications for other accounting periods. The 
closing inventory at the end of the period is a component in determining the 
cost of goods sold (and therefore gross margin) for two periods: the one end-
ing with that inventory measurement and the one beginning with that inven-
tory measurement.
This can probably best be seen with an example. Let us suppose that a com-
pany in its first two years of trading has the following figures:
Year 1
Year 2
€
€
Sales
20 000
25 000
Purchases
17 000
21 000
Closing inventory value
(a) 2 000
4 000
(b) 3 000

Part 2  basic financial statements
112
As you see, we have included two alternative inventory figures at the end of year 1: 
figure (a), €2000, is the one the owner has calculated, but the auditor thinks the 
owner has undervalued the inventory and proposes figure (b), €3000. The com-
pany was sold at the end of year 2, with an inventory figure of €4000 agreed by 
all parties. We have computed the gross profit for the two years, using the owner’s 
and the auditor’s inventory figures as at the end of year 1:
Year 1
Using inventory (a) 
owner’s view 
€
Inventory (b) 
auditor’s view
€
Sales
20 000
20 000
Cost of goods sold
Opening inventory
0
0
Purchases
17 000
17 000
Goods available
17 000
17 000
Closing inventory
(2 000)
(3 000)
Cost of goods sold
15 000
14 000
Gross margin
5 000
6 000
Gross margin to sales ratio
25%
30%
Year 2
(a)
(b)
€
€
Sales
25 000
25 000
Cost of goods sold
Opening inventory
2 000
3 000
Purchases
21 000
21 000
Goods available
23 000
24 000
Closing inventory
(4 000)
(4 000)
Cost of goods sold
19 000
20 000
Gross margin
6 000
5 000
Gross margin to sales ratio
24%
20%
If you study the figures it will become apparent that where the closing inventory 
at the end of year 1 has a higher value – column (b) – the gross profit was higher 
than (a), reflecting the impact of inventory on the cost of goods sold measure-
ment. But the closing inventory is carried forward to become the opening inven-
tory in year 2 and, since it was higher in (b) than (a), the cost of goods sold in 
year 2 for (b) is higher than for (a), so reversing the year 1 position. By looking at 
the gross margin percentages you can also see how the inventory figure can dis-
tort the measurement of performance.
Of course, if you add the results for the two years together, you will find that 
the gross profit in aggregate is the same:

Chapter 4  Accruals accounting
113
So you can see that, over the complete life cycle of the firm, the inventory mea-
sure will have no importance; total profits will be the same. The importance of 
the inventory measure is that it allocates cost between years and therefore al-
locates profit between years. Companies trying to minimize profits (say for tax 
purposes) would be inclined to undervalue inventory, while those trying to maxi-
mize profit would maximize inventory valuation.
Your response to this may be that the whole question is irrelevant in that the 
value of the inventory is surely something which can be empirically proved: you 
have ten items in inventory and purchase invoices show that these ten cost €X 
each, so the closing inventory value is €10X. In practice, companies can rarely 
identify individual items of inventory against the purchase price – nor for that 
matter would they necessarily find it worth the time and effort to identify indi-
vidual purchases even if it were possible.
There is also the question of changing prices. In times of inflation, prices are 
generally changing, although rarely in step with one another, and in a global 
economy many items are sourced in different currencies. The prices of some 
items, particularly those reflecting rapid technological change, linked to prime 
commodities (such as oil, coffee beans, wheat, etc.) or priced in another currency, 
can fall dramatically or fluctuate quite widely in a short time. It follows that the 
prices a retailer will pay for items coming into inventory will not normally be 
level or uniform during any one accounting period.
If identification of individual items is not possible, and prices are not stable, 
we are left with the major problem of how to ascribe a cost to inventory on hand 
at the end of the year (or of any other accounting period).
The solution to this problem is that, since individual costs cannot normally 
be attached to individual items, the accounting measurement can be determined 
by using assumptions about inventory movements, which need not necessarily 
coincide exactly with the actual inventory movements since we cannot be certain 
about the movement of individual items. Indeed, accounting principles such as 
prudence may call for valuation approaches which differ from physical inventory 
flow patterns. Later in this chapter we will go on to look at the various methods 
available to ascribe an accounting cost to inventory using various assumptions 
about inventory utilization patterns.
Relevant costs
The allocation of purchase price to individual items is not the only problem, 
though. We must also consider whether the purchase price is in itself the appro-
priate reflection of the inventory asset. There are two considerations here: on the 
(a) 
€
(b) 
€
Year 1
5 000
6 000
Year 2
6 000
5 000
2-year aggregate gross margin
11 000
11 000

Part 2  basic financial statements
114
one hand, prudence demands that we do not use an inventory measure which 
overstates the value of the inventory and, on the other hand, we should consider 
whether we have added any value to the goods since they were first purchased.
There is a risk of overstating inventory values when prices fluctuate rapidly. 
For example, a British importer of a commodity may have ordered 1m tonnes at 
$28.00, while the £/$ ‘exchange rate’ was £1 5 $1.20, giving rise to a historical 
cost of £23.33m. Assuming that the commodity was held in stock, but that the 
£/$ rate moved to £1 5 $1.50, although the price of the commodity in dollars 
might remain fixed, the market value of the 1m tonnes in sterling would drop 
from £23.33m to £18.67m. Is it then reasonable to continue to value the inven-
tory at £23.33m? Accounting principles usually require that if an asset is held for 
resale and its historical cost exceeds the market value (this is usually called the 
‘net realizable value’ – that is, what the company could obtain by selling the 
inventory at the market price, less any selling costs), the value should be written 
down (i.e. reduced) to reflect the unrealized loss. We will come back to this issue 
later in this chapter.
The other side of the valuation question, additions to value, is perhaps rather 
more difficult to pin down. It may be that in most cases a retailer, for example, 
buys goods wholesale, puts them on display and sells them, without in any way 
changing them. But if the retailer is involved in any costs which improve the 
product or change it in some way (e.g. a PC hardware supplier buys processors, 
flat screens, keyboards and DVD devices from separate suppliers and sells them 
together as a workstation), it could be argued that these costs (repackaging) are 
part of the inventory asset since they represent an aspect of the cost in bringing 
the goods to the condition where they can be sold to the customer.
The problem may perhaps be more clearly seen in relation to a second-hand 
car dealer. Supposing the dealer buys a car in bad condition after a crash but 
then repairs it, resprays it and generally restores it to a better condition. The item 
which is finally put on display and sold is not the same item which was bought 
in the first place. Should its inventory value be the purchase price alone or should 
it reflect the purchase price and the costs of renovating it or, indeed, should it be 
valued at what it would cost the dealer to buy a car in renovated condition?
If the inventory value was only the purchase price this would ignore the ex-
tra costs associated with bringing the car to a saleable condition so, arguably, it 
would not match that cost and the subsequent profit on sale, which is what ac-
counting tries to do.
But what about carrying the car at a value based on what it would have cost to 
buy it already renovated? There certainly appears to be a case for it, since one can 
argue that it is possible to perceive two stages in the dealer’s profit-creating: stage 
1 is buying a car and working on it to increase its wholesale value, while stage 2 
is simply selling the car. There is a case for recognizing the value gained in stage 1 
at a theoretical level but this brings us back to the problem of prudence: the gain 
has not been realized, i.e. it is purely notional since the car has not been sold. 
The dealer has increased his or her profit potential but until the car is sold no  
‘accounting profit’ has been made.
The principle should now be clear: all the costs associated with creating a par-
ticular asset should be expensed at the same time as the asset is consumed (sold 
to the customer), in order to match revenues with expenses. Until the item is sold 
the costs should accumulate as part of the value of the asset, subject to the rule of 
being carried at the lower of cost or net realizable value.

Chapter 4  Accruals accounting
115
IAS 2, Inventories, requires that the ‘cost of inventories’ comprises ‘all ‘costs 
of purchase’, ‘costs of conversion’ and other costs incurred in bringing the 
inventories to their present location and condition’ (IAS 2, par.10). The purchase 
cost of inventory comprises the purchase price, import duties and other non re-
coverable taxes, and transport, handling and other costs directly attributable to 
the acquisition of the inventory items. Trade discounts, rebates and other simi-
lar items are deducted in determining the purchase price. Conversion costs re-
late to manufacturing processes and will be commented on later in this chapter 
(see the section on manufacturing accounts). The cost of inventories does not 
include wastage, administrative overheads and selling costs. Storage costs are not 
included unless those costs are necessary in the production process before a fur-
ther production stage.
Having reviewed the problems underlying the accounting measurement of inven-
tory values, we can now look at the practices employed. In this area we can iden-
tify three different categories:
	
1.	continuous inventory, where individual items are identified for accounting 
purposes;
	
2.	measurement methods that rely on assumptions about inventory move-
ments (but do not increase inventory value by adding in any associated 
costs);
	
3.	methods used where the inventory value of goods for resale includes costs 
other than the initial purchase price.
Continuous inventory
Although in most industries it is impractical to attach to individual goods the 
cost of acquiring them, there are some cases where either the nature of the busi-
ness or the technology used to control inventory allows this ‘actual’ valuation.
If a business deals in a small volume of high-value items which are not homo-
geneous, as, for example, does a dealer in fine art, it is perfectly possible to keep 
records of the cost of each individual item of merchandise, so no assumptions 
need to be made about inventory movements. Each item can have its acquisition 
cost recorded and this can be expensed individually when the item is sold, leaving 
a closing inventory value which relates quite specifically to the items still in hand.
Computer technology has also made possible the treatment of individual in-
ventory items at their actual purchase price because the ability of a computer to 
deal with an enormous volume of data means that there is a facility for keeping 
this information available. However, such techniques are unlikely to be used sim-
ply so that inventory can be on an actual basis – generally it is part of the man-
agement information system to monitor levels of inventory (for reordering and 
checking how fast individual items are moving) and to keep a check on buying 
prices to be sure that selling prices achieve the required gross profit margin on an 
item-by-item basis.
In short, what is called a continuous inventory system has considerable manage-
ment benefits in a sophisticated retail business. One advantage may be the ability 
to calculate an actual cost of goods sold, though the cost of the system is justified 
Inventory accounting techniques

Part 2  basic financial statements
116
not by that, but by the management controls and profit maximization which it 
provides.
Accounting assumptions
In this area we are taking the cost of each individual item as given, and then us-
ing methods based on assumptions about inventory movements to allocate those 
costs between the cost of sales expense and the inventory asset carried forward to 
the next year.
These methods would be applicable to any retailing business and to the retail-
ing side of a manufacturing business. For example, going back to our used-car 
dealer, once cars had been refurbished they would come into inventory at a figure 
which included initial costs plus refurbishing costs. These systems deal with the 
subsequent transfer of those costs to expense at the time of sale and are therefore 
equally applicable whether the company is buying finished goods in from outside 
and simply reselling them, or whether it is adding value in some way by process-
ing before selling. These systems come into play once the good is ready for resale 
and enters the retailing system.
There are three generally recognized systems for accounting for inventory 
within a historical cost framework: LIFO, ‘FIFO’ and weighted average.
	
1.	LIFO (Last In First Out) assumes that the first item of inventory to be sold 
will be the last item delivered into the stores. It allocates an accounting 
value to the cost of goods sold which uses the most recent purchase of goods 
into the stores.
	
2.	FIFO (First In First Out) assumes that inventory will be rotated in an orderly 
manner consistent with good housekeeping: newly delivered items will go 
to the back of the shelf and the oldest items will be the first sold.
	
3.	Weighted average, on the other hand, ascribes a cost to sold units based on 
the average cost of all the items of that type which were on hand at the time 
of sale. A new average is computed each time a sale takes place.
Common-sense physical inventory control tends to follow FIFO principles: in-
ventory would be rotated so that the oldest inventory is sold first. But there may 
be good reasons why, for accounting purposes, we should make the opposite 
assumption.
In periods of rising prices (and if we disregard temporary fluctuations and goods 
where technological change has affected their manufacturing cost, the trend for 
the past hundred years has been for prices to rise), LIFO will provide the lowest 
inventory value and the lowest profit (making it popular for tax purposes in some 
countries). FIFO, however, provides a higher inventory value and consequently a 
higher profit measurement. Weighted average provides a compromise solution to 
inventory valuation problems in so far as it always produces a final value between 
FIFO and LIFO. In the UK the vast majority of companies use FIFO for inventory 
valuation. Practice in other countries is more mixed. Weighted average is popular 
in continental Europe, whereas a significant number of US companies use LIFO.
When the IASB revised IAS 2, Inventories in 2003, the IASB eliminated the use of 
LIFO to measure the cost of inventories, arguing that it is generally not a reliable rep-
resentation of actual inventory flows. Consequently, companies obliged to follow IFRS 
do not have the opportunity to use the LIFO assumption. It has become therefore a 
noticeable difference with US GAAP that will probably call for attention in the future.

Chapter 4  Accruals accounting
117
Company policy in this area is much influenced by their tax environment 
and their profit objectives. A low value ending inventory will reduce current year 
profits and carry them forward as a kind of hidden reserve in the form of under- 
valued inventories. If the tax regime permits such practices, a private company 
will certainly adopt a low inventory value strategy (in the UK, LIFO is not allowed 
for tax purposes, but in Switzerland, companies are allowed to reduce the account-
ing value of their inventory by one-third every year as a tax incentive). Where 
artificially low values are not allowed, private companies will tend to ‘lose’ inven-
tory, while public companies may prefer anyway to record a higher current profit.
Note that the principle of consistency does not allow a company to switch in-
ventory valuation methods from one year to another.
Later, when comparing one company’s performance with another, you should 
check inventory valuation methods used to see that they are equivalent. Note 
also that US companies, if they use LIFO, are required to state the FIFO value of 
their inventories in the notes to the financial statements.
Even when we arrive at a historical cost measure of the inventory on hand at re-
porting date using one of the major inventory flow assumptions, our efforts may 
not end there. In fact, IAS 2, Inventories, requires that inventory is valued at his-
torical cost, unless its net realizable value is lower. In that case the inventory value 
should be written down below cost to net realizable value. So the general measure-
ment rule is that inventories are measured at the lower of cost and net realizable 
value. This measurement rule is consistent with the view that assets should not be 
carried in excess of amounts expected to be recovered from their sale or use.
The net realizable value of inventory items is the net amount that a company 
expects to realize from the sale of inventory in the ordinary course of business. 
Writing down the inventory may become necessary for a number of reasons. For 
Net realizable value
STANDARDS
IAS 2 – INVENTORIES – NET REALIZABLE VALUE (extracts)
6. Net realizable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of 
business less the estimated costs of completion and the estimated costs nec-
essary to make the sale.
9. Inventories shall be measured at the lower of cost and net realizable value.
34. When inventories are sold, the carrying amount of those inventories shall 
be recognized as an expense in the period in which the related revenue is rec-
ognized. The amount of any write-down of inventories to net realizable value 
and all losses of inventories shall be recognized as an expense in the period 
the write-down or loss occurs. The amount of any reversal of any write-down 
of inventories, arising from an increase in net realizable value, shall be recog-
nized as a reduction in the amount of inventories recognized as an expense in 
the period in which the reversal occurs.
Source: IAS 2, Inventories

Part 2  basic financial statements
118
example, the inventory has become damaged, is wholly or partly obsolete or its 
selling price has declined. Additionally, the costs to complete or the estimated 
costs to be incurred to make the sale may have increased to levels such that the 
costs of inventory may not be recovered from sale.
If there are established selling prices for the inventory items, the comparison 
of cost and net realizable value can be straightforward. In most cases, however, 
considerable judgement will be necessary to arrive at an accurate comparison. 
Note that net realizable value is an ‘entity-specific value’ and estimates of it 
have to take into consideration the specific purpose for which the inventory is 
held. For example, if inventory items are designated to satisfy specific sales con-
tracts, the estimate of the net realizable value should be based on the contract 
price and not on general selling prices, or if it is an inventory of materials held for 
use in the production of finished goods, the materials inventory will not be writ-
ten down below cost if the finished goods in which they will be incorporated are 
expected to be sold above their cost.
The amount of any write-down of inventories to net realizable value will be 
recognized as an expense in the period the write-down occurs. The write-down 
to net realizable value is thus not governed by the revenue matching principle 
which triggers the cost of goods sold calculation.
We have seen that the use of accruals in accounting leads to the existence within 
the statement of financial position of a number of short-term assets and liabili-
ties which are linked to the trading or ‘operating cycle’ and, because they are 
part of a cycle, linked to each other, even if the presentation of the statement 
of financial position splits the liabilities from the assets. Conventional thinking 
in this area talks about the concept of ‘working capital’ and the working capital 
cycle (Figure 4.1). The working capital cycle models the operating activity of the 
company as a continuous chain of events:
	
n	 Purchase of raw materials for production (or goods for resale) gives rise to 
trade payables (or creditors) and inventories.
	
n	 During production raw materials are converted into finished goods inventories.
	
n	 Finished goods are sold to customers, which reduces inventories and creates 
receivables.
	
n	 Customers pay their invoices, which reduces receivables and increases cash.
	
n	 Cash is used to pay creditors and a residual cash balance is left, represent-
ing the profit (assuming a profit has been made!).
The working capital cycle (or operating cycle) can be defined as the average 
time it takes to acquire materials, services and labour, manufacture the product, 
sell the product and collect the proceeds from customers. It is a useful manage-
ment model for showing the interrelationships within the operating cycle, and 
some Anglo-Saxon statements of financial position present current assets (inven-
tories, cash and trade receivables in Figure 4.1) and current liabilities (trade pay-
ables) together, to emphasize that they are economically linked. However, it does 
not in all cases explain the cash balance in a company, which is essentially a resid-
ual which includes short-term elements of financing and ‘investing activities’.
Accruals and the working capital cycle

Chapter 4  Accruals accounting
119
You should see that, because accounting tries to capture data when there is an 
economic event, and not just a cash transaction, the operating cycle involves a 
series of changes in working capital before a particular cycle is complete and the 
operation has been completed and a net inflow or outflow of cash has occurred. 
If a company stopped operating, this part of its statement of financial position 
would disappear, since it is only concerned with short-term operating events and, 
equally, when we wish to explain why, over a year, the profit does not equal net 
cash flow, changes in working capital are a significant part of the answer.
Inventory
Inventory
Cash
Receipts
Sales
Production
Purchases
Trade
payables
Payments
Trade
receivables
Figure 4.1
The working 
capital cycle
COMPANY REPORT
NOKIA – INVENTORIES (extracts)
Notes to the consolidated financial statements – 1. Accounting principles
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is deter-
mined using standard cost, which approximates actual cost, on a FIFO (First-in 
First-out) basis. Net realizable value is the amount that can be realized from 
the sale of the inventory in the normal course of business after allowing for the 
costs of realization.
In addition to the cost of materials and direct labour, an appropriate propor-
tion of production overheads is included in the inventory values.
An allowance is recorded for excess inventory and obsolescence based on 
the lower of cost or net realizable value.
Source: Nokia, Annual Report, 2010

Part 2  basic financial statements
120
Summary
In this chapter we have dealt with that part of the company’s accounting sys-
tem which captures sales and expense ‘events’ as they happen and keeps track 
of amounts due to suppliers and amounts owed by customers. The timing of the 
recognition of sales revenue is crucial as it triggers profit measurement through 
the matching of revenues and expenses. Regular trading also involves constant 
changes in the inventories of purchased or manufactured goods which are held 
for sale. We have seen that companies usually do not transfer the costs for 
sold goods into the statement of profit or loss on a transaction-by-transaction 
basis, but rather calculate the cost of goods sold by adding up the value of all 
goods available for sale and calculating the value of goods still unsold, so that 
the difference between these two is the accounting value of goods sold. The 
operating cycle (goods being obtained on credit, put into inventory, being sold 
on credit giving rise to receivables and then finally turning into cash) links 
together these economic events in the accounting system and is known as the 
working capital cycle.
Discussion Questions
1.	 Explain the link between accruals accounting and the concept of working 
capital.
2.	 Elaborate how the concept of accruals is applied in accounting for inventory.
3.	 What is the meaning of a net realizable value test?
4.	 Describe the issues of revenue and profit recognition relating to construction 
contracts.
5.	 What is the primary difference between a periodic inventory system and a 
perpetual inventory system?
6.	 A company usually reports on different types of inventory. Elaborate these 
and explain how they are different.
Appendices
1.	 Applying LIFO/FIFO and average cost assumptions to inventory
A detailed knowledge of each basis of measuring inventory is not necessarily use-
ful for non-accounting management, but in order to see how each system works in 
practice, there follows a very simple set of inventory transactions. You can follow 
these through, if you wish, to see how they can acquire a different accounting value 
according to each of the three methods.
Imagine a student who spends his summer selling cold drinks on the beach 
in the South of France. He buys his inventory from a wholesaler and sells indi-
vidual cans on the beach. During the summer his inventory turnover works out 
like this:

Chapter 4  Accruals accounting
121
Buys
Sells
June
100 crates @ €1.00
90 crates
July
150 crates @ €1.20
120 crates
August
150 crates @ €1.30
160 crates
Total
400 (cost €475)
370
At the end of August, therefore, he has on hand 30 crates of drinks and in order 
to arrive at an accounting measure of profit he needs to work out a cost of goods 
sold for the 370 crates sold, and an inventory value for the remaining 30 crates.
Notice that:
	
1.	We are not concerned with the selling price of his goods. We are trying to 
measure the cost of those goods, which is entirely independent of what he 
received when they were sold. Of course we need to know in due course 
what the sales revenue was, in order to deduct cost of goods sold and arrive 
at a profit figure.
	
2.	The wholesale price is rising throughout the period. If the buying price were 
stable, then the cost of goods sold would be the same under all three meth-
ods. It is only under conditions of changing prices that there is a problem 
about allocating cost in this context.
LIFO
The LIFO model charges out withdrawals from inventory at the value of the most 
recent invoice, subject to the constraint of quantities. If the inventory withdrawal 
is for 100 units and the last invoice was for 120, that price is used; but if the last 
delivery was 80, then the excess of 20 will be costed at the price of the next to last 
delivery and so on.
Use of the LIFO system has made the following allocations:
€
Cost of goods sold (€90 1 €144 1 €207)
441.00
Closing inventory
34.00
Total goods purchased
475.00
Notice that the original inventory at the end of June is still part of the  
accounting value of inventory, and this is a particular feature of LIFO. Unless 
a business actually runs out of inventory, the accounting measure of inven-
tory is likely to be at a very old rate (imagine a company which is still selling 
the same goods after 50 years), while the cost of goods sold will be a recent 
­purchase cost.

Part 2  basic financial statements
122
Cost of goods in
Cost of goods sold
LIFO inventory
June
100 3 €1.00
90 3 €1.00 5 €90.00
10 3 €1.00 5 €10.00
July
150 3 €1.20
120 3 €1.20 5 €144.00
10 3 €1.00 5 €10.00
30 3 €1.20 5 €36.00
Total 5 €46.00
August
150 3 €1.30
150 3 €1.30 5 €195.00
10 3 €1.00 5 €10.00
10 3 €1.20 5 €12.00
20 3 €1.20 5 €24.00
Total 5 €207.00
Total 5 €34.00
Note that in July the delivery was in excess of the withdrawal, so the July price 
was used for the withdrawal, while in August the withdrawal was greater than the 
delivery, so was costed at a mixture of the August delivery plus the balance from 
the July delivery remaining in the inventory valuation.
FIFO
The FIFO model assumes that all transfers out of inventory are made from the oldest 
goods in store at that time. Using our cold drink figures as for LIFO, this would give 
us the allocations between cost of goods sold and inventory which are shown here:
Cost of goods in
Cost of goods out
FIFO inventory
June
100 3 €1.00
90 3 €1.00 5 €90.00
10 3 €1.00 5 €10.00
July
150 3 €1.20
10 3 €1.00 5 €10.00
40 3 €1.20 5 €48.00
110 3 €1.20 5 €132.00
Total 5 €142.00
August
150 3 €1.30
40 3 €1.20 5 €48.00
30 3 €1.30 5 €39.00
120 3 €1.30 5 €156.00
Total 5 €204.00
The system has allocated the cost of the deliveries as follows:
€
Cost of goods sold (€90 1 €142 1 €204)
436.00
Inventory at end of period
39.00
Total goods purchased
475.00

Chapter 4  Accruals accounting
123
Notice that in this case the closing inventory value is at the most recent price. 
Where prices are rising this means that FIFO will give the highest closing inven-
tory figure – and therefore the lowest cost of goods sold. But if prices are falling, 
the opposite will hold good.
Weighted average
The weighted average method adjusts the average price of all units in inventory 
each time there is a new purchase. For example, if the existing inventory is ten 
units with an average cost of €7.00 and then five more units are delivered at a 
cost of €8.00 each, any subsequent withdrawal will be costed at:
(10 3 €7 1 5 3 €8)/15 5 €7.33 per unit
The allocations made by the weighted average using our original example are:
Cost of  
goods in
Cost of  
goods out
Weighted average 
inventory
June
100 3 €1.00 90 3 €1.00 5 €90.00
10 3 €1.00 5 €10.00
July
150 3 €1.20 150 3 €1.20 1 10 3 €1.00 5 €190
40/160 3 €190 5 €47.50
120/160 3 €190 5 €142.50
August
150 3 €1.30 150 3 €1.30 1 €47.50 5 €242.50
30/190 3 €242.50 5 €38.30
160/190 3 €242.50 5 €204.20
The allocation of the purchases under this method works out as follows:
€
Cost of goods sold (€90 1 €142.50 1 €204.20)
436.70
Closing inventory
38.30
Total goods purchased
475.00
The main disadvantage of this method is that it can be quite cumbersome in use, 
given that the average has to be recalculated every time there is a new delivery of 
merchandise.
Impact on gross profit
The next stage in considering the use of different inventory valuation systems, is 
to see what impact the choice of method has on the state of the financial affairs 
of the company.

Part 2  basic financial statements
124
If we say that the sales revenue achieved by our student selling cola was €740, 
his results would look like this:
LIFO 
€
FIFO 
€
Weighted  
average 
€
Sales
740.00
740.00
740.00
Cost of goods sold
(441.00)
(436.00)
(436.70)
Gross profit
299.00
304.00
303.30
Balance sheet:
Value of inventory
34.00
39.00
38.30
The choice of inventory measurement system provides a choice of profit measures. In 
our particular example the difference between each of the three is not great, but then 
the quantities involved are not substantial. In a major company the inventory, on 
hand, could run to several million pounds, therefore a method which has a result 10 
per cent different could result in a quite different view of the company’s performance.
2.	 Manufacturing accounts
We would regard it as beyond the scope of this book to examine in great detail 
how a manufacturing business (or any business which processes goods before re-
sale) accounts for and allocates costs between expenses and the asset value of the 
finished goods [this is a complex and relatively controversial question normally 
dealt with in the context of managerial (cost) accounting]. However, a general 
picture is certainly germane to your understanding of financial accounting.
As we have discussed, the matching principle calls for revenues and ex-
penses which relate to the same transaction to be recognized in the statement 
of profit or loss of the same period. It follows that all the costs of manufactur-
ing a product should therefore be expensed at the moment when the prod-
uct is sold. Typically a manufacturing concern buys raw materials, processes 
them and then sells them. The actual amount of time taken for the produc-
tion cycle to be completed will vary from one industry to another, but may 
last many months between the initial delivery of raw materials and the fin-
ished goods moving into the warehouse.
Until the goods enter the warehouse, all the costs associated with produc-
ing them are accumulated and treated as an asset. However, the problems 
arise in defining exactly what are the costs associated with producing the fin-
ished goods.
We can easily distinguish between two broad categories of cost: direct 
cost and overhead. Direct costs are those costs which arise directly from the 
manufacture of the product – for example, the raw materials, the cost of the 
workers who actually produce the good, packaging, etc. These can be seen 
quite clearly to form part of the asset.
Where we run into problems is in the area of overheads where the cost 
cannot be so easily allocated. Typical overheads might be:
	
n	
supervisory production staff;
	
n	
cost of machines used in production;

Chapter 4  Accruals accounting
125
	
n	 cost of energy used in production;
	
n	 cost of factory building (rent, maintenance, rates, etc.);
	
n	 cost of product design team;
	
n	 cost of accounting department;
	
n	 cost of general management.
As you go down the list, the costs become more remote from the production of 
the finished good, and it is difficult to pinpoint where exactly the line is drawn 
between costs which should be allocated to the finished product and costs which 
should be immediately expensed as part of the general operating expenses.
The answer differs from one company to another, and indeed this is another 
factor which is influenced by national characteristics and the tax environment. 
Where tax measurement is linked closely to the company accounts, there is an 
incentive to carry the minimum of costs in the accounting value of manufac-
tured goods and pass as many costs as possible immediately into expense, to defer 
tax. As a rule of thumb, expenses such as those of operating the factory (where 
they can be separated) might be allocated to the asset, while general business 
operating expenses such as office staff would not be treated as part of the asset. 
However, some companies may well treat only direct costs such as direct labour 
and raw materials as part of the asset and expense the rest immediately. One side-
effect of this is that where two companies in the same industry make different 
allocations, their financial statements will not be directly comparable: what is an 
operating expense in one may be treated as an asset in the other and expensed in 
the next period.
By way of a simple example, let us suppose that a small factory produces ash-
trays. It buys plates of stainless steel which are stamped out by a press into the 
shape of an ashtray. The factory is operated by four people; three are directly 
employed producing the ashtrays while the fourth manages the business and 
handles sales. The monthly payroll is €2800, of which €1000 goes to the manager. 
The factory is rented and costs €1000 a month; the building includes the offices 
in which the manager works and these occupy one-tenth of the floor space. Dur-
ing the month of August the electricity bill is €100 and the raw materials con-
sumed were worth €1210. We might allocate the costs as follows:
Total costs  
(€)
Production 
costs (€)
Other operating 
costs (€)
Payroll
2 800
1 800
1 000
Rent
1 000
900
100
Electricity
100
90
10
Raw materials
1 210
1 210
—
Totals
5 110
4 000
1 110
You can see that even in so simple an example the allocations are problematical: 
Does the manager not supervise production in any way? Is it reasonable to allo-
cate the electricity bill on the basis of floor area when the machines probably use 
proportionately more than the office?

Part 2  basic financial statements
126
The main point though is that €4000 would be treated as costs incurred in produc-
ing the finished goods. If the production in the month was 2000 ashtrays, these would 
appear in the balance sheet at an inventory value of €2 each (€4000 divided by 2000 
units) and would pass into the retail part of the business (the equivalent of ‘purchases’) 
as being delivered at €2 each. You can see that, if the rent, for example, were treated 
as a period operating cost and not allocated to the product, the average product cost 
would decrease to about €1.50: it follows that for internal management purposes it is 
vital to understand fully how costs are allocated within the company’s system; igno-
rance could lead to wrong decisions, such as how great the unit profit margin is.
The €1110 would be expensed immediately as operating expenses. The ash-
trays, however, would be expensed only when they were sold – and at a value 
which depended upon whether LIFO, FIFO or weighted average was in use.
It is also worth mentioning at this point that a manufacturing business will 
have a number of different components to its inventory. Aside from the inven-
tory of finished goods, it will also have inventory of raw materials and probably 
a value for work in progress (sometimes ‘work in process’). The latter value simply 
acknowledges that, where the production cycle takes some time, there will at any 
given reporting date be products which are only part completed.
Assignments
The following questions have answers on the lecturer side of the digital support 
resources for the book.
1.	 Allocate revenue between different accounting periods in the following cases:
	
(a)	 Carolyn works as a freelance journalist. In November 20X1 she wrote an 
article for a magazine. The article appeared in the February 20X2 issue 
and she was paid in March 20X2. She draws up her financial statements 
to 31 December.
	
(b)	 Beker Industries manufactures and installs specialized 
telecommunications equipment at the premises of customers on behalf of 
Teleworks, a network operator. On 15 December 20X5 Teleworks placed 
an order with Beker Industries to manufacture and instal 210 specialized 
equipment items at the plant sites of its customers. Beker Industries had 
the items on inventory and shipped them to the customers’ plants on 28 
December 20X5. Beker Industries expects to instal the equipment by 5 
January 20X6. Payment is due 14 days after installations of the goods.
	
(c)	 Standard International runs a small chain of bookshops. During the 
month of December 20X6 it sold books for an amount of €800 000. It 
also sold €100 000 worth of gift certificates, 5 per cent of which were 
redeemed by customers for merchandise in the same month.
	
(d)	 Merseyside Ship-building Inc. receives an order to build a small cargo 
ship. The work starts on 1 July 20X2. At 31 December 20X2 the ship is 
10 per cent complete, at 31 December 20X3 it is 80 per cent complete 
and the ship finally leaves the yard on 30 June 20X4. During this 
period Merseyside Ship-building received the following payments from 
the client: 31 July 20X2 €500 000; 1 January 20X3 €500 000; 30 June 
20X3 €500 000; 31 December 20X3 €500 000; 30 June 20X4 €750 000; 1 
January 20X5 €1 250 000 (final instalment).

Chapter 4  Accruals accounting
127
	
(e)	 Wirral Electrical sells electric appliances wholesale. In November 20X1 it 
sold 20 fan heaters at €15 each to a retailer (Meols Stores) and in December 
a further 30 at €15 each to the same customer. In February 20X2 Meols 
Stores pays its outstanding account, subject to deduction of €30 for two 
defective heaters which it returned at the same time. In April 20X2 Meols 
Stores sends back a further heater, demanding a refund because it does not 
work. How would Wirral deal with this situation in its financial statements?
2.	 Review the following revenue-related transactions of Borlo AG with  
regard to its fiscal year ending on 31 December 20X8.
n	 On 30 June 20X8 the company recognized revenue on a sale of its 
products for €30 m. The terms of the sale include free after-sales service 
for a period of two years. The cost to Borlo AG of the after-sales service is 
estimated to be €2 m per annum and a reasonable profit margin on the 
service would be 20 per cent.
n	 On 20 December 20X8 the company sold goods and recognized revenue 
on delivery of the goods. The goods had a manufacturing cost of €10 m 
and were sold at a gross profit margin of 20 per cent. The goods were 
supplied on a sale or return basis, with a right to return up to and 
including 31 May 20X9. The customer had returned 50 per cent of the 
goods by 1 March 20X9. It is uncertain as to how many of the remaining 
goods will be returned prior to 31 May 20X9.
3.	 Wirral Electrical had the following statement of financial position as at 31 
December 20X1:
€
Assets
Inventories
400
Trade receivables
2 500
Cash
1 500
4 400
Liabilities and equity
Payables
3 200
Equity
1 200
4 400
€
Cash sales
8 500
Credit sales
14 000
Receipts from clients
13 250
Payments to creditors
17 500
Purchases of goods on credit
18 400
Overheads paid cash
3 000
During 20X2 the following business was done:

Part 2  basic financial statements
128
You are asked to:
	
(a)	 Enter the opening statement of financial position and subsequent 
transactions on a spreadsheet (or any other working paper).
	
(b)	 Prepare a statement of profit or loss and statement of financial 
position as at 31 December 20X2 (closing inventory was €600).
4.	 The inventory of Lowhill Gravel Company on 30 April 20X4 shows 500 tons 
of gravel at €7.00 per ton. A physical inventory on 31 May 20X4 shows a 
total of 600 tons on hand. Revenue from sales of gravel for May 20X4 totals 
€18 000. All sales took place after the purchases for the month of May were 
made. The following purchases were made during May 20X4:
Purchase date
Tons
€/ton
5 May
1 000
8.00
15 May
250
9.00
25 May
300
10.00
You are asked to:
	
(a)	 Compute the inventory value as of 31 May 20X4, using (i) FIFO, (ii) 
LIFO and (iii) the weighted average inventory valuation method.
	
(b)	 Compute the gross profit using each method.
5.	 The owner of Mansfield Supply Co. Ltd is considering a change of account-
ing policy as regards closing inventory valuation. For the first three years of 
the business the company has used FIFO but the owner is now considering a 
change to weighted average. Condensed financial statements are given below.
	
You are asked to provide alternative statements based on the alternative 
inventory valuations.
	
The relevant year-end inventory valuations according to the new method 
would be 31 December 20X1 €7400, 31 December 20X2 €9800, 31 December 
20X3 €6900.
Statement of profit or loss for year ended:
31 Dec. 20X1
31 Dec. 20X2
31 Dec. 20X3
€
€
€
€
€
€
Sales
120 000
150 000
110 000
Opening inventory
—
6 300
8 100
Purchases
68 000
82 900
63 400
Closing inventory
6 300
8 100
6 700
Cost of goods sold
   61 700
81 100
64 800
Gross profit
58 300
68 900
45 200
Distribution/admin.  
Expenses
   59 100
64 800
44 800
Net profit/(loss)
(800)
4 100
400

Chapter 4  Accruals accounting
129
Statement of financial position as at:
31 Dec. 20X1 
€
31 Dec. 20X2 
€
31 Dec. 20X3 
€
Non-current assets (net) 
36 000
32 000
28 000
Inventory
6 300
8 100
6 700
Cash
2 700
10 900
13 300
Total
45 000
51 000
48 000
Equity
Share capital
40 000
40 000
40 000
Reserves
800
3 300
Profit/(loss) for year
(800)
4 100
400
39 200
43 300
43 700
Trade payables
5 800
7 700
4 300
Total
45 000
51 000
48 000
6.	 The accounting records of RobinHood SA show the following inventory, pur-
chases and sales data for the month of April:
Inventory
April 1
90 units @ €4
€360
Purchases
April 2
60 units @ €3.50
€210
April 15
40 units @ €6
€240
April 27
80 units @ €4.50
€360
Sales
April 7
70 units
April 18
30 units
April 24
40 units
A
B
C
D
E
Opening inventory
...
236
647
9 375
5 296
Closing inventory
12 200
110
…
8 760
5 820
Purchases
110 500
937
5 122
76 420
…
Cost of goods sold
108 950
…
4 928
…
33 996
	
The company uses a periodic inventory system.
	
The physical inventory count on April 30 amounts to 130 units of inventory.
	
Required: Determine the cost of inventory on hand at April 30 and the 
cost of goods sold for April under (a) the FIFO method; (b) the LIFO 
method; and (c) the weighted average method
7.	 Complete the missing figures:

Part 2  basic financial statements
130
8.	 The following transactions took place at a wholesale wine merchants during 
the month of August:
You are asked to:
	
(a)	 compute the closing inventory according to FIFO, LIFO and 
weighted average assumptions;
	
(b)	 compute gross profit under each assumption.
9.	 Pino Fabrics manufactures three main products and provides the following 
data with regard to its year-end inventories:
01 Opening inventory 
72 crates @ €20
02 Purchase
20 crates @ €21
04 Sale
40 crates @ €30
05 Purchase
60 crates @ €23
09 Sale 
60 crates @ €30
12 Sale
35 crates @ €30
13 Purchase
40 crates @ €24
17 Sale
10 crates @ €32
20 Purchase
50 crates @ €25
22 Sale
30 crates @ €32
23 Sale
30 crates @ €32
24 Purchase
45 crates @ €26
28 Sale
40 crates @ €32
	
You are asked to:
	
(a)	 apply a net realizable value test;
	
(b)	 propose inventory value adjustments.
Product A
Product B
Product C
Production cost
400
180
240
Selling price
600
240
440
Additional cost to enable sale
—
40
160
Marketing costs
140
40
40
Number of items
20 000
18 000
10 000

131
C H A P T E R  5
Non-current assets  
and depreciation
In this chapter we are going to look at how the costs of productive facilities, 
computers and other equipment which are used up by the business are passed 
through the statement of profit or loss and disappear from the statement of financial 
position as part of the matching process. The chapter starts with an overview of 
the general principles of asset valuation. We then consider the main categories of 
non-current or long-term assets and their specific recognition and measurement 
characteristics.
	 Introduction
	 General valuation principles of non-current assets
	 Expensing non-current assets
	 Accounting for depreciation
	 Specific valuation principles by type of non-current assets
n	 Intangible assets
	 Tangible assets
	 Investments
	 Summary
	 Discussion questions
	 Assignments
Chapter Structure

Part 2  Basic financial statements
132
We have earlier used the model of the company as an empty shell where finance 
is put in, the finance is used to buy productive capacity and then profits are made 
(one hopes) by using this capacity. However, the productive capacity (i.e. long-term 
assets such as buildings or machinery) is used up over time in a company’s opera-
tions. Accordingly that use must be recognized as an expense in the statement of 
profit or loss (income statement/profit and loss account), and adjustments made to 
the value of the assets in the statement of financial position (balance sheet). The 
profit measure each year would be an over-estimate, if no attempt were made to 
match the using up of the productive capacity with the revenues that are derived 
from its use.
Just as the inventory of finished goods is consumed and expensed in the course 
of a company’s operations, many other assets are also consumed – although they 
are frequently consumed at such a slow pace that it may not at first be evident 
that they should be considered as an expense. Indeed, in the 19th century, early 
companies such as the railways took the view that their non-current assets had 
such a long potential life that only repairs required to maintain them at the ap-
propriate level should be expensed – no reduction in accounting value from the 
original cost was provided.
However, most long-lived assets are eventually consumed. For example, a sim-
ple retail operation might take place in a shop on the main street of a town. If 
the business owns the premises outright, you might ask whether the premises are 
in any way consumed during business operations. Well, the shop front will dete-
riorate in condition (wood or aluminium has a finite life) but, perhaps more im-
portant, the business may well depend on an attractive, modern presentation to 
attract customers and therefore it will be necessary to modernize the shop front 
every five years or so. In either case, there is some limitation on the life of a long-
term asset and it will ultimately have to be replaced. If the asset is replaced by a 
new one, it follows logically that the old asset has been consumed and this ex-
pense should be recognized.
For some long-term assets the consumption may be clearer: a business that 
uses vans for distributing its product or cars for its sales force to visit the custom-
ers has assets whose life is limited. Say a van is bought for €30 000, is used in the 
business for two years and then sold for €10 000: it is quite clear that in those two 
years the business has consumed €20 000-worth of van. For the accountant there 
is a problem: there is an expense of €20 000 covering two years which (a) must 
be recognized in the statement of profit or loss as such, (b) reflects a diminution 
of asset value which should therefore be reflected in the value of the asset in the 
statement of financial position, and (c) needs to be matched with the operations 
to comply with the matching principle and therefore should be allocated across 
two years of operations.
Looked at from another point of view, every asset is an unexpired expense and 
at every accounting date a company must review to what extent each individual 
asset has been consumed during the financial year. The expense must be recog-
nized (brought into the accounts), offset against revenue for a more accurate mea-
sure of net income and the revised value of the asset shown in the statement of 
financial position. In principle, all assets can be regarded as a bundle of goods or 
Introduction

Chapter 5  Non-current assets and depreciation
133
services which are held by the company for subsequent use in the business. As 
the goods or services are used, some expense must be recognized and the unex-
pired expenses carried forward (this is in fact an important point about asset val-
ues under historical cost accounting: they are simply expenses of future periods; 
they do not represent any independent valuation of the asset’s ‘worth’ in any 
external sense).
We can divide the accounting issues to be considered into two parts:
	
1.	How do we determine the appropriate value of an asset at the point of 
acquisition?
	
2.	How do we then systematically recognize the using up or expensing of the 
asset period by period? (The deduction of the expense from the opening 
value will provide a revised value in the statement of financial position at 
the end of each period.)
IAS 16, Property, Plant and Equipment, addresses these questions both in general 
and more specifically for tangible assets. Property, plant and equipment are tan-
gible assets held for more than one accounting period (in this sense they are 
‘non-current’ or ‘long-term’) and used in the production or supply of goods and 
services, or for administration.
Non-current assets are initially recorded at cost, which includes all expenditure to 
get the item ready for use. At first sight there might not seem to be any difficulty 
about the initial valuation of an asset. When a company buys a van, for example, 
a price is agreed and paid and that surely is the cost of the asset and the value at 
which it will initially enter the accounting system. In essence, that argument has 
much to support it but, if we look a little closer, we will see that there is a need to 
define more carefully what the asset has cost – or rather what aspect of the cost is 
an asset, and what an expense.
General valuation principles of non-current assets
IASB FRAMEWORK – DEFINITION AND RECOGNITION OF AN ASSET
Recall that the IASB Framework defines an asset as a resource controlled by 
a company as a result of past events from which future economic benefits are 
expected to flow to the company. The asset will be recognized if (a) it is probable 
that future economic benefits associated with the element will flow to the entity 
and (b) the item has a cost or value that can be measured reliably. The point is 
that assets represent future economic benefits and these will be gradually con-
sumed through the use of the asset.
Applied to a van, this means that, provided that the van is useful in the com-
pany’s operations and its purchase value is certain, it should be treated as an 
asset. As the van is used, the amount of future economic benefits is decreasing 
and the decrease of the economic benefits will be accounted for as an expense.
Between the lines

Part 2  Basic financial statements
134
Supposing the van purchase was invoiced to the company (as is usually the 
case) at an ‘on the road’ price of €30 000, the invoice would then be made up of a 
number of items, as shown below:
Van supply
€
Basic vehicle
29 300
Special gear box
1 300
Petrol
50
Annual vehicle tax
250
30 900
less Discount
(900)
Net payable
30 000
Should the van enter the books at the invoice price of €30 000? To answer that 
we have to consider whether all the items paid for on the invoice are really assets, 
i.e. does everything included within the €30 000 purchase price have a life longer 
than the end of the current accounting period? In this case, there are two items, 
the petrol and the annual tax, which are ordinary running expenses which will 
be consumed within the current accounting year, so we should immediately treat 
those as an expense for operating the van. The discount may also be a problem. 
Clearly in this case the amount of discount has been given to arrive at a round 
sum price, so arguably the expensed element, petrol and tax, should be reduced 
by some of the discount. Against that, it is unlikely that the dealer intended to 
offer discounts on petrol or tax, and there is a strong argument for applying the 
discount to the asset value alone. In this case the costs would be allocated as 
shown below:
Van asset
€
Basic
29 300
Gear box
1 300
less Discount
(900)
Long-term asset:
29 700
Operating expenses:
Petrol
50
Annual tax
250
Total invoiced
30 000
Let us consider one further complication: suppose that the company then em-
ploys a sign-writer to paint some advertising on the side of the van and this costs 
a further €500. Should that be treated as an expense or part of the cost of the 

Chapter 5  Non-current assets and depreciation
135
asset? Is there any difference in nature between what the sign-writer contributed 
to the final product and what the vehicle manufacturer contributed? The answer 
has to be ‘no’, since both are costs associated with providing the van in the form 
required by the company. The final asset value of the van in the company’s books 
would therefore be €30 200: €29 700 being the cost from the dealer and €500 be-
ing other costs associated with reaching the desired final asset.
Would it make any difference to the asset value if the sign-writing on the van 
had been done by the company’s own staff? Suppose the €500 consisted of €100 
for paint and €400 for staff wages, would that influence the asset value? Logi-
cally the source of the cost should have no bearing, and that is the case here. If 
a company uses some of its own resources in creating an asset, the cost of those 
resources becomes part of the cost of the asset. This is the same principle as that 
applied in manufacturing accounts (see Chapter 4) – just as wage and other costs 
were allocated to the value of the inventory of manufactured goods, so here the 
cost of bringing the van to the condition in which it will be used is added to its 
accounting value.
We can therefore go some way to defining what we understand by the cost of 
the asset. It consists of all the costs associated with creating the asset in the form 
required by the company to start productive use.
This principle applies in general to the measurement of all assets in the frame-
work of historical cost accounting. The total asset value recorded can include not 
only costs paid to a supplier, but also extra items which have all contributed to 
the bringing into service of the asset. For example, a manufacturing company 
might well buy some machine tools which are installed in its factory by its own 
maintenance staff. In that case the asset value at the point where they come into 
service will include the amount (exclusive of any expenses to do with operations) 
paid to the supplier, cost of delivery on site, cost of installation including mainte-
nance staff wages and so on.
The basic test in allocating cost between asset value and expense is, was the 
cost a part of bringing the asset into service? If so, it would be allocated to asset 
value. Subsequent expenditure is added to the cost of an existing asset only if it 
will produce economic benefits beyond its originally assessed performance, for 
example:
	
n	 extending the useful life or capacity of a plant;
	
n	 upgrading a machine to substantially improve the quality of its output;
	
n	 adopting new processes to substantially reduce production costs.
Subsequent expenditure on day-to-day servicing of the long-term asset, includ-
ing the cost of small repair parts (often referred to as costs of repair and mainte-
nance), is recognized in profit or loss as incurred.
Normally, then, the initial value of an asset will be its cost, but this is subject 
to a limitation as in the case of inventory valuation. This valuation is subject to 
the constraint that these costs should not exceed the future economic benefits 
which will derive from using the asset. Prudence requires that asset values should 
not be overstated in the statement of financial position. For assets which are 
held for use in the business (as opposed to being held for resale), the rule is that 
they should be held at whichever is the lower of cost or recoverable amount. 
Recoverable in this sense is normally taken to mean through use in the business. 
To use our van example, the fact that the van had been painted with advertising 

Part 2  Basic financial statements
136
on the side would immediately reduce its resale value, but the company was not 
intending to resell it. The intention was to keep the van and use it in the busi-
ness for deliveries etc. – so its cost will be recovered through being operated as 
part of the business.
Nonetheless, non-current assets are subject to special write-downs when there 
has been some ‘permanent impairment’ of their value. This might occur if, for ex-
ample, a company built a factory for manufacturing microchips, only to find that 
demand falls away – the cost of the factory is unlikely to be recovered through 
manufacturing the chips and its value should be reduced. We will come back to 
the issue of impairment testing of assets in Chapter 6.
Companies acquire assets in order to generate profits by their use. Such operating 
assets are consumed by the business over a period of time: machines wear out. 
Expensing non-current assets
STANDARDS
IAS 16 – ELEMENTS OF ACQUISITION COST (extracts)
15. An item of property, plant and equipment that qualifies for recognition as 
an asset shall be measured at its cost.
16. The cost of an item of property, plant and equipment comprises:
(a)	 its purchase price, including import duties and non-refundable pur-
chase taxes, after deducting trade discounts and rebates.
(b)	any costs directly attributable to bringing the asset to the location and 
condition necessary for it to be capable of operating in the manner in-
tended by management.
(c)	 the initial estimate of the costs of dismantling and removing the item 
and restoring the site on which it is located, the obligation for which an 
entity incurs either when the item is acquired or as a consequence of 
having used the item during a particular period for purposes other than 
to produce inventories during that period.
17. Examples of directly attributable costs are:
(a)	 costs of employee benefits arising directly from the construction or ac-
quisition of the item of property, plant and equipment;
(b)	costs of site preparation;
(c)	 initial delivery and handling costs;
(d)	installation and assembly costs;
(e)	 costs of testing whether the asset is functioning properly, after deduct-
ing the net proceeds from selling any items produced while bringing 
the asset to that location and condition (such as samples produced 
when testing equipment); and
(f)	 professional fees.
Source: IAS 16, Property, Plant and Equipment

Chapter 5  Non-current assets and depreciation
137
The cost of these assets must therefore be expensed in order to match with the 
revenues produced by using them.
Although that may seem potentially quite a complex operation, in fact systems 
have been evolved which deal with it pragmatically. In the first place it should be 
made clear that the problem is again one of allocation. That is, accountants are 
not concerned primarily with assessing the reducing value of the asset in external 
terms, rather they are concerned with allocating the original cost of the asset over 
the period of its use (depreciating the asset).
You should note that accounting doctrine distinguishes between two differ-
ent kinds of reduction in the accounting values of assets: there is (1) systematic 
expensing of the cost of an asset over the period which benefits from its use – 
depreciation or amortization – which takes place routinely every year; and 
(2) special write-downs where, usually at reporting date, all assets should be con-
sidered for ‘impairment’ and their depreciated accounting value compared with 
their recoverable value. Any excess must be removed, but this is an unusual event.
The important elements are that the asset has a value at the point where it 
comes into the company and that, when the company has finished with the asset, 
it may also have a resale or scrap value at that time. The difference between the 
acquisition cost and the disposal revenue (depreciable amount) is the expense 
which has to be recognized and allocated in some reasonable way across the fi-
nancial years when the asset remains in use. This is another significant estimate in 
the financial statements where we can only say for certain what costs really were 
when an asset is sold, sometimes many years after it entered service. This alloca-
tion of cost has significant effects on measured profitability which in turn may im-
pact upon taxation. In some jurisdictions (the Netherlands, UK, USA) depreciation 
for tax purposes is calculated separately from that for financial reporting purposes. 
However, in most mainland European countries the rate of depreciation charged 
in the financial statements is heavily influenced by tax considerations. In France, 
for example, the tax authorities will look at what is charged in the annual finan-
cial statements as the upper limit of what can be charged for tax purposes. We will 
discuss below the theoretical basis of depreciation, but you should be aware that 
there is a strong link with taxation in many countries, and therefore accountants 
will be likely to look at the agreed tax rates rather than apply accounting stan-
dards. Put another way, the accounting standards are sufficiently flexible for it to 
be possible to comply with both tax and accounting rules, but the possibility of 
deferring tax by using high depreciation rates will cause a company to be perhaps 
more prudent in its estimates than might otherwise be the case . . .
STANDARDS
IAS 16 – DEPRECIATION ACCOUNTING (extracts)
50. The depreciable amount of an asset shall be allocated on a systematic  
basis over its useful life.
53. The depreciable amount of an asset is determined after deducting its re-
sidual value. In practice, the residual value of an asset is often insignificant 
and therefore immaterial in the calculation of the depreciable amount.

Part 2  Basic financial statements
138
Reverting to our example of a van, bought for €30 000 and sold for €10 000 
two years later, the expense is €20 000 (difference between entry and exit values) 
and the decision to be made is how to allocate that expense over the two years 
to match the use of the van with the revenues generated by its use. (It is always 
a temptation to think that depreciating an asset has something to do with ap-
proximating the balance sheet value to a declining second-hand value. This is not 
the case in traditional historical cost accounting: depreciating is a cost allocation 
process, which equally is why assets in the balance sheet should be thought of 
largely as unexpired costs rather than values – even if some of them have substan-
tial resale potential.)
56. The future economic benefits embodied in an asset are consumed by an 
entity principally through its use. However, other factors, such as technical 
or commercial obsolescence and wear and tear while an asset remains idle, 
often result in the diminution of the economic benefits that might have been 
obtained from the asset. Consequently, all the following factors are consid-
ered in determining the useful life of an asset:
(a)	 expected usage of the asset. Usage is assessed by reference to the as-
set’s expected capacity or physical output.
(b)	expected physical wear and tear, which depends on operational factors 
such as the number of shifts for which the asset is to be used and the 
repair and maintenance programme, and the care and maintenance of 
the asset while idle.
(c)	 technical or commercial obsolescence arising from changes or improve-
ments in production, or from a change in the market demand for the 
product or service output of the asset.
(d)	legal or similar limits on the use of the asset, such as the expiry dates of 
related leases.
60. The depreciation method used shall reflect the pattern in which the asset’s 
future economic benefits are expected to be consumed by the entity.
61. The depreciation method applied to an asset shall be reviewed at least at 
each financial year-end, if there has been a significant change in the expected 
pattern of consumption of the future economic benefits embodied in the as-
set, the method shall be changed to reflect the changed pattern.
73. The financial statements shall disclose, for each class of property, plant 
and equipment:
(a)	 the measurement bases used for determining the gross carrying 
amount;
(b)	the depreciation methods used;
(c)	 the useful lives or the depreciation rates used; 
(d)	the gross carrying amount and the accumulated depreciation (aggre-
gated with accumulated impairment losses) at the beginning and end of 
the period;
(e)	 a reconciliation of the carrying amount at the beginning and end of the 
period.
Source: IAS 16, Property, Plant and Equipment

Chapter 5  Non-current assets and depreciation
139
Of course, the accountant cannot know precisely how many years an asset 
will remain in use, nor its precise scrap value, at the time when a decision has 
to be made on allocating the expense. These therefore have to be estimated and 
corrections made (sometimes years later) if the estimates prove to be wrong. (Re-
member that the process of measuring the annual profit is in any event one of 
estimation – a question of trying to work out what proportion of the firm’s life-
time profit was earned in that 12-month period.)
There are several methods used to calculate depreciation on a systematic basis 
to match the expensing of the asset with its use. Broadly these fall into one or 
other of two kinds: those which allocate over time and those which try to match 
depreciation to use.
With the time-based approach, having arrived at the acquisition value of the asset, 
an estimate is made both of the likely working life of the asset within the company 
and of its expected scrap or salvage value at the end of that working life. The difference 
between the original asset cost and the expected scrap value is called the ‘depreciable 
amount’ of the asset – that is, the total expense to be allocated over the working life. 
One of the methods we shall now consider will then be selected to allocate the depre-
ciable amount over the working life of the asset. We shall look first at these methods, 
and then at the way in which depreciation is reported in the financial statements.
Straight-line depreciation
This method is the one most favoured by companies, probably because it is the 
simplest and easiest to use. The straight-line method, as its name implies, assumes 
that the use of the asset is uniform throughout its working life, and therefore al-
locates the expense accordingly.
The annual expense (annual depreciation) is found simply:
Depreciable amount
Estimated useful life 
5 Annual depreciation expense
For example, supposing a company buys desks and other office furniture for 
€5000, and estimates that they will be used for ten years and have no scrap value. 
The annual depreciation would be charged as follows:
Depreciable amount: €5000 less 0 5 €5000
Useful life: 10 years
Annual depreciation charge: 5000
10
5 €500
This method is most appropriate to assets whose consumption takes place in a 
uniform manner. Examples of this would be assets such as a shop front, a build-
ing, a lease premium, furniture and so on.
Diminishing balance method
A method which allocates a high proportion of expense in the early life of the 
asset is the diminishing balance method (also called reducing balance method). 
This uses a method which gives a geometric reduction in the charge in succeeding 

Part 2  Basic financial statements
140
years. A basic difference is that the annual depreciation charge is calculated by 
applying a percentage not to the depreciable amount but to the asset value after 
deduction of all previous years’ depreciation. The net value of the asset after de-
duction of the accumulated depreciation might be called the balance of the asset, 
which diminishes year by year, hence diminishing balance. (The net value after 
depreciation is also known as net book value or carrying value.)
There is a mathematical formula for calculating the depreciation rate to be used:
            d 5 1 –  
R
A∙
n
	
with:	
d 5 depreciation rate
	
n 5 number of accounting periods
	
R 5 residual value
	
A 5 acquisition cost
This rate is then applied each year to the balance of the asset at the beginning of 
the year in order to arrive at the annual depreciation expense.
To take a concrete example, suppose that an asset was acquired for €1050 and 
was expected to have a five-year useful life and a scrap value of €50; the annual rate 
would be 45.6 per cent. This is applied to the asset’s net value each year as follows:
Net book value 
start of year  
€
Depreciation  
expense  
€
Net book value end 
of year  
€
1
1050 3
45.6%
5 479
(1050 – 479 5) 571
2
571 3
45.6%
5 260
(571 – 260 5) 311
3
311 3
45.6%
5 142
(311 – 142 5) 169
4
169 3
45.6%
  5   77
(169 – 77 5) 92
5
92 3
45.6%
5   42
(92 – 42 5) 50
The diminishing balance method allocates a high proportion of expense to the 
early years of the asset’s life. It is therefore suitable for assets whose future service 
life is subject to uncertainty, such as computer hardware or software, or which 
have a high maintenance cost in the latter part of their lives. At a practical level, 
the diminishing balance method is not used very widely by companies and nor-
mally, where it is used, the annual depreciation rate is approximated (in the above 
example a company would probably accept 45 per cent as the rate). Very often, 
diminishing balance is used when the tax authorities allow it (governments like 
to collect taxes but they also sometimes use tax to influence behaviour, and high 
initial depreciation encourages companies to invest and therefore keep up with 
technology and create employment in the industries which make equipment).
Tax depreciation
As we have noted, tax rules can have a potentially distorting effect on the applica-
tion of depreciation rules and consequently on comparisons between companies. 

Chapter 5  Non-current assets and depreciation
141
Take the following example where the profit after all expenses but before depre-
ciation is €20 000 and the tax rate is 25 per cent. A company buys a vehicle for 
€30 000; the tax rules say that this may be depreciated at 40 per cent diminishing 
balance without regard to residual value, and the company estimates it will use the 
vehicle for four years, when it can be sold for an estimated €10 000. The two ap-
proaches would give the following results:
COMPANY REPORT
LUFTHANSA – TANGIBLE ASSETS (extract)
Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Tangible assets used in business operations for longer than one year are valued 
at cost, less regular straight-line depreciation. The cost of production includes 
all costs directly attributable to the manufacturing process as well as appropri-
ate portions of the indirect costs relating to this process.
As a result of last year’s amendment to IAS 23, borrowing costs are now cap-
italized if they are incurred in close connection with the financing of the acquisi-
tion or production of a qualifying asset. In the reporting year borrowing costs of 
EUR 2m were capitalized. The useful lives applied to tangible assets correspond 
to their estimated/expected useful lives in the Group.
New aircraft and spare engines are depreciated over a period of 12 years to a 
residual value of 15 per cent.
A useful life of between 20 and 45 years is assumed for buildings, whereby 
buildings, fixtures and fittings on rented premises are depreciated according to 
the terms of the lease or over a shorter useful life. Depreciation rates are mainly 
between 10 and 20 per cent per annum. A useful life of up to ten years is fixed 
for plant and machinery. Operating and office equipment is depreciated over 
three to ten years in normal circumstances.
Source: Lufthansa, Annual Report 2010
Profit before 
depreciation
Annual 
depreciation
Profit after 
depreciation
Tax at 
25%
Tax method
Year 1
20 000
(12 000)
8 000
2 000
Year 2
20 000
(7 200)
12 800
3 200
Year 3
20 000
(800)
19 200
4 800
Year 4
20 000
—
20 000
5 000
Totals
80 000
(20 000)
60 000
15 000
Straight-line/economic
Year 1
20 000
(5 000)
15 000
3 750
Year 2
20 000
(5 000)
15 000
3 750
Year 3
20 000
(5 000)
15 000
3 750
Year 4
20 000
(5 000)
15 000
3 750
Totals
80 000
(20 000)
60 000
15 000

Part 2  Basic financial statements
142
This illustrates fairly well what tax planning is about – both sequences give 
the same four-year total deductions, but the tax method reduces early profits and 
pushes tax payments towards later in the life of the asset, so the company is get-
ting the maximum benefit in financing the asset. Of course, from a management 
perspective, the tax is distorting the quality of the information, turning a sta-
ble situation (same before-depreciation profit each year) into the appearance of 
a company which is becoming more profitable year on year (after-depreciation 
profit gets bigger over the four years).
This said, the distortion is mitigated in a large company because this will have 
a portfolio of assets, some of which are changed each year. A company with four 
vehicles, one of which is replaced each year, will have the same total annual de-
preciation (€20 000 every year) whichever method is used. Another point is that 
while in some jurisdictions accelerated methods of depreciation are available to 
help companies, they must be used for the shareholder accounts. However, as 
Special tax method
It may be useful to know that in some countries, notably France and Germany, 
the tax authorities use a depreciation method which is a combination of diminish-
ing balance and straight-line methods. The problem with diminishing balance is 
that it cannot, by definition, depreciate an asset to zero, and the method if applied 
indefinitely leaves a very long tail of small annual charges. The tax authorities get 
around this by permitting a combination method where the company uses declin-
ing balance in the early years and then switches to straight-line once this gives a 
higher annual charge, and this is applied without regard to any salvage value.
Year
Opening 
book value
Rate
Annual 
charge
Closing 
book value 
Remaining  
life
1
50 000
40%DB
20 000
30 000
4 years
2
30 000
40%DB
12 000
18 000
3 years
3
18 000
40%DB
7 200
10 800
2 years
4
10 800
50%SL
5 400
5 400
1 year
5
5 400
50%SL
5 400
—
     0
The depreciation calculation switches from diminishing balance (DB) to straight-
line (SL) in year 4 in this case. This is because at that point the diminishing bal-
ance calculation would give a lower annual charge (€10 800 3 0.4 5 4320). 
Applying straight-line to the asset value as it stands at that point (€10 800) gives 
two years at €5400 and enables the asset to be depreciated to zero, whereas the 
strict application of diminishing balance would leave the asset with a value of 
€3888 at the end of the fifth year.
Between the lines

Chapter 5  Non-current assets and depreciation
143
we shall see later in the book, if these companies are part of a group, the group 
financial statements can be prepared using normal economic methods such as 
straight-line.
There are other time-based methods, but these are the two which are classically 
used. There are potentially many usage-based methods. For example, it would be 
relatively simple to allocate depreciation on a van according to the number of 
kilo-metres travelled in the year. In practice such methods are rarely used except 
by companies which extract minerals, particularly oil companies.
Units of production method
Mineral resource companies usually expense the mineral asset as it is extracted 
for sale – this is called the depletion method or the units of production method. Sup-
posing a company acquires a quarry for extracting ore, and the acquisition cost 
is €5m, the unexpired expense represented by this asset would be the un-mined 
ore available on the site, and it is relatively simple to allocate the acquisition cost 
on the basis of the amount of ore extracted. If the engineers estimated that the 
quarry contained 10m tonnes of ore, the cost of the quarry could be divided over 
the resource:
 € 5m acquisition cost
10m tonnes ore in quarry 
5 Depreciation of €0.50 per tonne
As the ore was extracted, the quarry asset could be expensed in direct relation to 
the ore. So if extraction was as follows:
Year
Tonnes extracted
1
500 000
2
1 200 000
3
1 400 000
etc.
the annual charge for depreciation would be:
Year 
Annual depreciation
1
(500 000 3 €0.50) €250 000
2
(1 200 000 3 €0.50) €600 000
3
(1 400 000 3 €0.50) €700 000 etc.
Clearly the accuracy of the units of production method depends upon the ac-
curacy of the estimate of the ore in the quarry, and this method is only suitable 
for assets where such estimates of the resource are possible and the utilization of 
the resource can be monitored in that way. However, it is a method of allocating 
expense which most closely follows the economic use of the asset, rather than 
working on an assumed utilization pattern.

Part 2  Basic financial statements
144
Components approach
An asset may be composed of several component parts with different useful 
lives or providing benefits to the company in a different pattern. This would 
imply the use of different depreciation rates and methods for each compo-
nent. IAS 16 requires that the company records its property, plant and equip-
ment in sufficient detail to recognize separately components with different 
useful lives. Subsequent expenditure that is incurred to replace or renew a 
separately recognized asset component will be treated as the acquisition of 
a new asset. The overall useful life of an electricity plant, for example, can 
be estimated to be 30 years, but one of its major component parts, a steam 
generator, has to be replaced every ten years. The steam generators will there-
fore be recognized separately and depreciated over a ten-year period, while 
the other plant facilities will be depreciated over a 30-year period. When the 
steam generator is replaced after ten years, the replacement is recognized as a 
new (component) asset.
Excess depreciation as a hidden reserve
Depreciation is also one of the ways in which companies which wish to follow 
highly ‘prudent’ accounting may reduce their profitability. This is done simply 
by charging excess depreciation against assets and profit. The consequence is that 
the company appears to have fewer assets than are actually in use, and these are 
one form of hidden reserve. In fact, accelerated depreciation for tax purposes (of-
fered by governments as an incentive to companies to invest) has the effect of 
writing off assets while they are still in use, but some companies (rarely if ever 
those listed on stock exchanges!) go further than that.
Every year part of the asset cost is expensed in the statement of profit or loss 
and the statement of financial position shows a reduced net value for the as-
set. In record-keeping terms, though, the net value of the asset is preserved 
through two accounts: opening (acquisition) cost and accumulated deprecia-
tion. As depreciation is expensed, the asset account is not reduced directly. 
Rather a separate, linked account is opened to accumulate the value written 
off. In the published statement of financial position a company must disclose 
both the original cost of an asset and the cumulative amount written off (this 
detail is usually found in the notes rather than directly in the balance sheet, 
but that does not change the principle). This disclosure is facilitated if the in-
formation is kept on two separate data files in the records – in a large company 
it would be impossible to give the information without taking that kind of 
precaution.
If we take a tangible asset with a gross acquisition cost of €15 000, an expected 
useful life of five years and no scrap value, it would be depreciated at a rate of 
€3000 a year on the straight-line basis. The table below shows how the book value 
of the asset would appear over the years.
Accounting for depreciation

Chapter 5  Non-current assets and depreciation
145
For 20X1, the depreciation charge would be accounted for as follows:
Statement of profit or loss
–3 000 (reduce equity)
Accumulated depreciation
–3 000 (reduce assets)
The net book value of the tangible asset is the sum of the tangible asset account and 
the accumulated depreciation account relating to that asset at any given point.
Asset – gross cost
15 000
Accumulated depreciation
–3 000
Net book value at end 20X1
12 000
It follows from this that the accounting records are likely to have two accounts 
involving depreciation in any one year: the income statement expense through 
which the appropriate part of the asset value is charged against profits in the year, 
and the reduction of the asset which is accumulated in a separate data file from 
the asset and accumulates over the life of the asset the total amount by which it 
has been charged against profits at any given moment.
The accumulated depreciation is simply the reduction of the asset value, but it 
is held in a separate account in order to facilitate disclosure. It always represents 
amounts which have already been expensed. Most corporate disclosure rules re-
quire that the business shows both the original cost of the assets and the accumu-
lated depreciation.
In some sophisticated accounting systems the regular depreciation expense is 
recognized on a month-by-month basis and is written into a monthly accounting 
programme within a computerized system, so that it takes place automatically. 
However, in general terms it is an adjustment to the financial records which must 
be made at every balance sheet date to recognize the consumption of some of the 
unexpired expenses which the company’s assets represent.
Note that the management accounts of a company should normally make a 
deduction for depreciation in arriving at monthly profit and loss figures for oper-
ating units. A unit which makes a ‘profit’ before depreciation, but not enough to 
absorb the depreciation, is still making some contribution to the company’s over-
heads, but in the long term is obviously not making sufficient money to repay 
Year 
Annual 
depreciation charge 
€
Gross 
cost 
€
Accumulated 
depreciation 
€
Net book 
value 
€
20X1 
3 000
15 000
  3 000
12 000
20X2 
3 000
15 000
  6 000
  9 000
20X3 
3 000
15 000
  9 000
  6 000
20X4 
3 000
15 000
12 000
  3 000
20X5 
3 000
15 000
15 000
         0

Part 2  Basic financial statements
146
COMPANY REPORT
NESTLé – RECONCILIATION DETAILS ON NET CARRYING AMOUNT OF PROPERTY,  
PLANT AND EQUIPMENT (extracts)
Notes to the consolidated financial statements
7. Property, plant and equipment
In millions of CHF
2007
Land  
and 
buildings
Machinery 
and 
equipment
Tools 
furniture 
and other 
equipment
Vehicles
Total
Gross value At 1 January 2010
12931
25562
7717
876
47086
Currency retranslations
(961)
(2722)
(670)
(95)
(4448)
Capital expenditure(3)
872
2468
893
151
4384
Disposals
(137)
(688)
(541)
(65)
(1431)
Reclassified as held for sale
(48)
(31)
(5)
—
(84)
Modification of the scope of consolidation
148
186
(9)
2
327
At 31 December 2010
12805
24775
7385
869
45834
Currency retranslations
(104)
(719)
(187)
(21)
(1031)
Capital expenditure (3)
1022
2643
950
164
4779
Disposals
(140)
(624)
(507)
(65)
(1336)
Reclassified as held for sale
—
5
1
—
6
Modification of the scope of consolidation
526
392
86
14
1018
At 31 December 2011
14109
26472
7728
961
49720
Accumulated depreciation and 
impairments
At 1 January 2010
(5014)
(14596)
(5384)
(493)
(25487)
Currency retranslations
434
1461
512
52
2459
Depreciation
(370)
(1319)
(765)
(98)
(2552)
Impairments
(38)
(131)
(17)
—
(186)
Disposals
107
641
492
56
1296
Reclassified as held for sale
30
29
4
—
63
Modification of the scope of consolidation
—
1
10
—
11
At 31 December 2010
(4851)
(13914)
(5148)
(483)
(24396)
Currency retranslations
76
286
125
14
501
Depreciation
(341)
(1263)
(728)
(90)
(2422)
Impairments
(51)
(81)
(17)
(1)
(150)
Disposals
99
525
490
56
1170
Reclassified as held for sale
—
(5)
(1)
—
(6)
Modification of the scope of consolidation
—
3
1
—
4
At 31 December 2011
(5068)
(14449)
(5278)
(504)
(25299)
Net at 31 December 2010
7954
10861
2237
386
21438
Net at 31 December 2011
9041
12023
2450
457
23971
Including borrowing costs.

Chapter 5  Non-current assets and depreciation
147
its investment, let alone add to the value of the company. At the same time, the 
basis on which the depreciation charge is calculated should be checked because, 
as we have seen, this may not accurately represent the economic consumption of 
the assets concerned, which therefore distorts the performance measure.
We have dealt with depreciation as simply a question of absorbing the costs of 
the company’s productive capacity as it is used up. This is generally how deprecia-
tion is regarded these days, but you may come across alternative notions which 
are not necessarily incompatible.
For example, in the past some accountants considered depreciation rather as a 
means of building up a replacement fund to buy new equipment when the old is 
worn out. This leads to the idea that instead of reducing the cost of the asset year 
by year in the statement of financial position, you create a provision in the financ-
ing side which will be used to buy the new asset. The snags with this are that:
	
a.	 The user has no way of knowing how old the assets are because in the as-
set side of the statement of financial position they are all shown at original 
cost, no matter how old they are, and there is no direct link with the re-
placement provisions in the financing side of the balance sheet.
	
b.	Would the company necessarily want to replace a particular asset at the end 
of its life? Business changes rapidly.
	
c.	 Would the same asset still be available?
	
d.	How do you know what it would cost? (This argument also leads to the ar-
gument that one should use replacement cost as the basis of depreciation.)
Another argument is that depreciation is the repayment, either to shareholders or 
to lenders of the money used to buy the equipment. Of course, the depreciation 
charge does not involve any cash movement – it is purely a paper adjustment of 
values within the accounting database. However, it should be realized that if no 
depreciation were charged in calculating profit, and all the profit were paid out 
in tax and dividend, the original capital would have been lost; so depreciation, 
by restricting profit, reduces tax and dividends and preserves the original capital.
This question of not involving a cash movement is also important in recogniz-
ing the difference between a company’s profits for the year and its cash flow – the 
cash flow will be systematically higher than the profit by the amount of the de-
preciation charge.
Worked example
The figures below represent the data in the company’s accounting database as at 
31 December 20X1. As you can see, the company has the following ­non-current 
tangible assets: land €120 000 (not depreciated, considered to have an infinite life), 
At 31 December 2011, property, plant and equipment include CHF 1267 million of assets under 
construction (2010: CHF 802 million). Net property, plant and equipment held under finance leases 
amount to CHF 194 million (2010: CHF 240 million). Net property, plant and equipment of CHF 323 
million are pledged as security for financial liabilities (2010: CHF 112 million). Fire risks, reasonably 
estimated, are insured in accordance with domestic requirements.
Source: Nestlé Consolidated Financial Statements, 2011 (Comparative figures omitted for clarity)

Part 2  Basic financial statements
148
buildings €80 000 (policy is to depreciate on a straight-line basis over 40 years – 
i.e. 2.5 per cent per annum) and plant €45 000 (being depreciated at 25 per cent 
diminishing balance – note that the figure consists of several components bought 
at different times). We have to update the accounting database for the annual 
depreciation charges, prior to issuing the annual financial statements. We need to 
depreciate the buildings and plant:
Buildings €80 000 3 0.025 5 €2000
Plant (€45 000 – 18 000) 3 0.25 5 €6750
(we deduct the accumulated depreciation which has been charged in previous 
years to find the net book value and then apply the diminishing balance rate)
Total charge for 20X1 5 €8 750
Database
Adjustment
Statement of  
profit or loss
Statement  
of financial position
Assets
Land
120 000
120 000
Buildings
80 000
80 000
Accumulated 
depreciation
–14 000
–2 000
–16 000
Plant
45 000
45 000
Accumulated 
depreciation
–18 000
–6 750
–24 750
Inventory
19 500
19 500
Receivables
17 250
17 250
Cash at bank
8340
8340
Totals
258 090
–8 750
249 340
Financing
Share capital
80 000
80 000
Reserves
62 100
62 100
Profit for the year
16 040
Debt
75 000
75 000
Accounts payable
16 200
16 200
Statement of profit or loss
Sales
200 000
200 000
Cost of goods sold
–82 310
–82310
Personnel
–61 200
–61200
Other expenses
–26 700
–26700
Interest
–5 000
–5 000
Depreciation charge
–8 750
–8 750
Totals
258 090
–8 750
16 040
249 340
Notice that the profit or loss data has been thrown into a separate column to 
identify it separately from the statement of financial position, but of course the 
net profit of €16 040 also appears in the statement of financial position.)

Chapter 5  Non-current assets and depreciation
149
Disposal or retirement of a long-term asset
A long-term asset will be derecognized on disposal or when no future economic 
benefits are expected from its use or disposal. At de-recognition date, the non-
current asset item disappears from the statement of financial position and a gain 
or loss on disposal is included in the statement of profit or loss. The gain or loss 
from the retirement or disposal is the difference between the net disposal pro-
ceeds and the net book value of the asset at the disposal date.
Let us revert again to our example of a van, bought for €30 000 and expected 
to be used for two years with a residual value of €10 000. After one year of use we 
receive a nice offer and decide to sell the van for €23 000. On disposal date, the 
net book value would be €20 000 (acquisition cost minus one year depreciation 
charge), leading to a gain on disposal of €3000 to be included in the statement of 
profit or loss.
In the accounting records the disposal or retirement will have an impact on 
both the acquisition cost account and on the accumulated depreciation account. 
Both accounts will be reduced for the full amount related to the long-term asset 
disposed of. This will be reflected in the notes to the financial statements where 
the different types of changes in the net book value of the non-current assets are 
disclosed (see the Nestlé Report).
Specific valuation principles by type  
of non-current assets
We did not want to get involved within the general presentation of non-current 
assets and depreciation with a discussion of particular types of assets. However, 
we now present a number of different kinds of long-term assets and discuss their 
particular attributes for accounting purposes.
As we discussed in the early part of the chapter, the value which a company 
will use for its long-term assets will incorporate the full cost of bringing the as-
set into service (‘bringing the asset to the location and condition necessary for it 
to be capable of operating in the manner intended by management’ according 
to IAS 16, par.16). We have not examined the implications of this in respect of 
major categories of non-current assets nor their specific recognition features, and 
we shall therefore now review some of the more frequently encountered types 
of non-current assets and the accounting practices normally followed. The EC 
Company Law Fourth Directive calls for non-current assets to be split between 
intangible assets, tangible assets and investments, with different valuation rules 
for each. Although not required, this split also makes sense for non-current assets 
under IFRS.
So far discussion of assets has been confined to physical productive assets such 
as buildings or machinery, but companies also have other assets which are not 
physical in nature; these are called intangible assets. Intangible assets reflect intan-
gible resources such as scientific or technical knowledge, development of new 
processes or systems, intellectual property, privileged customer relationships, etc. 
Typical intangible assets would be research and development, brand names, copy-
rights, computer software, licences, patents.
Intangible assets

Part 2  Basic financial statements
150
Intangible assets are increasingly important to companies and are a continu-
ing source of accounting problems. It is very difficult to attach a historical cost 
to some intangibles, such as brand names, which are built up slowly over years. 
Even if one could attach a cost and therefore have an accounting asset, there is 
still the question of estimating its useful life and related amortization.
STANDARDS
 IAS 38 – INTANGIBLE ASSETS (extract)
8. An intangible asset is an identifiable non-monetary asset without physical 
substance.
12. An asset is identifiable if it either:
(a)	 is separable, i.e. is capable of being separated or divided from the entity 
and sold, transferred, licensed, rented or exchanged, either individually 
or together with a related contract, identifiable asset or liability, regard-
less of whether the entity intends to do so; or
(b)	arises from contractual or other legal rights, regardless of whether those 
rights are transferable or separable from the entity or from other rights 
and obligations.
21. An intangible asset shall be recognized if, and only if:
(a)	 it is probable that the expected future economic benefits that are attrib-
utable to the asset will flow to the entity; and
(b)	the cost of the asset can be measured reliably.
22. An entity shall assess the probability of expected future economic benefits 
using reasonable and supportable assumptions that represent management’s 
best estimate of the set of economic conditions that will exist over the useful 
life of the asset.
51. It is sometimes difficult to assess whether an internally generated intan-
gible asset qualifies for recognition because of problems in:
(a)	 identifying whether and when, there is an identifiable asset that will 
generate expected future economic benefits; and
(b)	determining the cost of the asset reliably. In some cases the cost of gen-
erating an intangible asset internally cannot be distinguished from the 
cost of maintaining or enhancing the entity’s internally generated good-
will or of running day-to-day operations.
52. To assess whether an internally generated intangible asset meets the cri-
teria for recognition, an enterprise classifies the generation of the asset into:
(a)	 a research phase; and
(b)	a development phase.
53. If an entity cannot distinguish the research phase from the development 
phase of an internal project to create an intangible asset, the entity treats the 
expenditure on that project as if it were incurred in the research phase only.
Source: IAS 38, Intangible Assets

Chapter 5  Non-current assets and depreciation
151
IAS 38, Intangible Assets, defines an intangible asset as ‘an identifiable non-
monetary asset without physical substance’ (IAS 38, par.8). This definition con-
tains three essential characteristics of intangible assets:
	
a.	 they are assets – resources controlled by the company from which future 
economic benefits are expected to flow to the entity
	
b.	they lack physical substance; and
	
c.	 they are identifiable.
A major problem with intangible assets is that of uncertainty surrounding the 
future economic benefits which arise from expenditure of this nature. This un-
certainty relates to both the amount of future economic benefits and the ability 
to control the future economic benefits flowing from the intangible items and 
restrict the access of others to those benefits. For example, if a company spends 
money training its staff, the object is to improve future operations and, one 
hopes, profitability. However, the improvement is not certain and the staff may 
leave at some future point, taking their improved efficiency with them. Similarly, 
advertising is done to generate future sales, but the long-term effects are gener-
ally impossible to estimate and are not under the control of the company.
The identifiability characteristic of the definition of an intangible asset is met 
when it is separable (capable of being separated from the company and sold, li-
censed, rented, etc.) or when it arises from contractual or other legal rights. This 
characteristic is essential to distinguish intangible assets from the more general 
concept of goodwill.
The useful life of an intangible asset can be finite or indefinite. The useful life 
of the intangible asset is usually assessed based on the expected cash flow streams 
associated with the asset. According to IAS 38, an intangible asset can be regarded 
as having an indefinite useful life when there is no foreseeable limit to the period 
over which the asset is expected to generate net cash inflows for the company. 
This means that under IAS 38 it is now possible to recognize some intangible as-
sets without having to depreciate them at all.
Intangible assets can be acquired externally or generated internally, although 
current practice imposes limitations on internally generated intangible resources 
such as research and development.
Research and development
In some sense research and development (R&D) expenditure is the arche-
typal intangible asset and raises a number of basic questions when assess-
ing whether the costs incurred in research and development activities qualify 
for asset recognition. These issues relate to determining whether and when 
an identifiable asset exists that will generate probable economic benefits for 
the company and how the cost of such an asset is measured with sufficient 
reliability.
Where a company has invested in researching and developing new products, 
it does not seem unreasonable that the cost of creating a new product should be 
considered an asset, provided that the new product will lead to a commercial ex-
ploitation. Very often it is relatively late in the R&D process that one can be rea-
sonably certain that an asset (in the sense of something which will bring a future 
economic benefits) has been created.

Part 2  Basic financial statements
152
In defining the costs associated with creating the new product, there is the 
problem of the treatment of the costs of unsuccessful research. For example, sup-
posing a chemist sets out to create a new headache tablet and takes four years, 
during which he tries five alternative bases, of which only the last is wholly satis-
factory. Does the R&D asset include the costs only of the research into the alter-
native which was ultimately accepted? Or should one consider that the process of 
defining the unsuccessful alternatives is part of finding the usable alternative, and 
therefore all the costs should be treated as an R&D asset?
In the US, the difficulty of finding a suitable definition, plus the operation of 
prudence, have led to a situation where all R&D costs must be expensed as they 
are incurred. In Europe, the treatment in national accounting rules is generally 
more flexible: general research must be expensed immediately, but research in-
volved in refining and developing a specific product may be treated as an asset 
and expensed over its economic life (although many companies expense all 
R&D expenditure immediately anyway, not least because it qualifies immediately 
as a deduction for tax purposes).
IAS 38, Intangible Assets, focuses on the distinction between the research phase 
and the development phase of an internal project, whereby research costs should 
be expensed as incurred, but development costs may qualify for recognition. The 
IASB argues that at the research phase of a project, a company is unable to demon-
strate that an intangible asset exists that will generate probable future economic 
benefits. In the development phase of an internal project, however, activities are 
focused on the application of research findings or other knowledge to a plan or 
design of new products or systems and circumstances may enable the company to 
identify an intangible asset and demonstrate the probable future economic ben-
efits flowing from these development activities. IAS 38 includes specific recogni-
tion criteria for development costs (and internally generated intangible assets in 
general) that expand on the general recognition criteria for intangible assets (see 
the boxes on IAS 38). If these criteria are met, an intangible asset arising from de-
velopment should be recognized.
Estimating the useful life of internally generated intangible assets will usually 
be done on a prudent basis. As with patents, there is a strong economic argu-
ment for spreading this over the whole expected commercial exploitation of the 
project. But again there is the problem of uncertainty – can one reasonably ex-
pect that a new headache tablet, for example, might be exploited for as long as 
20 years? The amortization method used should reflect the pattern in which the 
asset’s future economic benefits are expected to be consumed by the company. If 
that pattern cannot be determined reliably, the straight-line method will be used. 
The residual value of an intangible asset with a finite useful life is generally as-
sumed to be zero.
A detailed analysis of the intangible assets, divided into major classes and 
showing original cost (or valuation) and accumulated depreciation, has to be dis-
closed and is usually shown in the notes to the accounts.
Brand names
In many bulk product areas where there are several competing products with very 
similar characteristics (coffee, chocolate, cars, washing machines, etc.) it has be-
come increasingly understood by management that what is important to the suc-
cess of a business is not so much its manufacturing capacity (or not exclusively 

Chapter 5  Non-current assets and depreciation
153
its manufacturing capacity) but also its ability to sell the products. Very often this 
is associated with the creation and maintenance of brand names. Ownership of a 
brand name may be described as a right to a future economic benefit (and there-
fore potentially an accounting asset), but having that brand name appear in the 
statement of financial position is problematical.
STANDARDS
IAS 38 INTANGIBLE ASSETS (cont.)
54. No intangible asset arising from research (or from the research phase 
of an internal project) shall be recognized. Expenditure on research (or on 
the research phase of an internal project) shall be recognized as an expense 
when it is incurred.
57. An intangible asset arising from development (or from the development 
phase of an internal project) shall be recognized if, and only if, an entity can 
demonstrate all of the following:
(a)	 the technical feasibility of completing the intangible asset so that it will 
be available for use or sale;
(b)	its intention to complete the intangible asset and use or sell it;
(c)	 its ability to use or sell the intangible asset;
(d)	how the intangible asset will generate probable future economic ben-
efits. Among other things, the entity can demonstrate the existence of a 
market for the output of the intangible asset or the intangible asset itself 
or, if it is to be used internally, the usefulness of the intangible asset;
(e)	 the availability of adequate technical, financial and other resources to 
complete the development and to use or sell the intangible asset.
(f)	 its ability to measure reliably the expenditure attributable to the intan-
gible asset during its development.
71. Expenditure on an intangible item that was initially recognized as an ex-
pense shall not be recognized as part of the cost of an intangible asset at a 
later date.
Source: IAS 38, Intangible Assets
Where a company buys a brand name from another company, there is no 
problem – a clear historical cost value emerges from the transaction. But where 
a company creates a brand name – very similar to creating a new product – there 
are the problems of how early in the expenditure programme does it become rea-
sonable to categorize the costs as being an asset and how to reliably measure the 
cost of the brand name. Expenditure on internally generated brands (like adver-
tising campaigns) is in most cases indistinguishable from the cost of developing 
the business in general.
A further issue that has arisen is the question of amortization of brand names 
acquired in company takeovers. Many large companies which carry brand names 
argued that the regular advertising and promotion budget maintains the value 
of the brand, and depreciation is therefore unnecessary and represents a double 

Part 2  Basic financial statements
154
charge. The IASB has been receptive to these kinds of argument by allowing in-
tangible assets with indefinite useful lives to be accounted for without systematic 
amortization.
Patents
Patents are in effect a legal protection of an invention which prevents anyone 
using the invention without permission. As such, they are sometimes costly to 
establish, but once established they do have a future economic use to the com-
pany (either from making or using the product or from licensing others to use it) 
provided that there is a demand for the particular invention.
Assuming that a patent does represent future economic benefits to the com-
pany, it should be recognized at cost and then the cost expensed over the ex-
pected useful life of the asset in the normal way. Where a company buys a patent, 
its historical value is clear, but where it invents the subject of the patent, the 
problem of identifying the related costs and the application of the specific recog-
nition criteria for internally generated intangible assets come into play. The exact 
depreciation pattern could be a matter for debate, but unless exploitation can be 
foreseen with a high degree of certainty, patents are a good candidate for meth-
ods which load depreciation into the early years.
Purchased goodwill
Sometimes companies expand by ‘buying’ customers from other suppliers, and 
when this happens a company is said to be buying ‘goodwill’. For example, a 
solicitor who was planning to retire could sell the goodwill of her practice to an-
other solicitor. Her clients would presumably still need a solicitor, and although 
they cannot be forced to move to the alternative selected, she can write to them 
recommending a specific alternative. The person recommended would have paid 
a fee for this to happen, and would have an excellent chance of retaining the 
customers.
Should the figure paid by an entity which acquires customers in this way be 
treated as an intangible asset? In the absence of legal rights to protect the client 
relationship or their loyalty, there is usually insufficient ground to establish real 
control over these items to meet the definition of an intangible asset. Neverthe-
less, exchange transactions for the same or similar non-contractual customer rela-
tionships may provide evidence that the company is able to control the expected 
future benefits flowing from the customer relationships even in the absence of 
legal control. The existence of such exchange transactions also provides evidence 
STANDARDS
IAS 38 INTANGIBLE ASSETS (cont.)
63. Internally generated brands, mastheads, publishing titles, customer lists 
and items similar in substance should not be recognized as intangible assets.
Source: IAS 38, Intangible Assets

Chapter 5  Non-current assets and depreciation
155
that customer goodwill is separable, a necessary condition to meet the definition 
of an intangible asset. As such exchange transactions are rare, this kind of good-
will is not frequently encountered in company accounts. However, if recognized, 
the purchased goodwill must be expensed in the usual way. Views differ as to the 
appropriate length of the period and the tendency is towards a short economic 
life on the basis that once the customers have tried the alternative service it is the 
quality of the alternative which will determine whether they remain customers 
or not.
IAS 38 explicitly prohibits the recognition of internally generated goodwill as 
an asset, because it is not an identifiable (separable) resource controlled by the 
company that can be measured reliably at cost.
There is a third type of goodwill (goodwill arising on consolidation) which is 
a product of accounting for groups of companies and will be discussed in that 
context in Chapter 12.
Historically, tangible long-term assets have been the major assets of companies. 
IAS 16, Property, Plant and Equipment, covers the main non-current tangible as-
sets. Property, plant and equipment are tangible assets held for more than one 
Tangible assets
Intellectual capital
Intellectual capital is a relatively new and enigmatic concept, relating primarily 
to the intangible, highly mutable assets of the firm or, as some have put it, the 
‘brain power’ of the organization. This brain power accounts for an increasing 
proportion of the capital in traditional industries and forms the backbone of 
the rapidly growing technology and knowledge-intensive sectors in the global 
economy.
Microsoft is used as the example of the hidden value of these intangible as-
sets of the firm. In 1996 Microsoft’s market value was 11.2 times its tangible asset 
value. This ‘missing’ value to a large degree represents the market’s estima-
tion of Microsoft’s stock of intellectual capital that is not captured in its financial 
statements.
This is not the exception but rather the rule in financial reporting and il-
lustrates one of the major limitations of the current financial reporting model. 
The Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants concludes that accounting for 
intellectual capital will require developing accounting measures that can differ-
entiate between firms in which intellectual capital is appreciating versus firms 
in which it is depreciating, and measures that will show the long run return in 
investment in people skills, information bases and the technological capabili-
ties of organizations.
Source: Extract from ‘Buried treasure’ by Ramona Dzinkowski, World Accounting Report, May 1999
Between the lines

Part 2  Basic financial statements
156
accounting and used in the production or supply of goods and services, or for 
administration.
A detailed analysis of these assets, divided into major classes and showing orig-
inal cost (or valuation) and accumulated depreciation, has to be shown and is 
usually given in the notes to the accounts.
Land and buildings
In general terms, a company would recognize such an asset as land or buildings at 
a value which was based on the acquisition cost and any other ancillary costs. A 
simple case would be where a company buys a ready-built factory and may only 
have ancillary costs for professional fees such as for a surveyor and the solicitor 
who drew up the contract. Both the acquisition price and the fees would be capi-
talized in the value of the asset – the fees represent an integral part of the cost of 
bringing the asset to the location and condition necessary for it to be capable of 
operating in the manner intended by management.
A more complicated case might be where a company buys a plot of land on 
which there is a derelict building, demolishes the building, clears the site and 
builds a new factory. The value of the factory in the company’s accounting re-
cords would include all those costs, as well as perhaps architect’s fees and so on.
COMPANY REPORT
AGFA – INTANGIBLE ASSETS (extract)
Significant accounting policies
(H) Intangible Assets
Intangible assets with indefinite useful lives, such as trademarks, are stated at 
cost less accumulated impairment losses. Intangible assets with indefinite use-
ful lives are not amortized. Instead, they are tested for impairment annually and 
whenever there is an indication that the intangible asset may be impaired.
Intangible assets with finite useful lives are stated at cost less accumulated 
amortization and impairment losses.
Intangible assets with finite useful lives, such as acquired technology and 
customer relationships, are amortized on a straight-line basis over their esti-
mated useful lives, generally for periods ranging from 3 to 20 years.
In accordance with IFRS 3 Business Combinations, if an intangible asset is 
acquired in a business combination, the cost of that intangible asset is its fair 
value at the acquisition date. The fair value of an intangible asset reflects mar-
ket expectations about the probability that the future economic benefits em-
bodied in the asset will flow to the entity.
Research and development costs are expensed as they are incurred, except 
for certain development costs, which are capitalized when it is probable that a 
development project will be a success, and certain criteria, including technolog-
ical and commercial feasibility, have been met. Capitalized development costs 
are amortized on a systematic basis over their expected useful lives.
Source: Agfa, Annual Report, 2010

Chapter 5  Non-current assets and depreciation
157
The aggregation of these elements provides a base cost, but the accounting 
problems and depreciation approach will depend on the legal means whereby the 
land is held. A company may either acquire a lease – a licence to use the land for 
a specific number of years – or it may own the land outright. Under a lease, the 
problem is that the company’s right to use the land will cease after a specified pe-
riod, but the implications of that depend on the length of the period. If the lease 
is for a relatively short period, say five years, the asset must be expensed over that 
period. However, leases are also issued for much longer periods, occasionally as 
long as 999 years, in which case the cessation of the company’s right to use the 
land is so remote as not to be worth considering. Leased property is usually depre-
ciated over the life of the lease, with a maximum depreciation period for build-
ings of around 50 years.
Land which is owned outright provides a different problem because of the 
trend for land prices to rise. This means that in the classic approach to deprecia-
tion, the depreciable amount (acquisition cost less estimated residual value) may 
actually be negative. Supposing you acquired a piece of land for a project limited 
to ten years and that the land cost €500 000, it could be that with the rise in land 
prices expected over the ten years the residual value would be (say) €600 000, giv-
ing a negative depreciable amount of €100 000.
Land usually has an indefinite useful life and therefore is not  depreciated. That 
still leaves the question of the buildings which may stand on the land. Buildings, 
on the other hand, have a limited useful life and therefore are depreciable as-
sets. The traditional approach would be to arrive at separate values for the land 
and buildings (perhaps by asking a professional valuer to give estimates of each 
and then applying the proportion to the historical cost) and then depreciate the 
buildings separately from the land – usually over 50 years on a straight-line basis. 
Here again some companies argue that there seems little justification for depre-
ciating buildings whose value may also rise but which, in any event, sit on land 
whose value is rising in the long term.
An issue that has not really presented itself very strongly yet is the question 
of creating provisions for the eventual re-instatement of land to its natural state. 
This has surfaced, for example, in respect of the decommissioning costs of nuclear 
power stations. It can be argued that any company which builds a factory should 
make provisions for the ultimate removal of the factory when its useful life has 
ended and include the corresponding cost as part of the acquisition cost of the as-
set. In this vein, IAS 16 requires that when a company incurs an obligation to dis-
mantle and remove the tangible asset and restore the site on which it is located, it 
should estimate the associated costs and include the initial estimate in the acqui-
sition cost of the asset (we will come back to the issues involved in Chapter 14). 
The capitalized decommissioning costs will be depreciated alongside the other 
acquisition costs to match the costs to the asset’s revenue-earning period.
Plant and equipment
Here again the purchase price of the plant may well be only a part of the total 
costs of bringing the plant into service. Ancillary costs to be capitalized might 
include elements such as site preparation, engineers’ time in assembling and test-
ing the plant on site, cost of transport to the site, etc. Sometimes a company’s 
own workforce may be involved in the preparation of the asset. The fact that the 

Part 2  Basic financial statements
158
company’s workforce is involved does not change the basic concept – their wages 
etc. should be treated as part of the installation cost.
Leased assets
Sometimes a company acquires plant and equipment, or other assets, on a lease 
agreement rather than buying them outright. The increasing use of this method of 
financing has highlighted a particular accounting problem. If a company acquires 
an asset under a lease agreement and in effect has the use of the asset throughout 
its useful life, should that asset be recognized in the statement of financial posi-
tion? Should the obligation under the lease to make payments to the lessor be 
recognized as a liability?
If, for example, a company borrows €100 000 to buy some plant worth 
€100 000, both the plant asset and the debt liability would appear in the state-
ment of financial position. When a company hires equipment on a lease for sub-
stantially the whole of its useful life, the company is in effect acquiring the asset’s 
economic value while incurring a liability to pay for it in instalments. The instal-
ments would include both an element of interest and an element of repayment 
of the value of the asset. Is this situation different in principle from that where 
the company borrows the money and buys the asset in two separate transactions?
The US, UK and IASB all have standards requiring that where a company ac-
quires substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership of an asset under a 
lease, that asset should be recognized in the statement of financial position as 
well as the liability to the lessor, irrespective of the fact that legal title of owner-
ship to those assets is not transferred to the company. IAS 17, Leases, defines a 
lease as an arrangement whereby the lessor conveys to the lessee, in return for 
a payment or series of payment, the right to use an asset for an agreed period of 
time. The type of lease whereby substantially all the risks and rewards of owner-
ship of an asset are transferred is called a finance lease (as opposed to operat-
ing leases). Accounting for finance leases is a typical example of the application 
of the ‘substance over form’ principle whereby the accounting rules act on eco-
nomic substance and not on legal form.
It is not particularly useful in the context of an introductory financial account-
ing course to analyze in detail the methods which are used for arriving at a precise 
value of the asset and splitting the total amounts payable under the lease into repay-
ment of the loan and interest charges. In principle, the asset is valued at fair value 
(its purchase price if bought on the open market) and this value is recognized as an 
asset. A balancing liability for the same amount is recognized as an obligation to the 
lessor. The amount payable over the length of the lease will normally be more than 
this, since it includes an interest element. The interest element is allocated over the 
length of the lease, ideally in relation to the outstanding value of the lease liability.
Take a simplified example where a company leases a machine for five years at 
a rate of €10 000 a year. If the company had bought the machine on the open 
market it would have cost €35 000. Accordingly the machine will appear in the 
statement of financial position at €35 000 and there will also be a balancing lease 
liability of €35 000. This means that the difference between the fair value assumed 
and the total of the lease payments (€10 000 3 5 years 5 €50 000) is €15 000 and 
this represents the implied interest charge on the transaction.
The €15 000 needs to be allocated over the life of the asset in proportion to the 
amount of the loan outstanding, and this can be done accurately with a computer 

Chapter 5  Non-current assets and depreciation
159
program or there are simplified approximations to work out the effective rate of 
interest being charged. If we simplify in this case and say that the implied rate of 
interest is 10 per cent, then the first annual payment of €10 000 would be split 
for accounting purposes as €3500 interest charge (€35 000 lease liability 3 10 per 
cent) and €6500 as repayment of the lease liability, leaving €28 500 outstanding 
at the start of the second year.
In the second year the interest charge is 10 per cent 3 €28 500 5 €2850 and 
the balance of the annual payment, €7150, is used to further repay the lease li-
ability. This continues until the lease liability is extinguished.
The asset is depreciated in the same way as assets which are owned once a 
value has been arrived at.
This is the third category of non-current asset. Companies may make investments 
on both a short-term and a long-term basis. Short-term investments are often 
made in liquid securities when a company has a temporary excess of cash. These 
are sometimes called treasury investments and appear as a current asset, often as 
part of cash at bank (or cash equivalents).
Where a company makes an investment for strategic purposes, which it in-
tends to hold for some length of time, this will appear in the fixed or non-current 
asset category. Companies may invest in other companies for a number of rea-
sons – to secure a relationship with a major customer or supplier; to participate in 
a new development but spread the risk with other interested parties; as a forerun-
ner to a takeover. Where a company has a substantial stake in another (less than 
50 per cent but large enough, for example, to be given a seat on the board) this is 
called an investment in an associated company (the technique for accounting for 
associated companies is dealt with in Chapter 12). Where companies set up joint 
ventures (for example, oil companies sometimes jointly own pipelines) these are 
often shown as an investment in an associate.
According to the EC accounting directives, such investments are valued at the 
full cost of acquisition, subject to any permanent impairment of value. If their 
current value falls below historical cost, then the investment should be written 
down (and the expense would normally appear in the financial result part of the 
profit and loss account). In some jurisdictions, if the current value exceeds his-
torical cost, this information would be disclosed as a note to the accounts.
Under IFRS, these investments are measured at fair value (in accordance with IAS 
39, Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement). The IASB defines fair value as 
‘the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an 
orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date’ (IFRS 13, 
Fair Value Measurement, para 9). Essentially, fair value is a proxy for current market 
value. The effect of investments measured at fair value on income will depend on 
how they are classified. If the investments are classified as held for trading (or if 
the company elects to generically designate the investments on initial recognition at 
fair value through profit and loss), the changes in fair value are recognized in profit or 
loss in the period in which they occur. Classification as available for sale would result 
in recognizing the changes in fair value directly in equity, through the statement of 
changes in equity, until the financial asset is derecognized; at which time the cumula-
tive gain or loss previously recognized in equity shall be recognized in profit or loss.
Investments

Part 2  Basic financial statements
160
Summary
In this chapter we first looked at the question – central to profit measurement – 
of the treatment of the costs of using up the company’s productive capacity. We 
have seen that where an asset has a determinable life within the company, the 
cost of using up the asset must be allocated over this life, and impacts upon the 
estimate of profit for each accounting period. We have seen that there are sev-
eral conventional bases for measuring depreciation and these do not necessarily 
reflect their economic consumption when there are tax considerations involved. 
We have noted that the depreciation charge reduces profit but does not cause 
any cash flow, thereby introducing another systematic difference between profit 
and cash flow on a period-to-period basis. When a long-term asset is disposed 
of, both gross acquisition value and accumulated depreciation are offset against 
disposal proceeds and a gain or loss on disposal is included in the statement of 
profit or loss.
We have also considered the accounting treatment and valuation specifics 
of the main long-term asset categories. Specific recognition and measurement 
rules with regard to intangible assets, tangible assets and investments have been 
reviewed.
COMPANY REPORT
BEKAERT – FINANCE LEASES (extract)
Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Finance leases
Leases under which the Group assumes substantially all the risks and rewards 
of ownership are classified as finance leases. Items of property, plant and 
equipment acquired by way of finance lease are stated at the lower of their fair 
value and the present value of the minimum lease payments at inception of the 
lease, less accumulated depreciation and impairment losses.
In calculating the present value of the minimum lease payments, the discount 
factor used is the interest rate implicit in the lease, when it is practicable to de-
termine it; otherwise the Company’s incremental borrowing rate is used. Initial 
direct costs are included as part of the asset. Lease payments are apportioned 
between the finance charge and the reduction of the outstanding liability. The 
finance charge is allocated to periods during the lease term so as to produce 
a constant periodic rate of interest on the remaining balance of the liability for 
each period. A finance lease gives rise to a depreciation expense for the asset 
as well as a finance expense for each accounting period. The depreciation policy 
for leased assets is consistent with that for owned depreciable assets.
Source: Bekaert, Annual Report, 2010

Chapter 5  Non-current assets and depreciation
161
Discussion Questions
1.	 Contrast the accounting consequences of financing the acquisition of a 
building through a bank loan or as a finance lease.
2.	 What is included in the acquisition cost of a long-term tangible asset? Give 
examples of at least four costs that would be included in the acquisition cost 
of a new production line.
3.	 Discuss the recognition rules for research and development costs.
4.	 Under what conditions will the disposal of a long-term tangible asset lead to 
a loss? How will the sale affect the financial statements?
5.	 What are the most common causes of the depreciation of a long-term  
tangible asset?
Assignments
The following questions have answers on the lecturer side of the digital support 
resources for the book.
1.	 Profit forecasts
	
A company is considering investing in a project with a five-year useful life. 
The project involves paying €75 000 for a licence to manufacture a new prod-
uct and equipping a production line at a cost of €300 000. The product is ex-
pected to have a useful life of five years only, and at the expiry of that time 
the production line will be sold and should yield a salvage value of €50 000. 
In order to launch the product the company plans a three-month advertising 
campaign which will cost €100 000.
	
Assuming that in each year the expected sales are €1 000 000 and 
expenses other than those detailed above are €800 000, draw up two 
alternative series of statements of profit or loss for the project us-
ing (a) straight-line, and (b) diminishing balance depreciation of 30 
per cent per annum, for the plant, while treating the other expenses 
consistently in each set.
If, for policy reasons, the company wished to maximize profits in the first 
two years of operation, what accounting choices could be made (within the 
terms of generally accepted accounting principles) to achieve this?
2.	 Depreciati Ltd. purchased a truck for long-distance deliveries in Europe on Janu-
ary 3, 20X7. The purchase consideration amounts to €100 000. The truck is ex-
pected to have a salvage-value of €20 000 at the end of its eight-year useful life.
	
Required:
	
(a)	 Prepare a depreciation schedule using the straight-line method.
	
(b)	 Prepare a depreciation schedule using the diminishing balance method.
3.	 On 1 January 20X7, Nyvice Ltd. purchases a specialized machine tool for 
€20 000. The useful life of the machine tool is estimated to be five years. The 
residual value at the end of its useful life is expected to be zero. On 1 January 
20X8, Nyvice purchases another machine tool for €4000. This has an ex-
pected useful life of four years and a residual value of €400. On 31 December 

Part 2  Basic financial statements
162
20X9, the company sells the first machine tool for €6000. Nyvice Ltd. uses 
the straight-line depreciation method.
	
Required:
	
Show how the statement of financial position and the statement of profit or loss of 
Nyvice Ltd. are affected by the this purchase for the years 20X7, 20X8 and 20X9.
4.	 Zetis SA had the following situation in its accounting database at  
31 December 20X1:
Assets
Land
150 000
Buildings
50 000
Accumulated depreciation
–4 000
Plant and equipment
46 800
Accumulated depreciation
–19 300
Vehicles
52 500
Accumulated depreciation
–27 300
Inventory at 1 January
9 400
Receivables
17 300
Cash
24 600
Financing
Share capital
100 000
Reserves
189 300
Trade payables
5 400
Sales
247 200
Purchases
–69 600
Salaries
–131 000
Other expenses
–41 300
You are asked to draw up a statement of profit or loss and statement 
of financial position after making the following adjustments:
	
(a)	 Provide depreciation on the following assets: buildings, 2 per 
cent straight-line; plant and equipment, 15 per cent straight-line; 
vehicles, 40 per cent diminishing balance.
	
(b)	 Closing inventory at 31 December was 10 650.
5.	 A company decides to replace one of its production lines with new machin-
ery. All the costs associated with the exercise are grouped together by the 
accountant in the same account, pending later analysis. The items appearing 
in the account after three months are:

Chapter 5  Non-current assets and depreciation
163
€
Removal of old machinery
2 800
Installation of new power lines
350
Resurfacing factory floor
825
Purchase of new machines
62 100
Transport of machines to factory
3 200
Hire of crane to position new machines
450
Servicing after first month’s production
375
Replacement of conveyor damaged in production
580
Engineer’s fee to check installation
250
In addition to the above items, the payroll records show that the company’s 
maintenance crew spent 300 hours on installing the machines. The usual 
charge-out for labour is €5.75 per hour.
	
Which of the above items should be part of the asset value of the new 
machinery?
6.	 Bramen NV, a Dutch engineering company, decided to replace an older machine 
with a new one because of efficiency concerns and higher quality requirements. 
The machine was purchased in Canada, transported to Schiphol Airport by 
plane and subsequently transported to Haarlem by road. The new machine re-
places the old one which is dismantled.
	
Please indicate which of the following expenditure items will be in-
cluded in the initial asset value of the new machine.
Yes
No
1
Air transportation costs
2
7 per cent trade discount on gross purchase price
3
Production losses in start-up phase
4
12 per cent overhead charge
5
Installation costs paid to external crew
6
Personnel costs of employees involved with  
pre-operational testing
7
Investment grant of the Dutch government
8
3 per cent financial discount if payment received 
within 30 days
9
VAT paid at import
10
Training costs of personnel
11
Insurance of transport from Canada to Haarlem

Part 2  Basic financial statements
164
7.	 On January 2, 20X1, Machinery Unlimited purchased a second-hand trailer 
at a cost of €63 000. Before placing the trailer in service, the company spent 
€2200 painting it, €800 replacing tyres, and €4000 overhauling the chassis. 
Machinery Unlimited management estimates that the trailer will remain in 
service for six years and have a residual value of €14 200. The trailer’s annual 
mileage is expected to be 18 000 miles in each of the first four years and 14 000 
miles in each of the next two years. In deciding which depreciation method to 
use, Brett Coombs, the general manager, requests a depreciation schedule for 
each of the following depreciation methods: (a) straight-line and (b) depletion.
	
You are asked to:
	
(a)	 Prepare a depreciation schedule (i.e. for the six year period) for each 
depreciation method, showing asset cost, depreciation expense, and 
asset book value.
	
(b)	 For income tax purposes, the company wishes to use the depreciation 
method that minimizes income tax payments in the early years of as-
set use. Identify the depreciation method that meets this requirement.

165
C H A P T E R  6
Refining the accounting system
In this chapter we are going to look at other areas where the accountant intervenes 
in the accounting database to refine the information, usually as part of the process 
of preparing the annual financial statements and with a view to giving a more 
precise profit estimate and statement of financial position. We are going to look at 
accruals and deferrals of both expenses and revenues, provisions to anticipate future 
expenditures related to past events, as well as impairment testing for loss of value 
in assets. We will end this chapter with a closer look at the components of the equity 
side of financing.
n	 Introduction
n	 Accruals and deferrals of expenses and revenues
n	 Provisions
n	 Asset impairment
n	 Bad debts and doubtful debts
n	 Hidden reserves
n	 Summary
n	 Discussion questions
n	 Assignments
Chapter Structure

Part 2  Basic financial statements
166
The routine accounting system works very well for things like invoices to clients 
and recording deliveries from suppliers. However, there are transactions that fall 
slightly outside this convenient framework and need to be brought into it or 
aligned with it when making accurate profit measurements. For example, we con-
sume electricity and gas, use telephones and are invoiced afterwards; generally 
company lawyers or auditors do not send in monthly bills, but rather invoice us 
at the end of delivering a series of services which frequently do not correspond to 
our accounting year. In these areas the company accountant has to intervene and 
form a judgement as to what expenses have not been brought into the database, 
but should be incorporated into the profit estimate. Similarly, some expenses al-
ready posted in the database will have to be matched with next period’s revenues 
and, thus, have to be deferred. Such period matching may be necessary for rev-
enues as well.
Accrued expenses and accrued revenues (sometimes called just accruals) are pre-
viously unrecorded expenses and revenues that need to be adjusted at the end 
of the accounting period to reflect the amount of expenses incurred or revenues 
earned during the accounting period. Deferred expenses and deferred revenues 
(sometimes called deferrals) are previously recorded (and probably paid/received) 
expenses and revenues that have to be adjusted at the end of the accounting pe-
riod by deferring part of them to the following accounting period.
Accrued and deferred expenses and revenues are the near cousins of payables/
creditors and receivables/debtors. These are items where the economic transaction 
takes place at a different time from the cash transaction, but where the volume 
or frequency of the transactions does not warrant a continuing record in the ba-
sic accounting system, or where the invoice or similar document that is used to 
record the economic event arrives sometime after the expenses are incurred or 
the revenues earned – or sometime in advance of this. We have a timing differ-
ence between notification of the item and the economic event, so the accountant 
must make adjustments when preparing the annual financial statements. (Note 
that a highly sophisticated database which is used for preparing monthly internal 
accounts may well make monthly adjustments for accruals and deferrals, or use 
standard charges or some other device to bring these time-based items regularly 
into the database. For our purposes, the first need is simply to be aware of this type 
of transaction; later we will need to take these into account when preparing an-
nual financial statements). Figure 6.1 and Figure 6.2 outline the accounting conse-
quences of accruals and deferrals of expenses and revenues respectively.
Accrued expenses
Accrued expenses represent amounts for goods or services that have been received 
or supplied by third parties, but have not yet been invoiced, paid or formally 
agreed with the supplier at year-end. Typical transactions in this area would be 
Introduction
Accruals and deferrals of expenses and revenues

Chapter 6  Refining the accounting system
167
invoices for items such as telephone, gas or electricity, where the bill is received 
after the service or product has been used. For example, supposing a business 
prepares financial statements to 31 December each year but receives in February 
a gas bill for the months of November, December and January. The proportion of 
the bill which relates to November and December is an expense of the financial 
year ended on 31 December. Such an expense is called an ‘accrued expense’ and 
calls for an adjustment to be made in the financial statements for the year to 
31 December to recognize the outstanding charge.
Supposing in this case the invoice referred to was for €1200. In the absence of 
any specific information about how much related to each month, the accountant 
will make a straightforward allocation on a time basis: the invoice covers three 
months, two of those are in the previous financial period, so the accrued expense 
is 2/3 × €1200 = €800.
Incurred and recorded
during accounting period
Incurred
but not yet recorded
during accounting period
Recorded
but not yet incurred
during accounting period
No adjustment 
Accrue expenses (–E)
as Liability  (+L)
Defer expenses (+E)
as Asset (+A)
Expenses
Figure 6.1
Accruals and 
deferrals of 
expenses
Year- end adjustment
Following year
Assets
Cash
–1 200
Totals
0
–1 200
Liabilities
Accrued expenses 
1800
–800
Equity
Profit year 1
–800
Profit year 2
–400
Totals
0
–1 200

Part 2  Basic financial statements
168
This adjustment would be inserted in the accounting system in order to ­allocate 
the expense across the appropriate years. The €800 expense would be deducted 
from the profit, while the corresponding liability would be put in a ­temporary 
account and appear in the statement of financial position or balance sheet as a 
short-term liability. In the following accounting year, when the €1200 bill was 
paid, only €400 would be treated as an expense, while €800 would extinguish the 
year-end liability. The operation of the accrual account ensures that the actual 
payment of the bill automatically expenses the correct portion into the following 
year operating expenses as well as cancelling the accrual.
Not all accruals fall across two accounting periods. For example, there would 
be a major accrual each year for the audit fee, which is conventionally treated as 
an expense of the year being audited (on a matching basis) although the work is 
carried out in large part in the following year. Accrued vacation pay is another 
significant accruals category: expensed when personnel services are rendered, but 
usually paid in the following calendar year.
A further point to note is that not all accruals are for known amounts. That 
is, when the accountant is drawing up the financial statements, he or she may 
not have received an invoice such as the gas bill examined above. Part of the 
exercise in drawing up the annual statements (sometimes called the year-end 
exercise) involves checking expense accounts to see whether all charges for the 
year have been received. If they have not, the precise details of the charge may 
not have arrived and the accountant will be obliged to estimate – based on 
previous year charges or current trends as appropriate (just one of the many 
instances where the data in the annual financial statements is not a matter of 
indisputable fact).
Deferred expenses
Deferred expenses (or prepaid expenses) are the opposite of accrued expenses – 
they are payments made or invoices received in one financial year for expenses 
which relate to a future financial year. Some items and services, such as rent and 
insurance (also prepaid mobile phone cards), are paid in advance. As such they 
are an asset at the time of payment and only become an expense as time elapses 
and the service or good is used up.
Typically the accounting system does not record such items as assets since 
in practical terms they start to be used up immediately. Usually such transac-
tions are accounted for as expenses when the invoice or payment enters the 
accounting records and later on, as a further part of the year-end exercise, the 
accountant will examine such expense categories to check that the whole of 
the asset has indeed expired and was properly an expense. Frequently there 
is an unexpired portion since rental periods, for example, rarely coincide ex-
actly with a company’s financial year and, in order to match the transaction to 
the correct financial periods, the expense needs to be diminished and an asset 
recognized at balance sheet date, representing the unexpired portion of the 
expense.
If we take an insurance premium as an example, suppose an annual ­premium 
is paid on 1 April and the company’s financial year runs to 31 December. 
Nine-twelfths of the premium should be expensed in the year of payment and 
three-twelfths recognized as an asset at 31 December – to be expensed in the 
following year.

Chapter 6  Refining the accounting system
169
Assuming that the premium was €2400 and that it was initially treated as an 
expense, three-twelfths (€600) should be recognized as an asset at the year-end:
Original  
payment
Year-end 
adjustment
Following  
year
Assets
Cash
–2 400
Prepaid expenses
1600
–600
Totals
–2 400
+600
–600
Equity
Profit year 1
–2,400
1600
Profit year 2
–600
Totals
–2 400
+600
–600
The use of the temporary prepaid expenses account allows the part of the expense 
which relates to the following year to be carried forward to the expenses for that year.
Figure 6.2
Accruals and 
deferrals of 
revenues
Earned and
recorded during 
accounting period
Earned but not yet 
recorded during
accounting period
Recorded but not yet
earned during
accounting period
No adjustment
Accrue revenues (+E)
as Asset  (+A)
Defer revenues (–E)
as Liability (+L)
Revenues
Deferred revenues
Deferred revenues (also called precollected or unearned revenues) are revenues that 
have been recognized before they are actually earned. At year-end, part of the 
recorded revenues that have not been earned yet are deferred or carried forward 
to the following year. These deferred revenues represent a liability that arises be-
cause the company has received advance payment for a service it has agreed to 
render in the future. A typical example from the publishing industry are unearned 
subscription revenues which represent journal subscription payments received in 
advance, for which the publishing company agrees to deliver issues of its journal 
during some future period.

Part 2  Basic financial statements
170
Assuming that a publishing company receives an annual subscription fee 
of €1400 at the start of the annual subscription period (1 April) and that the 
subscription fee is initially treated as full revenue, three-twelfths (€350) of 
the revenue will be deferred and recognized as a short-term liability at the 
year-end:
Original  
receipt
Year-end  
adjustment
Following  
year
Assets
Cash 
11 400
Totals
1 400
0
0
Equity
Profit year 1 
11 400
–350
Profit year 2 
1350
Liabilities
Deferred revenue 
1350
–350
Totals
1 400
0
0
Again, the use of the temporary deferred revenue account allows the part of 
the revenue which relates to the following year to be forwarded to the revenues 
of that year.
In some companies deferred revenue can be quite significant. Microsoft, for ex-
ample, reports in its 2010 financial statements unearned revenue for a total sum 
of $14,830 million (see Microsoft Company Report). Note that ‘deferred revenue’ 
is one of those peculiar liabilities that does not implyexpected future cash out-
flows. It meets the definition of a liability in the sense that the future economic 
benefits to be sacrificed refer to services or goods to be delivered, not cash to be 
paid.
Accrued revenues
Accrued revenue is the reverse of precollected revenue: revenues will be recog-
nized in the statement of profit or loss before actual receipt of cash (or before 
recording of a formal revenue notification).
Assume that on 1 September 20X1 the company loans €100 000 to another 
business which will repay the loan in one year. The company charges interest 
on the loan at an annual interest rate of 9 per cent to be paid at the end of the 
loan term. The company prepares its annual financial statements for the period 
ending 31 December 20X1. In this case the borrower does not actually pay the 
interest in the year in which the loan was provided. But even if the interest 
payment is not made until next year, the company has earned interest income 
this year for a period of four months. The amount earned but unpaid as of the 
end of 20X1 (one-third of €9000) will be shown on the balance sheet of the 
loan provider as an asset. The accrued interest income is similar to a short-term 
receivable.

Chapter 6  Refining the accounting system
171
COMPANY REPORT
Vodafone
Accrued and deferred revenue (extract)
Revenue for access charges, airtime usage and messaging by contract custom-
ers is recognised as revenue as services are performed, with unbilled revenue 
resulting from services already provided accrued at the end of each period and 
unearned revenue from services to be provided in future periods deferred. Rev-
enue from the sale of prepaid credit is deferred until such time as the customer 
uses the airtime, or the credit expires.
Source: Vodafone, Annual Report, 2010
COMPANY REPORT
MICROSOFT – DEFERRED REVENUE (extract)
Unearned revenue
Unearned revenue comprises mainly unearned revenue from volume licensing 
programs, as well as payments for undelivered elements and for other offer-
ings for which we earn the revenue when we provide the service or software or 
otherwise meet the revenue recognition criteria.
Volume licensing programs – Unearned revenue from volume licensing pro-
grams represents customer billings for multi-year licensing arrangements paid 
either at inception of the agreement or annually at the beginning of each billing 
coverage period and accounted for as subscriptions with revenue recognized 
ratably over the billing coverage period.
Undelivered elements – Undelivered elements consist mainly of payments for 
unspecified upgrades or enhancements of Microsoft Internet Explorer on a when-
and-if-available basis for Windows XP, and technology guarantee programs
Other – Also included in unearned revenue are payments for post-delivery sup-
port and consulting services to be performed in the future; Xbox LIVE subscrip-
tions; Microsoft Dynamics business solutions products; and other offerings for 
which we have been paid in advance and earn the revenue when we provide 
the service or software, or otherwise meet the revenue recognition criteria.
The components of unearned revenue were as follows:
(In millions)
June 30
2010
2009
Volume licensing programs
$12 180
$11 350
Undelivered elements
 624
 1 083
Other
 2 026
 1 851
Unearned revenue
$14 830
$14 286
Source: Microsoft, Annual Report, 2010

Part 2  Basic financial statements
172
The operation of the accrued income account ensures that the actual receipt of 
the interest cash flow in 20X2 will cancel out the accrual and leads to the recogni-
tion of a net interest income for the year of €6000 in the 20X2 statement of profit 
or loss.
A provision is an amount charged against profit or loss and carried forward in 
the statement of financial position (balance sheet) in anticipation of a future ex-
penditure whose timing or amount are uncertain, but which derive in some way 
from current circumstances (i.e. the event generating the future expenditure has 
already taken place). The provision can always be released back to the statement 
of profit or loss at some future time if it proves not to be needed. Generally, a pro-
vision is made where some current event may have future consequences which 
will create an expense for the company. Prudence and matching both require that 
this possibility is recognized, but typically neither the exact amount nor the mo-
ment when it will crystallize is known, so a provision is created for an estimated 
amount.
Suppose that a company guarantees the product that it manufactures, under 
a warranty agreement. Under the terms of the agreement, the company under-
takes to repair or replace manufacturing defects that become apparent within 
one year from the date of sale. On past experience, it is likely that in future 
periods a material amount of costs will be incurred in replacing or repairing the 
products sold in the current period. Both the prudence and the matching prin-
ciples require that the profit of the period in which the revenue is recognized, 
be adjusted for the future (expected) replacement and repair costs. At the time 
of the sale, the exact amount of warranty expense is still uncertain. The com-
pany can, however, estimate the future repair and replacement costs based on 
past experience.
Other common examples of this kind of situation are where a company 
agrees to pay a pension in the future to employees, where a company decides to 
­restructure or close down an operation. The adverse impact of business activi-
ties on the environment could also create a remediation obligation that has to be 
provided for.
Provisions
Year-end adjustment
Following year
Assets
Accrued income
13 000
–3 000
Cash
19 000
Totals
3 000
6 000
Equity
Profit year 1
13 000
Profit year 2
16 000
Totals
3 000
6 00\0

Chapter 6  Refining the accounting system
173
From an accounting perspective, the provision is created by reducing profits 
and increasing liabilities:
Create provision
Equity
Profit for the year
–15 000
Liabilities
Provisions
115 000
Note that the provision is accounted for in the statement of financial position 
as part of liabilities (although generally separated clearly from debt). Taking into 
account the estimated timing of the expected future expenditure, it can be a long-
term or a short-term liability.
Provisions should be reviewed at each reporting date and adjusted to reflect the 
current best estimate of the liability amount. When the expenditures for which 
the provision has been created actually occur, the provision will be used:
Use provision
Assets
Cash
–15 000
Liabilities
Provisions
–15 000
The actual expenditure for which the provision has been set up, does not give 
rise to an additional expense, but extinguishes (part of) the provision. If it is no 
longer probable that an outflow of company resources will be required to settle 
the obligation, the provision should be reversed. The reversal will be credited to 
income:
Reverse provision
Equity
Profit for the year
15 000
Liabilities
Provisions
–15 000
Provisions can appear, at first sight, to be rather a fluid subject. Students tend 
immediately to think that provisions must give company accountants a splen-
did opportunity to manipulate profits, by reducing profits in booming years and 
boosting them in lean years. This is true to a certain extent. For example, the 
concept of provisions as introduced by the Fourth EC Company Law Directive 
gives companies a fair amount of flexibility in deciding how to make use of pro-
visions. However, tax authorities are well aware of this and strictly control what 

Part 2  Basic financial statements
174
provisions, if any, are accepted in calculating the taxable profit. On the other 
hand, the IASB has introduced quite restrictive recognition and measurement 
rules with regard to provisions with the effect of restraining manipulative use of 
provision accounting.
STANDARDS
IAS 37 – PROVISIONS, CONTINGENT LIABILITIES AND CONTINGENT 
ASSETS (extract)
14. A provision shall be recognized when:
(a)	 an entity has a present obligation (legal or constructive) as a result of a 
past event;
(b)	it is probable that an outflow of resources embodying economic ben-
efits will be required to settle the obligation; and
(c)	 a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation.
If these conditions are not met, no provision shall be recognized.
Source: IAS 37, Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets
IAS 37, Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets, defines a provi-
sion as a liability of uncertain timing or amount (IAS 37, par.10). As a liability, 
a provision should meet the definition and recognition criteria of a liability, but 
the main difference with an ordinary liability is the uncertainty of the timing or 
amount. The main characteristics of a provision can be described as follows:
	
n	 It reflects a present obligation (at reporting date) as a result of a past event 
that will probably (i.e. more likely than not) lead to a future outflow of 
company resources (usually cash) to settle the obligation.
	
n	 The timing or amount of the future outflow of resources is however still 
uncertain.
	
n	 The cause of the obligation (the obligating event) lies in the past and 
should not refer to a future event.
	
n	 The obligation can be legal (i.e. enforceable by law) or constructive. A con-
structive obligation is an obligation that derives from a company’s past 
actions whereby it has indicated to third parties that it will accept certain 
responsibilities; this may be by a pattern of past practice or by some form 
of public statement.
	
n	 Although the amount and/or timing of future payments are uncertain, 
it should be possible to arrive at a reliable estimate of the amount of the 
obligation.
IAS 37 offers a decision tree that is quite helpful in deciding on the recognition of 
provisions. The decision tree is shown in Figure 6.3. Note that the left-hand side 
of the decision tree, which leads us to the recognition of a provision in the state-
ment of financial position, reflects in fact the typical IASB criteria for defining 
and recognizing a liability in the financial statements.

Chapter 6  Refining the accounting system
175
In the case of the product warranty, the obligating event is the sale of the prod-
uct with a warranty, which gives rise to a legal obligation. A history of claims 
can be compiled in order to determine the probability of warranty claims and 
the probable amount of claims related to the sales for a given period can be esti-
mated. In this case, all three recognition criteria have been met and a provision 
for warranty claims will be recognized in the financial statements. Lawsuits are 
another area for which provisions can be significant. However, it may not always 
be clear that a present obligation exists in a lawsuit. Generally one does not wait 
for the final court decision to recognize a liability, but ponders all available evi-
dence (including the opinion of legal experts) in deciding whether a present ob-
ligation exists. If available evidence brings the legal experts to the opinion that it 
is likely that the company will be found liable, a provision will be recognized for 
the best estimate of the amount needed to settle the present obligation.
Pensions are often a special case, and we will come back to those later in the 
book in more detail, but you can see that where, for example, the company gives 
long service awards, the right to the award is gained by (say) ten years of service 
and is therefore being earned during the ten years and is strictly a cost of those 
ten years, but it is difficult to predict how many employees will qualify for these 
at any given time. This is a classic provision – the company is contractually com-
mitted to pay such awards, but does not know how many people will eventually 
claim them, nor when, so it is a case for a provision.
Figure 6.3 also illustrates the borderline between provisions and contingent li-
abilities. A contingent liability refers to (IAS 37, par.10):
Start
Present obligation
as a result of an
obligating event?
Remote?
Disclose
contingent liability
Do nothing
Probable outflow?
Reliable estimate?
Provide
Possible obligation?
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No (rare)
Figure 6.3
Decision tree – 
recognizing a 
provision

Part 2  Basic financial statements
176
	
1.	a possible obligation that arises from past events and whose existence will be 
confirmed only by the occurrence or non-occurrence of one or more uncer-
tain future events not wholly within the control of the company, or
	
2.	a present obligation that is not recognized because the future expenditure is 
not probable or the obligation cannot be measured with sufficient reliability.
The difference between a provision and a contingent liability is quite impor-
tant as to its reporting consequences: a contingent liability is not recognized in 
the statement of financial position and statement of profit or loss and will only 
be disclosed in the notes to the accounts.
COMPANY REPORT
NOVARTIS – CONTINGENCIES (extract)
A number of our subsidiaries are involved in various government investiga-
tions and legal proceedings (intellectual property, product liability, commercial, 
employment and wrongful discharge, environmental claims, etc.) arising out of 
the normal conduct of their businesses. For more information, see note 20 to 
the Group’s consolidated financial statements.
We record accruals for contingencies when it is probable that a liability has 
been incurred and the amount can be reliably estimated. These accruals are ad-
justed periodically as assessments change or additional information becomes 
available. For product liability claims, a significant portion of the overall accrual 
is actuarially determined based on factors such as past experience, amount 
and number of claims reported, and estimates of claims incurred but not yet 
reported. We provide for individually significant cases when probable and the 
amount can be reliably estimated. Legal defense costs are accrued when they 
are expected to be incurred in connection with a loss contingency and the 
amount can be reliably estimated.
In some instances, the inherent uncertainty of litigation, the resources re-
quired to defend against governmental actions, the potential impact on our 
reputation, and the potential for exclusion from US federal government reim-
bursement programs have contributed to decisions by companies in our indus-
try to enter into settlement agreements with governmental authorities. These 
settlements have had in the past, and may continue in the future, to involve 
large cash payments, including potential repayment of amounts that were al-
legedly improperly obtained and penalties of up to treble damages. In addition, 
matters underlying governmental investigations and settlements may be the 
subject of separate private litigation.
Provisions are recorded for environmental remediation costs when expen-
diture on remedial work is probable and the cost can be reliably estimated. 
Remediation costs are provided for under ‘Noncurrent liabilities’ in the Group’s 
consolidated balance sheet. They are estimated by calculating the present value 
of expected costs.
Provisions relating to estimated future expenditure for liabilities do not usually 
­reflect any insurance or other claims or recoveries, since these are only recog-
nized when the amount is reasonably estimable and collection is virtually certain. 
Source: Novartis, Annual Report, 2010

Chapter 6  Refining the accounting system
177
Pending litigation for which available evidence does not indicate that it is more 
likely than not (but still reasonably possible) that the company will be found li-
able, is an example of a possible obligation to be disclosed as a contingent liabil-
ity. If the probability of any settlement is regarded as slight (remote), no action 
is taken. A financial guarantee is an example of the second type of contingent 
liabilities. If a company guarantees payment of a loan made to a third party, there 
is definitely a legal obligation. However, as long as there is no available evidence 
that the borrower has or probably will default, no provision should be recognized 
in the financial statements. On the other hand, as the granting of a guarantee 
makes the company contingently liable, the nature and the amount of the finan-
cial guarantee must be disclosed in the notes to the accounts.
Generally speaking, the extent of the use of provisions is one of the areas where 
­Anglo-Saxon practice is noticeably different from practice in continental Europe, 
and as usual this is driven by tax considerations. Many European tax authorities 
are more ­sympathetic to provisions than their anglophone counterparts, which 
leads to a greater use of them, since they reduce profit. The IASB definition of a 
provision (see above) requires there to be a firm commitment to make a pay-
ment, whereas in many other regimes a provision is justified if there is simply a 
possibility of making a payment.
COMPANY REPORT
PHILIPS – CONTINGENT LIABILITIES (extract)
Guarantees
Philips’ policy is to provide guarantees and other letters of support only in 
writing. Philips does not stand by other forms of support. At the end of 2010, 
the total fair value of guarantees recognized by Philips in other non-current li-
abilities was EUR 9 million. The following table outlines the total outstanding 
off-­balance sheet credit-related guarantees and business-related guarantees 
provided by Philips for the benefit of unconsolidated companies and third 
­parties as at December 31, 2010.
Expiration per period  
(in millions of euros)
Business-related 
guarantees
Credit-related 
guarantees
Total
2010
Total amounts committed
302
49
351
Less than 1 year
100
22
122
1–5 years
133
8
141
After 5 years
69
19
 88
Source: Philips, Annual Report, 2010

Part 2  Basic financial statements
178
Finally, it is worth noting that the borderline between provisions and ac-
crued expenses is not always that evident. Recall that accrued expenses are 
liabilities to pay for goods or services that have been received or supplied 
but have not yet been invoiced or paid. Sometimes the amount or timing 
of these accruals has to be estimated, but the uncertainty involved in esti-
mating accruals is generally considered to be much less than for provisions. 
Moreover, accrued expenses are often not reported separately in the state-
ment of financial position; they may be included in trade or other payables, 
whereas provisions are reported separately with extensive disclosures in the 
notes to the accounts.
Periodically, assets that have already been recognized on the statement of 
financial position should be reviewed for potential impairment. An asset is 
considered to have become impaired if its ‘economic’ value drops below its 
carrying amount. The general idea is that a company acquires an asset because 
it believes the expected future economic benefits to be generated by that asset 
exceed its cost. Subsequently, if the asset’s remaining expected future benefits 
drop below its net carrying value, that asset is considered to have become 
­impaired. In that case, the carrying value of the asset will be adjusted for an 
impairment loss. Like a provision, it is created by making a deduction from 
profit or loss, but where the opposite entry for a provision for expenses goes 
into the financing side of the statement of financial position as a liability, 
the asset impairment adjustment is a deduction from the asset value and is 
handled just like depreciation.
Asset impairment rules generally prescribe an impairment test in which the 
carrying value of the asset is compared to some threshold value level to deter-
mine whether an impairment has occurred and a write-down must be made. If 
the threshold level has been triggered, the amount of the impairment loss must 
be determined and recorded.
These issues are covered by IAS 36, Impairment of Assets. IAS 36 requires that 
assets are not to be carried at values in excess of their recoverable amount (the 
threshold value). An asset is regarded as impaired if its carrying amount exceeds 
the recoverable amount (IAS 36, par.1). Basically, the recoverable amount of an 
asset is the amount the company can recover either through using the asset in 
the future (‘value in use’ – see below) or selling the asset now.
Assets have to be reviewed for indications of possible impairment at the 
end of each reporting period (IAS 36, par.9). Impairment indicators may re-
late to either the assets themselves or to the economic environment in which 
they are used and include both external sources (such as market interest rates, 
significant adverse changes in technological, market, economic or legal envi-
ronment in which the company operates) and internal sources (such as inter-
nal restructurings, evidence of obsolescence or physical damage of an asset). 
If there is an indication that an asset may be impaired, a detailed calcula-
tion of the recoverable amount is made and the carrying value will be reduced 
accordingly.
Asset impairment

Chapter 6  Refining the accounting system
179
Recoverable amount
The recoverable amount is the higher of an asset’s ‘fair value less costs to sell’ and 
its ‘value in use’ (IAS 36, par.18) (Figure 6.4).
The IASB defines fair value as ‘the amount for which an asset could be ex-
changed or a liability settled between knowledgeable, willing parties in an arm’s 
length transaction’. This fair value definition is very near to market value. This 
means that the ‘fair value less costs to sell’ essentially equals the net selling 
price of the asset. However, if the asset is not traded in an active market, a 
reliable estimate should be made of the amount obtainable from an arm’s length 
COMPANY REPORT
BAYER
Impairment indicators (extract)
In the fourth quarter of 2003, the Bayer Group considered it necessary to con-
duct an impairment test on its global assets in accordance with IAS 36. In the 
industrial business areas in particular, this was triggered partly by the strate-
gic realignment of the Bayer Group, including the plans to place certain of the 
polymers and chemicals activities into an independent entity, and partly by the 
deterioration in business conditions in some areas of operation. These condi-
tions mainly consist of an expected accumulation of adverse external factors 
such as sustained unfavourable price trends, especially higher raw materials 
prices that cannot be passed on fully to customers, lower volume growth as 
a result of tougher competition caused partly by global overcapacities, lower 
economic growth forecasts and continued unfavourable currency trends.
Source: Bayer, Annual Report, 2003
Illustration – impairment of a long-term asset
Assume a company acquired on 2 January 20X1 a specialized machine for 
€1 500 000, expecting to use it to produce a specific item for 12 years. The equip-
ment was depreciated on a straight-line basis. By the end of 20X4 demand 
for the specific product has dropped so much that the company expects that 
the net cash flows the item would generate over the remainder of its product 
life cycle would be less than the machine’s net carrying value (€1 000 000). The 
value in use was estimated at €800 000, while the estimated net selling price 
on 1 January 20X5 was €750 000. The equipment is therefore written down to 
€800 000, its estimated value in use, and the impairment loss is recognized in 
the 20X4 statement of profit or loss.
Between the lines

Part 2  Basic financial statements
180
sale between knowledgeable, willing buyers and sellers, less costs of disposal. 
In that case, the outcome of recent transactions for similar assets within the same 
industry would be considered good evidence. Costs of disposal are the incremen-
tal costs that would be directly attributable to the disposal of the asset, such as 
stamp duty and similar transaction taxes and legal costs, but also costs of remov-
ing the asset.
Value in use is to be distinguished from market value or fair value. It typically 
reflects the value to a particular user rather than to the market in general, rec-
ognizing the extent to which the asset contributes to the specific business and 
performance of the company. IAS 36 defines value in use as the present value of 
estimated future cash flows from continued use of the asset and eventual disposal 
at the end of its useful life. Being based on present value calculations, discounting 
will be an essential part in measuring value in use. Basically, estimating the value 
in use of an asset involves two essential steps (IAS 36, par.31):
	
a.	 estimating the future cash inflows and outflows to be derived from continu-
ing use of the asset and from its ultimate disposal, and
	
b.	applying the appropriate discount rate to those future cash flows.
IAS 36 provides detailed guidance to apply these rules (see box below for some 
headlines of the calculation guidance).
It is not always necessary to determine both the fair value less costs to sell and 
the value in use. If either of the values exceeds the carrying amount of the asset, 
the asset is not impaired and it is not necessary to estimate the other amount. 
So, in practice, one will probably start with determining the fair value less costs 
of disposal (or the net selling price). If this value proves to be lower than the as-
set’s carrying amount, the more complex calculation of value in use will become 
necessary. Figure 6.5 illustrates the typical sequence of steps of an impairment 
test process.
Individual assets versus cash-generating units
In principle, an asset’s recoverable amount is determined at the individual asset 
level (IAS 36, par.66). However, assets are often used in combination with other 
assets and not in isolation. Individual long-term assets, for example, usually do 
not generate cash flows independently. It is their utilization together with other 
types of assets that generates cash flows. Hence, if the cash flows necessary for 
Figure 6.4
Recoverable 
amount
Carrying value
<compare>
Fair value
less cost to sell
Value in use
Recoverable
amount
<is higher of>

Chapter 6  Refining the accounting system
181
Are there indicators of
potential impairment of
the asset?
Can one determine
the FV of the asset?
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Calculate VIU
Is VIU > CA?
Impairment loss
No impairment
Is FV less costs to
sell > CA?
FV   =  Fair value
CA   =  Carrying amount
VIU  =  Value in use
Figure 6.5
Impairment test
STANDARDs
VALUE IN USE – CALCULATION HEADLINES
In calculating an asset’s value in use, one should use:
	 1.	Estimates of the future cash flows the entity expects to derive from the 
asset and expectations about possible variations in the amount and tim-
ing of those future cash flows; the estimates should include all estimated 
future cash inflows and cash outflows except for cash flows from financ-
ing activities and income tax receipts and payments.
	 2.	Cash flow projections based on assumptions that reflect the asset in its 
current condition (without considering future restructurings or improve-
ments) and represent management’s best estimate of the set of condi-
tions that will exist over the remaining useful life of the asset.
	 3.	A pretax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the 
time value of money and the risks specific to the asset; the discount 
rate should not reflect risks for which the future cash flows have been 
adjusted.
Source: Adapted from IAS 36, Impairment of Assets, par.30–57

Part 2  Basic financial statements
182
the calculation of value in use are not generated by individual assets but by a 
combination of assets being used together, it is only sensible to estimate value in 
use in total for groups of assets. These groups are referred to as cash-generating 
units. So, if an asset does not generate cash inflows that are largely independent 
of those from other assets, the recoverable amount will be determined as a higher 
level – the cash-generating unit to which the asset belongs.
A cash-generating unit (CGU) is the smallest identifiable group of assets that 
generate cash flows that are largely independent of the cash flows from other as-
sets or groups of assets. IAS 36 insists that a CGU should be identified for the 
lowest level of aggregation of assets possible. Identifying the lowest level of inde-
pendent cash inflows for a group of assets will not always be straightforward and 
could involve considerable judgement. The independence of cash flows will be in-
dicated by the way management monitors the company’s operations, for example 
by product lines, businesses or geographical locations. Management’s analysis will 
probably reflect the independence of cash inflows in its reporting structures and 
formats. IAS 36 stipulates that the existence of an active market for the output 
produced by an asset or group of assets, constitutes primary evidence that cash 
STANDARDs
IMPAIRMENT RULES – INDIVIDUAL ASSETS VERSUS CASH-GENERATING 
UNITS (examples)
	 1.	A mining entity owns a private railway to support its mining activities. 
The private railway could be sold only for scrap value and it does not gen-
erate cash inflows that are largely independent of the cash inflows from 
the other assets of the mine. It is not possible to estimate the recoverable 
amount of the private railway because its value in use cannot be deter-
mined and is probably different from scrap value. Therefore, the entity 
estimates the recoverable amount of the cash-generating unit to which 
the private railway belongs, i.e. the mine as a whole.
	 2.	A bus company provides services under contract with a municipality that 
requires minimum service on each of five separate routes. Assets devoted 
to each route and the cash flows from each route can be identified sepa-
rately. One of the routes operates at a significant loss. Because the entity 
does not have the option to curtail any one bus route, the lowest level of 
identifiable cash inflows that are largely independent of the cash inflows 
from other assets or groups of assets is the cash inflows generated by 
the five routes together. The cash-generating unit for each route is the bus 
company as a whole.
Source: IAS 36, Impairment of Assets, par.67 and 68
flows are independent. Such an asset or group of assets will therefore be a CGU. 
Examples of outputs from assets for which an active market exists include oil, elec-
tricity, marketable subassemblies, etc.

Chapter 6  Refining the accounting system
183
The recoverable amount of the asset’s CGU is determined in the same way as 
an asset’s recoverable amount. The principles to determine the CGU’s fair value 
less costs to sell and its value in use are the same as those applicable for an in-
dividual asset. The carrying amount of the CGU should include all assets that 
generate the future cash inflows at the CGU level. Sometimes it will be necessary 
to include allocations of the carrying amount of corporate assets (such as a 
research centre, a central IT department or the corporate head office) when they 
contribute to the generation of cash inflows of the CGU.
Annual impairment test requirements
IAS 36 (par.10) requires that intangible assets with indefinite useful lives have to 
be tested for impairment annually, irrespective of whether there is any indication 
that these may be impaired. The same applies to capitalized goodwill (see Chap-
ter 12 on group financial statements) which is not subject to systematic annual 
depreciation, but should be tested for impairment annually (according to IFRS 3, 
Business Combinations). An annual impairment test is also required for intangi-
ble assets that have not yet been brought into use, due to their higher intrinsic 
uncertainty.
By their nature, goodwill and intangibles will necessarily be tested for impair-
ment at the level of cash-generating units. These impairment tests can be per-
formed at any time during an annual period, provided that the tests are scheduled 
at the same time every year.
STANDARDs
ILLUSTRATION – IDENTIFICATION OF A CASH-GENERATING UNIT  
IN A RETAIL STORE CHAIN
Store Downtown belongs to Alphaline, a retail store chain. Downtown makes 
all its retail purchases through the central purchasing centre of Alphaline. 
Pricing, marketing, advertising and human resources policies (except for hir-
ing X’s cashiers and sales staff) are decided at corporate level. Alphaline also 
owns five other stores in the same city as Downtown (although in different 
neighbourhoods) and 20 other stores in other cities. All stores are managed 
uniformly.
In identifying a cash-generating unit in this context, one should consider, 
for example, whether internal management reporting is organized to ­measure 
performance on a store-by-store basis and whether the business is run on 
a store-by-store profit basis or on a region/city basis. Although the stores of 
Alphaline are managed at a corporate level, they are all located in different 
neighbourhoods and probably have different customer bases. Downtown 
generates cash inflows that are largely independent of those of the other 
stores of the retail chain and, therefore, it is likely that Downtown is a cash-
generating unit.
Source: Adapted from IAS 36 – Illustrative Examples

Part 2  Basic financial statements
184
Impairment loss
If an asset’s carrying amount exceeds its recoverable amount, it will be written 
down and an impairment loss recognized as an expense in the statement of profit 
or loss.
For assets carried at a revalued amount, the impairment loss is treated as a re-
valuation decrease.
If the impairment loss is determined at the level of a cash-generating unit, 
the CGU’s impairment loss has to be allocated between the assets of the CGU. If 
goodwill has been allocated to the asset base of the CGU, the impairment loss is 
allocated first to reduce the carrying amount of goodwill. Secondly, the remain-
ing impairment loss is allocated to the other assets of the CGU pro-rata, on the 
basis of their carrying amounts in the CGU.
An impairment loss should be reversed (and income recognized) when there 
has been a change in the estimates used to determine an asset’s recoverable 
STANDARDs
ILLUSTRATION – IDENTIFICATION OF A CASH-GENERATING UNIT  
IN A SINGLE PRODUCT COMPANY
Company Unique produces a single product and owns plants A, B and C. 
Each plant is located in a different continent. A produces a component that is 
­assembled in either B or C. Alternatively, plant A’s products can be sold in an 
active market. The combined capacity of B and C is not fully utilized. Unique’s 
products are sold worldwide from either plant B or C. For example, plant B’s 
production can be sold in plant C’s continent if the products can be delivered 
faster from plant B than from plant C. Utilization levels of plants B and C de-
pend on the allocation of sales between the two sites.
As there is an active market for plant A’s products, A could sell its product in 
that market and, so generate cash inflows that would be largely independent 
of the cash inflows from plants B or C. Therefore, it is likely that plant A is a 
separate cash-generating unit, although part of its output is used by plants B 
and C.
Although there is an active market for the products assembled by plants B 
and C, cash inflows for B and C depend on the allocation of production across 
the two plants. It is unlikely that the future cash inflows for plants B and C can 
be determined individually. This brings us to conclude that plant B and plant C  
together are the smallest identifiable group of assets that generates cash 
­inflows that are largely independent.
Source: Adapted from IAS 36, Illustrative examples
amount since the last impairment loss was recognized. However, an impairment 
loss should only be reversed to the extent the reversal does not increase the carry-
ing amount of the asset above the carrying amount that would have been deter-
mined for the asset (net of amortization or depreciation) had no impairment loss 
been recognized.

Chapter 6  Refining the accounting system
185
Probably the most commonly occurring asset impairment adjustment is that re-
lating to non-collection of company receivables. A company’s suppliers will natu-
rally expect to be paid in full, but on the other hand the company may not expect 
to collect all the debts owing to it. At first sight that might seem a little odd, but 
there are various reasons why this may be:
	
1.	A customer may be a bad risk: it is difficult to assess creditworthiness, so mis-
takes are made and credit given to those who cannot pay or, on the other 
hand, a company with a good credit record may suddenly hit bad times.
	
2.	A customer might be disputing the amount of the invoice you sent: perhaps he 
or she thinks the price charged was higher than that agreed or the quantity 
greater than that delivered.
	
3.	A customer may have refused to accept some of the goods because they were faulty 
or may be planning to send some faulty goods back, but this has not yet 
been picked up by the accounting system.
There are many reasons why the receivables’ balance at any given point is un-
likely to be collected in full. If the full accounting value was used in the statement 
of financial position, it would therefore overstate the value of the asset and of the 
profit for the period.
There are two separate aspects of assessing a ‘prudent’ value for outstand-
ing receivables (or ‘debtors’ in British English). First, there is the case of spe-
cific receivables which on the evidence available are not likely ever to be paid 
and, second, there is a more general assessment of the collectability of all 
receivables.
In the first case, it is a routine part of credit management to inspect all out-
standing receivables and particularly those which have been outstanding a 
long time. What exact length of time is appropriate depends upon the normal 
terms of credit in a particular industry – in most cases if a receivable has not 
been paid within 60 days of the issue of the invoice (or perhaps by the end of 
the month following the month of issue), the credit manager will regard the 
receivable as overdue and in need of follow-up. After 90 days the receivable is 
a source of concern and normally a credit manager would be in touch directly 
with the debtor at that point to discover why payment has not been made. 
After six months the credit manager and the accountant should consider the 
receivable together with whatever information the credit manager has gleaned 
from the customer (or indeed the sales force) to decide whether the receiv-
able is likely to be settled. It may be that the client is going into liquidation 
or disputes the bill and refuses to pay and a decision has to be taken about 
recoverability. If it is decided that the amount is not recoverable, then the re-
ceivable becomes categorized as a bad debt and should be removed from the 
receivables’ total. Note that in practice the phrases bad debts and doubtful debts 
are quite common, although it would be more accurate to use the labels bad 
receivables and doubtful receivables.
The bad debt, although it derives originally from a sale, is considered to be an 
expense. After all, the original sale took place; it is the settlement of the receiv-
able which has not happened. Accordingly there is a simple transfer to credit 
Bad debts and doubtful debts

Part 2  Basic financial statements
186
the receivable account (and therefore cancel the amount outstanding) and debit 
the profit and loss account. This evaluation of individual receivables should take 
place routinely throughout the year, but in any event it will also be a part of the 
exercise undertaken in preparing financial statements to ensure that no bad debts 
are included in the receivables’ total.
The second consideration is that of taking a prudent view of the likely value 
to be received from the current receivables’ balance at the accounting date when 
statements are being prepared. As we noted, there are many reasons why the 
total of accounts receivable may not be ultimately converted to cash, but most 
of the problems on individual receivables only come to light after the debt has 
aged a little. Consequently, as the bulk of the receivables outstanding at any one 
moment will be current, there is no way of knowing which will cause problems.
The prudent response to this is to set aside an ‘allowance for doubtful debts’. 
This is an amount expensed in the statement of profit or loss, but simply held as a 
credit balance in the general ledger (or nominal ledger) against the day when any 
of the receivables outstanding at balance sheet date is classified as bad.
The object of making this general allowance for doubtful debts is to show a 
prudent value of total receivables. Exactly how much should be set aside in the 
allowance is a matter for consideration in the context of the business of each 
company. In general terms, a company might be guided by:
	
n	 industry practice generally
	
n	 average percentage of actual bad debts experienced by the company in 
­previous years
	
n	 an estimate consisting of a high proportion of receivables outstanding 
more than (say) three months plus a low proportion of current receivables.
COMPANY REPORT
AUSTRIAN AIRLINES
Impairment of aircraft (extract)
Due to the impairment test carried out on the aircraft fleet, there is no require-
ment for impairment to a lower recoverable value for aircraft employed in the 
longer term. In detail, calculation is performed on the basis of so-called Cash 
Generating Units. Since all aircraft are used for all traffic streams according 
to the transferral concept of the Austrian Airlines Group, the total Group fleet 
has been included as a single Unit. An interest rate of 5.0 per cent (5.0 per cent 
the previous year) was set for the purposes of calculation. For the cash flows 
of the periods from 2012, which lie outside the limits of the calculations of the 
current corporate plan, the cash flow for the year 2011 was measured and es-
calated by 2.0 per cent per annum. Because the book values of those aircraft 
and spare parts specified for disposal but in regular flight operation until that 
time were below the market values minus disposal costs, no impairments were 
recognized in the report period (EUR 5.0 m the preceding year). There was also 
no need for impairment on aircraft not used in own flight operation due to the 
redimensioning of long-haul.
Source: Austrian Airlines, Annual Report, 2007

Chapter 6  Refining the accounting system
187
The precise amount will be a matter of the opinion of the accountant prepar-
ing the statements and the auditor.
It may be helpful to look at the impact of such an allowance in the context of 
a statement of profit or loss and statement of financial position. Let us say that 
Wholesale Merchants Ltd has total receivables in its general ledger of £115 000 
and that in preparing the annual financial statements the accountant has de-
cided that £1000 of receivables should be treated as definitely bad, while a further 
£1300 should be set aside as an allowance for doubtful debts.
The impact of this will be to create an expense of £2300 and reduce the 
published balance sheet value of receivables by the same amount. Within the 
­company’s records, the transactions would be:
Write off  
bad debt
Create  
allowance
Assets
Receivables
–1000
Valuation allowance
–1300
Equity
Profit for the year
–1000
–1300
The book value of the receivables goes down by £1000 directly and in the pub-
lished statement of financial position or balance sheet the receivables figure 
would also be reduced by the valuation allowance, although in the general ledger 
the allowance will be held in a separate account, and in practical terms all the 
‘live’ receivable accounts will continue to be followed up with monthly state-
ments etc.
Normally, a company will set aside an allowance for doubtful debts each year, 
and in the next set of statements will simply add to or subtract from the ex-
isting allowance to reach the required figure. For example, a company with an 
unutilized balance on the allowance of £500 brought forward from the previous 
year would determine the required allowance for the current statement, let us say 
£750, and then expense the difference (£250) needed to bring the valuation al-
lowance up to the required amount.
It is important to realize that the allowance for doubtful debts is an adjustment 
made in order that the published financial statements show a reasonably prudent 
view. Notice that none of the individual accounts of the customers is credited. 
They still record the full amount due. The allowance will be used during the fol-
lowing year, as the bad debts materialize. This ensures that the bad debts do not 
affect the expenses (and hence the profit) of the year in which they prove to be 
bad, but rather the year in which the business was done.
Less strict provision accounting rules can lead to significant ‘hidden reserves’. Clearly, 
provisions provide great scope for reducing profits under a prudent accounting regime, 
even though they are not necessarily considered to be an ‘allowable’ (i.e. accepted by 
Hidden reserves

Part 2  Basic financial statements
188
the tax authorities) expense for calculating the tax base. A typical example of pro-
visions that used to be popular for these purposes and that are still allowed under 
European accounting rules (and under numerous other local GAAP regimes) are the 
‘deferred maintenance’ provisions.
Provisions for maintenance and repairs usually relate to installations and 
equipment that require substantial expenditure every few years for major refits 
or refurbishment and the replacement of major components. Suppose a power 
plant has a useful life of 25 years, but the steam generators need to be replaced 
every eight years. Utility companies used to account for this type of replacement 
programme by building a maintenance provision over a period of eight years up 
to the estimated replacement cost. The provision is used when the steam genera-
tor is actually replaced. IAS 37 does not allow this kind of provision, because at 
balance sheet date there exists no obligation to replace the steam generator inde-
pendently of the company’s future actions. Even the actual intention of the com-
pany to effectively replace the steam generator after the eight-year period does 
not create a present obligation as the company can always decide not to replace 
the steam generator or avoid the future expenditure by selling the power plant 
during the eight-year period. In fact, IAS 16, Property, Plant and Equipment, clears 
this point with its guidance on allocating expenditure on an asset to its compo-
nent parts where these components have different useful lives or provide benefits 
in a different pattern. Instead of a provision being recognized, the depreciation 
of the steam generator has to be scheduled over eight years (and not the 25-year 
periods of the power plant as a whole). The replacement costs of the steam gen-
erator then incurred have to be capitalized and depreciated over the subsequent 
eight years.
COMPANY REPORT
CHINA SHOTO – ALLOWANCE FOR DOUBTFUL TRADE RECEIVABLES (extract)
Significant accounting policies
The Group makes sales on credit. A proportion of the outstanding credit sales 
may prove uncollectable in due course. An estimate is made of the uncollect-
able portion of accounts receivables using a percentage based on the ageing 
profile of the amounts outstanding, and also individually confirmed accord-
ing to the customers’ accrual credit conditions. Historically the Group has not 
born losses exceeding 1 per cent of gross book value of trade and other receiv-
ables but has increased its allowance for doubtful trade receivables during this 
­period to reflect tightening monetary policy, in particular.
There is a degree of uncertainty as to actions the Group is able to undertake 
to enforce collection of doubtful debts, which may impact the eventual recover-
able amounts. Accordingly, the Directors have assessed their best estimate of 
the recoverability of such debts as nil. More details of the allowance for doubt-
ful trade and other receivables is provided in Note 14.
Source: China Shoto, Annual Report, 2010

Chapter 6  Refining the accounting system
189
It should be clear that, in the aggregate, the ‘deferred maintenance’ type of 
provisions (and similar ‘intentional’ or even more general provisions for potential 
risks) can be used to even out the trend of profits over several accounting periods 
or projecting a trend of modestly rising profits over the years (what shareholders 
generally expect), when true underlying profits may be quite volatile. Provisions 
which have been created with a view to concealing profits or storing them for the 
future (the Securities and Exchange Commission talks about ‘cookie jar’ provi-
sions) could be considered to constitute ‘hidden reserves’.
By way of illustration, suppose that in 20X1 a company reported profits of 
€100m; the position might be:
20X1  
€m
20X2  
€m
20X3  
€m
Reported profit
100
Market expectations
120
140
In 20X2 the draft financial statements show a profit of €150m but the com-
pany does not expect to be able to sustain that level of profitability, which was 
caused by unusual trading conditions. If it reports that profit, the situation 
would be:
20X1  
€m
20X2  
€m
20X3  
€m
Reported profit
100
150
Market expectations
225
So it makes a provision:
20X1  
€m
20X2  
€m
20X3  
€m
Draft profit
150
Provision
–30
Reported profit
100
120
Market expectations
140
The following year is particularly bad:
20X1 
€m
20X2 
€m
20X3 
€m
Draft profit
110
Release provision
130
Reported profit
100
120
140

Part 2  Basic financial statements
190
Pressure on immediate profitability in the international field means that such 
provisions are used less often than they used to be, but it is normal practice for 
companies to try to even out profit flows a little by matching windfall profits 
with extra costs (known as income smoothing). The SEC says that US companies 
do this also. Apart from anything else there is a closer correlation between profit 
and dividend and shareholders look first at the dividend, not the profit, but also 
check the dividend as a percentage of profit.
The term reserve has a specific connotation in technical accounting jargon – it 
is an amount set aside from profit after tax and will appear in the statement of 
financial position as a component of owners’ equity. Hidden reserves (also secret 
reserves, silent reserves) are rather different. These are deductions from measured 
profit, which do not appear separately in the statement of profit or loss when 
charged and are not visible in the statement of financial position. Historically, 
such reserves might be created by:
	
n	 writing down assets excessively
	
n	 creating provisions for fictitious risks
	
n	 overstating allowable provisions
	
n	 overstating financial liabilities.
The pressures for increased transparency of accounting mean that in many juris-
dictions such activity is now illegal and, where it is legal (as in Switzerland) some 
disclosures have to be made when reserves are released. Clearly, while such re-
serves may be defended on the grounds of prudence, they provide endless oppor-
tunities for disguising the true state of a company’s profit and financial position.
Capital structure
Broadly, companies are financed externally either with equity or debt. Equity par-
ticipates fully in the risks and rewards of ownership – has no guaranteed return, 
but no upper limit either. Companies have limited liability so the equity-holder’s 
downside risk is limited to the amount of his or her investment. The equity is only 
ever repaid to the individual investor in the event of liquidation. Ordinarily, an 
investor realizes the investment by selling the shares they own to someone else, 
although in restricted circumstances companies can buy back their own shares. 
(Exact regulation varies quite substantially from one jurisdiction to another.)
Debt is usually advanced to the company for a fixed period, earns a fixed re-
turn (although the interest rate may float in line with market rates) and must be 
repaid at the end of the period. The debt may be for the short, medium or long 
term, may be in foreign currency and can derive from a variety of sources. Many 
large companies obtain debt by issuing bonds or debentures which are bought 
and sold on the international financial markets.
This traditional distinction has broken down somewhat as a result of financial 
engineering – banks compete with each other for corporate clients by devising 
ever more complicated debt instruments which incorporate many characteristics 
of equity.
The decision as to what proportion of debt and equity to use in a company is a 
major issue. In principle, a company which uses a high proportion of debt (a highly 
geared company) has the possibility of enhancing the return to shareholders at the 
cost of making the return more volatile, more risky to the shareholder (discussed 

Chapter 6  Refining the accounting system
191
in Chapter 17). The ratio of debt to equity is one of the key aspects reviewed by the 
markets and some companies put a lot of effort into massaging this ratio.
Generally, companies have a target debt/equity ratio around which they oper-
ate, but which they do not usually achieve in practice. Issuing new equity can 
be expensive (professional fees, underwriting etc.) and therefore companies tend 
to use internally generated funds and debt to finance new projects in the first 
instance and then every few years issue new equity to move back closer to their 
target gearing.
Components of equity
The main type of share is the ordinary shares. The ordinary shareholders are 
the ultimate owners of the company and all other forms of finance rank ahead 
of these for payment. Their interest in the company is called equity – what is left 
after all other calls have been met.
Equity in a statement of financial position or balance sheet consists of ordi-
nary shares and reserves. Reserves are either capital or revenue in nature. Capital 
reserves may not be distributed to shareholders (except on liquidation); revenue 
reserves are usually derived from the company’s profit-making activities and may 
be paid over to shareholders by way of dividend. The archetypal revenue reserve 
is accumulated or retained earnings.
Ordinary shares have a face or par or nominal value. When companies are cre-
ated, legal documents are drawn up which specify the upper limit on the number 
of shares which can be issued. Companies are not obliged to issue all these, and 
their effective voting share capital is the issued share capital. Note that sometimes 
companies have different classes of ordinary shares – ‘A’ shares, ‘B’ shares, etc. – 
often this is to give different voting rights to different groups of shareholders, a 
practice not entirely popular with the market.
Ordinary shares are rarely issued at par value and the difference between issue 
price and par value is also part of equity. It is called share premium and is a capital 
reserve. Costs of issuing shares are offset against share premium.
Preference shares
Preference shares attract a fixed return (hence ‘7 per cent preference shares’) and 
holders do not routinely have voting rights, so they have the characteristic of 
debt. On the other hand the preference dividend may not be paid if there are no 
profits and does not qualify as a deduction before tax. Usually, if no dividend is 
paid preference shareholders are enfranchized. Typically preference shares are cu-
mulative – if the dividend is not paid, the right to receive it accumulates against 
future profits. Dividends cannot be paid to ordinary shareholders ahead of prefer-
ence shareholders. It is a matter of opinion as to whether preference shares should 
be treated as debt or equity for the purposes of calculating gearing.
Convertibles
Convertible securities – either preference shares or debt which can be converted at 
some point in the future into ordinary shares – are another form of debt which 
was particularly popular at the end of the 20th century. The merit of convertible 
securities is that the initial fixed return status means that there is little risk to the 

Part 2  Basic financial statements
192
Summary
In this chapter we have dealt with year-end adjustments, including accruals and 
deferrals (of expenses and revenues) and provisions. We specifically outlined 
the more subjective aspects of provision accounting and the borderline with 
contingent liabilities. We have introduced and discussed the concept of impair-
ment testing of asset values which has become a primary procedural issue in 
preparing financial statements at year-end. The underlying idea of the impair-
ment test requirement is that an asset should not be carried on the statement of 
financial position at more than the company will be able to recover either from 
using or selling the asset. Adjusting the carrying amount of receivables for bad 
or doubtful debts is a specific application of the recoverability analysis of asset 
values. We have also visited briefly the equity side of financing, looking at how 
this is made up.
Discussion Questions
1.	 Accurately accounting for accruals and deferrals is a major issue in preparing 
financial statements. Discuss what constitutes an accrual and a deferral and 
give appropriate examples of the main categories one can discern.
2.	 Explain why and how deferred revenue is recognized in the statement of  
financial position.
3.	 In what sense is provision accounting a specific application of the principle 
of accrual accounting?
4.	 Explain the meaning of the word ‘impairment’ within the context of IFRS 
and discuss why it can be difficult to apply the concept to individual assets.
5.	 Identify and discuss the main categories of shareholders’ equity that you 
would find in an IFRS statement of financial position. Be sure to enumerate 
specific sources included in each main category.
lender, while the possibility of converting to equity in the longer term means 
that if the company does well, the holder can convert to equity and participate 
in the company’s growth. For the issuer it means a finer issue price and, if con-
verted, a relatively cheap way to issue equity. For the analyst there is a problem 
as to whether convertible debt should be treated as debt or equity for analytical 
purposes.
In recent years companies have issued all sorts of complex financial instru-
ments which combine both elements of debt and elements of equity.
The earliest instruments were probably convertible debentures or preference 
shares, where companies might argue that they should be considered to be part 
of the equity component rather than debt. Variants on this might be debt (some-
times called mezzanine debt) which ranked behind other debt for repayment and 
received a return based on profitability of the company. More recent develop-
ments are capital bonds and perpetual loan notes. If a loan is never to be repaid, it 
can be argued that it is more like equity than debt.

Chapter 6  Refining the accounting system
193
6.	 A company that grants defined pension benefits to its employees usually 
shows in its statement of financial position a net liability representing the 
difference between the obligation to pay pension benefits and the fair value 
of the assets included in the pension fund. Explain why it is not enough to 
expense the company’s yearly contributions to the pension fund and even-
tually include an overview of the relevant assets of the pension fund (that 
is a separate entity) as an addendum in the notes.
Assignments
The following assignments have answers on the lecturer side of the digital sup-
port resources for the book.
1.	 The following balances were extracted from the accounting records of Arling-
ton SA as at 31 December 20X1:
100 000 ordinary shares
100 000
10% preference shares
50 000
12% debenture
50 000
Premises
130 000
Motor vehicles (gross cost €48 000)
36 000
Purchases
219 700
Administration expenses
73 200
Distribution costs
102 600
Sales
476 900
Receivables
39 250
Trade payables
23 600
Inventory at 1 January 20X1
21 250
Bank balance (asset)
70 420
Investments at cost
45 800
Reserves
48 220
Debenture interest
3 000
Preference dividend
2 500
Ordinary dividend
5 000
	
You are required to draw up a statement of profit or loss and a statement 
of financial position for the company as at 31 December 20X1, after tak-
ing into account the following adjustments (note that expenses have 
been analyzed by function, not by type, in this example):
	
(a)	 The closing inventory (31 December 20X1) was valued at €19 300.
	
(b)	 Preference and ordinary dividends were paid halfway through the year, 
as well as debenture interest, but an accrual should be made for the 
balance of the debenture interest for the year. The company proposes a 
final dividend of €8000 on ordinary shares.
	
(c)	 The audit fee has been agreed at €5000.
	
(d)	 Insurance (included in administrative expenses) has been paid in 
advance and €950 relates to 20X2.

Part 2  Basic financial statements
194
	
(e)	 There are accrued expenses of €480 for telephone (included in 
administration) and €620 for light and heat (distribution).
	
(f)	 The receivables balance includes €1200 of bad debts which should be 
written off.
	
(g)	 Depreciation of 25 per cent on a straight-line basis should be charged on 
the motor vehicles (which are vans used in distribution).
	
(h)	 The market value of the investments at 31 December 20X1 amounts to 
€44 100.
	
(i)	 It is estimated that the tax charge for 20X1 will be €20 000.
	
(Comment: This question is presented in an unhelpful way! You should reor-
ganize the information from the database onto a spreadsheet in a way with 
which you are comfortable and then deal with the adjustments. You will not 
have come across one or two adjustments, and should just suggest a way of 
dealing with them based on what you know so far.)
2.	 Critically assess the following cases within the context of the IAS 37 
­requirements for provision accounting.
	
(a)	 Company A offers a one year warranty for the products that it 
manufactures. Yearly revenue subject to product warranties amounts 
to €3 000 000. In past years between 1 per cent and 3 per cent of the 
products proved defective. Defective products are replaced.
	
(b)	 Company B produces and sells phosphate fertilizers that are used to 
grow grains. The process of extracting the raw materials from the land 
the company owns, has a major impact on the natural environment. 
At balance sheet date, estimates of environmental remediation costs 
amount to €5 000 000.
	
(c)	 A law suit claiming damages has been filed against company C. The 
company foresees a reasonable possibility of losing the law suit. The 
company’s legal advisers have estimated potential settlement costs at 
€350 000.
	
(d)	  Company D runs an airline. The company is required by law to 
overhaul its aircraft once every three years. The future maintenance costs 
are estimated at €2 500 000.
3.	 On 2 January, 20X3 Dinasus Ltd purchased a specialized machine tool for 
£3 000 000. The straight-line depreciation schedule established an annual 
depreciation charge of £600 000 over a five-year useful life. Changes in 
market demand brought the company to carry out an impairment test at 
the end of accounting period 20X6. The impairment test was executed by 
external valuation experts and they concluded that (a) the machine tool 
suffered permanent impairment of its operational value, (b) the original 
useful life was still appropriate, (c) the net present value calculation of the 
cash flows to be generated by the machine tool amounted to £800 000 and 
(d) £950 000 is a reasonable estimate of the net selling price of the machine 
tool at the time of the impairment test.

Chapter 6  Refining the accounting system
195
	
Required: What are the accounting effects of this impairment test for 
­accounting period 20X6?
4.	 At 31 December 20X3, Biaz Ltd carries out a review for impairment of a machine 
shop, acquired at the beginning of 20X1 for £20 000. The useful life of the ma-
chine shop was estimated at five years with a zero residual value. The machine 
shop is depreciated straight-line. Taking into account the impact of technological 
advances on operating conditions, the recoverable amount of the machine shop 
is estimated at £6000, with a remaining useful life of two years.
	
Required: Determine if any impairment loss is to be accounted for at the 
end of 20X3. What would be the book value of the machine shop at the end 
of 20X4 (no further impairment during 20X4)?
5.	 The following end-of-year balances (in €) were extracted from Gearcorp’s  
accounting system at 31 December 20X1:
Land
250 000
Buildings (acquisition cost)
1 250 000
Accumulated depreciation of 
buildings
–437 500
Equipment (acquisition cost)
595 000
Accumulated depreciation of 
equipment
–178 500
Share capital
650 000
Reserves
230 000
Debt
960 000
Inventory at 1 January 20X1
260 490
Trade receivables
280 300
Bank
1 040 000
Trade payables
675 900
Sales
1 810 410
Purchases
–627 360
Salaries
–482 630
Other operating expenses
–120 530
Interest expense
–36 000
	
(a)	 The value of the closing inventory at 31 December was €320 550.
	
(b)	 So far, no depreciation has been provided for 20X1. As far as buildings 
are concerned, the company assumes a zero residual value and applies a 
5 per cent straight-line depreciation rate. The equipment is depreciated 
using the reducing balance method. The equipment has an estimated 
useful life of five years and a residual value of €100 000.
	
(c)	 The company rents a building in which the offices of its administrative 
personnel are located. The monthly rent amounts to €5000. Currently, 
the trial balance includes the payment of the rent relating to January 
20X2, since that rent was prepaid in December 20X1.

Part 2  Basic financial statements
196
	
(d)	 The audit fee pertaining to 20X1 is agreed to be €110 000.
	
(e)	 The company’s tax advisers estimate that Gearcorp will have to pay 
about €72 3900 corporate income tax on the 20X1 profit.
	
(f)	 Included in other operating expenses is a business insurance policy 
which cost €4800 and which runs for the year from 1 April 20X1.
	
(g)	 The company is facing litigation from a former employee and considers 
it prudent to recognize a provision against legal costs of €30 000.
Required: Use the above information to make the necessary 
accounting adjustments and draw up Gearcorp’s statement of profit 
or loss for the 20X1 fiscal year as well as its statement of financial 
position at 31 December 20X1.
6.	 See assignment Traduct SA in Chapter 12 for an exercise on impairment 
issues including goodwill.

197
C H A P T E R  7
Preparing financial statements
In this chapter we are going to reach the end of our journey to the first major 
objective, which is to gain the ability to put together a simple statement of profit or 
loss and statement of financial position. The techniques we have been using are not 
those used directly by accountants, but the object is to understand the principles, 
in order to be able to use financial statements better as managers. This chapter will 
serve to bring together and review the different allocations and adjustments we have 
discussed so far, and should consolidate the techniques learned.
Chapter Structure
Constructing financial statements
n	 Constructing financial statements
n	 Accounting adjustments
n	 Uses of financial statements
n	 Summary
n	 Assignments
The basic technique for the preparation of a statement of profit or loss (income 
statement/profit or loss account) and a statement of financial position (balance 
sheet) consists of taking the aggregate transaction data from the accounting re-
cords as at the end of the financial year, quantifying the adjustments necessary to 
convert the data to reflect generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), then 
putting the base data and the adjustments together in the approved statement 
format.

Part 2  Basic financial statements
198
There is no prescribed way of carrying out this exercise, but most accountants 
prepare working papers on the basis of what is called an extended trial balance. 
This is not exactly the method we shall use, but we will discuss it here for your 
information.
The base data with which the accountant starts are the trial balance as at the 
end of year 2 that is, the listing of all the balances on all the general ledger ac-
counts at the end of the year. The accountant must then refine these data by 
adjusting for unrecorded bills, revenue invoiced but not yet earned, depreciation, 
bad debts, provisions, impairment losses, etc. This may seem a potentially lim-
itless exercise involving a major investigative activity, but in fact the accountant 
always starts off with the previous year’s adjustments and then checks to see what 
has changed subsequently, so that the ‘year-end exercise’ is built up incremen-
tally as the business develops.
The adjustments which are calculated at this stage are put into working papers 
in the first instance and a draft set of statements is prepared. These will form the 
basis of discussion with management and auditors, since usually they will involve 
taking a position about open transactions and other uncertainties (and will also 
impact on issues like taxation and profit-related bonuses).
The traditional extended trial balance working paper consists of four sets of 
debit and credit columns which will be added across to give the final picture. You 
will recall that, formally speaking, the accounting database is constructed with 
two columns for each account (see Chapter 2) although we have not replicated 
that presentation, since our object is to understand how the figures work rather 
than run an accounting function.
Ledger  
balances
1
Adjustments
5
Profit or  
loss
or
Balance 
sheet
D / C
D / C
D / C
D / C
€    €
€    €
€    €
€    €
Mathematically, the ledger balances and adjustments are added together horizon-
tally. Each adjusted balance will have its place in either the statement of profit or 
loss or statement of financial position (balance sheet) and the adjusted total is en-
tered in the appropriate column. The total debits and credits in the first column 
will equal each other, as will those in the adjustments column, but the statement 
of profit or loss and balance sheet columns must be added together to get balanc-
ing totals. For our purposes we shall continue to work with single-column spread-
sheets, and we will add across to the right as we put in adjustments and so on.
The adjustments consist typically of all the elements we have looked at in the 
preceding sessions and which are necessary to provide financial statements which 
fully comply with generally accepted accounting principles. Specifically this in-
volves the following:
	
1.	Calculation of cost of goods sold: Insertion of closing inventories to arrive at 
the measurement of the cost of the goods sold during the period.
	
2.	Adjustment for accruals/deferrals: Bringing into the accounts details of ex-
penses and revenues relating to the period but unrecorded at reporting date; 
carrying forward the unexpired expense for payments made which relate to 

Chapter 7  Preparing financial statements
199
future periods and deferring revenues received but yet unearned at reporting 
date. (The information for this in a practical situation comes from examin-
ing individual ledger accounts to check the periods covered by payments/
receipts, and examining payments/receipts after the balance sheet date.)
	
3.	Charging annual depreciation: Debiting the operating expenses and credit-
ing accumulated depreciation (or amortization) to reflect the expensing of 
long-term assets consumed during the year.
	
4.	Updating provisions: Adjusting existing provisions for uses and reversals and 
adding new provisions.
	
5.	Reviewing assets for potential impairment: If an impairment test evidences an 
impairment loss, the asset value will be decreased (credited) while the im-
pairment loss will be accounted for in the statement of profit or loss as an 
operating expense (debiting an expense account).
The easiest way to see what happens in practice is if we now take an example, and 
work through the adjustments individually.
Worked example
The trial balance of Mornington Crescent Emporium SA as at 31 December 20X1 
was as follows:
Mornington Crescent Emporium SA
Trial balance as at 31 December 20X1
   €
Assets
Land
30 000
Equipment (at cost)
15 000
Accumulated depreciation
–4 500
Inventory at 1 January X1
13 250
Trade receivables
23 000
Bank
18 560
95 310
Financing
Share capital
50 000
Retained profits
10 500
Trade payables
16 850
Sales
193 000
Purchases
–145 000
Salaries and wages
–15 325
Rent
–10 000
Insurance
–2 500
Legal and professional expenses
–1 250
Telephone
–345
Light and heat
–620
95 310

Part 2  Basic financial statements
200
In reviewing the accounting transactions both before and after the reporting date 
(date of the statement of financial position), the following information comes to light:
	
1.	The value of the inventory of goods for resale at 31 December 20X1 was 
€14 150.
	
2.	Rent is payable quarterly in advance and rent for the three months January 
to March 20X2 was paid in December 20X1.
	
3.	An insurance premium of €1000 was paid in September 20X1, covering the 
period October 20X1 to March 20X2 inclusive.
	
4.	A telephone account of €120 was received in February 20X2 and related to 
the three months ending 31 January 20X2.
	
5.	An electricity account (the most recent one paid) for the three months up 
to the end of November 20X1 for €150 was paid in December 20X1.
	
6.	 The financial statements must be audited and the estimated cost of this is €2000.
	
7.	At year-end the company received a notification that a lawsuit was filed 
against it for injuries due to defects of goods sold. The company’s legal 
counsel believes that an unfavourable outcome is probable and that a rea-
sonable estimate of the settlement is €1000. Settlement is expected to occur 
at the beginning of May 20X2.
The accountant normally provides depreciation on a straight-line basis for the 
equipment owned by the company (note there is already accumulated deprecia-
tion in the trial balance) on the basis that it will have a nil salvage value and a 
useful life of ten years. There are no indications that assets might be impaired.
The above details represent the accountant’s blueprint for action. She or he 
will set out the trial balance information on the extended trial balance worksheet 
we have described, and will then set out to incorporate the adjustments which 
are required on the worksheet, in order to calculate a draft set of statements.
We will not go through the formalities of the extended trial balance as such 
but will use a spreadsheet. While managers are unlikely to have to prepare a set of 
accounts themselves, they need to understand the mechanics of the process, since 
they may well be involved in making decisions about year-end adjustments and 
in any event need to know what are the areas of certainty and uncertainty which 
are concerned with the profit measurement process. Generally, some hands-on 
practice at drawing up statements fixes the basics more clearly in the mind!
Adjustments
(a)  Inventory of goods
The trial balance already contains an ‘inventory’ figure – the opening inventory 
at the beginning of the year. The value of the inventory at the end of the year 
(independently established either by the company or by outside stock-takers) is 
€14 150. Inventory levels have increased by €900 and this must be reflected in the 
final statement of financial position. As we have discussed previously, this also 
fixes the cost of goods sold, and we can adjust the trial balance as follows:
Inventory of goods for resale
1900 (1 assets)
Purchases (becomes ‘cost of goods sold’)
–900 (1 equity)

Chapter 7  Preparing financial statements
201
(b)  Rent prepayment
The information outside the trial balance shows that the €10 000 expenses 
recorded in the rent account include a payment for the first three months of 
20X2. The rent account must therefore be adjusted to show the 20X1 expense 
only and recognize that at reporting date there is an asset, the unexpired rent 
expense for three months. From the information given the rent account balance 
represents 15 months’ rent, so the unexpired element must be three-fifteenths, 
or €2000. Therefore the expense account is reduced by €2000 and a new asset 
must appear:
Rent expense
–2 000 (1 equity)
Prepaid expenses
12 000 (1 assets)
(c)  Insurance prepayment
The accountant also knows that the last insurance paid (€1000) referred to a six-
month period of which only half was in 20X1, so here again he or she has to rec-
ognize an unexpired expense. The last payment related half to 20X1 and half to 
20X2, so €500 (1/2 3 €1000) should be recognized as an asset. Again the expense 
account is reduced and prepaid expenses increased:
Insurance expense
–500 (1 equity)
Prepaid expenses
1500 (1 assets)
(d)  Telephone accrual
The telephone account paid in 20X2 included elements which related to 20X1 
and are therefore expenses for 20X1. They must be incorporated in the statement 
of profit or loss and recognized as current liabilities. The proportion of the bill 
relating to 20X1 was two-thirds – the months of November and December, so 
two-thirds of the bill should be accrued (€80). Telephone expenses for 20X1 are 
reduced and another new balance sheet account opened up, this time accrued 
expenses:
Telephone expense
180 (– equity)
Accrued expenses
180 (1 liabilities)
(e)  Electricity accrual
The electricity account also needs adjusting for accrued expenses, but the basis 
of calculation this time is different. The accountant has discovered from the led-
ger that the electricity account only includes charges up to the end of ­November, 
but no invoice for December charges has yet come in. Notwithstanding, he or 
she has to make an accrual, and must base the calculation on something else. 
Sometimes this is done by taking the previous year’s figure and making an al-
lowance for inflation, sometimes by taking a proportion of the most recently 
paid bill. In this case the most recent bill was for three months, so using that 
as a basis an accrual of one-third of the earlier bill (3 €150 5 €50) is made. You 
may think this is a rather crude approximation, which it is, but the amount in 

Part 2  Basic financial statements
202
relation to overall expenses is not material so a more precise approach is not 
necessary. As before, the light and heat expense account is reduced and accrued 
expenses increased:
Light and heat
150 (– equity)
Accrued expenses
150 (1 liabilities)
(f)  Accrued audit expense
The cost of the annual audit (although the actual work may in part take place 
after the reporting date) is considered to be part of the operating expenses for 
20X1 and this accrued expense should also be recognized. The figure in this case 
is €2000 and a new expense line is created for it. The adjustment is:
Legal and professional
12 000 (– equity)
Accrued expenses
12 000 (1 liabilities)
(g)  Provision for litigation costs
From the advice of the legal experts it is likely that the company will be found 
liable for the injuries caused by defective products sold in the past. The accoun-
tant concludes that there is a present obligation arising from a past event and 
that a future settlement payment is probable (around May next year). Although 
the settlement expenditure is still uncertain, the legal experts are able to provide 
a reliable estimate. All three recognition criteria for a provision have been met 
and a corresponding liability will be recognized in the statement of financial 
position.
An expense line is created for the provision as an operating expense and a new 
liability account is inserted in the statement of financial position. The adjustment 
is:
Provision expense
11 000 (– equity)
Short-term provision (liability)
11 000 (1 liabilities)
(h)  Depreciation
The company’s equipment appears in the statement of financial position at 
€15 000 original cost and must be depreciated over ten years on a straight-line 
basis. The annual expense will therefore be:
1 5000 5 1 500
   10
This is entered by creating a new expense line for the annual charge to operating 
expenses and crediting the other side of the transaction to the accumulated de-
preciation account to reflect the reduced value of the asset:
Depreciation expense
11 500 (– equity)
Accumulated depreciation
11 500 (– assets)

Chapter 7  Preparing financial statements
203
The classic problem with the adjustments is to have non-balancing adjustments, 
with the effect that although one starts from a database where assets equal li-
abilities and equity, this equilibrium is destroyed by the adjustments. Of course, 
computerized worksheets build in control of this nature to avoid the problem. 
MBA students in an exam context have less luck, generally.
Worksheet
Trial  
balance
 
Adjustments
Statement of 
profit or loss
Balance  
sheet
Premises
30 000
30 000
Equipment (at cost)
15 000
15 000
Accumulated depreciation
–4 500
(h) –1 500
–6 000
Inventory at 1 January X1
13 250
(a) 1900
14 150
Trade receivables
23 000
23 000
Bank
18 560
18 560
Prepaid expenses
(b) 12 000
2 500
(c) 1500
Totals
95 310
11 900
97 210
Share capital
50 000
50 000
Retained profits
10 500
10 500
Profit for year
(i) 16 730
Trade payables
16 850
16 850
Sales
193 000
193 000
Purchases
–145 000
(a) 1900
–144 100
Salaries and wages
–15 325
–15 325
Rent
–10 000
(b) 12 000
–8 000
Insurance
–2 500
(c) 1500
–2 000
Legal and professional 
expenses
–1 250
(f) –2 000
–3 250
Telephone
–345
(d) –80
–425
Light and heat
–620
(e) –50
–670
Accrued expenses
(d) 180
2 130
(e) 150
(f) 12 000
Short-term provision
(g) 11 000
1 000
Provision expense
(g) –1 000
–1 000
Depreciation expense
(h) –1 500
–1 500
Profit
(i) –16 730
Totals
95 310
11 900
97 210
Note
Letters in brackets refer to the adjustments previously discussed.

Part 2  Basic financial statements
204
Since we are splitting out on the worksheet a separate column for the statement 
of profit or loss, the balance sheet sections will not balance internally – the profit 
is missing from the equity section. In order to correct this and ‘prove’ the balance 
sheet, we need to calculate the profit figure and enter it into the balance sheet 
[entry (i)].
You have now completed working papers for the statement of profit or loss and 
statement of financial position as they would appear in the company’s books, and 
all that remains is to set them out in an acceptable format for publication.
Mornington Crescent Emporium SA
Statement of profit or loss for the year ended 31 December 20X1  
(format for use internally)
€
€
Sales
193 000
Cost of goods sold
(144 100)
48 900
Salaries and wages
15 325
Rent
8 000
Insurance
2 000
Light and heat
670
Depreciation expense
1 500
Provision expense
1 000
Legal and professional
1 250
Telephone
425
Audit fee
2 000
(32 170)
Net income
16 730
Statement of profit or loss for the year ended 31 December 20X1  
(published format)
€
€
Revenue
193 000
Cost of goods sold
(144 100)
48 900
Personnel costs
15 325
Other operating costs (excluding  
depreciation and provisions)
14 345
Depreciation expense
1 500
Provision expense
1 000
(32 170)
Profit before interest and tax
16 730

Chapter 7  Preparing financial statements
205
In preparing annual financial statements we have so far dealt only with the oper-
ating result. We now need to add to that adjustments for interest payments and 
taxation, and consider the dividend.
Interest is usually paid in arrears (sometimes monthly, or quarterly or every 
six months – customs differ between countries and types of borrowing) and will 
often need to be considered when calculating year-end accruals.
Taxation also varies from country to country. Tax on company profits may be 
levied at a national level only, or at both national and regional level. It is rarely 
found at local municipality level. In some countries it is paid after the account-
ing year, once annual profits have been determined; in many countries, compa-
nies make payments on account based on their own estimate of the profit for a 
quarter year or half year. At the year end there will normally be an amount to be 
accrued.
The deduction of interest and tax expense normally figures separately in the 
statement of profit or loss.
Accounting adjustments
Statement of financial position as at 31 December 20X1
€
€
Non-current assets
Premises
30 000
Equipment (at cost)
15 000
less accumulated depreciation
(6 000)
9 000
39 000
Current assets
Inventory
14 150
Trade receivables
23 000
Prepaid expenses
2 500
Bank
18 560
58 210
Total assets
97 210
Equity
Share capital
50 000
Retained earnings
10 500
16 730
27 230
77 230
Current liabilities
Short-term provisions
1 000
Trade payables
16 850
Accrued expenses
2 130
Total equity and liabilities
97 210

Part 2  Basic financial statements
206
There remains after that the question of dividends to shareholders. Large listed 
companies will usually pay a dividend every six months and this will be charged 
directly against accumulated profits in shareholders’ equity (companies listed on 
the New York Stock Exchange have to produce figures every quarter and some pay 
a dividend every quarter as well). The amount of the final, year-end dividend has to 
be approved by the shareholders in a general meeting, which takes place when the 
financial statements have been finalized, as they too are approved at that meeting.
In some countries this final dividend is also shown within the statement of profit 
or loss as a deduction from the profit for the period and in the balance sheet as a 
liability, but treatment varies from country to country. More often the dividend is 
shown simply as a deduction from retained earnings once it has been paid. The IASB 
rules, however, are very explicit on this point: in accordance with IAS 10, Events after 
the Reporting Period, dividends declared after the reporting date may not be recognized 
as a liability because they do not constitute a present obligation yet at the date of the 
statement of financial position – they will be disclosed in the notes to the accounts.
Worked example
In order to demonstrate how the adjustments would look, let us return to the 
financial statements we prepared in the last session and rework them on the basis 
of a different capital structure. We can also include an allowance for doubtful re-
ceivables and a current income tax accrual.
The share capital in the original example was €50 000. Let us now substitute a 
different structure:
€
Ordinary shares
40 000
5% long-term debenture
10 000
Total sources
50 000
The company would need to make the following adjustment:
Debenture interest (5% 3 €10 000)
500 (reduce equity)
Accrued expenses
1500 (increase liabilities)
Profit before interest and tax
XXXXX
Finance costs (interest expense)
(XXXX)
Profit before tax
XXXXX
Income tax expense
(XXXX)
(Net) profit for the period 
(Net income available to shareholders)
XXXX

Chapter 7  Preparing financial statements
207
The total trade receivables outstanding was €23 000. If the company wanted to 
take into account an allowance for doubtful debts of 1 per cent, this would in-
volve a charge of €230 against profits and a reduction of the asset value, in this 
case, by the same amount:
Doubtful debt expense
–230 (reduce equity)
Trade receivables
–230 (reduce assets)
Assuming an income tax rate of 30 per cent, the company would also need to set 
aside €4800 as an income tax accrual (original profit was €16 730; deduction of 
€230 doubtful debt allowance and €500 debenture interest would leave €16 000, 
30 per cent of which is €4800).
Assuming that you are using the same working papers as before, the ad-
justments are entered into the adjustment column and then extended across 
horizontally into the statement of profit or loss and statement of financial 
position.
Current tax expense
4 800 (reduce equity)
Taxes payable
14 800 (increase liabilities)
The adjusted financial statements are as follows:
Mornington Crescent Emporium SA
Statement of profit or loss for the year ended 31 December 20X1
    €
€
Revenue
193 000
Cost of goods sold
(144 100)
48 900
Personnel costs
15 325
Other operating expenses  
(excluding depreciation, impairment and provisions)
14 345
Depreciation expense
1 500
Provision expense
1 000
Allowance for doubtful debts
230
(32 400)
Profit before interest and tax
16 500
Interest expense
(500)
Profit before tax
16 000
Income tax expense
(4 800)
(Net) Profit for the period
11 200

Part 2  Basic financial statements
208
This is by way of recapitulation of some of the issues which we considered at the 
start of the course. It is a major problem of financial reporting that a single set of 
numbers is expected potentially to satisfy all manner of diverse objectives:
	
n	 measure how much dividend might be paid
	
n	 provide reassurance of a company’s financial strength to creditors
	
n	 provide a basis for measuring future growth for stock market analysis
	
n	 measure management performance in a principal/agent context
	
n	 provide the basis of taxation of the company
	
n	 give employees an idea of the company’s strength.
Uses of financial statements
Statement of financial position as at 31 December 20X1
    €
€
Non-current assets
Premises
30 000
Equipment (at cost)
15 000
less accumulated depreciation
(6 000)
9 000
39 000
Current assets
Inventory
14 150
Trade receivables
23 000
less impairment allowance
(230)
Prepaid expenses
2 500
Bank
18 560
57 980
Total assets
96 980
Equity
Share capital
40 000
Retained earnings
10 500
11 200
21 700
61 700
Non-current liabilities
Long-term debenture
10 000
Current liabilities
Short-term provisions
1 000
Trade payables
16 850
Accrued expenses
2 630
Taxes payable
4 800
Total equity and liabilities
96 980

Chapter 7  Preparing financial statements
209
It will be clear to you that (a) some of these objectives are contradictory and (b) 
accounting leaves open some choices which can affect how the company looks.
It needs also to be understood that the large, listed company which has opera-
tions in many parts of the world sees its annual report as a public relations docu-
ment for trumpeting the group’s strength and viability.
A private, family-controlled company may see its financial statements as some-
thing secret, to be disclosed to as few people as possible, and where profit is minimized 
in order to keep taxation low and to retain as much cash as possible in the company.
Summary
In this chapter we have demonstrated the technique used to prepare annual fi-
nancial statements from the ledger. This involves extracting a trial balance and 
then using that as a working paper in which we incorporate adjustments for rev-
enues and expenses that fall either side of the year end. The objective is to assign 
revenue and expense to the appropriate year. We have also discussed how differ-
ent capital structures are treated in the financial statements.
Assignments
The following questions have answers on the lecturer side of the  digital sup-
port resources for the book.
1.	 The trial balance of Arénières Inc. at 31 December 20X4 was:
    €
Land
82 100
Buildings (at cost)
120 000
Accumulated depreciation buildings
–36 000
Equipment (at cost)
89 500
Accumulated depreciation equipment
–53 700
Bank account
83 200
Trade receivables
91 300
Inventory at 1 January
214 300
Share capital
100 000
Reserves
185 600
7 per cent debenture
50 000
Trade payables
184 800
Sales
942 700
Purchases
–398 100
Salaries
–343 600
Other operating expenses
–102 200
Interest expense
–3 500
Interim dividend
–25 000

Part 2  Basic financial statements
210
The following additional information is provided:
	
(a)	 The closing inventory at 31 December 20X4 was €216 300.
	
(b)	 No depreciation has been provided for 20X4. The company assumes zero 
residual values and uses the following straight-line rates: buildings 2 per 
cent and equipment 20 per cent.
	
(c)	 The audit fee for 20X4 is expected to be €20 000.
	
(d)	 The company estimates that it had phone costs of €1200 and energy 
costs of €1350 outstanding at the year-end.
	
(e)	 Included in ‘other operating expenses’ is a business insurance policy 
which cost €3000 and which runs for the year from 1 April 20X4.
	
(f)	 The company decides, on the recommendation of its auditors, that it 
would be prudent to create a provision of €10 000 against a claim for 
damages resulting from faulty merchandise.
	
(g)	 Corporate income tax for 20X4 is estimated at €15 000.
Please draw up a statement of profit or loss and a statement of financial 
position for the year ended 31 December 20X4.
2.	 The trial balance of Ansermet SA at 31 December 20X6 was:
    €
Land
155 000
Buildings (at cost)
560 000
Accumulated depreciation buildings
–112 000
Plant (at cost)
1 890 200
Accumulated depreciation plant
–1 039 610
Share capital
750 000
Share premium
220 000
Retained earnings
254 790
Long-term debt
600 000
Inventory
619 300
Trade receivables
414 700
Bank
208 100
Payables
336 800
Sales
2 740 500
Purchases
–1 247 000
Personnel expenses
–691 300
Other operating expenses
–268 100
Supplementary information:
	
(a)	 The closing inventory was valued at €584 600.
	
(b)	 The audit fee with regard to the 20X6 financial statements is agreed at 
€50 2800.
	
(c)	 The company paid outstanding December 20X6 travel expenses for 
various staff in January 20X7 – total value €2750.

Chapter 7  Preparing financial statements
211
	
(d)	 No interest had been paid at 31 December 20X6 on the long-term debt, 
which was contracted on 1 January 20X6 at 7 per cent.
	
(e)	 Depreciation should be provided at a rate of 2 per cent straight-line for 
the buildings (assuming no residual value) and 30 per cent diminishing 
balance for the plant.
	
(f)	 The company is facing litigation from an employee who has left and 
considers it prudent to make a provision against legal costs of €20 000.
	
(g)	 The tax advisers suggest that the company will have to pay about 
€60 000 tax on the 20X6 profit.
Please draw up a statement of profit or loss and a statement of financial 
position for the year ended 20X6.
3.	 You are asked to prepare the statement of financial position and statement 
of profit or loss of Agrestic Corp. for the year ended 31 December 20X4.
	
The trial balance of Agrestic extracted from the company’s accounts at 
31 December 20X4 is shown below (all amounts in €).
    €
Land
200 000
Buildings (at cost)
630 000
Accumulated depreciation buildings
–84 000
Equipment (at cost)
108 000
Accumulated depreciation equipment
–27 610
Trade receivables
253 800
Cash and cash equivalents
120 730
Inventory at 1 January 20X4
685 260
Share capital
800 000
Reserves
65 000
Trade payables
95 420
Long-term debt
300 000
Provision (liability)
50 000
Sales
2 465 300
Purchases
–1 258 000
Salaries
–420 800
Other operating expenses
–210 740
You receive the following information:
	
(a)	 The value of the inventory on hand at 31 December 20X4 was €558 460.
	
(b)	 No depreciation has been provided for 20X4. The company uses the 
following depreciation rates: 30 years straight-line for the buildings and 
30 per cent diminishing balance for the equipment. Residual values are 
assumed to be zero.
	
(c)	 The provision (liability) in the trial balance has been used to pay for legal 
damages. The company received the court decision on 28 December 
20X4. The original estimate of the legal damages amounted to €50 000. 

Part 2  Basic financial statements
212
The final court decision set the indemnification at €46 000 and is to be 
recorded under the heading of ‘Other payables’.
	
(d)	 The company decides to create a provision of €80 000 for 
decontamination of land.
	
(e)	 The audit fee for the 20X4 financial statements has been agreed at €20 000.
	
(f)	 At 31 December 20X4 the interest of 5.5 per cent on the long-term debt has 
not been paid yet. The long-term debt was contracted on 1 September 20X4.
	
(g)	 The company assumes that 2 per cent of the total amount of the trade 
receivables will be irrecoverable.
	
(h)	 The company paid rent in December 20X4 relative to the period 
December 20X4 to February 20X5: total amount €3000.
	
(i)	 The tax adviser estimates the company’s 20X4 income taxes to be 
€120 000.
	
(j)	 The Board of Directors proposes a dividend of 50 per cent of the 20X4 
net profit to be distributed in May 20X5.
4.	 The trial balance of Mare’s Nest from the company’s books at 31 December 
20X4 is shown below (all amounts in €).
    €
Land
450 000
Buildings (at cost)
1 320 000
Accumulated depreciation buildings
–640 000
Equipment (at cost)
1 652 000
Accumulated depreciation equipment
–495 600
Trade receivables
489 000
Long-term receivables
65 000
Cash and cash equivalents
365 200
Inventory (raw materials and consumables)
896 600
Share capital
1 500 000
Retained earnings
185 000
Trade payables
854 000
Long-term debt
1 000 000
Provision (liability)
250 000
Sales
4 638 500
Cost of sales
–2 805 000
Other operating income
126 500
Distribution costs
–897 800
Administrative expenses
–690 800
Interest expenses
–58 200
	
Supplementary information:
	
(a)	 On 25 October 20X4 the company booked and paid tuition fees 
(€10 000 – 100 per cent administration) for an in-house course on the 
new financial accounting system. The course will be equally spread over 
the period from 1 November 20X4 to 28 February 20X5.

Chapter 7  Preparing financial statements
213
	
(b)	 The audit fee pertaining to 20X4 is negotiated at €125 000.
	
(c)	 Depreciation should be provided straight-line at a rate of 10 per cent 
for the equipment, while the buildings have an estimated useful life of 
33 years (no residual values assumed). Buildings, land and equipment are 
allocated as follows: 60 per cent production, 20 per cent distribution and 
20 per cent administration.
	
(d)	 The closing inventory at 31 December 20X4 was €1 133 800.
	
(e)	 The company paid a consultant €3200 for a review of the production 
cycle administrative controls. The consultant’s invoice has been 
accounted for as 20X4 expenses, but the invoice was in fact an advance 
invoice for review services to be performed during 20X5.
	
(f)	 Mare’s Nest received €24 000 of advance fees (‘other operating income’) 
from concessionaires on 1 July 20X4, covering marketing services to be 
delivered over a one-year period (ending on 30 June 20X5).
	
(g)	 The company granted a loan of €60 000 to an employee for a five-year 
period at an annual interest rate of 4 per cent. The employee has to pay 
the interest every six months. The agreement started at 1 December 
20X4. Interest received will be accounted for as finance income.
	
(h)	 The tax adviser estimates the company’s 20X4 income taxes to be 
€100 000.
Please draw up a statement of profit or loss and a statement of financial 
position for the 20X4 period.


P A R T  T H R E E
An introduction to financial 
statement analysis
The object in this part of the book is to start to develop some ideas about what 
financial statement analysis is for and how it is done. Up until now we have 
been looking at the nuts and bolts of preparing financial statements, essentially 
so that you understand the fairly strict framework within which accounting data 
are produced. Now we move on to ask why analysts look at financial statements 
(Chapter 8) and then we start to use some of the traditional tools (Chapter 9).

216
In this chapter we look at the fundamental questions an analyst is asking and review 
some of the management models that guide companies and against which we 
measure their performance. This section of the book is intended to deepen your 
understanding of financial statements in terms of interpreting the data disclosed in 
them, rather than, as previously, in terms of understanding the rules of recognition 
and measurement. However, it should be remembered that the material in this 
chapter is usually addressed much more fully in a corporate finance course. The 
chapter is provided as a link between the two subject areas.
C H A P T E R   8
A framework for interpretation
	n	Introduction
	n	Financial structure
	n	Sources of finance
	n	Dividend policy
	n	Working capital management
	n	Performance measurement
	n	Summary
	n	Discussion questions
Chapter Structure

Chapter 8  A framework for interpretation
217
In interpreting financial statements it is necessary to make assessments of how 
a company has behaved in relation to how it might have been expected to be-
have. In order to have a framework of expectations it follows that one must have 
theories about how companies should behave, and it is that area which we will 
discuss in this chapter. You will, of course, have your own views about how com-
panies should behave, and other courses within your programme will also have 
provided many other insights. The reason for raising the issue of company behav-
iour is that you cannot make assessments of a company’s performance without 
some idea of how you expect it to perform. Inevitably, the treatment here will ad-
dress first principles: the objective is to provide a basic set of ground rules against 
which to judge company behaviour, rather than giving any detailed discussion of 
the theoretical background. You should extend this yourself. You need to bring to 
financial analysis a mixture of accounting, finance and strategy.
Financial analysis mainly concerns itself with two areas: evaluation of the fi-
nancial structure and policy of a company, and evaluation of corporate manage-
ment’s performance. A potential lender to the company will be assessing slightly 
different aspects from those assessed by a potential investor, or perhaps the same 
aspects but with a different weighting.
The first question to evaluate is that of financial risk. The more borrowing 
a company already has, the more risky it is to lend more. As we discussed earlier, 
the level of borrowing also impacts upon the variability of profit. A potential in-
vestor will need to assess the degree of financial risk in order to decide whether 
the profit prospects of the company are sufficiently attractive. Business is about 
taking risks, so investors (and lenders) do not shun ‘risky’ investments, but they 
do expect a higher potential return as compensation for a higher degree of risk. 
For the investor, therefore, there is a link between financial structure (risk) and 
management performance (future potential profits). The return which an investor 
wants should be sufficient to:
	
a.	 compensate for inflation
	
b.	equal the return available from no-risk investments
	
c.	 provide compensation for the risk.
This can be represented graphically (Figure 8.1).
Introduction 
Return
Risk
Figure 8.1
The risk/return 
relationship

Part 3  An introduction to financial statement analysis
218
This risk/return relationship holds good for both investors and lenders, and is be-
hind the analytical approach which looks at financial structure and management 
performance: the first to assess financial risk, the second as a basis for forecasting 
future returns so that the financial decision can be made. We will now take a look 
at considerations in financial structure (including dividend policy and working 
capital management) and management performance.
It is worth revisiting the statement of financial position or balance sheet of a com-
pany to re-examine it from a point of view of analysis. You remember that the 
company is simply a legal vehicle into which investors have put money. This in 
turn has been used to buy productive capacity which is used to generate profits.
Financial structure
Assets
Working capital:
Working capital:
inventory,
trade receivables,
cash
Long-term
financing from
owners
Long-term
financing from
lenders
trade payables
Financing
Productive capacity
(long-term assets)
Figure 8.2
Financial 
structure
In Figure 8.2 the statement of financial position is structured in such a way as to 
show how the company has dealt with a number of strategic issues. It enables the 
analyst to see clearly the long-term financing structure, the investment in pro-
ductive capacity and the different components of working capital and their rela-
tionship to each other. In Figure 8.3 the same building blocks of the statement of 
financial position are labelled according to accounting terminology.

Chapter 8  A framework for interpretation
219
The issues in relation to the basic structure are, first, that of the proportion of 
debt to equity (often known as gearing) and then, within debt, the term structure 
or maturity mix (when does the debt fall due for repayment?). Other questions 
which arise are the security ranking of different debt sources, and, in the case of a 
multinational, the currency make-up.
As regards the basic gearing of a company, there is no satisfactory guide as to 
what is a ‘good’ debt/equity mix. Of course, in general terms higher debt may 
both increase the return and increase the risk of a company. What one tends to 
find is that there are industry patterns which reflect other aspects of risk. For ex-
ample, high-technology companies have a high operational risk and tend to have 
little financial gearing as a result.
Size and ownership are also factors in explaining the debt structure. Family-
held or director-controlled businesses typically try to avoid issuing equity to out-
siders because of the loss of management control that this might bring, so they 
tend to prefer to borrow. Small and medium-sized companies therefore often have 
higher gearing than their larger competitors.
Current liabilities
(long-term
financing from
owners)
Equity
(long-term 
financing from
lenders)
Debt
(trade payables)
Assets
Non-current assets
(long-term assets)
Current assets
(inventory,
trade receivables,
cash)
Financing
Gearing
Figure 8.3
Gearing
Gearing has the additional benefit that, under tax law, interest is deductible as an 
expense in arriving at taxable profit, while the return to the shareholder is after 
tax. Therefore, given a tax rate of 30 per cent, the real net cost of a 10 per cent 
interest rate is 7 per cent when compared with the return to equity.

Part 3  An introduction to financial statement analysis
220
There are no real guidelines as to the appropriate ratio between debt and  
equity in any industry. Gearing varies enormously from one industry to another 
and in assessing the gearing in any one company the safest approach is a com-
parison with the gearing in similar companies. An examination of the statement 
of financial position of a company will reveal its gearing, and comparison of sev-
eral balance sheets over a period of time will reveal the trend of that particular 
company.
Most companies work to a notional debt/equity target ratio. But when raising 
new finance, they do not automatically split the financing requirement between 
equity and debt. Normally they borrow for specific needs and then every few 
years have a major share issue to restore the debt/equity ratio.
Share issue
When an existing company wants to raise more equity capital it will usually ask 
its existing shareholders to subscribe more (companies listed on a stock exchange 
are generally obliged to offer new shares to existing shareholders first). This is 
done by means of what is called a ‘rights issue’. If, for example, a company has 
1m shares already issued, the current price on the stock exchange is $3.00 per 
share and the company wants to raise approximately $1.25m in new finance, it 
could give existing shareholders the right to buy one new share for every two 
held, and at a price of $2.50 a share.
The reduction (discount) between the market price and the price of the new 
share would reflect an expectation that the future profits would have to be 
split between more people, albeit in the longer term the extra profits created 
by the expansion of the company would compensate for this. The shareholder 
may then either buy the shares or sell his or her right to them on the stock 
exchange.
Normally a company would have the share issue underwritten, that is, special-
ist institutions would guarantee to the company to buy all unsold shares at a 
predetermined price. The underwriter receives a large fee for accepting this risk, 
and this is one reason why share issues are not undertaken frequently. Any share 
issue has to be accompanied by detailed statements (a prospectus) about the com-
pany’s past performance and future expectations. This involves the use of experts 
to check and confirm the information and is another reason for the high cost of 
raising equity.
An alternative to issuing rights is to issue shares on a different capital mar-
ket. This has the advantage of opening up new sources and not obliging the 
company to sell the new shares at a discount, as well as potentially bringing in 
finance denominated in a foreign currency. This is not a common tactic and 
most stock exchanges require that existing shareholders are at least given the 
right to participate in any future issue of shares, but is likely to become more 
frequent amongst large companies as the market becomes ever more global and 
companies want to have the many strategic advantages of being listed on sev-
eral stock exchanges. It is evident that companies with multiple listings tend 
to be strong supporters of IFRS (International Financial Reporting Standards) as 
global reporting standards.
Sources of finance

Chapter 8  A framework for interpretation
221
Loans
Loan finance can be obtained in a number of ways, either through financial 
­institutions or directly through the public markets. Typically, many small and 
medium-sized companies arrange long-term loans from their commercial banks 
or from merchant banks, in a single direct transaction. However, very large com-
panies can also arrange ‘syndicated loans’ where the finance is provided by a 
group of banks or other lending institutions. Syndicated loans are commonly 
­arranged by governments or state agencies for financing development or budget 
deficits, but they are also sometimes provided for special transactions by commer-
cial companies such as the purchase by an airline of a new fleet of aircraft.
The rate of interest chargeable on such loans is usually a ‘floating rate’ which 
goes up and down in accordance with a market interest rate indicator. Central 
banks fix a minimum lending rate and loans are usually expressed as X per cent 
over minimum lending rate – in Europe the European Central Bank’s interest rate 
is considered to set the basis for commercial borrowing and lending rates. Al-
though actual rates offered to a customer are fixed individually by the banks, 
there is usually no difference in rate between banks.
Bonds
Companies also raise large blocks of finance by issuing debt directly to the capital 
market, known as bonds. Frequently such bonds are issued at a fixed interest rate. 
Bonds, like shares, can be taken up in small quantities by individuals: so bond 
debt could be raised from a large number of sources. Medium-sized family compa-
nies in Europe are often quite active in raising finance on the bond market since 
that offers public financing and a stock exchange listing but without dilution of 
control, since only debt is listed and not equity.
Leasing
Another possible source of finance is leasing. Here the company in effect rents an 
asset with finance often supplied by the supplier of the asset. This has the advan-
tage of avoiding the need to raise finance separately when buying new assets. As 
discussed in Chapter 5, the accounting requirements now ensure that theoreti-
cally liabilities under finance leases appear in the statement of financial position 
in the same way as other sorts of finance.
Other methods
Other aspects of debt management are maturity mix, currency and interest rates. 
The maturity mix is the scheduling of repayment of debt – has the company bor-
rowed in such a way that all its borrowings will fall due at the same time? It may 
be expensive to carry out a massive refinancing in one exercise and it is usual to 
spread out the maturity dates of debt.
This also impacts upon interest rates – raising long-term debt at fixed interest 
rates means locking the company into a high interest charge for a long period if 
such a manoeuvre takes place when the market rates of interest are high. Borrow-
ing on floating rate agreements can be expensive if made when the market is low 
but then it subsequently rises. The ideal is to borrow long-term on fixed rates when 
the market rates are low, and to borrow on floating rates when the market is high.

Part 3  An introduction to financial statement analysis
222
Hedging
For a continental European company that wishes to raise finance in another cur-
rency than the euro, a further element of financial strategy is involved. This is 
the question of hedging foreign investments. The existence of the euro may well 
reduce the amount of borrowing done in foreign currencies by European compa-
nies, but the currency mix can be an important issue and is something normally 
to be disclosed by companies.
When a French company buys a US subsidiary, if it provides the cash from its 
home resources, it has debt raised in euro and an investment denominated in 
US dollars. There is therefore a transactional exchange exposure: the exchange 
rate between the euro and the US dollar fluctuates regularly. A company investing 
in a foreign currency risks two things: (a) that the investment will of itself yield a 
suitable return and (b) that the exchange rate will not vary so widely as to make 
the loan finance more costly over a period of time.
To illustrate the problem with our USA/France example, suppose a French com-
pany buys for US$100m a small US company which subsequently achieves an-
nual profits of a steady $15m – an acceptable return of 15 per cent. The purchase 
is financed by a domestic loan and at the time of purchase the exchange rate was 
$1.00 5 €1.00. The French company would therefore have borrowed €100m, and 
let us say that the interest rate was 7 per cent. To illustrate the exchange risk, if 
we ignore the commercial risk of the investment itself and assume profits remain 
steady at $15m, the euro outturn of the investment will also depend on the ex-
change rate. Table 8.1 shows the situation at the time of the initial investment, 
and the impact of rate changes in both directions.
As you can see from Table 8.1, the result in terms of the French parent’s receipts 
can vary widely as a result of the exchange exposure. The exposure, of course, ex-
tends to the value of the investment as well: if the exchange rate went to $1 5 
€0.80, the euro equivalent of the original investment drops from €100m to €80m, 
giving an additional balance sheet ‘loss’ of €20m.
INES
Table 8.1
Impact of 
exchange rate 
changes
Investment 5 $100m
Annual return 5 15%
Exchange rate $1 5 €1 (at date of acquisition of subsidiary)
French loan €100m – interest rate 5 7%
US profit  
($)
Rate  
1$ 5  
(on reporting 
date)  
(€)
French  
profit  
(€)  
(pre-tax)
Interest 
(€)
Net result  
(€)
15m
1
15m
7m
8m
15m
0.80
12m
7m
5m
15m
1.30
19.5m
7m
12.5m

Chapter 8  A framework for interpretation
223
This kind of problem was a major contributor to the South-East Asian 
­financial crisis of the late 1990s. A number of indigenous companies borrowed 
heavily in US dollars to finance expansion in the area. When their exchange 
rates started to slide, this meant that the local currency value of their debt 
increased enormously, as also did the relative cost of interest. At a stroke the 
companies became loss-making and had rapidly worsening debt/equity ratios 
at the same time.
A decision has to be made as to whether a company wishes to accept both the 
commercial risk and the exchange risk, and usually the answer will be negative. 
The exchange risk can be minimized by raising the finance in the country where 
the investment is made. So, in our example above, if the French parent company 
had borrowed $100m on the US capital market, both the investment and the as-
sociated loan and interest would be denominated in the same currency, thereby 
cancelling one risk with another. The company would have hedged its investment 
and the exposure would be limited to the difference between the US return and 
US interest payment.
A look at the debt analysis provided in the annual financial statements and the 
investment analysis will give some indication of the extent to which any particu-
lar company hedges its foreign investments with foreign borrowing – although 
precise details of the investment in subsidiaries are rarely provided as such.
If it is assumed that the major preoccupation of the managers of a company is 
to maximize the gain for their shareholders, a major question will be how, in 
practice, this is best achieved. A shareholder gains from the investment in two 
ways: (a) through the receipt of dividends and (b) through the increase in the 
stock market price of the shares (and note in passing that although the creation 
of profit should help in both these aims, it is not the creation of profit in itself 
which is the objective).
Following on from the identification of these two types of gain, there arises 
the question of what importance to give each aim in relation to the other. Is the 
Dividend policy
Run a risk or plant a hedge?
Every time there is a currency ‘shock’ the spotlight inevitably falls on the man-
agement of foreign currency exposures – a complex art due to the many subtle 
interactions of trading and international capital flows between different econo-
mies. Mastering this art begins with exploration of the origins of currency ex-
posure and the risks which flow from it. It is usual to group these risks into 
three main types depending upon whether the exposure is transactional, trans-
lational or economic.
Source: Extract from ‘Run a risk or plant a hedge’ by Martin Scicluna, Deloitte & Touche, 
Accounting & Business, May 1998
Between the lines

Part 3  An introduction to financial statement analysis
224
shareholder indifferent as to whether the gain comes from dividend or market 
appreciation, or does he or she prefer dividend at the expense of growth in price 
or vice versa?
One school of thought is that the dividend is unimportant – if a company re-
tains the bulk of its profits in order to finance new profit-making opportunities, 
the market price of the shares should rise in anticipation of the higher levels of 
profit to be earned in the future (remember, as we have discussed before, that the 
market price of shares is determined by expectations of future performance). The 
shareholder benefits by an increase in market price. If the shareholder needs cash 
flow from the investment, then he or she can independently convert the market 
gain into cash flow by selling some of the shares.
However, other theorists say that shareholders give a priority to receiving an 
assured cash flow from dividends. They hold the shares, not for long-term price 
appreciation, but for short-term, continuing cash flows. Therefore if the com-
pany does not pay a dividend these shareholders are disenchanted, sell the shares 
and the share price falls because expectations of future dividend cash flows are 
low. Management is therefore failing in both aspects of maximizing shareholder 
wealth.
In practice, some companies apparently see a need to pay a continuing cash 
flow to shareholders irrespective of profit, while others are influenced in deter-
mining the amount of a dividend by the current profit. In looking at published 
financial statements, a comparison of net income after tax with the dividend pay-
ments will show whether the dividend is determined independently of the profit 
level.
Some theorists point out that in all probability it is incorrect to assume that all 
shareholders are looking for the same type of return – some may want dividends, 
others prefer price appreciation. Consequently there may be no discernible pat-
tern in shareholder preferences: those who want high dividends will invest in 
companies that offer high dividends, while those who want price appreciation 
will invest in the companies which offer that possibility. This is called the clientele 
effect – companies acquire the clientele which prefers their particular approach to 
the question.
There is no overall best practice in this area against which to evaluate ­individual 
companies, but the question of dividend policy is an integral element of financial 
management because of its potential effect on shareholder wealth (the main ob-
jective of management) and subsequently because of the effect on the company’s 
cash flows and its financing. A company with high dividends will have that much 
less cash available from internal operations – but, depending upon which theory 
you prefer, may find it easier to issue new shares. In any event, internally gener-
ated cash flows are an important part of a company’s financing and dividend 
­payments a major use of that finance.
The working capital cycle consists of a continuous flow of values (value-relevant 
items). We have already reviewed working capital movements and their impact 
on cash flows in Chapter 4. Their essential nature in many companies is repre-
sented in the simplified diagram shown in Figure 8.4. The company has a cash 
position that it has obtained from shareholders, lenders or from past profitable 
Working capital management

Chapter 8  A framework for interpretation
225
operations. These funds are used to acquire inventories, either by purchasing 
goods from third parties or by producing them itself. Other operating costs are 
also incurred. Trade payables (and other types of current liabilities) intervene 
between the incurrence of these costs and the actual outgoing cash flows (pay-
ments). The company sells the goods to customers, who either pay cash or buy 
on credit. If the company sells on credit, trade receivables intervene between the 
recognition of the revenue and the incoming receipts. When the customer pays, 
the cash position is replenished.
Inventory
Raw materials/consumables
Inventory
Work in progress/
finished goods
Sales
Trade
receivables
Receipts
Cash
(equivalents)
Payments
Trade
payables
Purchases
Production
Figure 8.4
The working 
capital cycle
Basically, in a manufacturing company the working capital affects the following 
components of the statement of financial position (see rectangles in Figure 8.4):
	
1.	Raw material inventory
	
2.	Work in progress inventory
	
3.	Finished goods inventory
	
4.	Trade receivables (debtors)
	
5.	Cash (equivalents)
	
6.	Trade payables (creditors).
Working capital needs demand a net investment of funds: net working capital. 
The net investment in working capital amounts to the difference between work-
ing capital assets (current assets) and working capital liabilities (trade creditors/­
current liabilities). It is the net investment of funds needed to get the working 
capital cycle going.
Financial management in this area consists, on the one hand, of keeping to a 
minimum the cash tied up in working capital, while, on the other hand, preserv-
ing sufficient cash or readily convertible current assets to meet payment needs. In 
general terms, cash flows are benefited by withholding payment to creditors for 
as long as possible, while keeping inventories at the various stages of production 
and debtors to a minimum. However, restriction of cash outflows is not the only 

Part 3  An introduction to financial statement analysis
226
objective of management, and there are interactions between the commercial 
success of a company and these working capital elements (Figure 8.5):
	
1.	Inventories of raw materials. The unit cost of raw materials may be reduced by 
bulk buying, and maintenance of inventory at very low levels risks the pos-
sibility of production being halted by a late delivery of an essential item.
	
2.	Inventories of finished goods. High inventories of finished goods allow sales 
always to be satisfied quickly – a sudden increase in sales can be supplied 
instantly. Sales may be lost because of delays in supply to the customer.
Figure 8.5a
Gross working 
capital
Assets
Non-current assets
Current assets
Financing
LT Debt
Current liabilities
Equity
Assets
Non-current assets
Current assets
Financing
LT Debt
Current liabilities
Net working capital
(overlay on part of the 
current assets)
Equity
Figure 8.5b
Net working 
capital

Chapter 8  A framework for interpretation
227
	
3.	Receivables. Every company, in the interests of cash management, wishes to 
buy on credit and have as long a credit period as possible. Customers there-
fore will take into account the credit available from each supplier when 
­deciding between competing supplies of uniform products.
	
4.	Payables. When buying supplies it may be that the supplier who offers the 
best unit price or the best value for money in terms of product quality is also 
the supplier who offers the least credit (since they have a competitive edge).
It follows that each company has to determine its working capital management 
in the light of the trade-offs between the ideal financial management policy and 
the ideal commercial policy. What exactly these trade-offs amount to will depend 
on the circumstances of each company and the nature of the industry within 
which it operates. Just in time inventory management, developed in particular by 
Japanese manufacturers, says that tight management control of inventory lev-
els should eliminate production stoppages or failure to supply customers, while 
keeping inventories at a minimal level and reducing capital requirements. Sup-
pliers are expected to maintain inventories and deliver to the customer ‘just in 
time’.
It is impossible to suggest any general guidelines as to what is appropriate. In 
evaluating the working capital policy of any particular company it is essential 
to compare its policy with that of other companies in the same field or industry 
norms. The only overall guidelines are that companies should, on the one hand, 
keep their working capital levels at a minimum consistent with commercial pol-
icy while, on the other hand, ensuring that they are generating sufficient short-
term cash flows (from inventory and receivables) to meet their requirements for 
settling amounts due to creditors and other payments (i.e. that they are suffi-
ciently ‘liquid’).
Liquidity is the other aspect of working capital management and as a con-
cept it is easy to grasp – simple domestic management proceeds smoothly as long 
as cash is available to meet bills as they fall due for payment. Liquidity as applied 
in a particular company is a rather more difficult matter to grasp because of the 
extreme variability of circumstances for each company.
In essence, each company needs to plan its cash outflows and its cash inflows 
and try to time them so that they coincide with each other. If inflows are large but 
at infrequent intervals (for example, in large-scale civil engineering contracts), the 
company is likely to need to maintain high inventories of cash or overdraft facili-
ties, whereas if inflows are regular (for example, in food retailing), cash balances 
may be kept low and surplus funds invested in the short-term money market.
We can sum up the factors which affect working capital management as 
follows:
	
1.	Length of production cycle. If it takes a long time to move from delivery of raw 
materials to completion of the finished product, inventories of raw materi-
als and work in progress will be high.
	
2.	Variability of demand/flexibility of production. If demand levels fluctuate, high 
inventories of finished goods may be required, except where the production 
cycle is short and the volume of production can be changed rapidly.
	
3.	Scale of credit sales. In some industries all sales are on credit, in others virtually 
none. The length of credit demanded will also vary. A high proportion of credit 
sales and long credit periods will mean a high volume of trade receivables.

Part 3  An introduction to financial statement analysis
228
	
4.	Frequency of sale transactions. A company which sells a high volume of units, 
each having a relatively low unit price, will tend to have a regular cash in-
flow. One selling a small number of high-value objects will have an irregu-
lar cash inflow. Cash levels will be low where there are regular inflows, but 
higher where inflows are irregular.
	
5.	Frequency of payments. Where outflows are high and infrequent, cash levels 
may be kept low between outflows, but this pattern is relatively rare since 
basic running expenses such as wages and overheads form a fairly large and 
regular component of outflows.
By way of example, one would expect a company in the heavy capital goods in-
dustry, say, one which manufactured turbines to order, to have a long production 
cycle and infrequent cash inflows. It could therefore be expected to have a high 
level of inventories, receivables and cash, and therefore a high proportion of cur-
rent assets to current liabilities.
At the other extreme, a retail organization such as a hypermarket would ex-
perience frequent, high-volume sale transactions and no credit sales (although 
the trend towards retailers issuing in-store credit cards is changing that pattern 
slightly). Its inventories, trade receivables and cash balances would therefore be 
very low. The relationship between current assets and current liabilities would be 
in a completely different proportion.
Generally, however, this relationship should be stable. As sales increase or 
decrease, the absolute value of inventories, trade receivables and trade payables 
should normally fluctuate in proportion to sales but remain constant in their re-
lationship towards each other. Any marked shift in this relationship means that 
something has changed in the way the company is managed. One would also 
expect the relationship between the elements of working capital to be broadly 
comparable as between companies which work in the same business sector.
In the next chapter we shall be looking at financial statement analysis, and 
one of the measures used for evaluating a statement of financial position is the 
proportion of current assets to current liabilities (known as the current ratio). You 
will realize from the discussion of working capital that the nature of the current 
ratio can be expected to vary from one industry to another and care should be 
exercised in evaluating it!
While the financial statements provide considerable information about the finan-
cial position of the company, they do not really do the same for a wider apprecia-
tion of performance. Of course, one major measure of performance is profitability, 
and the statements will give that in a number of different forms, but there are 
other areas not mentioned. By way of example, a particular UK company pub-
lished its business objectives in the annual report and these were:
	
1.	Maximize use of existing assets (rather than diversify).
	
2.	Increase market share.
	
3.	Build on strong personnel traditions.
Only the first objective can be related to the financial statements as such, 
­although the company includes data in its annual report about the other aspects. 
Performance measurement

Chapter 8  A framework for interpretation
229
Evaluation of performance involves many considerations other than those which 
are visible from the annual financial statements. However, our concern here is the 
information available in the published financial statements.
In its financial objectives the same company stated that its target return is 
25 per cent on the assets used and this, of course, can be evaluated from the 
­financial statements themselves. The financial objectives are also expressed as a 
5 per cent increase in real terms in earnings per share, and this too can be evalu-
ated by reference to the financial statements.
But notice certain characteristics of the targets for evaluating performance: 
the absolute profit measure, for example, is not mentioned – the important 
measures are profit in relation to assets, and net earnings in relation to the 
individual share (after adjusting for inflation). You cannot judge performance 
in an absolute sense, but only in relation to another aspect of the company’s 
structure. So a target of (say) profit before tax of €200m is meaningless, whereas 
a target of 25 per cent return on assets can be compared usefully with other 
companies.
Improving shareholder value is one possible target for company manage-
ment to aim for. We will come back to the subject later and look at what this 
means, but it can be taken to be not only making current profits but ensur-
ing that future profits are better as well. The target of increasing market share 
cited above is one example of a strategy which should yield not only current 
profits but future profits as well. For example, increased marketing expendi-
ture is probably necessary to boost market share, causing a short-term decline 
in profitability; but, once that share has been achieved, it can probably be 
maintained with less marketing, and the higher volume of business should re-
duce average unit costs, thereby increasing profit both by increasing sales and 
by reducing average costs.
Summary
Corporate finance and its management is a very wide subject, and in this chapter 
we have made a very short examination of some of the major areas. Within such 
confines it is impossible to be other than superficial, but at the same time a total 
ignorance of corporate finance issues makes analysis and interpretation of finan-
cial statements a less productive exercise.
We have examined the structuring of company finance between debt and equity: 
this will influence both the volume and variability of the return to the shareholders. 
Equity is normally raised through the home stock exchange, although flotation on 
foreign exchanges is both possible and increasingly popular. Usually equity on the 
home market will be raised by first offering new shares to existing holders. However, 
issuing shares is an expensive exercise and is not, therefore, done at short intervals.
Debt finance may be obtained from a variety of sources, both individual lend-
ers and capital market issues. The possibility of raising debt on foreign markets al-
lows companies making foreign investments to hedge their investment – to limit 
their exposure to exchange rate fluctuations.

Part 3  An introduction to financial statement analysis
230
A major policy decision for companies is their approach to dividend payments 
to shareholders. Theorists are not agreed as to the best policy and some compa-
nies try to maintain a steady flow to shareholders irrespective of profit perfor-
mance, while others gear their dividend to profits. The effect on share price of the 
dividend policy is not certain and it is possible that different shareholders have 
different preferences, buying shares in those companies whose policy most nearly 
satisfies their preference.
Working capital management is an important aspect of finance, but the com-
position and best policy towards working capital will be influenced by commercial 
considerations and the actual circumstances of the individual company within an 
industry. Some industries require very high levels of current assets, while others need 
very little. Policy therefore has to be evaluated in relation to the individual company.
Performance measurement has implications wider than purely assessing profit, 
although profitability is clearly an important measure. Profitability can most eas-
ily be stated by expressing it in relation to another aspect of the company’s struc-
ture, such as assets employed in the business.
Discussion Questions
The following questions have answers on the lecturer side of the digital support 
resources for the book.
1.	 Why does an analyst need to take a view about the riskiness of a company as 
well as its profitability?
2.	 Distinguish between debt and equity and explain the importance of this 
­ratio in financial statement analysis.
3.	 What is the working capital cycle, and what are the likely conflicts in 
­managing this from a financial point of view as opposed to a sales or 
­production point of view?
4.	 Explain why net working capital tends to be industry-specific.
5.	 How does high liquidity affect the risk/return relationship?

231
This is the first chapter to address the tools for conventional financial statement 
analysis. It introduces the ratio, the classical working tool, and explains how the ratio 
facilitates comparisons and what key ratios are particularly useful in gaining a quick 
insight into company performance and financial position.
Financial statement analysis I
C H A P T E R  9
n	 Introduction
n	 The purpose of analysis
n	 Traditional analysis
n	 Tools of analysis
n	 Management performance ratios
n	 Financial strength ratios
n	 Analyzing financial statements
n	 Summary
n	 Assignments
Chapter Structure
Although this chapter is entitled ‘Financial statement analysis’, to an extent 
that is misleading because of course the whole book is about financial statement 
analysis. The preceding chapters which dealt with the preparation of financial 
Introduction

Part 3  An introduction to financial STATEMENT ANALYSIS
232
statements are intended to give insights into the recognition and measurement 
framework within which financial statements are prepared and the limitations 
of that framework. The chapters that follow will look at more variables in state-
ment preparation and how these impact upon interpretation of financial state-
ment information.
Given that framework, we are now going to look at some technical elements 
used in the process of evaluating the financial statements of individual compa-
nies in order to arrive at conclusions about the company. We are going to exam-
ine financial statements through the eyes of users of financial information and, 
in particular, look at the tools which are used to aid analysis and extract useful 
information about the company.
We have identified a wide range of potential users of financial statements, but for 
the purpose of analysis we are going to focus primarily on the needs of equity in-
vestors (or potential investors) and to a lesser degree those of suppliers of credit. 
Such users will each be interested in different aspects of the company and will also 
have differing levels of technical expertise available to them to interpret what they 
see. This is an underlying problem in the preparation of financial ­statements – they 
should contain information to enable sophisticated users to make good investment 
decisions, while at the same time they should not obscure the broad picture with 
so much detail that the less sophisticated user cannot understand them. However, 
financial statements are becoming increasingly complex and it is doubtful whether 
they are at all meaningful to those with no special training. Many companies in-
clude a section in the report (usually entitled ‘Highlights from the year’ or some-
thing similar) which gives a synopsis for the user who is not equipped to undertake 
a detailed analysis of the figures.
The tools of analysis which we are going to examine in this chapter are those 
used by the sophisticated user, and we should consider their objectives in making 
the analysis to see the relevance of the tools to that purpose. Stockbrokers and in-
vestment analysts examine financial statements in order to advise on investments 
in the shares – or bonds – of commercial companies. The investment might be 
made by a private individual or an institutional investor such as a pension fund, 
insurance company or unit trust. The trend in most markets is away from indi-
vidual investors and towards institutional investors. Many people prefer to make 
their investments by way of a collective investment vehicle, such as a mutual 
fund or a policy with a life assurance company, so stock exchange investment 
is increasingly professionalized. However, the internet offers an alternative ap-
proach through the use of online brokers by individuals. Some people apparently 
like to get up early in the morning, check what the financial reports on television, 
radio or Internet are saying, and then buy and sell shares. They then go to work, 
and when they get home in the evening check out the Internet to see how their 
investment plays have worked out.
As we discussed in Chapter 8, users are primarily interested in answering two 
questions:
	
1.	How well did the company perform?
	
2.	How strong is the financial position of the company?
The purpose of analysis

Chapter 9  Financial statement analysis I
233
Their purpose in posing these questions, however, will differ, as will the relative 
importance of the one question to the other. Investment analysts are mainly in-
terested in assessing future performance of the company. They are therefore only 
interested in the financial statements as a predictor of the future. The information 
about what the company did last year has no value of itself; its only relevance is 
as to whether it will do better or worse next year and whether the expected return 
is adequate for the expected level of risk.
Typically such analysts are specialists in a particular industry and their invest-
ment advice is based on an assessment of the likely performance of the indus-
try in the future, combined with an appreciation of which company within the 
industry is most likely to perform well within the anticipated economic envi-
ronment. The performance of any individual company will be affected by the 
economic environment within which it operates: it is affected by general levels 
of economic activity, changes in exchange rates, commodity prices, the introduc-
tion of new technology, inflation levels, etc.
Management cannot control these external forces which will affect all compa-
nies within a particular industry in the same way. But the best management will 
be able to minimize the impact of negative external forces and maximize the im-
pact of positive external forces. Financial statement analysis provides one method 
of assessing how well managements perform from one company to another in 
the same industry.
The emphasis for the lender making a credit decision is likely to be differ-
ent. Lenders do not participate in success in that the return they receive is not 
geared to profit. In addition, payment of interest will take place irrespective of the 
level of profit, so the lenders’ concern in future performance is merely that there 
Value of accounts
(The annual report) provides an essential service whose key features must be 
preserved. That essential service is of relatively increased importance in the 
case of smaller listed companies. The main features may be summarized as:
n	
acting as a significant landmark in the cycle of business information;
n	
prompting questions and indicating trends;
n	
providing a basis for decision-makers to create their own model of the 
company;
n	
giving reassurance because the financial statements are subject to regula-
tion and to audit and there is awareness that auditors at least cast an eye 
over the non-statutory sections of the annual report; and
n	
providing progressively greater detail, such as segmental information, for 
those who wish to probe the various aspects of the business.
Source: ICAS, Corporate Communications: Views of Institutional Investors and Lenders 
(Research Committee, Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland, 1999)
Between the lines

Part 3  An introduction to financial STATEMENT ANALYSIS
234
should be sufficient cash flow for the company to stay in business and pay the 
interest (interest cover).
The greater concern for lenders is the financial strength of the business. The 
lenders’ main risk is that the company should fail and be unable to repay the loan 
(default risk). Future performance will of course have an impact on this, but the 
stability of the company’s finances is the first concern, the marketability of the 
company’s assets the second. The debt/equity gearing will therefore be a key is-
sue, as will the relationship of the company’s assets to its liabilities and the exter-
nal value of the assets. For example, if it costs €100m to open a microchip factory, 
this asset is useful while there is a profitable market for microchips, but if the 
company failed following a slump in demand for microchips, a lender would find 
it difficult to raise €100m on the factory. Recall that the asset impairment rules 
touch this external value issue through the notion of the recoverable amount of 
assets.
If we look at the nature of the questions themselves (performance, finan-
cial position), it can be seen that each is the sum of a number of different 
issues. Management performance might be measured according to growth in 
assets, profit generated in relation to assets used or success in reducing tax 
liability, or extent of cash inflows, etc. The relevance of each detailed ques-
tion will vary from one company to another, since no two companies are 
exactly the same and no two industries require the same proportion of long-
term (non-current) assets to current assets, current assets to liabilities, debt to 
­equity, etc.
What may be a useful and relevant measure of success in one industry may be 
totally irrelevant in another industry. For example, the ratio of sales to assets may 
be useful when comparing one retail company to another since it says something 
about the efficiency with which their premises are employed. But such a ratio 
would be meaningless in relation to an advertising agency, where perhaps a better 
measure of efficiency would be sales in relation to staff numbers or staff cost. This 
point should be borne in mind when considering the application of the analyti-
cal tools.
Financial statement analysis has been carried out ever since financial statements 
existed, but the methods of analysis have become more sophisticated over the 
years and, in particular, the development of computers has permitted the use 
of complex statistical analysis and the development of financial models. In this 
chapter we shall look at the longer-established methods and review recent devel-
opments later in the book.
The basis of traditional analysis is comparison. An absolute number has little 
information value: to say that Nestlé made €995m last year means very little. 
If we say Nestlé made €995m but a similar company (say Danone) made only 
€750m then the information begins to fit into a framework and have more use. 
But an important point in analysis is the relevance of the comparison. To say 
Nestlé made €995m but British Airways lost €500m tells us nothing about either 
company, merely what we already know: that their operations and objectives are 
quite different.
Traditional analysis

Chapter 9  Financial statement analysis I
235
The framework for comparison may be either the company’s own perfor-
mance in other years, the performance of another company in the same in-
dustry or an industry average. Comparison over a period of years is known 
as a time series analysis (or intertemporal comparison), while that with a differ-
ent entity or an industry average is called a cross-sectional analysis (or interfirm 
comparison).
Time series analysis
At a simple level, time series analysis (also referred to as horizontal analysis) would 
compare for a single company the figures for one year with those of the preced-
ing year. But this is not very sound from a statistical point of view because such 
a short period may not reveal trends or may have been distorted by individual 
events. Analysts therefore, and particularly when making predictions, use at least 
a five-year base and often prefer a ten-year base. Companies usually provide a 
five- or ten-year summary of principal figures within their annual report. Such a 
time frame allows trend analysis.
Trend percentages can be used to follow changes in financial statement 
items over a longer period. They are computed by selecting a base year and set 
the amounts of the items of the financial statements of that base year equal to 
100 per cent. The corresponding amount for each following year is stated as a per-
centage of the base amount. Trend percentages of total sales for a five-year period 
will be computed as follows:
Trend percentages of total sales (20X3 5 100%)
20X8
20X7
20X6
20X5
20X4
20X3
Sales (€m)
617
583
492
413
627
445
Sales – trend %
139
131
111
93
141
100
A long time base may raise questions about the impact of inflation – a 5 per cent 
inflation rate will lead to a 40 per cent loss of value in the measuring unit over 
ten years. The impact of inflation on the numbers must therefore be considered 
in time series analysis. If it is thought to be significant, a simple remedy is to con-
vert the measurement unit to a common value by use of the retail price ­index – 
although where property revaluations have taken place during the series, care 
should be taken in the interpretation.
Cross-sectional analysis
Cross-sectional analysis involves making a comparison with other companies in 
the same industry for the same year. Potentially this may yield insights if the 
companies have very similar products, since differences will be the result of dif-
ferent management strategies in the face of the same problems.
Useful comparisons can still be made even if the companies are not ex-
actly similar in their product line, but in evaluating the figures produced it is 

Part 3  An introduction to financial STATEMENT ANALYSIS
236
necessary to make allowances for the differences between the companies. This 
can become particularly difficult in relation to comparisons with companies 
which have diversified activities. For example, if one was doing an analysis of 
listed international media companies, one would find Walt Disney, News Cor-
poration and Pearson. However, while Walt Disney and News Corporation 
(Twentieth Century Fox) both make films, and all three have significant televi-
sion activities (but Disney owns the ABC network in the US), only Pearson and 
News Corporation publish newspapers. They also both publish books, but Pear-
son has a wide educational range (e.g. Prentice Hall) whereas News Corporation 
is mainly a producer of bulk fiction (HarperCollins) and Walt Disney, of course, 
has theme parks and resorts.
Useful comparisons can still be made, but the interpretation must take account 
of the differences between the companies. A general point to remember is that 
analysis rarely offers very exact comparisons: you can often only say ‘X is worse 
than (better than) Y as regards such and such an attribute’, not ‘X performed 
22.58 per cent worse (better) than Y’.
The other possibility in cross-sectional analysis is the use of industry averages. 
Many industries have trade associations which collect and publish such data, and 
some specialist financial data companies also compile this type of information for 
sale. These can provide some useful comparisons but here again interpretation 
must be cautious because the ‘average’ may be distorted by a number of factors. 
Because many companies have peripheral activities or more than one product, 
they may be included in an industry average for their main product, but their 
accounts will include the results of the other operations, leading to some distor-
tion. Again the definition of the industry grouping may be so wide as to make 
comparison useless. Sometimes the grouping is dominated by one or two large 
companies, as would be the case with media companies in Germany, dominated 
by Bertelsmann, so it may be that the national ‘industry average’ reflects heavily 
the structure of one or two companies.
A simple approach to analysis would be to compare one component of the state-
ment of financial position (balance sheet) or statement of profit or loss (income 
statement/profit and loss account) of a company with the same component 
of the statement of financial position or statement of profit or loss of another 
company. However, in cross-sectional analysis this would not be very helpful 
if the two companies being compared were of different sizes. The size problem 
is overcome by standardizing financial statements and by the use of financial 
ratios. Moreover, financial ratios, as we will see, are a powerful tool to measure 
and compare fundamental aspects of the risks and returns which drive investor 
decisions.
Common-size financial statements
Common-size financial statements allow the comparison of companies with 
different levels of total assets or sales by introducing a common denominator. 
In a common-size balance sheet each component of the statement of financial 
Tools of analysis

Chapter 9  Financial statement analysis I
237
position is expressed as a percentage of total assets. For example, a company’s 
statement of financial position could be restated as follows:
Published  
€m
Common size 
%
Assets
Non-current assets
Tangible assets
113.9
22.4
Investments
8.6
1.7
Current assets
Inventories
53.2
10.5
Receivables
218.6
43.0
Bank
114.3
22.4
Totals
508.6
100.0
Liabilities and equity
Trade and related liabilities
111.6
22.0
Short-term borrowing
201.3
39.6
Long-term borrowing
3.1
0.6
Provisions
24.1
4.7
Equity
168.5
33.1
Totals
508.6
100.0
In a common-size statement of profit or loss each item is expressed as a percent-
age of sales. This might look like the following:
Published  
€m
Common size  
%
Sales
5 356
100.0
Cost of sales
(2 601)
(48.6)
Gross margin
2 755
51.4
Distribution costs
(382)
(7.1)
Administrative expenses
(874)
(16.3)
Profit before interest and tax
1 499
28.0
Interest
(362)
(6.8)
Profit before taxation
1 137
21.2
Taxation
(384)
(7.1)
Net profit for the period
753
14.1
Common-size financial statements are not only useful to cross-sectional analysis 
(comparing operating and financing characteristics of two companies of different 
size in the same industry), but also for (internal) structural or vertical analysis 
of the financial statements of a company. A common-size statement of financial 

Part 3  An introduction to financial STATEMENT ANALYSIS
238
position reveals the relative magnitude of the major categories of assets, equity 
and liabilities. The same proportioning procedure can be repeated within the 
major asset, equity and liabilities categories to reveal the relative importance of 
subcategories, for example inventories relative to total current assets, the capital 
structure of the company (debt relative to equity) and the debt structure (long-
term relative to short-term borrowing). If multi-period common-size financial 
statements are available, the structural perspective can be usefully combined with 
horizontal analysis for pointing out important changes in the relative weight of 
financial statement components from one year to the next.
Use of financial ratios
Financial ratios standardize financial statement data in terms of mathematical 
relationships expressed in the form of percentages or times. Instead of compar-
ing absolute amounts from financial statements, a ratio is used to express the 
relationship between two elements of financial data that are logically linked, and 
compares that relationship with the same relationship in the other company. 
That is more easily understood in relation to an example.
Suppose we wished to compare the profit performance of two companies and 
had the data shown on the next page about each company.
Company A  
€
Company B  
€
Sales
100 000
200 000
Net profit
10 000
15 000
Assuming that their products and activities are similar, a straight comparison 
would yield the information that company B had more sales than A and made 
more profit than A. In other words, company B is bigger than A – but that is easy 
to see and tells us very little about their relative efficiency.
However, a test of efficiency would be possible if we converted the information 
given to a ratio of profit to sales which would then tell us which company had 
the lower costs per unit of sales. This ratio is commonly used, and is sometimes 
called the ‘net profit margin ratio’:
Net profit margin ratio 5 
Net profit
Sales
Applied to our example companies this yields:
Company A      10 000
100 000
 3 100 5 10%
Company B      15 000
200 000
 3 100 5 7.5%
By using a ratio we eliminate the size difference (the ratio expresses a relationship 
internal to each company) and are then able to make a meaningful comparison. 

Chapter 9  Financial statement analysis I
239
We can see that company A has a better performance than B; it makes a higher profit 
from its sales, so is more efficient than B, although smaller. Note that common-size 
financial statements are a form of ratio analysis, with total assets as a common de-
nominator for balance sheet categories and sales for income statement items.
A practical point to bear in mind here is that the comparison is warped if the 
content of the numbers used is not exactly the same. For example, if in the above 
comparison the company A net profit was before tax, and the company B net 
profit was after tax, the comparison of ratios would not be valid. The golden rule 
is that like must always be compared with like.
The use of just the one ratio would not be sufficient to make a final assessment 
of either company; we should certainly look for other ratios to indicate other per-
spectives on performance, such as sales to capital employed. It could be that A is 
more capital intensive than B, so that would qualify the efficiency assessment in 
the first ratio. In essence, a good analyst will look for as many ratios as are mean-
ingful, in order to build up a complete picture of the companies being examined.
Ratio analysis permits many comparisons, depending on the degree of detail 
available from the source data, and in general the analyst should always be free to 
construct whatever ratios seem appropriate in the context of the companies under 
review. However, some ratios are more commonly used than others and the ratios 
we will review in this chapter are generally useful for most companies. Note that 
many companies include a selection of ratios in their annual report. For example, 
Ericsson publishes ratio data in a five-year summary section (see Company Report).
COMPANY REPORT
ERICSSON
Financial highlights – five year summary (extracts)
Five-year summary
SEK million
2011
Change
2010
2009
2008
2007
Income statement items
Net sales
226,921
12%
203,348
206,477
208,930
187,780
Operating income
17,900
9%
16,455
5,918
16,252
30,646
Financial net
221
−
−672
325
974
83
Net income
12,569
12%
11,235
4,127
11,667
22,135
Year-end position
Total assets
280,349
−1%
281,815
269,809
285,684
245,117
Working capital 
109,552
4%
105,488
99,079
99,951
86,327
Capital employed
186,307
2%
182,640
181,680
182,439
168,456
Gross cash
80,542
−8%
87,150
76,724
75,005
57,716
Net cash
39,505
−23%
51,295
36,071
34,651
24,312
Property, plant and equipment
10,788
14%
9,434
9,606
9,995
9,304
Stockholders’ equity
143,105
−1%
145,106
139,870
140,823
134,112
Non-controlling interest
2,165
29%
1,679
1,157
1,261
940
Interest-bearing liabilities and 
post-employment benefits
 
41,037
 
14%
 
35,855
 
40,653
 
40,354
 
33,404

Part 3  An introduction to financial STATEMENT ANALYSIS
240
Source: Ericsson, Annual Report, 2011
SEK million
2011
Change
2010
2009
2008
2007
Other information
Earnings per share, basic, SEK 
3.8
9%
3.49
1.15
3.54
6.87
Earnings per share, diluted, SEK 
3.77
9%
3.46
1.14
3.52
6.84
Earnings per share (non-IFRS), SEK
4.72
−2%
4.8
2.87
4.24
7.53
Cash flow from operating  
activities per share, SEK
 
3.11
 
−63%
 
8.31
 
7.67
 
7.54
 
6.04
Cash dividends per share, SEK
 2.51
11%
2.25
2
1.85
2.5
Stockholders’ equity per share, 
SEK
 
44.57
 
−2%
 
45.34
 
43.79
 
44.21
 
42.17
Number of shares outstanding (in millions)
  end of period, basic
3,211
−
3,200
3,194
3,185
3,180
  average, basic
3,206
−
3,197
3,190
3,183
3,178
  average, diluted
3,233
−
3,226
3,212
3,202
3,193
Additions to property, plant and 
equipment
 
4,994
 
35%
 
3,686
 
4,006
 
4,133
 
4,319
Depreciation and write-downs/
impairments of property, plant 
and equipment
 
 
3,546
 
 
8%
 
 
3,296
 
 
3,502
 
 
3,105
 
 
2,914
Acquisitions/capitalization of 
­intangible assets
 
2,748
 
−
 
7,246
 
11,413
 
1,287
 
29,838
Amortization and write-downs/
impairments of intangible assets
 
5,490
 
−18%
 
6,657
 
8,621
 
5,568
 
5,459
Research and development 
expenses
 
32,638
 
3%
 
31,558
 
33,055
 
33,584
 
28,842
  as percentage of net sales
14.40%
−
15.50%
16%
16.10%
15.40%
Ratios
Operating margin excluding 
joint ventures
 
9.60%
 
−
 
8.70%
 
6.50%
 
8%
 
12.50%
Operating margin
7.90%
−
8.10%
2.90%
7.80%
16.30%
EBITA margin
9.90%
−
11%
6.70%
9.40%
18%
Cash conversion
40%
−
112%
117%
92%
66%
Return on equity
8.50%
−
7.80%
2.60%
8.20%
17.20%
Return on capital employed
11.30%
−
9.60%
4.30%
11.30%
20.90%
Equity ratio
51.80%
−
52.10%
52.30%
49.70%
55.10%
Capital turnover
1.2
−
1.1
1.1
1.2
1.2
Inventory turnover days
78
−
74
68
68
70
Trade receivables turnover
3.6
−
3.2
2.9
3.1
3.4
Payment readiness, SEK million
86,570
−11%
96,951
88,960
84,917
64,678
  as percentage of net sales
38.10%
−
47.70%
43.10%
40.60%
34.40%
Statistical data, year-end
Number of employees
104,525
16%
90,261
82,493
78,740
74,011
  of which in Sweden
17,500
−2%
17,848
18,217
20,155
19,781
Export sales from Sweden,  
SEK million
 
116,507
 
16%
 
100,070
 
94,829
 
109,254
 
102 486
1) For 2011, as proposed by the Board of Directors

Chapter 9  Financial statement analysis I
241
Assessments of management performance will usually start with a focus on profit-
ability measures and, in a second stage, extend profitability analysis to asset utili-
zation ratios. We have grouped the common management performance ratios in 
Table 9.1. To an extent these ratios are self-explanatory. They all answer different 
aspects of the question as to how well management has performed.
Profitability is a primary measure of the overall success of a company. Earn-
ing a satisfactory profit is the fundamental goal of most businesses. The net profit 
margin is a first candidate measure of overall profitability. The net profit margin 
is also referred to as return on sales (with the term ‘return’ used as a synonym of 
‘profitability’). It shows (in its change from year to year, or compared to another 
company) how successful the management is in creating profit from a given 
Management performance ratios
Table 9.1
Management 
performance 
ratios
A. Profitability ratios
Net profit margin
5 
Net profit after tax
Sales
Gross operating margin
5
Sales less Cost of sales
Sales
Net operating margin
5
Net profit before interest and tax
Sales
Return on equity (ROE)
5
Net profit after tax
Equity
Return on assets (ROA)
5
Net profit before interest
Total assets
5
Net profit after tax  (interest  (1tax rate))
Total assets
Return on capital  
employed (ROCE)
5
Net profit before interest on long-term debt
Equity  long-term debt
Earnings per share (EPS)
5
Net profit after tax
Number of shares outstanding
B. Asset utilization ratios
Total asset turnover
5
Sales
Total assets
Long-term asset turnover
5
Sales
Long-term assets
Inventory turnover
5
Cost of sales
Inventories
Receivables turnover
5
(Net credit) Sales
Receivables

Part 3  An introduction to financial STATEMENT ANALYSIS
242
quantity of sales. Net and gross operating margin ratios narrow down the analysis to 
operating profitability. Gross operating margin shows control of manufacturing 
or purchasing costs (depending upon the activity of the company). It is the pre-
ferred ratio to measure operating efficiency. Margin ratios are very useful for trend 
analysis and intra-industry comparisons. It is, however, very difficult to compare 
margin ratios for companies in different industries, as they tend to be industry-
specific. For example, food retailers operate with low profit margins, while profit 
margins are generally high in the clothing industry. Both types of business can 
generate nice profits, because a high sales volume can compensate for a low profit 
margin.
Net (operating) profit, considered by itself or as a percentage of sales, does not 
take into account the investment needed to generate the profit. A return on in-
vestment ratio (ROI) does. Depending on what is meant by ‘investment’, different 
ROI ratios can be used: return on equity (ROE), return on assets (ROA) and return 
on capital employed (ROCE).
Return on equity (ROE) measures how much the company has earned on the 
funds invested by its shareholders. Funds invested by shareholders are set equal to 
equity and thus imply both directly invested funds and funds invested indirectly 
through retained profit. Obviously, the ROE ratio reflects a shareholder perspective. 
ROE is a slightly dangerous figure in that it is not a ‘real’ return and should not be 
compared with, for example, the rate of interest paid on a bank deposit account. 
It can be used in time series analysis to show whether profitability is improving or 
declining, viewed from the equity perspective, as opposed to all finance.
Return on assets (ROA) reflects how much the company has earned on the in-
vestment of all the financial resources committed to the company. In this ratio 
the investment base is set equal to the sum of equity and all liabilities – the total 
sources of funds invested in the company’s assets. The ROA shows how well the 
company has used its funds, irrespective of the relative magnitudes of the sources 
of those funds (current liabilities, LT liabilities, equity). As the ROA ratio brings 
in the debt element of the company as well, it affords a comparison between the 
efficiency of companies with different debt/equity ratios The ROA ratio is used 
to evaluate management performance both at corporate level and at individual 
business unit level (divisions within the company). The business unit manager 
usually has significant influence over the assets used in the business unit, but has 
little control over how those assets are financed. The business unit manager usu-
ally has no impact on the relative roles of external creditors and shareholders in 
financing his or her assets, because financing decisions are in most cases taken at 
corporate level and not at business unit level.
Taken in conjunction with the ROE ratio, the ROA ratio shows whether the 
return to shareholders is changing better or worse than the return on overall 
financing.
Return on capital employed (ROCE) shows how much the company has earned 
on invested long-term funds (also called permanently employed capital). Sharehold-
ers’ equity and long-term debt (or non-current liabilities) are funds entrusted to 
the company for a relatively long period of time and can be considered quasi-
permanent capital. Figure 9.1 shows that capital employed (or permanent capital) 
is also equal to net working capital plus non-current assets. In fact, the statement 
of financial position equivalency indicates that capital employed is expected to 
finance non-current assets and the portion of current assets that is not financed 
by current liabilities (or net working capital).

Chapter 9  Financial statement analysis I
243
The three ROI ratios differ not only with regard to the denominator (the in-
vestment base), but also in the calculation of the numerator (the profit figure re-
tained). The calculation of the ROE ratio is straightforward: net profit after tax is 
by definition the residual net income attributable to the funds invested by share-
holders. In arriving at this net profit figure, part of the cost of finance – the inter-
est on debt financing – was subtracted as an expense. Using the same net profit 
figure in calculating ROA or ROCE would in fact understate the earnings gener-
ated by total funds or long-term funds available. Thus, when including interest-
bearing debt in the investment base, the interest expense should be added again 
to the net profit figure to arrive at an earnings level which is not affected by the 
relative use of equity or debt financing.
Because the interest expense is tax deductible, it also affects taxation in the 
statement of profit or loss. This means that the amount of the adjustment of the 
net profit figure in the calculation of ROA or ROCE should be the after-tax inter-
est expense. The after-tax interest expense is the interest expense multiplied by 
the complement of the tax rate. For example, if the corporate tax rate on income 
is 30 per cent and the gross interest expense amount to €10 000, the after-tax in-
terest expense would be €10 000 3 (1 – 0.3) or €7000.
The different ROI measures each reflect the earnings generated by a specific 
pool of funds, excluding the costs of the specific funds considered. In practice, 
the interest adjustments are sometimes ignored by analysts because they add 
complexity to calculating the ROA and ROCE ratios.
Earnings per share (EPS) is another way of checking whether profitability is grow-
ing from a shareholder-only perspective. EPS is calculated as net profit for the 
period (net income or net earnings) divided by the average number of shares out-
standing during the period. It shows how much of a period’s net profit has been 
earned by each ordinary share. This ratio is given great importance by Anglo-Saxon 
companies and analysts. It has taken on a major significance in the investment 
industry and is the single most commonly used measure to compare companies’ 
Figure 9.1
Capital 
employed
Assets
Non-current assets
Current assets
Financing
Equity
LT Debt
Current liabilities
Net working capital
(overlay on part of the 
current assets)
Capital employed
Capital employed

Part 3  An introduction to financial STATEMENT ANALYSIS
244
performance. It usually appears on the face of the comprehensive income state-
ment of listed companies (an IFRS and US GAAP requirement). Many accountants, 
though, deplore its use as being too simplistic – it reduces a complex information 
set to a single figure, thereby destroying much of the message. The basic calcula-
tion of earnings per share is relatively easy. EPS calculation can, however, become 
more complicated if there is significant fluctuation of shares outstanding through-
out the year and if there are different types of shares or extra share rights. There is 
even a separate IFRS standard dealing with it – IAS 33, Earnings per Share.
IAS 33 requires that listed companies disclose both basic EPS and diluted EPS 
on the face of the statement of comprehensive income (or of the statement of 
profit or loss if this is presented as a separate statement). IAS 33 considers the 
basic EPS ratio insufficient if a company has issued share options, share war-
rants or convertible securities that can be converted into ordinary shares at the 
option of the holders of those securities. These types of financial instruments 
(equity instruments) are called ‘potential ordinary shares’, as they entitle 
their holder to acquire ordinary shares. If these potentially ordinary shares are 
actually exchanged for ordinary shares, they may have the effect of reducing (di-
luting) the earnings accruing to pre-existing shareholders, through the fact that 
the number of shares outstanding will increase and through the effect of the con-
version on net income available to ordinary shareholders. IAS 33 sets the rules for 
calculating both basic and diluted earnings per share and provides a basis for 
quantifying the impact of the conversion of issued equity instruments into ordi-
nary shares in the future.
Analysts also talk about ‘quality of earnings’ as well as the absolute number 
as being important (how sustainable are the profits? What activities are they de-
rived from?). This is a question which needs further consideration in the light of 
accounting and other devices which are discussed later. The key question is the 
extent to which current profits are affected by special circumstances (e.g. asset 
sales) and to what extent they can be expected to continue for the foreseeable 
future.
The EPS number is used as an input to a market ratio, the price/earnings or P/E 
ratio:
Price/Earnings 5 Market price per share
EPS
The P/E ratio involves an amount not directly controlled by the company: the 
current market price of an ordinary share. It reflects how the market judges the 
company’s performance. The P/E ratio is another form of rate of return ratio, al-
beit inverted. The numerator is today’s market price and the denominator the EPS 
for the most recent 12 months. Thus, the P/E ratio varies throughout the year and 
the major financial newspapers usually display a company’s P/E ratio along with 
the daily market prices of its ordinary shares.
The P/E ratio is also called the earnings multiple. It reflects the market’s expecta-
tions about the company’s performance and measures how much the market is 
willing to pay for a share in the company’s potential future earnings. Basically, 
a high P/E ratio indicates that investors expect that the company’s earnings will 
grow rapidly. Growth expectations will be linked to the industry to which the 
company belongs. As the relative rate of expected growth in earnings differs sig-
nificantly among industries, so will the typical P/E ratios for industries tend to 

Chapter 9  Financial statement analysis I
245
vary. In this vein, it makes more sense to compare the P/E ratio of Peugeot SA 
to the P/E of Volkswagen AG than to the P/E of Microsoft Inc. A decline of the 
predictions of general economic conditions generally has a negative effect on the 
overall level of P/E ratios, because the market takes it as an indication that the 
earnings of virtually all companies will be affected. We will come back to the P/E 
ratio later.
Investors generally expect two kinds of return: appreciation of the market price 
of a share and dividend income. Investors who like to receive dividend income 
will look at the dividend yield ratio. It reflects the relationship between the divi-
dends per share paid to shareholders and the current market price of a share. The 
ratio measures the percentage of a share’s market value that is returned (annually) 
in cash to the shareholders.
Dividend Yield 5 Dividend per share
Market price per share
Dividend yields vary widely, from 0 per cent to 5–6 per cent. Young, high growth 
companies usually are reluctant to pay cash dividends, as they need the funds to 
finance further growth. Companies with high dividend yields are usually older, 
established companies. The major financial newspapers publish dividend yields 
of listed companies daily.
Asset utilization ratios measure how efficiently management uses the compa-
ny’s assets. The concept of a turnover ratio can be explained best with regard to 
inventory turnover: if the company keeps an inventory of only one unit and sells 
50 units during the accounting period, the inventory must completely turn over 
and be replaced 50 times (assuming we want to keep the ending inventory equal 
to beginning inventory). If the inventory were 50 units and 50 units are sold, the 
inventory must turn over and be replaced only once.
Total asset turnover shows how efficient a company is in using its total asset 
base. It measures the company’s success in keeping the total asset base active, 
with sales as the activity measure of reference. But again, the absolute ratio has 
little meaning; it is the comparison from one year to another or one company to 
another similar company which yields the interesting measure of efficiency. For 
example, does the company make less and less use of capacity? If so, it might in-
dicate a dying market for the product, even if inflation were pushing up the sales 
price and the profits.
Long-term asset turnover focuses only on the use of non-current assets. The ratio 
is usually even narrowed down to the turnover of property, plant and equipment. 
It shows the level of sales the company was able to generate for each euro in-
vested in property, plant and equipment. The long-term asset turnover ratio is of-
ten referred to as (the inverse of) the capital intensity ratio. This label better reflects 
the industry-specific nature of the ratio. A steel company is a typical example of a 
company with a high level of long-term tangible assets (highly capital intensive) 
and, thus, a low long-term asset turnover ratio. Companies with low long-term 
asset turnover tend to have a lot of fixed costs which makes them particularly 
vulnerable to cyclical fluctuations in business activity. When business activity de-
clines and sales drop, they may be unable to cover the fixed costs. Conversely, 
companies that are not capital intensive, like many service companies, usually 
have much more flexibility to reduce their costs when sales decline.

Part 3  An introduction to financial STATEMENT ANALYSIS
246
STANDARDS
IAS 33 – EARNINGS PER SHARE 
(extract)
Presentation of basic and diluted earnings per share
66. An entity shall present in the statement of comprehensive income basic 
and diluted earnings per share for profit or loss from continuing operations 
attributable to the ordinary equity holders of the parent entity and for profit 
or loss attributable to the ordinary equity holders of the parent entity for the 
period for each class of ordinary shares that has a different right to share in 
profit for the period. An entity shall present basic and diluted earnings per 
share with equal prominence for all periods presented.
67. Earnings per share is presented for every period for which a statement of 
comprehensive income is presented. If diluted earnings per share is reported 
for at least one period, it shall be reported for all periods presented, even if 
it equals basic earnings per share. If basic and diluted earnings per share are 
equal, dual presentation can be accomplished in one line on the statement of 
comprehensive income.
67A. If an entity presents items of profit or loss in a separate statement as 
described in paragraph 10A of IAS 1 (as amended in 2011), it presents basic 
and diluted earnings per share, as required in paragraphs 66 and 67, in that 
separate statement.
68. An entity that reports a discontinued operation shall disclose the basic and 
diluted amounts per share for the discontinued operation either in the state-
ment of comprehensive income or in the notes.
68A. If an entity presents items of profit or loss in a separate statement as 
described in paragraph 10A of IAS 1 (as amended in 2011), it presents basic 
and diluted earnings per share for the discontinued operation, as required in 
paragraph 68, in that separate statement or in the notes.
69. An entity shall present basic and diluted earnings per share, even if the 
amounts are negative (i.e. a loss per share).
Source: IAS 33, Earnings per Share
The inventory turnover ratio is based on the relationship between the inventory 
and the volume of goods sold during the period. It shows how many times on 
average the inventory was acquired and sold during the period. A high inventory 
turnover indicates that the company is able to sell its inventory quickly. This sug-
gests efficient inventory management, but it can also be troublesome if it means 
that the company does not keep enough inventory on hand, which could lead 
to fewer sales if the company cannot fill incoming customer orders. Note that we 
use cost of sales as the numerator in the ratio and not sales revenue as such, be-
cause both inventory and cost of sales are measured at cost.
The receivable turnover ratio reflects the relationship of receivables to (credit) 
sales during the period. A high receivable turnover ratio suggests that the com-
pany efficiently manages the funds tied up in credit-granting and is effective in 
its credit collection activities. In practice, the amount of credit sales is not always 

Chapter 9  Financial statement analysis I
247
known and, if so, total sales will be used as a rough approximation. While a low 
receivable turnover ratio suggests that significant funds are tied up in unproduc-
tive assets, a very high receivable turnover could mean that the company has an 
overly stringent credit policy that could lead to lost sales.
Inventory turnover and receivable turnover are important indicators of 
working capital management. They are measures of both operating efficiency 
and liquidity (see next section). Tensions between operating efficiency and 
liquidity needs are typical for the trade-offs to be made in working capital 
management.
In this section we have covered the major management performance ratios, 
albeit not the only ones. The definitions given are ones commonly found, but are 
not the only definitions possible – when discussing ratios it is sensible to check 
exactly what definition is being used. The need to check ratio definitions before 
comparing is never more true than with the debt/equity or gearing ratio (see next 
section).
Financial strength ratios indicate the strength of the company’s financial position 
from different points of view. While profitability ratios highlight the return side 
of the basic risk/return relationship, financial strength ratios mainly focus on the 
financial risks associated with the company’s financial position. Basic financial 
risk concerns are typically assessed using solvency ratios and liquidity ratios.
Solvency refers to the long-term ability to generate cash internally or from ex-
ternal sources in order to meet long-term financial obligations. Solvency ratios 
mainly focus on the relative size of debt in the financial structure of the company. 
Liquidity refers to the company’s ability to generate cash to meet its short-term 
obligations (essentially working capital needs and immediate debt repayment 
needs). Liquidity tests focus on the size of, and relationships between current as-
sets and current liability (working capital components). The most common finan-
cial strength ratios are shown in Table 9.2.
The debt/equity ratio is the solvency ratio found most frequently in the 
­financial press and reflects the relationship between loan finance and share-
holders’ funds. Recall that debt financing introduces risk because debt implies 
fixed commitments in the form of interest payments and principal repayment. 
Recall that default risk refers to potential failure to satisfy the fixed payments 
associated with debt which will ultimately result in bankruptcy. A lesser finan-
cial risk is that a heavily indebted company will have difficulty in obtaining 
additional debt financing when needed or will have to pay significantly higher 
interest rates.
A high debt/equity ratio indicates high financial risk because it implies substan-
tial interest charges and an exposure to interest rate movements: if interest rates 
are rising, this will imply lower profitability in the future. The existence of debt 
means that ultimately repayment must take place and a glance at the schedule of 
outstanding debt given in the notes to the accounts will indicate how early this 
may take place. Most agreements for the provision of long-term finance include 
stipulations as to the maximum debt/equity ratio the company may have (loan 
covenants) – and this sort of covenant has been the driver of a certain amount of 
creative accounting designed to improve the debt/equity ratio.
Financial strength ratios

Part 3  An introduction to financial STATEMENT ANALYSIS
248
The debt/equity ratio is sometimes computed in slightly different ways, for ex-
ample debt as a proportion of total capital employed. Sometimes the computa-
tion of debt will include all liabilities, both short- and long-term. Occasionally, 
debt repayable within one year is mixed in within short-term trade and opera-
tional creditors, thereby mixing a financing element with working capital. When 
computing the liability ratios, it is logical to look at the analysis of short-term 
creditors and include the pure financing element (normally indicated as ‘borrow-
ings’ or debt in the note which analyses short-term creditors) in the debt/equity 
ratio and the rest of short-term creditors (trade creditors, taxes payable, dividends 
payable, etc.) as part of working capital.
Although debt financing implies financial risk, it also holds the potential for an 
additional return to shareholders. When debt is used successfully – if the company 
is able to earn more on the external funds provided than the cost of debt – the 
return to shareholders is magnified through financial leverage. Thus, the impact 
of debt financing on the trade-off between risk and return is not that straight­
forward. We will elaborate on the subject of financial leverage in Chapter 17.
The interest cover ratio is often used as a surrogate for the debt/equity ratio, or in 
addition to that ratio. This is partly as a response to creative accounting schemes 
which have reduced the reliability of the debt/equity ratio. Interest cover indi-
cates the safety margin between profits and interest charges. In good times, bank-
ers and others like to see interest ‘cover’ of five times, but it is not unusual to see 
cover drop to as low as three times.
Short-term liquidity problems arise because current cash inflows don’t match 
current cash outflows. Take another look at Figure 8.2 in the previous chapter. 
The working capital cycle runs on a proper matching of cash receipts and cash 
payments. Liquidity problems arise when cash receipts from sales lag behind the 
cash payments to suppliers, employees, tax creditors, etc. Additionally, the work-
ing capital cycle should be able to generate sufficient cash to service short-term 
debt payments. The main liquidity ratios focus on the make-up of working capital 
and the activity level of its components.
Table 9.2
Financial 
strength  
ratios
A. Long-term solvency risk ratios
Gearing (Debt/equity ratio)
5
Debt
Equity
This ratio is also frequently computed on the basis of debt to total finance:
Gearing (Total finance)
5
Debt
Debt  Equity
Interest cover
5
Profit before interest and tax
Net interest charges
Dividend cover
5
Earnings per share
Dividend per share
B. Short-term liquidity risk ratios
Current ratio
5
Current assets
Current liabilities
Acid test (or quick ratio)
5
Current assets  Inventories
Current liabilities
Days outstanding of working capital components (see below)

Chapter 9  Financial statement analysis I
249
The current ratio and acid test ratio (called the quick ratio in the USA) are the 
most common liquidity tests. They measure in a crude way the relationship be-
tween assets which will shortly mature to cash, and liabilities which will require 
cash settlement within one year or one operating cycle. The acid test excludes in-
ventory on the basis that in some industries inventory turns over very slowly and 
therefore should not be looked to for very quick maturity into cash. Inventory is 
indeed the least liquid current asset and the most likely to suffer from losses if it 
has to be liquidated at short notice.
As we discussed in Chapter 8, when looking at working capital management, 
interpretation of these ratios should be done with care since the working capital 
structure of companies varies considerably from one industry to another. Hotels 
and retail businesses often have acid test ratios of less than one (i.e. their short-
term monetary assets are smaller than their short-term monetary liabilities), 
because (a) they have very few credit sales, so few receivables and (b) they gener-
ate immediate cash from sales and have no need to keep large amounts of cash 
available at the bank to pay creditors.
As so often in ratio analysis, what is important is not the absolute number, but 
the direction and rate of change from one year to another. If a company’s activ-
ity does not change, its working capital ratios should not change either. A sud-
den move in the working capital ratios means that something in the company’s 
structure has changed, and further questions should be asked as to why this is 
– for example, an increase in the current ratio may be generated by an increase in 
inventories, so one should ask: why have inventory levels risen? Has there been a 
sudden fall-off in demand for the company’s products?
Another way of examining individual components of working capital is to 
compare the balance sheet value with the related annual sales figure (gross mar-
gin component). For example, for a retail company, the ratio of inventory on 
hand at the year-end to annual cost of sales will tell you how many days’ business 
would be required to sell the inventory:
Days inventory outstanding	 5	 Inventories
Cost of sales  3 365 days
Similarly:
Credit given	
5	 Receivables
(Credit) Sales  3 365 days
Credit obtained	
5	 Trade payables
Cost of sales  3 365 days
‘Credit given’ tells you how many days’ credit are given to customers (but note 
that you need to know either that all sales are on credit or that a substantial pro-
portion of them is on credit). Where a company is buying goods for resale, the 
ratio of trade payables to cost of sales will show the days’ credit obtained or taken 
from suppliers.
These ratios can also be useful even if you do not know that there is a high 
proportion of credit sales, or where most of the company’s products are manufac-
tured (so purchases from suppliers are only a small part of cost of sales), because 
while the absolute number of days is no longer a meaningful figure, a significant 
(say, more than 10 per cent) shift in the figure from one year to another will indi-
cate a change in credit arrangements.

Part 3  An introduction to financial STATEMENT ANALYSIS
250
It is not uncommon for ratios including balance sheet figures to be calculated 
by using an average of the balance sheet element during the period. This is usually 
done by taking one half of the sum of the beginning and ending balance of the 
item, although it could be meaningful to take into account the timing of specific 
movements in the balance sheet items over the period. In the illustrations and 
examples in this books we will, however, use ending balance sheet amounts which 
can be more easily traced down to the figures on the face of the balance sheet.
It is very easy for people approaching ratios for the first time to go through a series 
of reactions, initially seeing the calculation of the ratios as an end in itself and then 
later asking what use the ratios are. Essentially analysis is about decoding the mes-
sages which are built into financial statements and using them to ‘tell the story’ of 
the company. Ratios are a means of throwing light upon certain aspects of a com-
pany, but not all ratios will be important for all companies and often the calcula-
tion of ratios leads to a question rather than an answer. You must remember that 
ratio analysis is only part (even if important) of the investment appraisal process, 
and investors need to look at economic variables, information about the company’s 
future plans, etc., as well as decoding the information in the financial statements.
So how does one set about analyzing a set of financial statements? The first 
question you must ask yourself is why you are making the analysis – is it for 
lending purposes or for investing? Is it for a long-term involvement or short-
term? In short, what is the nature of the decision which you need to make?
Having identified your analysis objective, you should gather what general 
­information is available to you about the nature of the company and its activities – 
this will depend on whether you have a full annual report which will include much 
non-financial information and under what circumstances you are carrying out the 
analysis.
Only then can you look at the financial statements and start work on calculat-
ing ratios. A normal process would be to compute a number of standard ratios 
which we have discussed above, for as long a time series as you have information 
available. Any one set of financial statements will include previous year compara-
tive figures, but in an ideal situation you would have more than one set of state-
ments so that you could compile a longer time series.
Having computed your ratios, you should look to see if there are any patterns – 
which ratios are stable, which changing? If ratios are changing, you need to ask why 
they are doing so. This may be obvious from the financial statements. For example, 
if the return on equity ratio increases, this might be because of an increase in profit, 
an increase in sales or a reduction in equity. If the net profit margin ratio (net profit/
sales) has gone up (say from 10 to 12 per cent), and you see that sales have remained 
static, this means that the amount of profit per euro of sales has increased, which 
probably means that the company is controlling its costs more efficiently but, on 
the other hand, that poses questions as to why sales have not increased.
It may be that a picture gradually emerges of the activities of the company, and 
what you have to do is attempt to ‘tell the story’ of the company based on what 
is available from its figures.
The next step is to do some cross-sectional analysis, if you have the necessary 
information – either data from another company in the same field or industry 
Analyzing financial statements

Chapter 9  Financial statement analysis I
251
data. You can then compare ratios and there may be further insights into your 
company from this process. If company A has a gross operating margin of 35 per 
cent, why does company B, in the same year and carrying out the same activities, 
have a gross margin of 40 per cent?
Worked example
In order to help put the use of ratios into some context, we will carry out basic 
analysis on a three-year time series of company data – note that we are not given 
any background information about the company’s activities, so that will limit 
how far we can make deductions about what is going on, and we do not have any 
material for cross-sectional analysis. Also, the financial statements are simplified 
to the extent that we do not have a breakdown of non-current assets and all debt 
is long term. The company pays a dividend of 20 (unchanged over the years). In-
terest relates to long-term debt. The applicable tax rate is 30 per cent.
Financial statements:
20X7
20X8
20X9
€’000
€’000
€’000
Statement of profit or loss:
Sales
620.0
745.0
762.0
Cost of sales
–217.0
–245.8
–266.7
Gross margin
403.0
499.2
495.3
Distribution costs
204.6
260.7
266.7
Administrative expenses
–95.1
–97.2
–101.4
103.3
141.3
127.2
Interest
–10.0
–30.9
–37.5
93.3
110.4
89.7
Taxation
–32.7
38.9
–31.4
Statement of financial position:
60.6
71.5
58.3
Non-current assets (net)
312.0
532.0
495.0
Inventories
43.4
49.2
66.7
Receivables
62.0
74.5
91.4
Cash
67.0
70.3
58.0
Total assets
484.4
726.0
711.1
Ordinary shares (€1)
120.0
120.0
120.0
Reserves
195.5
267.9
315.2
315.5
387.9
435.2
Debt
100.0
250.0
200.0
Trade payables
36.2
49.2
44.5
Taxes payable
32.7
38.9
31.4
Total equity and liabilities
484.4
726.0
711.1

Part 3  An introduction to financial STATEMENT ANALYSIS
252
Before starting on the ratios, let us just see if there are any trends visible from 
the financial statements as such. We can see that sales increased substantially 
from 20X7 to 20X8 (20 per cent) but the increase dropped to 2 per cent from 
20X8 to 20X9. Profits increased in 20X7/X8, as you would predict from the 
sales, but dropped off in 20X9. An obvious explanation of this is the rapid in-
crease in interest costs: from €10 000 in 20X7 to €30 900 in 20X8 and €37 500 
in 20X9. Looking at the statement of financial position, you can see debt going 
from €100 000 to €250 000 and then dropping to €200 000 (given the rising 
interest cost, it may well be that interest rates rose steeply during this period). 
We can see that long-term assets rose sharply as well, so already we can see 
some sort of story here: a company seems to have expanded capacity substan-
tially in 20X8, leading to borrowing but also higher sales. In 20X9 sales growth 
has not continued at the same pace and interest rates have risen, causing the 
company’s profits to fall.
Let us calculate the key ratios and see how this story is fleshed out:
Interpretation
Overall, this looks like a company which has gone for a major expansion/replace-
ment of capacity in 20X8 (long-term assets increased by 70 per cent), financed 
20X7
20X8
20X9
Management performance ratios
A. Profitability ratios
ROE
60.6/315.5 5 19.21%
71.5/387.9 5 18.43%
58.3/435.2 5 13.40%
ROA
(60.61(103(1–0.3)))/ 
484.4 5 13.96%
(71.51(30.93(1–0.3)))/ 
726 5 12.83%
(58.31(37.53(1–0.3)))/ 
711.1 5 11.89%
ROCE
(60.61(103(1–0.3)))/
(315.51100) 5 16.27%
(71.51(30.93(1–0.3)))/
(387.91250) 5 11.55%
(58.31(37.53(1–0.3)))/
(435.21200) 5 13.31%
EPS
60.6/120 5 50.50
71.5/120 5 59.58
58.3/120 5 48.58
Gross operating 
margin
(620–217)/620 5 65.00%
(745–245.8)/745 5 67.01%
(762–266.7)/762 5 65.00%
Net operating 
margin
103.3/620 5 16.66%
141.3/745 5 18.97%
127.2/762 5 16.69%
Net profit margin
60.6/620 5 9.77%
71.5/745 5 9.60%
58.3/762 5 7.65%
B. Asset utilization ratios
Total asset turnover
620/484.4 5 1.28
745/726 5 1.03
762/711.1 5 1.07
Long-term asset 
turn over
620/312 5 1.99
745/532 5 1.40
762/495 5 1.54
Inventory turnover
217/43.4 5 5.00
245.8/49.2 5 5.00
266.7/66.7 5 4.00
Receivables 
turnover
620/62 5 10.00
745/74.5 5 10.00
762/91.4 5 8.34

Chapter 9  Financial statement analysis I
253
largely by an increase in debt. This has resulted in increased sales and improved 
operating margins in 20X8, but in 20X9 the expansion of sales has not continued 
and the company has also been hit by higher interest costs.
The effect of the heavy investment is to reduce return on assets from 13.96 to 
12.83 per cent, and reduce asset turnover from 1.28 to 1.03 although a return to 
sales growth would easily correct this in the following year. The impression is that 
20X7
20X8
20X9
Financial strength ratios
A. Long-term solvency risk ratios
Gearing
100/315.5  
5 31.70%
250/387.9  
5 64.45%
200/435.2  
5 45.96%
Gearing (Total 
finance) 
100/(1001315.5)  
5 24.07%
250/(2501387.9)  
5 39.19%
200/(2001435.2)  
5 31.49%
Interest  
cover 
103.3/10  
5 10.33
141.3/30.9  
5 4.57
127.2/37.5  
5 3.39
Dividend  
cover 
60.6/20.0  
5 3.03
71.5/20.0  
5 3.58
58.3/20.0  
5 2.92
B. Short-term liquidity risk ratios
Current  
ratio 
(43.4162167)/
(36.2132.7)  
5 2.50
(49.2174.5170.3)/
(49.2138.9)  
5 2.20
(66.7191.4158.0)/
(44.5131.4)  
5 2.85
Acid test
(62167)/ 
(36.2132.7)  
5 1.87
(74.5170.3)/
(49.2138.9)  
5 1.64
(58.0191.4)/
(31.4144.5)  
5 1.97
Days inventory  
out standing 
(43.4/217)3365  
5 73.00
(49.2/245.8)3365  
5 73.06
(66.7/266.7)3365  
5 91.28
Credit given 
(62/620.0)3365  
5 36.50
(74.5/745)3365  
5 36.50
(91.4/762)3365  
5 43.78
Credit  
obtained 
(36.2/217.0)3365  
5 60.89
(49.2/245.8)3365  
5 73.06
(44.5/266.7)3365  
5 60.90
Growth:
20X7/X8
20X8/X9
Sales
20.16%
2.28%
Profit
19.47%
–7.04%
Capital employed
53.53%
–0.42%
Net long-term assets
70.51%
–6.95%

Part 3  An introduction to financial STATEMENT ANALYSIS
254
the market for the company’s product slowed down in 20X9, causing an increase 
in unsold inventory (days inventory outstanding up from 73 to 91 days). Receiv-
ables turnover has also slipped, suggesting that the company may be chasing sales 
with extended credit offers (or its customers may be similarly hit by slowdown). 
Gross operating margin has also slipped, which suggests that the company may 
have cut sales prices in order to boost business.
The company has sensibly used its internal cash flow to contribute to financing 
the 20X8 investment (debt increased by €150 000 while long-term assets increased 
by €220 000 – although credit obtained moved from 61 days to 73) and subse-
quently to reduce borrowing in 20X9. The gearing ratio (on total finance) moved 
from an unremarkable 24 per cent (ten times the interest cover) to a rather more 
risky 39 per cent, although interest cover remained reasonable at 4.6. In 20X9 the 
repayment of €50 000 brought gearing down to 31 per cent but the higher interest 
rates and lower profits caused interest cover to decline further to 3.4. If the market 
does not drop further the company should be able to continue to reduce borrow-
ing and diminish the exposure to interest costs, showing an improved return.
Overall, this looks like a company which has set out on a relatively ambitious 
expansion plan, financed by borrowing and internal cash flows, which has hit 
some difficulties with a slowdown in demand. While its gearing rose quite sharply 
in the expansion phase, the company looks as though it has a sensible policy of 
retrenching and reducing debt. It should be able to continue to trade satisfacto-
rily and generate further cash to further reduce gearing.
Summary
Financial analysts, lenders and other users of financial statements are concerned to 
measure both the efficiency of a company’s management and the financial strength 
of the company. They do this by extracting data from the published financial state-
ments and either making comparisons or feeding the data into financial models.
The traditional approach to financial analysis involves making comparisons of a 
company’s results over several years (time series) or comparisons between one com-
pany and another (cross-sectional). In order to make the analysis more meaning-
ful, various devices are used to take away the disparity in size between companies.
The chief of these is the use of financial ratios, which express one account-
ing number in relation to another (economically linked) number. When making 
comparisons using ratios it is necessary to be sure that the ratios being compared 
have been calculated from the same basis, and that the companies being com-
pared do indeed have broadly similar characteristics.
An examination of the patterns of ratios and the financial statements them-
selves can lead the analyst to deduce what the company has been doing with-
out any further non-financial information, although investors would normally 
take into account not only the results of financial statement analysis but also any 
other available information about the economy generally, the industry in which 
the company works etc.

Chapter 9  Financial statement analysis I
255
Assignments
The following questions have answers on the lecturer side of the digital support 
resources for the book.
1.	 The following is the statement of profit or loss and statement of financial 
position of a company. Please calculate four accounting ratios (e.g. return 
on equity, return on assets, gross operating margin, net operating mar-
gin, current ratio, gearing ratio) and supply the definition you have used 
with your answer. Tax rate = 30 per cent.
Statement of profit or loss
Sales
145 600
Cost of sales
–64 200
Other operating costs
–49 400
32 000
Interest paid
–17 500
Taxation
–4 500
Net profit
10 000
Statement of financial position
Assets
Financing
Tangible assets
149 000
Share capital (€1)
50 000
Accum. depreciation
–17 500
Reserves
63 000
Inventories
82 300
Debt (long-term)
100 000
Cash at bank
56 300
Trade payables
57 100
270 100
270 100
2.	 The following figures are drawn from the statement of financial position of 
Medmove:
20X1
20X2
20X3
€’000
€’000
€’000
Long-term assets (net)
2 350
2 900
3 800
Current assets
Inventories
150
160
160
Receivables
310
300
310
Cash
55
0
235
Total assets
2 865
3 360
4 505
Financing
Trade payables
220
600
200
Debt (LT)
0
0
1 500
Total liabilities
220
600
1 700

Part 3  An introduction to financial STATEMENT ANALYSIS
256
No fresh shares were issued during the period. The industry has an organiza-
tion which publishes average financial data.
The industry average statement of financial position is:
Long-term assets
75
Equity
70
Inventories
10
Debt (long-term)
20
Receivables
10
Payables
10
Cash
5
100
100
	
You are asked to:
	
(a)	 calculate whatever ratios you think may be useful in analyzing 
Medmove’s figures (but including current ratio, debt/equity); tax 
rate = 30 per cent
	
(b)	 using the analytical data which you have just computed, and the 
industry average statement of financial position, comment on the 
company’s position and development.
3.	 Company RATIS had the following financial statements:
20X2
20X3
20X4
€’000
€’000
€’000
Statement of profit or loss
Sales
620.0
745.0
762.0
Cost of sales
–217.0
–245.8
–266.7
Gross margin
403.0
499.2
495.3
Distribution costs
–204.6
–260.7
–266.7
Administrative expenses
–95.1
–97.2
–101.4
103.3
141.3
127.2
Interest
–10.0
–30.9
–37.5
93.3
110.4
89.7
Taxation
–32.7
–38.9
–31.4
60.6
71.5
58.3
Statement of financial position
Net long-term assets
312.0
532.0
495.0
Inventories
43.4
49.2
66.7
Receivables
62.0
74.5
91.4
Cash
67.0
70.3
58.0
Total assets
484.4
726.0
711.1

Chapter 9  Financial statement analysis I
257
	
(a)	 You are asked to compute whatever ratios you think will be useful 
in analyzing the above figures (but including EPS, ROCE, gearing, 
current ratio, total asset turnover, gross operating margin, net 
operating margin). Tax rate = 30 per cent.
	
(b)	 You are asked to comment on the company’s development and 
activity during the period covered by the financial statements.
4.	 Gunge AG and Guntzel AG are both wholesale companies working in the 
same business segment. Given the information embedded in a number of 
ratios that we collected (see table below), they seem, however, to take a dif-
ferent customer approach to their business.
Ratio
Gunge AG
Guntzel AG
Return on capital employed (ROCE)
14%
15%
Credit given
59 days
19 days
Credit obtained
50 days
47 days
Gross operating margin
42%
17%
Current ratio
2.4
1.3
Net operating margin
11%
11%
Days inventory outstanding
50 days
21 days
	
Required:
	
Explain what the ratios reveal with regard to the operating approach of 
Gunge AG and Guntzel AG. Take into account price competitiveness and 
customer service level.
5.	 The managing director of Bavarian Hypermarkets has been approached by 
the chief executive and majority shareholder of Black Forest Supermarkets, 
a medium-sized supermarket chain operating in southern Germany. Black 
Forest is looking for a partner: it feels it cannot grow any further without 
20X2
20X3
20X4
€’000
€’000
€’000
Ordinary shares (€1)
120.0
120.0
120.0
Reserves
195.5
267.9
315.2
315.5
387.9
435.2
Trade payables
36.2
49.2
44.5
Taxes payable
32.7
38.9
31.4
Debt (long-term)
100.0
250.0
200.0
Total equity and liabilities
484.4
726.0
711.1

Part 3  An introduction to financial STATEMENT ANALYSIS
258
Black Forest Supermarkets
20X6
20X5
20X4
€’000
€’000
€’000
Statement of profit or loss
Sales
3 674
2 987
1 643
Cost of sales
–2 718
–2 151
–1133
956
836
510
Distribution costs
–412
–392
–242
Administrative expenses
–183
–190
–86
361
254
182
Interest
315
243
0
46
11
182
Taxation
–15
–3
–65
Net profit
31
8
117
Statement of financial position
Non-current assets
Intangible assets
2 100
2 200
0
Tangible assets
4 446
4 220
2 085
Investments
0
0
240
Current assets
Inventories
301
255
105
Receivables
38
42
29
Cash at bank
68
54
73
Total assets
6 953
6 771
2 532
Financing
Ordinary shares (€1)
1 200
1 200
1 200
Retained profit
1 241
1 210
1 202
2 441
2 410
2 402
Long-term debt
4 000
4 000
0
Trade payables
512
361
130
Total equity and liabilities
6 953
6 771
2 532
outside capital, and would like to sell 40 per cent of its shares to a larger 
super-market operator who could inject more capital and provide manage-
ment expertise to expand the chain further. Black Forest is quite willing to 
contemplate selling a majority stake in due course.
Bavarian Hypermarkets is quite interested in the deal, because they think 
that the two businesses would be a good fit in operational terms. They hire 

Chapter 9  Financial statement analysis I
259
20X3
20X4
20X5
€m
€m
€m
Statement of profit or loss
Sales
589.4
601.2
604.1
Cost of sales
–206.3
–222.4
–235.6
383.1
378.8
368.5
Distribution costs
–22.7
–18.5
–32.1
Administration expense
–241.9
–254.0
–266.7
118.5
106.3
69.7
Interest expense
–49.5
–63.0
–72.0
Profit/(loss) before taxation
69.0
43.3
–2.3
Taxation
–22.8
–14.3
0.8
Profit/(loss) after tax
46.2
29.0
–1.5
Statement of financial position
Non-current (tangible) assets
Land and buildings
620.0
620.0
620.0
Fittings and equipment
72.4
72.4
72.4
Accumulated depreciation
–37.2
–44.4
–51.6
655.2
648.0
640.8
Current assets
Inventories
143.9
152.0
179.5
Receivables
5.7
6.1
5.9
Bank
12.7
7.3
Total assets
817.5
813.4
826.2
Ordinary shares (€1)
120.0
120.0
120.0
Retained profits
166.4
165.4
133.9
286.4
285.4
253.9
Long-term debt
450.0
450.0
450.0
Trade payables
58.3
63.7
95.4
Taxes payable
22.8
14.3
0.0
Bank overdraft
0.0
0.0
26.9
Total equity and liabilities
817.5
813.4
826.2
your firm to carry out an analysis of Black Forest, and you are given the fol-
lowing financial statements, on which you are asked to comment:
	
Your report should identify and comment on all strengths and weak-
nesses of the company as revealed by its figures. The tax rate = 30 per cent.

Part 3  An introduction to financial STATEMENT ANALYSIS
260
6.	 You work for the financial analysis section of a merchant bank and are 
asked to prepare a report on the following figures, which relate to a clothing 
­retailer, who is looking to the bank to take a share stake:
	
You are asked to prepare:
	
(a)	  eight key ratios which are relevant to the analysis of this company; 
tax rate 5 30 per cent.
	
(b)	  a report which attempts to explain what has been happening 
to the company over the last three years, using ratios and trends 
as appropriate, makes recommendations as to the desirability 
of becoming involved and makes suggestions for the future 
management of the company.
7.	 Who is who?
	
The following six ratio sets refer to real-life listed companies (consolidated 
statements). These are:
	
(a)	  An investment company (venture capital)
	
(b)	  A brewery
	
(c)	  A supermarket chain
	
(d)	  A restaurant chain
	
(e)	  A publisher (weekly publications and printing business)
	
(f)	  A steel company
A
B
C
D
E
F
Debt/equity ratio
0.21
0.90
1.52
3.46
0.26
1.74
Current ratio
2.6
0.95
1.06
1.38
0.63
0.91
Acid test ratio
2.57
0.90
0.39
0.58
0.63
0.86
Inventory turnover
25.12
63.39
11.73
3.33
N/A
185.32
Credit given
70.00
79.00
8.00
38.00
73.00
3.00
Asset turnover
0.94
0.87
2.35
0.97
0.01
3.25
Return on equity
0.11
0.05
0.04
0.01
0.16
0.02
	
Required:
	
Identify which company is represented in columns A to F.

261
Financial analysts make considerable use of cash flow information in their 
evaluation of companies. This chapter introduces the statement of cash flows and its 
preparation. It starts out by reviewing the relationship between profits and cash flow, 
then introduces the format, structure and content of the statement of cash flows and 
finally shows how to construct one.
Statement of cash flows
C H A P T E R   1 0
n	 Introduction
n	 Usefulness of cash flow information
n	 Cash flow cycles
n	 Format and structure of the statement of cash flows
n	 Cash flows from investing and financing activities
n	 Cash flows from operating activities
n	 Direct method for reporting operating cash flows
n	 Constructing a statement of cash flows 1
n	 Disposal of long-term assets
n	 Constructing a statement of cash flows 2
n	 Interpretation
n	 Presentational differences
n	 Summary
n	 Discussion questions
n	 Assignments
Chapter Structure

Part 3  an introduction to financial Statement analysis
262
Our focus so far has been on the preparation of the statement of financial position 
(balance sheet) and the statement of profit or loss (income statement/profit and 
loss account), but in this chapter we are going on to consider another essential 
component of annual financial statements, the statement of cash flows. We first 
introduced this statement in Chapter 1 – it analyzes the company’s cash flows dur-
ing the period covered by the statement of profit or loss. It presents information 
about the cash flows associated with the period’s operations (with the statement 
of profit or loss reporting on the economic results of those operations), but also 
about the cash flows associated with the company’s investing and financing activi-
ties of the period. The statement of cash flows shows, for example, the cash gener-
ated by the company from its operating activities during the year, the company’s 
investment in new non-current assets (increase in or renewal of its productive ca-
pacity) and the changes in the company’s external financing from one statement 
of financial position to the next. The statement of cash flows complements the 
other primary statements and functions in conjunction with both the statement 
of profit or loss (performance dimension) and balance sheet (financial position).
Although company law generally does not require the disclosure of a statement 
of cash flows, many accounting standards do. Internationally, corporate practice 
has settled more or less on what was originally the US model of presentation and 
which served as the main source of inspiration for IAS 7, Statement of Cash Flows.
Financial analysts have long used cash flows as a useful indicator of company per-
formance to complement profit measures, and not least when making compari-
sons between companies operating in different countries. One of the advantages 
of a cash flow measure is that it disregards charges such as non-cash depreciation 
or provisions, which may be applied differently by different companies, and fo-
cuses on actual revenue flowing in and costs being paid out. In this sense it filters 
out some of the differences which arise from accounting practices rather than 
operating practices.
The statement of profit or loss concentrates on measuring the economic result 
of the company’s operations irrespective of whether the associated cash changed 
hands during the accounting period or not. The statement of cash flows shows what 
cash transactions did take place and what the net cash effect of the company’s op-
erations was. This information is important to investors, whose return (dividends) 
is in part dependent on cash flows, and to various creditors who depend on the 
company’s ability to generate adequate cash flows to fulfil its financial obligations.
While the balance sheet shows the financial position of a company at a specific 
instant of time, the statement of cash flows reflects the change in financial posi-
tion between two balance sheet dates. It provides information that enables users 
to evaluate the changes in the company’s assets and in its financial structure. 
Whereas liquidity and solvency tests are mainly based on static financial position 
information, cash flow information may be used to highlight the dynamics of 
the short-term liquidity and long-term solvency characteristics of the company: a 
Introduction
Usefulness of cash flow information

Chapter 10  Statement of cash flows
263
statement of cash flows offers details to explain why liquidity and solvency ratios 
have changed between consecutive statements of financial position.
At a more generic level, cash flow information is also important as an essential 
input for economic decision models, which require an evaluation of a company’s 
ability to generate cash and the timing and certainty of the cash flows. In that 
context, historical cash flow information is used as an indicator of the amount, 
timing and certainty of future cash flows. Bankers, when lending to any size com-
pany, generally ask for a cash flow projection as part of any loan proposal.
In discussing the structure of a statement of financial position we have treated 
cash as being part of working capital, but of course the cash in the bank is simply 
the residual of a great number of different types of cash flows, not only operating 
cash flows but also purchases and sales of long-term assets, receipt of financing, 
reimbursement of old debt, etc. In the statement of cash flows, the net change in 
cash balances is the figure we are trying to explain, in terms of different types of 
cash flow cycles that generate or use cash. In fact, cash flows through the com-
pany continuously in a number of short-term and long-term conversion cycles. 
Figure 10.1 shows the short-term and long-term cash flow cycles and their inter-
action with the company’s cash position.
Procurement
Current
payables
Cash and cash
equivalents
Current
receivables
Receipts
External
financing
Payments
Investing/
productive
infrastructure
Main
operations
Inventory
Work in 
progress
Inventory
Sales
Cash flow cycles
Figure 10.1
Long-term 
and short-
term cash 
flow cycles

Part 3  an introduction to financial Statement analysis
264
During the course of a year a company will be generating cash flows from its 
main business operations, which will be used not only for materials, labour and 
other periodic costs but also for purchasing new productive assets or to pay off 
debt. It might also borrow fresh funds, sell off old assets and so on. The working 
capital cycle or operating cycle is the main short-term cash conversion cycle, while 
the investing and financing cycle are typically longer term (they relate to non-
current sources and uses of funds). The investing cycle relates to the acquisition,  
renewal and disposal of intangible and tangible productive infrastructure, while 
the financing cycle refers to the long-term sourcing of funds through share capital 
issuance and borrowings. The investing and financing cycles set the framework, 
which supports a smooth functioning of the operating cycle. Like the working 
capital cycle, the long-term cash conversion cycles are both a source and a user  
of cash.
The different cash conversion cycles all bring about a change in the cash posi-
tion of the company (and in the various components of the statement of finan-
cial position for that matter), and the statement of cash flows specifically analyzes 
the changes in the company’s cash position according to the main drivers of the 
changes.
The cash flow analysis gives important insights into the company’s success and 
strategy. It shows what cash has been created (or used) by the company’s operations 
in a year – an important measure of performance, in an absolute sense, but also key 
to the company’s potential for internally generated growth. What the company 
does with its cash (investing in productive capacity, paying off debt, paying divi-
dends, etc.) provides useful indicators of corporate strategy. Some of the questions 
that can be addressed using the statement of cash flows are the following:
	
n	 From which sources did the company raise cash last year? How was the 
cash used?
	
n	 Was the operating cycle capable of satisfying its need for cash during the year?
	
n	 If not, is the shortage of cash compensated by new borrowings, issuing new 
share capital or selling long-term assets?
	
n	 Is a surplus of cash used for repayment of debt, for investments in produc-
tive assets, retirement of shares or for the distribution of dividends?
	
n	 To what extent are new investments being financed by internally generated 
cash and to what extent by new loans or other external sources?
	
n	 Are dividend payments supported by internally generated cash or does the 
company have to borrow to maintain dividend payments?
	
n	 Why has the balance of cash available decreased, knowing that the  
company’s operations have been profitable?
These kinds of question are difficult to answer with only a statement of financial 
position and/or a statement of profit or loss on hand.
In the statement of cash flows, the net change in cash balances is the figure to be 
explained. The net change in cash will be aggregated from cash flows regrouped 
Format and structure of the statement of cash flows

Chapter 10  Statement of cash flows
265
in three major categories: operating activities, investing activities and financing 
activities. The basic structure of the statement, according to IAS 7, Statement of 
Cash Flows, looks like the following:
  Cash flows from operating activities
1 Cash flows from investing activities
1 Cash flows from financing activities
Net change in cash during period
1 Beginning cash balance
Ending cash balance
Operating activities are defined (in the negative) to be all transactions that are not 
investing or financing activities. They are primarily the revenue-producing activi-
ties of a company. Operating cash flows include the cash inflows associated with 
sales revenues and cash outflows associated with operating expenses. IAS 7 pro-
vides the following examples of cash flows from operating activities:
	
a.	 cash receipts from the sale of goods and the rendering of services;
	
b.	cash receipts from royalties, fees, commissions and other revenue;
	
c.	 cash payments to suppliers for goods and services;
	
d.	cash payments to and on behalf of employees;
	
e.	 cash receipts and cash payments of an insurance entity for premiums and 
claims, annuities and other policy benefits;
	
f.	 cash payments or refunds of income taxes unless they can be specifically 
identified with financing and investing activities;
	
g.	 cash receipts and payments from contracts held for dealing or trading 
purposes.
Operating cash flows of a period generally result from transactions and other 
events that enter into the determination of profit of that period.
Investing activities relate to the acquisition and disposal of long-term assets (tangi-
ble and intangible) and other investments (not included in cash equivalents). Note 
that changes in current receivables and inventory are not treated as investment  
activities – changes in these current assets are included in operating activities.
Financing activities are activities that result in changes in the size and composi-
tion of the contributed equity and borrowings of the company. Again, changes in 
current payables are part of operating activities and are not included in financing 
activities. Note also that changes in equity reflect financing activities only to the 
extent that they relate to the issuance or retirement of share capital. Changes in 
equity that result from retained profits are part of the profit generating operating 
activities.
In a statement of cash flows the change in cash balances to be explained covers a 
concept of cash which is somewhat broader than cash on hand and demand depos-
its. Many companies, when they have any temporary excess cash, lend this out short 
term on the money market or buy short-term securities for periods of as few as one or 
two days. These short-term investments are sometimes called ‘treasury’ investments 
and are regarded as being so liquid as to be the same as cash (they are referred to as 

Part 3  an introduction to financial Statement analysis
266
STANDARDS
IAS 7 – CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS (extracts)
	
7.	Cash equivalents are held for the purpose of meeting short-term cash com-
mitments rather than for investment or other purposes. For an investment to 
qualify as a cash equivalent it must be readily convertible to a known amount 
of cash and be subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value. There-
fore, an investment normally qualifies as a cash equivalent only when it has  
a short maturity of, say, three months or less from the date of acquisition.  
Equity investments are excluded from cash equivalents unless they are, in sub-
stance, cash equivalents, for example in the case of preferred shares acquired 
within a short period of their maturity and with a specified redemption date.
	 8.	Bank borrowings are generally considered to be financing activities. How-
ever, in some countries, bank overdrafts which are repayable on demand 
form an integral part of an entity’s cash management. In these circum-
stances, bank overdrafts are included as a component of cash and cash 
equivalents. A characteristic of such banking arrangements is that the 
bank balance often fluctuates from being positive to overdrawn.
Source: IAS 7, Statement of Cash Flows
cash equivalents). For purposes of the statement of cash flows, ‘cash’ means the sum of 
actual cash and cash equivalents. IAS 7 defines cash equivalents as ‘short-term, highly 
liquid investments that are readily convertible to known amounts of cash and which 
are subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value’ (IAS 7, par.6).
In this chapter we will look first at the more straightforward issues of investing 
and financing activities and then look at cash flow from operations, before going 
on to preparing a statement of cash flows.
In discussing the statement of financial position, we have pointed out that it is a basic 
tenet of financial management that long-term assets should generally be bought with 
long-term finance, in order to match the expected cash inflows from use of the asset 
with the outflows to repay the finance. Sometimes companies borrow short-term and 
arrange new finance when the short-term debt expires (roll over the borrowing), but 
this involves two risks: first, that finance may be difficult to obtain in the second phase 
and, second, that interest rates may have increased, making the cost of borrowing un-
economic in relation to the asset purchased. The cost of capital is normally an impor-
tant factor in evaluating an asset purchase and companies expose themselves to an 
interest rate risk if they do not match the borrowing to the investment cash flows. 
Matching investment with the borrowing is known as hedging the interest rate risk, 
and the decision whether to do this or not is part of the company’s financial strategy.
Cash flows from investing and financing activities

Chapter 10  Statement of cash flows
267
A company will generate long-term finance by retaining cash generated by its 
operations (increasing its equity through retained profits), but it would not nec-
essarily wish to restrict its investments in new activities (or expanding existing 
ones) to the rate at which cash is generated internally. It will therefore often bor-
row outside finance or issue new shares.
Typically, a company will wish to preserve a balance between the amount of 
funds borrowed and that obtained by issuing shares. That is, it will have a tar-
get balance between debt and equity. However, as we mentioned in Chapter 8, 
issuing shares is a costly business, so what companies often do is finance new 
projects purely from internal cash flows and borrowing and then once every few 
years issue a major block of shares which reduces the debt/equity ratio and en-
ables them to pay off (retire) some existing debt. Equally, a company might sell 
off part of its operations which it no longer wants, as part of a rationalization 
programme.
A company which is expanding will also be buying new long-term assets regu-
larly, as well as selling off old ones which are worn out or which have been super-
seded by new technology. There will therefore be a pattern of regular change.
The long-term changes to be expected can be summarized as follows:
	
n	 Uses of finance:
	
	
  Purchase of new long-term assets
	
	
  Retirement of existing debt
	
n	 Sources of finance:
	
	
  Issue of new shares
	
	
  New long-term borrowing
	
	
  Sale of long-term assets.
In a statement of cash flows, these would be presented as:
	
n	 Cash flow from investing activities:
	
	
  Purchase of long-term assets (outflow)
	
	
  Sale of long-term assets (inflow)
	
n	 Cash flow from financing activities:
	
	
  Issue of new shares (inflow)
	
	
  Payment of dividend (outflow)
	
	
  New borrowing (inflow)
	
	
  Retirement of debt (outflow).
Note that we have slipped in the payment of dividends here in the financing sec-
tion. We will discuss this below, but IAS 7, Statement of Cash Flows, sees payment 
of dividend as an adjustment of equity, although some jurisdictions prefer it to 
be presented elsewhere in the statement of cash flows, such as in cash flow from 
operations, as a distribution of the cash generated. (Where exactly it appears in 
the statement of cash flows is not as important as checking when making com-
parisons that it is treated the same way in all statements being compared.)
Cash flows from investing and financing activities are usually identified indi-
rectly through an analysis of changes for the period in the non-current balance 
sheet categories. Direct identification of these cash flows through an analysis of 
the movements (transaction by transaction) in the cash (equivalent) accounts 
would be a more direct way, but the accounting database usually lacks the detail 
to proceed in that fashion.

Part 3  an introduction to financial Statement analysis
268
STANDARDs
IAS 7 – INVESTING AND FINANCING ACTIVITIES (extracts)
	16.	The separate disclosure of cash flows arising from investing activities is 
important because the cash flows represent the extent to which expendi-
tures have been made for resources intended to generate future income 
and cash flows. Only expenditures that result in a recognized asset in the 
statement of financial position are eligible for classification as investing 
activities. Examples of cash flows arising from investing activities are:
(a)	 cash payments to acquire property, plant and equipment, intangibles 
and other long-term assets. These payments include those relating to 
capitalized development costs and self-constructed property, plant 
and equipment;
(b)	cash receipts from sales of property, plant and equipment, intangibles 
and other long-term assets;
(c)	 cash payments to acquire equity or debt instruments of other entities 
and interests in joint ventures (other than payments for those instru-
ments considered to be cash equivalents or those held for dealing or 
trading purposes);
(d)	cash receipts from sales of equity or debt instruments of other enti-
ties and interests in joint ventures (other than receipts for those instru-
ments considered to be cash equivalents and those held for dealing or 
trading purposes);
(e)	 cash advances and loans made to other parties (other than advances 
and loans made by a financial institution);
(f)	 cash receipts from the repayment of advances and loans made to 
other parties (other than advances and loans of a financial institution);
(g)	 cash payments for futures contracts, forward contracts, option contracts 
and swap contracts except when the contracts are held for dealing or trad-
ing purposes, or the payments are classified as financing activities; and
(h)	cash receipts from futures contracts, forward contracts, option con-
tracts and swap contracts except when the contracts are held for deal-
ing or trading purposes, or the receipts are classified as financing 
activities.
	 17.	The separate disclosure of cash flows arising from financing activities is 
important because it is useful in predicting claims on future cash flows 
by providers of capital to the entity. Examples of cash flows arising from 
financing activities are:
(a)	 cash proceeds from issuing shares or other equity instruments;
(b)	cash payments to owners to acquire or redeem the entity’s shares;
(c)	 cash proceeds from issuing debentures, loans, notes, bonds, mort-
gages and other short or long-term borrowings;
(d)	cash repayments of amounts borrowed; and
(e)	 cash payments by a lessee for the reduction of the outstanding liabil-
ity relating to a finance lease.
Source: IAS 7, Statement of Cash Flows

Chapter 10  Statement of cash flows
269
COMPANY REPORT
CAPGEMINI GROUP
Consolidated statements of cash flows for the years ended December 31, 
2008, 2009, 2010
6.5 Consolidated statement of cash flows
In millions of euros
Note
2008
2009
2010
Profit for the year (Group share)
451
178
280
Non controlling interests
—
—
(2)
Impairment of goodwill
12
24
12
—
Depreciation, amortization and impairment of fixed 
assets
10–11
213
164
176
Net charges to provisions
(62)
(54)
(2)
Gains and losses on disposals of assets
3
4
5
Expenses relating to share subscriptions, share grants 
and stock options
5
22
19
16
Net finance costs
6
(2)
43
54
Income tax expense
7
116
61
124
Unrealized gains and losses on charges in fair  
value and other
(17)
18
(23)
Cash flows from operations before net finance  
costs and income tax (A)
748
445
628
Income tax paid (B)
(94)
(56)
(52)
Change in accounts and notes receivable and advances 
from customers and amounts billed in advance
(158)
309
(85)
Change in capitalized costs on projects
5
(15)
(16)
Change in accounts and notes payable
12
(73)
3
Change in other receivables/payables
35
(115)
25
Change in operating working capital (C)
(106)
106
(73)
NET CASH FROM (USED IN) OPERATING  
ACTIVITIES (D=A+B+C)
548
495
503
Acquisitions of property, plant and  
equipment and intangible assets
10–11
(134)
(119)
(144)
Proceeds from disposals of property, plant and  
equipment and intangible assets
20
24
11
(114)
(95)
(133)
Cash outflows on business combinations net  
of cash and cash equivalents acquired
2
(267)
(11)
(218)
Net proceeds on disposals of companies and 
operations
–
3
1
Net proceeds/payments relating to deposits and long 
term investments
(16)
(5)
(13)
Cash outflows on cash management assets
–
–
(71)
Dividends received from associates
1
–
1
(282)
(13)
(300)
NET CASH FROM (USED) IN INVESTING ACTIVITIES (E)
(396)
(108)
(433)
Proceeds from issues of share capital
10
225
46
Dividends paid
(143)
(143)
(122)
Net proceeds/payments relating to treasury share 
transactions
(75)
8
(1)
Proceeds from borrowing
17
10
569
10
Repayments of borrowings
17
(130)
(310)
(367)

Part 3  an introduction to financial Statement analysis
270
The statement of profit or loss and the statement of financial position are based on 
the accruals principle, which could be summed up as trying to present an economic 
analysis of profit by recording transactions when any relevant economic event takes 
place (sales, expenses, using up of assets, etc.). Cash flows are only one type of event 
recorded and, while a company must manage its cash flows, it cannot manage the 
business just on cash flow information – it needs to know about economic profit and 
profitability. For example, a company might have more cash coming in from sales 
than going out on expenses, but if it is not also recording the consumption of its 
non-current assets (depreciation), it could be making an economic loss even though 
generating a cash surplus in the short to medium term. Consequently, management 
focus has traditionally been on profits but, in a healthy company, the reinvestment 
of cash generated is the main source of internal growth and management should be 
looking at how best to allocate this resource to increase the profitability of the com-
pany. The statement of cash flows helps to show what wealth is being generated. Of 
course, over the life of the company the total of profits will equal the total of cash 
flows generated, but on a period-to-period basis this is not the case because of alloca-
tions of asset costs (depreciation) and timing differences from credit operations.
Again, the simplest way to get at the operating cash flows for the year would be 
to look at the company’s cash (equivalent) accounts or the cash book (a journal 
which records all receipts and payments) and remove cash flows relating to long-
term assets and financing. This can be done if the accounting records keep details on 
the types of activities involved, and in the jargon this is known as the ‘direct’ way 
of calculating cash flows. However, while this probably is easy enough for a small 
company, and may be the easiest way also for the small entrepreneur to envisage 
cash flows, in large companies it is arguably easier and more efficient to calculate the 
operating cash flow by manipulating the statement of profit or loss and statement of 
financial position. This is known as the ‘indirect’ method. In fact, most companies 
present the information using the indirect method, so that is the one we will use.
The indirect method of calculating operating cash flows consists of taking the 
net accounting profit for the year and then making three types of adjustments:
Cash flows from operating activities
In millions of euros
Note
2008
2009
2010
Interest paid
6
(39)
(26)
(32)
Interest received
6
68
22
21
NET CASH FROM (USED) IN FINANCING ACTIVITIES (F)
(299)
345
(445)
NET INCREASE (DECREASE) IN CASH AND CASH 
EQUIVALENTS (G=D+E+F)
(147)
732
(375)
In millions of euros
Note
2008
2009
2010
Effect of exchange rate movements on cash and cash 
equivalents (H)
(185)
60
85
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS AT BEGINNING 
OF YEAR (I)
17
2  137
1  805
2  597
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS AT END 
OF YEAR (G+H+I)
17
1  805
2  597
2 307
Cash flows for the period are discussed in Note 18= Cash flows.
Source: Capgemini Group, Consolidated Financial Statements, 2010

Chapter 10  Statement of cash flows
271
	
1.	adjustments for non-cash income and non-cash expenses
	
2.	timing differences arising from the working capital cycle
	
3.	adjustments for non-operating items.
Non-cash income and non-cash expenses are items that enter into the determina-
tion of profit or loss, but do not imply a cash flow (e.g. depreciation, provisions, 
impairment adjustments, etc.)
Non-cash profit or loss items
As we have seen above, the process of preparing annual financial statements involves 
several kinds of adjustments: refinements to the profit to anticipate revenues and ex-
penses which have not been included in the accounting database (such as accrued ex-
penses and accrued revenue) and to defer previously recorded revenues and expenses 
to the following period (deferred revenues and deferred expenses), recognition and 
de-recognition of provisions and periodic and ad hoc adjustments to asset values (re-
flecting the using up of productive assets and extraneous value changes in assets). 
In the case of accruals and deferrals, these are short-term timing differences between 
profit or loss items and cash flows but, in the case of asset value adjustments, the as-
sociated cash flow (purchase of an asset) has already taken place and we are simply 
showing that economically it has lost some value which should be taken into consid-
eration when estimating the economic position of the company. From a statement of 
cash flows perspective, the cash outflow on non-current assets appears under ‘invest-
ing activities’ and is reported when the asset is acquired. Therefore, when deprecia-
tion is charged, the investing cash flow has by definition already been reported. There 
is no operating cash outflow associated with depreciation or impairment charges for 
loss of value. Consequently, any charge to the statement of profit or loss for the year 
for these items should be added back to arrive at the underlying cash flow.
Provisions may turn into cash flows in due course, but their fate is uncertain 
and they too are added back here. Equally, where a provision is released, this will 
have the effect of increasing profit without increasing cash flows. Such releases 
must therefore be deducted from profit in calculating operating cash flow.
We can summarize as follows. The statement of profit or loss includes some items 
which do not reflect current cash outflows or cash inflows. These non-cash income 
and non-cash expenses should be used to adjust the accounting profit in order to 
arrive at a first, although rough, approximation of the net operating cash flow:
Net profit or loss after tax
Xxxx
Add back:
Depreciation charge for the year
xxx
Provisions created in year
xxx
Deduct:
Provisions released in year
(xxx)
‘Cash flow proxy’
Xxxx
If no statement of cash flows is available, analysts frequently calculate this proxy 
figure which is relatively easy to derive from the basic financial statements. It 
does not reflect the short-term timing differences which derive from credit op-
erations, nor does it filter out investment and financing related items, but it is 
often used as an approximation of cash flows from operations. In the absence 
of directly available cash flow information it has the advantage, in making 

Part 3  an introduction to financial Statement analysis
272
comparisons between companies and particularly across national boundaries, that  
it excludes the most subjective elements of annual profit estimations, thereby 
providing more directly comparable figures.
Working capital movements
Working capital is generated by the operations of a company (see discussion in 
Chapter 4) and builds on a short-term cash conversion cycle in that a company buys 
materials (creating inventory and creditors), processes the materials (in a manufac-
turing environment), pays the creditors, sells the finished goods on credit (creating 
receivables) and finally the debtors settle in cash, completing the cycle. The exact 
needs of any business for working capital are dependent on the nature of the busi-
ness. Some retailers, particularly supermarkets, keep very low inventories and have 
little or no credit sales, so their net working capital could even be negative. On the 
other hand, a manufacturing concern may have a long production cycle that takes 
many months for raw materials to progress through manufacturing and be sold as 
finished goods. Such companies will have extensive inventories as well as receivables 
and payables.
Movements in working capital items other than cash will affect cash flow 
from operating activities: increased trade receivables will mean that the cash 
from those sales will be received in the next accounting period; increased 
trade payables means that the cash outflow to suppliers has been deferred to 
the next period. The statement of cash flows will therefore need to take ac-
count of changes in working capital (excluding cash, which is the pivotal figure 
around which the statement of cash flows is organized and whose changes we 
are trying to explain) in order to show the cash generated during the year from 
operations.
Let us just look at an example of how that works. Supposing that in its start-up 
year a company had no initial share capital but had sales of €10 000, and had pur-
chased €8000 of goods for resale. Its inventory at the year end was worth €1000, 
it owed €5000 to its suppliers and its credit clients owed €2000. The business had, 
therefore, the following statement of profit or loss:
€
Sales
10 000
Cost of sales
–7 000
Profit
3 000
Its statement of financial position at the end of the period was:
Assets
€
Inventory
1 000
Receivables
2 000
Cash
5 000
8 000
Financing
Equity – Profit
3 000
Payables
5 000
8 000

Chapter 10  Statement of cash flows
273
The business has made a profit of €3000, but its cash generated was €5000. How 
was this possible? The answer is in the movements in non-cash working capital:
€
Cash owed to suppliers
  5 000
Cash held in inventories
–1 000
Cash not yet paid by clients
–2 000
Non-cash working capital
  2 000
The €2000 difference represents timing differences and, if the business 
stopped trading and disposed of its inventories, its cash position would in a 
few weeks equal its profit as clients paid their accounts and the company paid 
its suppliers.
If we now move forward into the second accounting period, we can show how 
the change in net working capital affects cash flows. Let us say that the busi-
ness has grown by 50 per cent and that the statement of profit or loss for period  
2 gives the following result:
€
Sales
  15 000
Cost of sales
–10 500
Profit
  4 500
Assuming that credit sales and purchases had grown proportionately, receivables 
at the end of period 2 would be €3000, inventory €1500 and payables €7500. 
We can display the statement of financial position at the ends of periods 1 and 
2 alongside each other and see not only how the cash position has changed, but 
also how the other balance sheet components have moved at the same time.
End period 1  
€
End period 2  
€
Uses of finance 
€
Sources of 
Finance €
Assets
Inventory
1 000
1 500
500
Receivables
2 000
3 000
1 000
Cash
5 000
10 500
5 500
8 000
15 000
Financing
Payables
5 000
7 500
2 500
Equity
Accumulated profit
3 000
7 500
4 500
8 000
15 000
7 000
7 000
In the two right-hand columns we have analyzed the change in each balance 
sheet component that has taken place during the second year. If you look at the 
changes, you can see that the inflow of cash is related to the accounting profit 
through the changes in the other elements of working capital.

Part 3  an introduction to financial Statement analysis
274
€
Accounting profit
4 500
less uses of finance:
n increase in receivables
–1 000
n increase in inventory
–500
plus sources of finance
n increase in payables
2 500
Increase in cash
5 500
The example given is much simplified in order to highlight the changes in work-
ing capital – in many companies the increase in payables would not be so high as 
to finance the increase in receivables and inventory entirely, and there would of 
course be some share capital subscribed to start with. Accrued or deferred expenses 
and revenue (or similar items) have been ignored, but would be included here.
Non-operating items
Transactions and events that enter into the determination of profit are not exclusively 
limited to operating activities. Investing and financing activities may affect the state-
ment of profit or loss as well. For example, when a company sells an item of plant 
or equipment, this will give rise to a gain or loss which is included in the statement 
of profit or loss, to the extent that the selling price is different from the net carrying 
value of the item sold. Such non-operating items affecting the profit figure should 
not be included in the net operating cash flow. Let us assume that the company sells 
an item of equipment with a net book value of €60 000 (acquisition cost €100 000 
and accumulated depreciation of €40 000) for €90 000. This sale will give rise to a 
gain on disposal of €30 000 that is included in the operating result. From a statement 
of cash flows perspective, the transaction is an investing activity (a disposal of a long-
term asset) and the inflow from the sale proceeds (€90 000) is to be accounted for in 
full as an investing cash flow. The gain on disposal is part of the cash flow from in-
vesting activities and should therefore be excluded from the net operating cash flow.
After the three types of adjustments, the indirect calculation model of the net 
operating cash flow would roughly look like the following:
Net profit after tax
Xxxxxxxxx
Add back
xxxxx
Depreciation for the year
xxx
Provisions created
(xxxx)
Deduct
(xxxxx)
Provisions released
(xxxxx)
Gain on asset disposal
Xxxxxxxxx
Net change in non-cash working capital
Xxxxxxxxx
Cash flow from operating activities
Xxxxxxxxx
Although most companies use the indirect method for calculating and reporting 
operating cash flows, IAS 7 encourages companies to use the direct method. 
Direct method for reporting operating cash flows

Chapter 10  Statement of cash flows
275
Under the direct method, major classes of gross cash receipts and gross cash pay-
ments relative to operating activities are presented. This kind of information 
could be extracted from the cash books (not very feasible for most companies) 
or constructed by adjusting sales, cost of sales and other items in the statement 
of profit or loss for (1) changes during the period in inventories and operating 
receivables and payables, (2) other non-cash items and (3) non-operating items. 
The direct method results in a more straightforward presentation that is intui-
tively understandable by users with little accounting knowledge. The information 
it provides (and which is not available under the indirect method) may also be 
useful in estimating future cash flows. On the other hand, the indirect method 
(also referred to as the reconciliation method) has the advantage that it helps the 
analyst to understand the reasons for the difference between the period net profit 
figure and the period’s net operating cash flow. If the direct method of presenta-
tion is used, IAS 7 does not require to present such a reconciliation.
STANDARDs
IAS 7 – DIRECT METHOD STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS (extract)
	
	
20X2
Cash flows from operating activities
Cash receipts from customers	
 30 150
Cash paid to suppliers and employees	
(27 600)
Cash generated from operations	
2 550
Interest paid	
(270)
Income taxes paid	
(900)
Net cash from operating activities	
	
1 380
Cash flows from investing activities
Acquisition of subsidiary X, net of cash acquired	
(550)
Purchase of property, plant and equipment	
(350)
Proceeds from sale of equipment	
20
Interest received	
200
Dividends received	
200
Net cash used in investing activities	
(480)
Cash flows from financing activities
Proceeds from issue of share capital	
250
Proceeds from long-term borrowings	
250
Payment of finance lease liabilities	
(90)
Dividends paid*	
(1 200)
Net cash used in financing activities	
	
(790)
Net increase in cash and cash equivalents	
	
110
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period	
120
Cash and cash equivalents at end of period	
	
230
* This could also be shown as an operating cash flow.
Source: IAS 7, Statement of Cash Flows, Illustrative examples

Part 3  an introduction to financial Statement analysis
276
On the previous page and below are two models of a statement of cash flows 
as ­exhibited in IAS 7. The two models (direct method and indirect method) 
refer to the same raw accounting data. Note that the method chosen does not 
affect the presentation of investing and financing cash flows and that both 
methods necessarily result in the same net operating cash flow figure. IAS 7 
does also require that interest and dividend paid and received and taxes paid 
should ­always be disclosed separately on the face of the statement of cash flows 
(in both presentation models).
STANDARD PRACTICE
IAS 7 – INDIRECT METHOD STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS (extract)
	
	
20X2
Cash flows from operating activities
Profit before taxation	
 3 350
  Adjustments for:
  Depreciation	
450
  Foreign exchange loss	
40
  Investment income	
(500)
  Interest expense	
400
	
	
3 740
Increase in trade and other receivables	
 (500)
Decrease in inventories	
1 050
Decrease in trade payables	
(1 740)
Cash generated from operations	
 2 550
Interest paid	
 (270)
Income taxes paid	
 (900)
Net cash from operating activities	
	
1 380
Cash flows from investing activities
Acquisition of subsidiary X, net of cash acquired	
(550)
Purchase of property, plant and equipment	
(350)
Proceeds from sale of equipment	
20
Interest received	
 200
Dividends received	
 200
Net cash used in investing activities	
	(480)
Cash flows from financing activities
Proceeds from issue of share capital	
250
Proceeds from long-term borrowings	
250
Payment of finance lease liabilities	
(90)
Dividends paid*	
(1 200)
Net cash used in financing activities	
	
(790)
Net increase in cash and cash equivalents	
110
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period	
120
Cash and cash equivalents at end of period	
	
   230
* This could also be shown as an operating cash flow
Source: IAS 7, Statement of Cash Flows, Illustrative examples

Chapter 10  Statement of cash flows
277
Let us now do a practical example. The working method is to take two consecu-
tive statements of financial position, calculate the difference between them and 
analyze these into inflows and outflows of cash. The scheme shown in Figure 
10.2 can be used as a rule of thumb to designate balance sheet movement as cash 
outflows or cash inflows.
Inflow
Inflow
Outflow
Equity /
liabilities
Assets
Increase
Decrease
Outflow
An increase of assets (for example buying a car or inventory) and a decrease 
of equity or liabilities (for example paying a dividend to shareholders or retiring 
debt), generally imply a use of cash. An increase of equity or liabilities (for example 
selling new shares, making a profit, getting a new bank loan) and a decrease of as-
sets (for example depreciating long-term assets, selling inventory), imply a source 
of funds.
X2
X1
∆
Outflow
Inflow
Assets
Non-current tangible 
   assets (at cost)
980
740
240
240
Acc. depreciation
–350
–265
  85
85
Inventories
180
171
    9
    9
Trade receivables
115
  98
  17
    17
Cash
  92
110
  18
18
1 017
854
Constructing a statement of cash flows 1
Figure 10.2
Classifying 
balance sheet 
movements  
as inflows or  
outflows of 
cash

Part 3  an introduction to financial Statement analysis
278
In the current example, the first step may be redundant, but this is useful where 
the analyst has to research more data to complete the analysis, as we shall  
see later. The cash difference is the figure we are trying to explain, and is entered 
onto the worksheet to ensure that one can make a mathematical control of  
the differences – when taking one statement of financial position from another, 
the difference must be in equilibrium, since the two original statements are  
in equilibrium. The cash figure is entered on the basis that an increase in  
assets is an outflow and a decrease of assets is an inflow, even though this is obviously 
counter-intuitive. It should be thought of simply as the balancing difference.
Having calculated the inflow/outflow data, we can proceed to lay it out ac-
cording to the type of activity with which the cash flow is associated (operating, 
investing and financing activities), as follows:
Operating activities
Net profit after tax
  50
Add back depreciation
  85
135
Changes in non-cash working capital
–23
Net cash flow from operations (A)
112
Investing activities
Purchase of tangible assets (B)
–240
Financing activities
New long-term debt (C)
110
Net change in cash (A1B1C)
–18
Cash balances
At beginning of year
110
At balance sheet date
  92
Difference
–18
Taking the statement of cash flows line by line, the net profit figure is the profit 
for the year in the statement of financial position (and in the statement of profit 
or loss, of course). The depreciation charge for the year is the difference between 
X2
X1
∆
Outflow
Inflow
Financing
Equity
600
600
—
Share capital
  90
  90
—
Reserves
  50
—
  50
50
X2 profit
Liabilities
Trade payables
  62
    69
    3
  3
Long-term debt
215
1058
110
110
1 017
854
266
266

Chapter 10  Statement of cash flows
279
accumulated depreciation at the beginning and end of the year. The change in 
non-cash working capital is:
Increase in inventories
–9
Increase in trade receivables
–17
Increase in trade payables
13
Net change in non-cash working capital
–23
All that is left after that is the increase in non-current tangible assets of 240 
and the increase in long-term debt of 110. You should check off the differences 
identified in the work-sheet against the statement of cash flows to be sure you see 
where the information comes from.
Having drawn up the statement of cash flows, the next question is: what useful 
information does that give us about the company?
Essentially here the message is simple – the company has acquired a substan-
tial new non-current tangible asset, and has financed it approximately half by the 
cash flow it has generated in the year and half by increasing its long-term debt.
The increase in productive capacity is a good sign indicating increased future 
profits (provided the company can manage the tangible asset successfully, of 
course). The degree of debt financing is out of line with the company’s prior debt/
equity ratio. In 20X1 the ratio was 105/690 or 15 per cent, and the financing of a 
new long-term asset 50 per cent by long-term debt must change this significantly. 
In fact, the new debt/equity ratio is 215/740 5 29 per cent. Of course, the com-
pany may be planning to reduce the debt in 20X3 when it has generated more 
cash from operations, or may simply have decided to adopt a more aggressive 
financing stance.
The use of raw balance sheet data in constructing a statement of cash flows is 
more complicated when there are both inflows and outflows under the same 
caption of the statement of financial position in the course of the year. This is 
frequently the case with long-term assets, like property, plant and equipment 
(PP&E), where companies are not only expanding capacity, but are replacing old 
equipment with new. As regards the statement of cash flows, long-term asset dis-
posals lead to two adjustments: (1) to separate out the disappearing book value of 
the old long-term asset from the newly acquired assets and (2) to remove the gain 
or loss on disposal from the operating profit and put it into the investing section, 
since all non-current asset acquisitions and disposals should appear there.
Suppose that a company had non-current tangible assets at cost of 540 and 
accumulated depreciation of 235 at the beginning of the year. During the year it 
sold for 135 some equipment which had cost 275 and had accumulated deprecia-
tion of 160. It replaced this with a tangible asset which cost 400. The depreciation 
charge for the year was 132.
The analysis of the statement of financial position would give the following 
picture:
Disposal of long-term assets

Part 3  an introduction to financial Statement analysis
280
X2
X1
∆
Outflow
Inflow
Non-current tangible assets
665
540
125
Acc. depreciation
–207
–235
  28
On the face of it, the company has acquired a new tangible asset which cost 125, 
and there was a depreciation credit for the year instead of a charge. This is of 
course hardly likely and would send the analyst immediately to the notes to the 
accounts for an analysis of movements on tangible assets, where it would quickly 
be discovered that there had been a disposal and an acquisition. Consequently 
the analysis can be completed more fully:
X2
X1
∆
Outflow
Inflow
Non-current tangible assets
665
540
125
400
275
Acc. depreciation
–207
–235
  28
160
132
On the tangible assets line, the 125 represents the difference between the acquisition at 
400 and the original cost of the asset disposed of, 275. For the purposes of the analysis 
we will put both the gross cost and the accumulated depreciation of the asset which has 
been sold into our worksheet, so that it is clear what is happening. The accumulated de-
preciation on this asset was 160 which, taken with the difference of 28 between balance 
sheet dates, means that the charge for the year was 132 (160 – 28 5 132).
The analysis therefore now includes all the elements which have intervened during 
the year: sale of a long-term tangible asset, acquisition of another one and deprecia-
tion charge for the year. In the statement of cash flows the depreciation charge of 132 
will be added back to profit in the calculation of operating cash flows. The purchase 
of the new tangible asset at 400 will appear under investing activities, and there too 
we must put the asset sold. The book value of (275 – 160) 115 should go there, but it 
should be adjusted by the amount of the gain or loss. In this case it is a gain of 20 (135 
– 115), which we should remove from operating cash flows and add to the book value 
of the asset in investing activities. We would therefore have ‘asset disposal 135’ (115 1 
20) which is the cash flow arising from the sale of the long-term asset.
Had the resale price received been (say) 100, this would have resulted in an account-
ing loss of 15. This loss of 15 should be removed from the operating result and be 
deducted from the disposal under investing activities: ‘asset disposal 100’ (115 – 15).
We can restate our checklist for operating cash flow as:
Net profit after tax
Xxxxxxxxx
Add back
Depreciation
xxxxxx
Provisions created
xxxxxx
Loss on disposal of assets
xxxxxx
Deduct:
Provisions released
xxxxxx
Gains on disposal of assets
xxxxxx
+/– Change in non-cash working capital
xxxxxx
Net cash flow from operating activities
xxxxxxxxx

Chapter 10  Statement of cash flows
281
Unlike the preparation of the statement of profit or loss and statement of finan-
cial position, there is no one tried and tested way of preparing a statement of 
cash flows any more than there is a unique format for presenting the data. We 
shall continue to use the system of comparing opening and closing statements of 
financial position. This direct comparison has the merit that it produces a table of 
differences where (given that the two statements of financial position do balance 
to start with) the differences in outflows will equal the differences in inflows. It 
gives a good starting point by providing a framework of change for that particular 
company. Let us do a new example. The statement of profit or loss follows and 
the statement of financial position has been laid out as a working paper.
Connecticut River Co. Ltd
Statement of profit or loss
Sales
500
Materials used
148
Salaries
105
Depreciation
116
Other expenses
  95
–464
   36
Gain on disposal of asset
     3
Interest cost
   –9
   30
Taxation
   –11
Net profit after tax
   19
Connecticut River Co. Ltd
Statements of financial position
X2
X1
∆
Outflow
Inflow
Land
105
 105
—
Buildings
235
 235
—
Acc. depreciation
–113
–107
  6
Plant
 441
 397
44
Acc. depreciation
–356
–282
74
Inventory
    82
    75
  7
Trade receivables
 243
 216
27
Cash
    73
    62
11
Trade payables
 190
 195
  5
Debt
 160
 150
10
Share capital
 200
 200
—
Reserves
 141
 156
15
Profit for the year
  19
—
19
Constructing a statement of cash flows 2

Part 3  an introduction to financial Statement analysis
282
The worksheet shows the crude differences between the two years’ statements of 
financial position, and the next step is to go in search of explanations of these 
differences.
The first one is an increase of accumulated depreciation on buildings. There is 
nothing inherently unusual in this – presumably this is the depreciation charge 
for the year, which we can verify in a real-life situation from the analysis of non-
current assets given in the notes. The statement of profit or loss shows us that the 
total charge for the year was 116, so there remains another 110 to explain. This 6, 
anyway, can be put into the inflow column as part of cash flow from operations.
Moving on to plant, there is a net difference of 44. However, there is an asset 
disposal in the statement of profit or loss (gain on disposal of 3 ). As there is no 
change in any non-current assets other than plant, this disposal must occur here, 
so the difference of 44 must be the difference between an acquisition and a dis-
posal. The non-current asset analysis in the notes to the accounts will reveal that 
the company bought a new plant asset for 85, and disposed of one whose original 
cost was 41, which enables us to reconcile the difference:
Plant acquired
85
Plant sold
–41
Balance sheet difference
44
We will therefore complete the plant assets line by showing an outflow of 85 and 
inflow of 41. Of course, this sale will impact upon the depreciation line for plant 
as well, since the accumulated depreciation on the plant which has been sold 
must be removed. The net difference on depreciation is 74, but we know from 
the other depreciation lines that the depreciation charge for plant during 20X2 
was likely to be 110 (116 in statement of profit or loss, less 6 depreciation on 
buildings). This would give the following:
Depreciation for the year on plan
110
Balance sheet difference
74
Depreciation on plant sold
36
We should be able to verify this from the non-current assets analysis in the notes, 
in a real-life case. We would show 110 as an inflow, being part of the net cash 
flow from operations, and 36 as an outflow. Of course the 36 is not an ‘outflow’ in 
a real sense, but it is a deduction from the book value of the asset which was sold 
and it is arithmetically convenient to note it here in this way, bearing in mind it 
is a deduction from an inflow. The 41 gross cost less 36 accumulated depreciation 
represents the accounting disposal value of the plant which has been sold (5) to 
which we will eventually add the gain of 3 (from the statement of profit or loss) 
to arrive at the sale proceeds which must have been 8.
After that we have routine increases in receivables and inventories, analyzed as 
outflows. The difference in cash is 11, and we will analyze this as an outflow, to 
preserve the balance sheet equilibrium (in effect it is the difference between the 
inflows and the outflows, of course).

Chapter 10  Statement of cash flows
283
If you are unhappy with this treatment of the cash difference, another way to 
deal with it is just to leave it out. If you do that, when you add up the inflows and 
outflows you will obviously have a difference, which will be the amount of the 
cash difference. If these two differences agree, your analysis is arithmetically cor-
rect, if not there is a problem.
The trade payables have actually reduced from 20X1 to 20X2, which is fairly 
unusual (but not impossible) where the inventories and trade receivables have in-
creased, since these three are all linked in an operational sense to the same variable 
– sales – and therefore should tend to move together. From an analytical perspec-
tive a decrease in trade payables is a decrease in financing and therefore an outflow.
The debt line shows an increase of 10. A review of the notes to the accounts 
will in many jurisdictions show a breakdown of debt, and in this case we under-
stand that a new debt has been taken out for 70. This means therefore that an old 
debt has been retired, if the net variation is only 10:
New debt
70
Retirement of old debt
–60
Net movement on debt
10
The new debt is an inflow, repayment of the old debt an outflow.
There is no change in share capital, but reserves have gone down by 15. The 
most obvious explanation for this would be the payment of a dividend, which 
in most jurisdictions flows directly from retained profit reserves. A review of the 
analysis of movements on equity in the notes would confirm this. This is then 
analyzed as an outflow.
The final difference is the profit for the year of 19. This will start off our state-
ment of cash flows, but we must bear in mind that it includes a disposal gain of 
3 which must be reallocated in the statement of cash flows to the investment 
section. The completed worksheet with the analyses on it is reproduced overleaf.
Connecticut River Co. Ltd
Statements of financial position
X2
X1
∆
Outflow
Inflow
Land
105
105
—
Buildings
235
235
—
Acc. depreciation
–113
–107
6
6
Plant
441
397
44
85
41
Acc. depreciation
–356
–282
74
36
110
Inventory
82
  75
7
7
Trade receivables
243
216
27
27
Cash
73
  62
11
11
Trade payables
190
195
5
5
Debt
160
150
10
60
70
Share capital
200
200
—
Reserves
141
156
15
15
Profit for the period
19
—
19
19

Part 3  an introduction to financial Statement analysis
284
We can now proceed to layout the statement of cash flows in the formal way:
Connecticut River Co. Ltd
Statement of cash flows for the year ended 31 December 20X1
Operating activities	
Net profit for the year
19
Add back
Depreciation
116
Deduct
Gain on asset disposal
–3
132
Net change in non-cash working capital
–39
Net cash flow from operating activities
93
Investing activities
Purchase of plant
–85
Disposal of plant
8
Net cash flow from investing activities
–77
Financing activities
Loan received
70
Retirement of debt
–60
Dividend paid
–15
Net cash flow from financing activities
–5
Net change in cash during year
11
Cash balance 1 January 20X2
62
Cash balance 31 December 20X2
73
Notes:
1.	 The net change in non-cash working capital is the total of inventory (outflow 7), 
trade receivables (outflow 27) and trade creditors (outflow 5).
2.	 The figure for disposal of fixed assets is the book value of the plant sold (gross 
cost 41 less accumulated depreciation 36) plus the gain on disposal of 3 moved 
down from operating activities.
The statement of cash flows is an interesting summary of a company’s changes in 
financial position during the course of a year and can often give clues to business 
strategy which are not so readily apparent from the statement of financial posi-
tion or the statement of profit or loss. The format of the statement of cash flows 
with the basic distinction between operating, investing and financing activities is 
intended to aid in this type of analysis.
Interpretation

Chapter 10  Statement of cash flows
285
Different elements will have more or less importance from one company to 
another, but major considerations which should be taken into account when in-
terpreting company statements are:
	
1.	How successful is the company at generating cash from operations? To 
what extent does this internally generated cash flow provide finance for 
expansion and to what extent is it used up in providing dividends for 
shareholders?
	
2.	Is the company disposing of many long-term assets? If so, does this mean a 
run-down of the business? Are assets being renewed or are new assets being 
acquired for expansion?
	
3.	Is the company borrowing extensively and, if so, for what purpose? Is it re-
structuring its debt by replacing old debts with new; is it borrowing for new 
expansion; is it issuing new equity?
	
4.	Is there any hidden message in the changes in working capital? For ex-
ample, is a company acquiring higher inventories and higher receivables 
without any corresponding increase in trade payables? Or, conversely, are 
payables growing very quickly while other working capital elements are 
stable (possibly implying a cash shortage or at least an attempt to delay 
outflows)? Has there been a sudden drop in cash?
The statement of cash flows can potentially provide a useful picture of the struc-
tural changes which a company is undergoing and it should be examined with 
care for any hidden messages.
If we look at the statement of cash flows we have just constructed, the mes-
sages there are relatively simple.
Most of the company’s operating cash flow comes from depreciation; the profit 
is relatively small in percentage terms. The main outflow has been on the pur-
chase of new long-term assets, but these – at 85 – are less than the depreciation 
of 116. In a crude sense this means that the company’s total assets are getting 
smaller. This would prompt an analyst to ask the company if this is significant. It 
may not be. The company may depreciate its assets very quickly, for tax or pru-
dence reasons, but it is curious.
The increase in working capital is relatively high in relation to profits as well, 
and one should check (the figures are not given here) whether there has been a 
substantial increase in sales to justify the change in working capital or, if not, 
what is going on. The increase in working capital is twice the net profit, which 
means that profits are being swallowed up to finance expansion. This may be a 
good thing which will give a better return the next year, but at this point it looks 
a bit doubtful.
The company seems to have ‘rolled over’ debt by repaying some but replac-
ing it. Again this is perfectly normal. On the whole, the statement of cash flows 
reveals that the company is investing in working capital more than long-term 
assets. This may be a good sign, meaning higher sales the next year and more ef-
ficient use of plant, but an analyst would be looking for further information to 
explain this. Aside from the growth of working capital, the picture is one of little 
change.
Some analysts will want to know the amount of free cash flow. The concept of free 
cash flow refers to the operating cash flow that can be freed up for new investment 

Part 3  an introduction to financial Statement analysis
286
initiatives. Free cash flow can be calculated as the net operating cash flow minus 
three items:
	
1.	cash needed for planned investing activities (like replacements of long-term 
assets to maintain existing productive capacity)
	
2.	scheduled debt repayments, and
	
3.	normal dividend payments.
A large amount of free cash flow means that there is a lot of discretionary room 
for expansion and new opportunities, extra retirement of debt or dividend in-
creases. If free cash flow is negative, it would indicate that extra financing is 
needed just to maintain the current level of business activity (and the related 
commitments). If a negative free cash flow continues for several years, this be-
comes troublesome if sources of extra cash (new debt, new share issues, selling 
assets) dry up. Note that some analysts will only take into account net operating 
cash flow and planned net capital expenditures to calculate free cash flow.
Additionally, analysts will use cash flow information to construct some extra 
liquidity and solvency ratios, such as net operating cash flow to current liabilities 
(liquidity test) or net operating cash flow to current liabilities plus long-term debt 
(solvency test). This last ratio is typically used by credit officers in evaluating a 
company’s creditworthiness for long-term debt.
There are sometimes differences at the level of detail as to how a statement of 
cash flows is presented. In particular, our model here assumes that interest pay-
ments and taxation are part of the net operating cash flow (as they are included 
in the net profit measure), while dividends are treated as a financing item. Not 
everyone agrees with that presentation. IAS 7 allows some choice in this matter. 
It suggests that interest paid can be classified under either operating or financing 
activities, and interest and dividends received can be included in either operating 
or investing cash flows. Dividends paid can be interpreted as a cost of obtaining 
external finance and included in the financing cash flow or they can be treated as 
a component of the net operating cash flow.
Some companies start from the net operating result instead of from the net 
profit before or after taxes in the indirect net operating cash flow model. This is not 
prohibited, but it will naturally affect the content of the different types of adjust-
ments that have to be made to arrive at the net cash flow from operating activities.
A cash flow statement will be accompanied by a significant number of extra 
disclosures in the notes to the accounts. IAS 7, Statement of Cash Flows, contains 
a lot of specific requirements in this matter. These notes are cross-referenced 
in the statement of cash flows. Some investing and financing activities do not 
imply cash flows at all (or only in part), such as the conversion of convertible 
debt into ordinary shares or acquiring an item of equipment through a finance 
lease. These non-cash transactions should be excluded from the statement of 
cash flows, although additional disclosures in the notes would be expected.
In all cases the analyst should either make or adjust his or her own statement 
of cash flows on a uniform base, or read the notes to the accounts carefully to  
Presentational differences

Chapter 10  Statement of cash flows
287
see how the company has been constructed and take care over items such as 
­dividends so that the statement can be adjusted to be comparable with others.
Summary
Most companies produce a statement of cash flows as well as the statement of profit or loss and state-
ment of financial position. The statement of cash flows analyzes the changes in financial position 
from one balance sheet to the next for their effect on the company’s cash position. The IASB formats 
of a statement of cash flows which analyzes cash flows between operating, investing and financing 
activities, have become generally accepted.
Companies generate funds internally from their profit-making activities, but the extent of these 
funds differs from accounting profit in so far as the accounting profit includes non-cash adjustments 
such as depreciation and provisions and to the extent that there have been changes in the working 
capital of the company derived from trading.
Companies’ finances are also affected by the acquisition of new long-term ­assets, the sale of old 
assets, the borrowing of funds and the issuing of new shares. The payment of dividends and taxes 
is another drain on company cash flows. The statement of cash flows regroups all these elements of 
change for the information of shareholders and other financial statement users. The statement of 
cash flows provides useful information about the company’s financial management and ­under-ly-ing 
changes in financial position and strategy.
There are no special rules for the workings necessary to construct a statement of cash flows, but 
we have approached this using one specific method. The method used depends upon an analysis 
of the net change in position between one statement of financial position and the next. This basic 
analysis provides a framework from which one may systematically extend the full outflows and 
inflows by correcting for net movements in each of the important balance sheet categories.
Discussion questions
1.	 Explain briefly the incremental utility of the statement of cash flows to external users of finan-
cial statements.
2.	 The statement of cash flows contains three major sections. What are these sections and what 
information is contained in each?
3.	 Why does only a small minority of companies use the direct method to elaborate the statement 
of cash flows?
4.	 Discuss the different types of adjustment needed to derive a net operating cash flow figure from 
net profit. Provide an example of each type of adjustment.
5.	 What is the logic of analyzing components of the statement of financial  
position when constructing a statement of cash flows?
Assignments
The following questions have answers on the lecturer side of the digital support resources for the 
book.

Part 3  an introduction to financial Statement analysis
288
1.	 Seurat AG commenced business on 1 January 20X1, having acquired an existing 
trading concern. The company’s opening statement of financial position was:
€
Property, plant and equipment
5 000
Inventory
1 200
Cash
1 800
8 000
Share capital
8 000
During the year it traded successfully and had the following statement of 
profit or loss:
€
Sales
  25 000
Cost of goods sold
–17 500
  7 500
Other operating expenses
   –4 500
Net profit after tax
   3000
	Its statement of financial position as at 31 December 20X1 was as follows.
€
Property, plant and equipment
  5 000
Acc. depreciation
–1 000
  4 000
Inventory
1 800
Trade receivables
2 300
Cash
4 300
  8 400
Total assets
12 400
Share capital
  8 000
Retained profit
  3 000
11 000
Trade payables
  1 400
Total financing
12 400
	
Calculate the company’s cash flow for 20X1, and reconcile  
this with the profit (assuming there is no taxation or dividend 
for 20X1).
2.	 During 20X2 Seurat AG (see question 1) continued to trade successfully, and 
also expanded. It acquired new equipment for €8000, and borrowed €5000 in 
order to help finance the transaction. Its statement of profit or loss for 20X2 is 
shown below and its statement of financial position as at 31 December 20X2.
	
You are asked to prepare a statement of cash flows for 20X2.

Chapter 10  Statement of cash flows
289
Statement of profit or loss 20X2
€
Sales
57 500
Cost of goods sold
–36 300
21 200
Other operating 
expenses
–11 000
Profit before tax
10 200
Taxation
–3 000
Net profit after tax
7 200
Statement of financial position at 31 December 20X2
€
€
Property, plant and equipment
13 000
Acc. Depreciation
–2 800
10 200
Inventory
4 400
Trade receivables
2 900
Cash
11 900
19 200
Total assets
29 400
Share capital
8 000
Retained profit
10 200
18 200
Trade payables
3 200
Taxes payable
3 000
Long-term borrowing
5 000
Total equity and liabilities
29 400
Statement of profit or loss 20X3
€
Sales
69 700
Cost of goods sold
–41 300
28 400
Other operating expenses
–13 500
14 900
Gain on sale of equipment
500
Net profit before tax
15 400
3.	 Seurat AG (see questions 1 and 2) continued to develop in 20X3. It acquired 
new equipment for €15 000 and sold its original equipment for €3500 (the 
equipment sold had a net book value of €3000 at the time of sale). The com-
pany also paid off its bank loan and paid a dividend of €2000. Its trading 
results for 20X3 are given below and its statement of financial position as at 
31 December 20X3.
	
You are asked to:
	
(a)	 prepare a statement of cash flows for 20X3
	
(b)	 comment on the company’s financial position.

Part 3  an introduction to financial Statement analysis
290
Statement of financial position at 31 December 20X3
€
Taxation
–4620
Net profit after tax
10 780
Property, plant and equipment
23 000
Acc. Depreciation
–3 100
19 900
Inventory
4 800
Trade receivables
3 200
Cash
7 400
15 400
Total assets
35 300
Share capital
8 000
Retained profit
18 980
26 980
Trade payables
3 700
Taxes payable
4 620
Total equity and liabilities
35 300
4.	 You are given below successive statements of financial position for a  
company (as at 31 December 20X6 and 20X7) and are asked to prepare a 
statement of cash flows for 20X7.
	
20X6  
€’000
20X7  
€’000
Property at valuation
2 350
3 850
Plant and equipment
980
1 560
Acc. depreciation
–423
–572
2 907
4 838
Inventories
841
923
Receivables
1 213
1 297
Cash
106
73
Total assets
5 067
7 131
Share capital
430
460
Share premium
802
892
Revaluation reserve
435
935
Retained profit
551
771
2 218
3 058
Trade payables
1 432
1 675
Taxes payable
217
198
Long-term creditors
1 200
2 200
Total equity and liabilities
5 067
7 131
	
You are advised that no long-term tangible assets were disposed of during 
20X7 and that taxation (€217 000) and dividends (€105 000) which related 
to 20X6 were paid out during 20X7.
	
(Comment: you should note that this case includes long-term assets held at 
valuation rather than historical cost. A valuation change does not involve 
any cash flows.)

P a r t  F o u r
In Part Four we switch from an approach anchored in the financial statements of 
individual companies to one where the focus is the multinational group of companies 
as a reporting entity, whose shares are listed on one or more stock exchanges. In the 
remainder of this textbook we will refer to such a multinational group of companies 
which operate under a unified management structure, as a multinational company 
(MNC). While all the accounting and reporting rules which we reviewed in the earlier 
parts of this textbook hold good, there are additional factors which need to be taken 
into account to understand the content of the financial statements of a multinational 
company. In particular, being the result of aggregating the financial position and 
activities of a group of individual companies, knowledge of additional accounting and 
disclosure rules is necessary to appropriately analyse and understand the figures of a 
multinational company. Equally, there are public interest issues such as transparency 
and controls on management behaviour which come into play when looking at a group 
which employs thousands of people and whose actions affect many different economies.
The financial statements 
of multinational companies

292
This first chapter of Part Four reviews briefly the annual report of the multinational 
company. It summarizes its main components and considers its use as a publicity 
document. Additionally, this chapter elaborates on the notion of comprehensive 
income and on how it relates to the traditional statement of profit or loss (income 
statement/profit and loss account).
C H A P T E R   1 1
The annual report
Chapter Structure
n	 Introduction
n	 The corporate report
n	 Publicity document
n	 Statement of comprehensive income
n	 Analyzing the annual report
n	 Summary
n	 Discussion questions
As we discussed in Chapter 1, it is widely recognized now that there are at least 
two quite different types of company in any developed economy: small and 
­medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and large, listed multinationals (MNCs). Where 
exactly one draws the line between the two is not clear and, in any event, prob-
ably varies from economy to economy, but we can identify two models which 
Introduction

Chapter 11  The annual report
293
represent the contrasting poles. First, the SME is a company whose shares are held 
by a small number of individuals and are not publicly traded. The managers of 
an SME are usually shareholders. The SME employs relatively few people, its fi-
nancing is oriented towards bank loans and the main users of its annual financial 
statements are the tax authorities, the management and the bank.
The second pole is the MNC, which may be listed on several stock exchanges. 
The MNC has no one shareholder with a significant proportion of its equity, has 
professional managers, is active in many countries and employs thousands of 
people. Its main objective is to generate returns for shareholders which it does by 
generating ever larger profits and trying to push up the share price. Generally, its 
annual financial statements will have to satisfy a wide range of users: the analysts 
in the financial markets, so that they can encourage institutional funds to buy 
the shares; the general public, in the sense of creating a public image of responsi-
bility; and governments, to reassure them that the company is honest and meets 
its commitments (and does not need further statutory surveillance). Transparency 
in reporting is essential because uncertainties lead investors to demand higher 
returns and generate tensions with governments and the general public.
From a financial reporting perspective, the two are quite different animals. The 
SME has narrow reporting needs, closely linked to taxation, and rarely if ever en-
ters into complex transactions, while the MNC has a wide audience and needs to 
use the annual report as a major publicity tool both to inform and reassure the 
world about the activities of the company. Equally, the scope of activities is differ-
ent: the SME typically has few or only one line of business, its scale of activity is 
small and it is usually based in one country; and therefore it is relatively easy to 
see what is going on from its financial statements. The MNC, on the other hand, 
has many different activities, works in many different currencies and many lan-
guages and may well have extremely complex financial and other transactions.  
A kind of report is needed which can make some attempt to bring together all 
these different elements and convey some impression of them to users – technically 
a very demanding challenge!
In terms of regulations, the difference between SME accounting and MNC re-
ports is usually most visible through the difference between individual financial 
statements and group financial statements (although you should not forget that 
many small or micro-businesses are not organized as limited liability companies 
and may only have the most rudimentary of accounts, while some SMEs may 
operate as groups and have to produce group financial statements). An MNC is 
usually a combination of very many individual entities, often in a range of prod-
uct areas and in different countries, operating under some kind of unified man-
agement structure. Typically, such a group has sophisticated accounting systems 
which are capable of providing detailed internal information on a timely basis for 
management purposes, while maintaining all the usual functions of a financial 
reporting system as well.
Each individual company in a group has to prepare single company or statu-
tory financial statements which are used, amongst other things, for tax purposes, 
and then the group prepares what are called ‘consolidated’ or group financial 
statements which aggregate the data from the individual companies. These con-
solidated financial statements are what we shall look at from here on. They re-
flect the financial position, performance and cash flows of an economic entity, 
not of a legal one. Consolidated financial statements serve the purpose of giving 
an economic picture of the reporting entity, which is not used for taxation and 

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
294
is therefore free of constraints imposed by tax rules. In many countries the rules 
for drawing up consolidated financial statements are separate from those for indi-
vidual financial statements (although they build on these). In international circles, 
the accounting rules used are now primarily those of the International Accounting 
Standards Board (IASB) – which we use here – although there are, of course, many 
American MNCs and foreign companies listed in the US that use those of the US 
capital markets (the Financial Accounting Standards Board or FASB – US GAAP).
The consolidated financial statements are published each year, generally in a 
glossy document often running to 100 pages or more. They are usually repro-
duced on the corporate website as well, sometimes as a complete pdf document 
but also sometimes as individually accessible sections. This document includes 
both legally required information and public relations material. It is often known 
as the annual report or the corporate report.
The contents of the annual report will differ from one company to another – as a 
result of the non-regulatory parts – but, in general, and you should make sure you 
study some examples to see this, the average annual report contains the following:
	
1.	Corporate publicity material. This is not statutory and not checked by the ex-
ternal auditor. Often this is described as a review of operations and contains 
a chairman’s statement or president’s letter. It might run to 50 or more 
pages, will have lots of photographs and is designed to present a good im-
age of the company. This information should not be discarded by the user – 
much of it is highly informative and relevant – you should just not expect 
it to contain too much bad news, even though some companies do try to 
be much more transparent than others.
	
2.	Management report. This can be very confusing, because the publicity mate-
rial may also include items which are described as a management report. The 
IASB refers to this type of narrative reporting as ‘Management Commentary’.
	
	
One should take into account, however, that different countries have dif-
ferent regulations and different traditions about narrative disclosures along-
side the financial statements. Companies listed in the US have to provide a 
‘Management’s Discussion and Analysis’ (MD&A) which discusses the year’s 
results in relation to the previous year and future prospects. Similarly, the 
UK Accounting Standards Board recommended that large companies pre-
pare an ‘Operating and Financial Review’ (OFR).
	
	
In 2010, the IASB issued the IFRS practice statement Management  
Commentary, providing a broad, non-binding framework for the presentation 
of this type of reporting. It is seen as a narrative report that offers a context 
within which to interpret the performance, position and progress of the 
company. Management should provide its perspective on the business and 
its analysis of the interaction of the elements to help users to understand 
the company’s financial statements and to understand management’s ob-
jectives and strategies for achieving those objectives. The management 
commentary report should supplement and complement the financial 
statements with explanations of the financial statement figures and the 
The corporate report

Chapter 11  The annual report
295
conditions and events that shaped that information. The IFRS practice 
statement suggests that the management commentary should cover the 
following essential areas:
	
a.	the nature of the business
	
b.	management’s objectives and related strategies
	
c.	its key resources, risks and relationships
	
d.	its results of operations and prospects
	
e.	its critical performance measures and indicators that management uses 
to evaluate progress in meeting its objectives.
	
	
It should be noted, however, that the practice statement is not an IFRS 
standard. Consequently, companies are not required to comply with the 
practice statement, unless specifically required by their jurisdiction.
	
	
The EU Accounting Directives also require companies to publish a for-
mal management report, including a narrative review of the development 
of the company’s business and of its position, together with a description 
of the principal risks and uncertainties that it faces. Where appropriate, 
the EU management report should include non-financial key performance 
indicators relevant to the particular business, including information relat-
ing to environmental and employee matters.
	
	
	
The European Commission’s Transparency Directive has extended these dis-
closures for listed companies with a corporate governance statement in which 
companies disclose information about their corporate governance practices. 
Auditors have to verify that the information provided in the management re-
port is consistent with the annual financial statements for the same financial 
year. However, some EU member states have gone beyond this requirement 
and made the management report subject to a full audit requirement.
	
3.	 Statement of financial position. This is as you would expect from your studies to 
date, but when we extend the concept of financial position of an individual 
company to that of an international group of companies, a layer of additional 
issues arises. We will examine these additional issues in the next chapters.
	
4.	Statement of comprehensive income (or Statement of profit or loss and other  
comprehensive income). We are already familiar with the statement of  
profit or loss (income statement/profit and loss account), but there are  
extra ramifications of this which are relevant to large companies with a 
portfolio of subsidiaries and more complex transactions. We will elaborate 
the extension of the statement of profit or loss later in this chapter.
	
5.	Statement of changes in equity.  Although this statement is not formally 
required in all jurisdictions, it is under IFRS. It is a bringing together of in-
formation from different places to help the shareholder better understand 
the changes in equity over the years. IAS 1 Presentation of Financial State-
ments specifies that an analysis should be provided of changes in equity 
during the year, to include payment of dividends, details of all classes of 
equity and any changes in these, the net profit or loss for the period and 
any expenses or income taken directly to equity without passing through 
the statement of profit or loss. Note that the latter are also included in the 
statement of comprehensive income (statement of profit or loss and other 
comprehensive income). Figure 11.1 documents changes of equity and 

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
296
Figure 11.1
Changes in  
equity
presents them as originating either from transactions with shareholders  
in their capacity as owners [new share issues, dividend payments,  
buy-back of shares (treasury shares)] or from transactions with others than 
shareholders in their capacity as owners (wealth creation by the company 
operations). Both transaction types bring about changes in the different 
classes of equity (share capital, share premium, retained earnings, reserves 
or accumulated Other Comprehensive Income) and these changes are 
detailed in the statement of changes in equity. There is a definite link with 
‘comprehensive income’ which we will elaborate in the next section.
	
6.	Statement of cash flows. As introduced in Chapter 10, this statement shows 
how the company has generated cash during the period and where that 
cash has gone. The statement of cash flows is a very useful analytical tool 
and is required as a primary statement by IAS 7, Statement of Cash Flows. In 
a multinational group the statement of cash flows will report incoming and 
outgoing cash flows at the group level.
	
7.	Summary of significant accounting policies. Actually a statutory note to the 
financial statements, but often placed separately by large companies, usu-
ally in close proximity to the statement of profit or loss and statement of 
financial position. Essential first reading when an analyst looks at a set of 
financial statements because this specifies what set of rules (e.g. IFRS, US 
GAAP, etc.) have been followed in preparing the financial statements.
	
8.	Notes to the accounts . The notes provide essential further analysis of main 
statement items (including those of the statement of cash flows). For large 
companies a lot of very useful information is to be found in the notes and 
they should always be read very carefully.
	
9.	Auditor’s report. This is sometimes found at the beginning of the financial 
statements, sometimes at the end, but should always be checked first in 
case there is anything unusual.
Changes in equity
Transactions
with owners
in their capacity as owners
Other
Comprehensive
Income (OCI)
Accumulated
OCI
Profit or loss
• Share issues
• Dividends
• Treasury shares, …
recycling
Retained
earnings/reserves
Share capital
Share premium
Transactions
with others than owners
in their capacity as owners

Chapter 11  The annual report
297
It would be a good idea to look at some examples of corporate reports and try to 
split them up into these categories – identify the different components – just to 
make sure you can do so. If you are able to locate the annual report of an SME, 
this would be a helpful comparative tool. In many countries the SME has much 
lighter disclosure requirements than the MNC and most SMEs prefer not to show 
their financial statements to anyone. In France, Belgium and the UK any limited 
company has nonetheless to file a copy of its annual financial statements with a 
public registry, and so they are in theory available to anyone who wants to look 
(although late filing is endemic amongst SMEs). In Germany, SMEs are supposed 
to file but many do not, while in Switzerland the file is not open to the public. 
Generally, therefore, SME financial statements are much more difficult to find 
and, when you have them, contain much less detail than the financial statements 
of multinationals.
For the MNC, however, the annual report fulfils a quite different role. As far as 
statutory and contractual requirements are concerned, the MNC has obligations 
to publish because of its economic importance and usually because it is listed 
on one or several stock exchanges. These obligations are typically very stringent. 
Thereafter, the MNC wishes to influence investors and any signs of opacity or 
failure to disclose what is regarded as key information will cause investors to be-
come suspicious. When they get suspicious they either do not invest or demand a 
higher return for their money to compensate the increased risk which is attached 
when there is uncertainty surrounding the company. For example, if an MNC has 
potentially polluting manufacturing activities but says nothing about its pollu-
tion control in the annual report, investors may fear that there is bad news await-
ing in the future with, say, a big bill to clean up a polluted river or compensate a 
poisoned community.
The annual report of an MNC has come to be a major publicity document. It 
has great authority as the major formal communication between the group and 
the outside world, and MNCs build on that to use it to present the company in 
as positive a light as possible and to explain what the company is doing. In some 
ways it represents the company’s passport. Aside from its statutory and investor 
role, the annual report is widely used when making major sales pitches to po-
tential clients, when talking to governments, even when taking on new staff – it 
is a way of establishing the company’s identity, its size, its range of activities, its 
financial strength.
The annual report is a key document and many large companies automatically 
include it on their website. This last is potentially a trap for the analyst or student. 
For the moment there is no regulation as such of financial information on cor­
porate websites. While company law usually requires that, say, income statements 
and balance sheets are never published without the audit report and the accom-
panying explanatory notes about accounting policies and so on, it is not always 
clear that these constraints apply to the internet. Some companies may put only 
extracts of key financial data on the Internet and the analyst should be wary of 
missing information; and, if in doubt, obtain the published hard copy. That said, 
of course, the internet is a great way of obtaining corporate data rapidly. You can 
even access MNCs’ filings with the SEC (Securities and Exchange Commission) in 
Publicity document

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
298
the US which are all made available on the SEC’s EDGAR database (www.sec.gov). 
This gives access not only to the annual report information but also all other data 
required by the SEC, including MD&A. For a detailed review of a US listed com-
pany, this is a good tool.
As we have discussed earlier in this book, there are potentially two ways of ap-
proaching the articulation between the statement of financial position and the 
statement of profit or loss. In what we will call the ‘operating’ approach, you 
measure the company’s revenue and deduct from that the expenses incurred  
(including using-up of assets), and that gives you net income (or net profit/net 
earnings) and the statement of financial position consists of the historical cost 
of the assets less the amounts deemed to have been used up, and the liabilities 
incurred to finance them.
In the other approach, which we will call the asset–liability approach, you 
measure the assets and liabilities in the balance sheet, and the sum of all the 
changes from one balance sheet to the next (other than transactions with share-
holders in their capacity of owners, e.g. to issue new shares or pay dividends) is 
set equal to the income for the period (also called comprehensive income). Note 
that the resulting income figures under both approaches will not be the same. While 
the comprehensive income yielded by the asset–liability approach will include  
the net income under the operating approach, it will also include changes in 
value of the assets and liabilities that are not derived from operations. For ex-
ample, if a company owned shares in say Yahoo which at the earlier balance sheet 
date were worth $10m at their market price, and at the subsequent balance sheet 
date the market price had gone up to $12m, this would give an increase in bal-
ance sheet values of $2m. This would appear under comprehensive income, but 
not in net income under the operating approach.
You should be aware also that when using an asset–liability approach, a mea-
surement basis such as fair value will indeed likely give rise to valuation changes 
from one balance sheet to the next. IFRS use fair value for some financial instru-
ments which we will look at in Chapter 14.
In the past it had come to be the practice to allow some changes in value not 
to pass through the statement of profit or loss, but rather to go straight to equity. 
A significant example of this is the foreign currency translation difference. We 
will look at this in detail in Chapter 13, but the issue is that when you prepare 
consolidated financial statements, you have to add together the financial state-
ments of companies that may be using different currencies. They all have to be 
converted (‘translated’) to a single ‘reporting’ currency. If exchange rates have 
moved during the year, this means that there will be a value difference that has 
nothing to do with the underlying assets and liabilities, and is essentially tem-
porary and a product of the financial reporting process. These differences were 
placed directly in equity.
Over time, standard-setters came to feel that although these differences were 
visible in the financial statements, they were not presented clearly nor neces-
sarily in the same place. IFRS now requires that value changes that do not pass 
Statement of comprehensive income

Chapter 11  The annual report
299
through profit or loss should be shown immediately after the traditional state-
ment of profit or loss, by adding a section called ‘Other Comprehensive Income’ 
(OCI) so that the two together would add up to total comprehensive income. 
Figure 11.2 presents the basic structure of a statement of comprehensive income 
and highlights its link with the statement of changes in equity. The components 
of ‘Other comprehensive income’ are enumerated in the extract from IAS 1, 
­Presentation of Financial Statements (see below).
Statement of
changes in equity
Transactions
with owners
in their capacity as owners
Transactions
with others than owners
in their capacity of owners
Components
of
‘Other
Comprehensive
Income’
Statement of 
profit or loss
+
Statement of Comprehensive Income
IAS 1, Presentation of Financial Statements, allows a presentation option for the 
statement of comprehensive income (renamed in 2011 as the statement of profit 
or loss and other comprehensive income, although the use of the new terminol-
ogy is not mandatory): (a) a single continuous statement presentation method, 
and (b) two separate but consecutive statements presentation method.
Whichever presentation is chosen, the distinction is retained between items 
recognized in profit or loss and items recognized in other comprehensive income. 
The only difference is that, for the two-statement approach, a total is struck in 
the separate statement of profit or loss at ‘profit for the year’ (this is the same 
amount as is presented as a sub-total under the one-statement approach). This 
‘profit for the year’ is then the starting point for the statement of profit or loss 
and other comprehensive income, which needs to be presented immediately fol-
lowing the statement of profit or loss.
From 2013 on, IAS 1 additionally requires to group and present items in other 
comprehensive income on the basis of whether they might at some point in time be 
reclassified from OCI to profit or loss. Note that Figure 11.1 refers to this reclassifica-
tion issue as ‘recycling’. So, irrespective of which presentation method is selected, the 
items of other comprehensive income should be classified by nature and grouped 
into those that, (a) will not be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss; and, (b) 
may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss when specific conditions are met (in 
Figure 11.2
Statement of  
comprehensive  
income

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
300
STANDARDs
STANDARD
OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
Definition:
Other comprehensive income comprises items of income and expense (in-
cluding reclassification adjustments) that are not recognized in profit or loss 
as required or permitted by other IFRSs.
The components of Other Comprehensive Income include:
a.	 changes in revaluation surplus (see IAS 16 Property, Plant and Equip-
ment and IAS 38 Intangible Assets);
b.	 actuarial gains and losses on defined benefit plans recognized in accor-
dance with paragraph 93A of IAS 19 Employee Benefits;
c.	 gains and losses arising from translating the financial statements of 
a foreign operation (see IAS 21 The Effects of Changes in Foreign Ex-
change Rates);
d.	 gains and losses from investments in equity instruments measured at 
fair value through other comprehensive income in accordance with 
paragraph 5.7.5 of IFRS 9 Financial Instruments;
e.	 the effective portion of gains and losses on hedging instruments in a 
cash flow hedge (see IAS 39 Financial Instruments: Recognition and 
Measurement).
f.	
For particular liabilities designated as at fair value through profit or loss, 
the amount of the change in fair value that is attributable to changes in 
the liability’s credit risk (see paragraph 5.7.7 of IFRS 9)
Source: IAS 1, Presentation of Financial Statements, extract from para 7
accordance with other IFRSs). This additional presentation requirement makes the 
potential effect of items of OCI on profit or loss in future periods clearer. The extracts 
below provide illustrative examples of the alternative presentation formats. They in-
clude the split in presentation of OCI according to the reclassification issue.
PRESENTATION OF PROFIT OR LOSS AND OTHER  
COMPREHENSIVE INCOME IN ONE STATEMENT
XYZ Group – Statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive ­income 
for the year ended 31 December 20X7
(illustrating the presentation of profit or loss and other comprehensive in-
come in one statement and the classification of expenses within profit or 
loss by function)

Chapter 11  The annual report
301
(in thousands of currency units)
20X7
20X6
Revenue
390 000
355 000
Cost of sales
(245 000)
(230 000)
Gross profit
145 000
125 000
Other income
20 667
11 300
Distribution costs
(9 000)
(8 700)
Administrative expenses
(20 000)
(21 000)
Other expenses
(2 100)
(1 200)
Finance costs
(8 000)
(7 500)
Share of profit of associates
35 100
30 100
Profit before tax
161 667
128 000
Income tax expense
(40 417)
(32 000)
Profit for the year from continuing operations
121 250
96 000
Loss for the year from discontinued operations
—
(30 500)
PROFIT FOR THE YEAR
121 250
65 500
Other comprehensive income:
Items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss:
Gains on property revaluation
933
3 367
Investments in equity instruments
(24 000)
26 667
Remeasurements of defined benefit pension plans
(667)
1 333
Share of gain (loss) on property revaluation  
of associates
400
(700)
Income tax relating to items that will not be  
reclassified
5 834
(7 667)
(17 500)
23 000
Items that may be reclassified subsequently  
to profit or loss:
Exchange differences on translating foreign operations
5 334
10 667
Cash flow hedges
(667)
(4 000)
Income tax relating to items that may be reclassified
(1 167)
(1 167)
3 500
5 000
Other comprehensive income for the year, net of tax
(14 000)
28 000
TOTAL COMPREHENSIVE INCOME FOR THE YEAR
107 250
93 500
Profit attributable to:
Owners of the parent
97 000
52 400
Non-controlling interests
24 250
13 100
121 250
65 500
Total comprehensive income attributable to:
Owners of the parent
85 800
74 800
Non-controlling interests
21 450
18 700
107 250
93 500
Earnings per share (in currency units):  
Basic and diluted
0.46
0.30
Alternatively, items of other comprehensive income could be presented in 
the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income net of tax.
Source: IAS 1, Presentation of Financial Statements, Extracts from Implementation Guidance

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
302
STANDARDs
PRESENTATION OF PROFIT OR LOSS AND OTHER  
COMPREHENSIVE INCOME IN TWO STATEMENTS
XYZ Group – Statement of profit or loss for the year ended 31 December 
20X7
(illustrating the presentation of profit or loss and other comprehensive  
income in two statements and the classification of expenses within profit 
or loss by nature)
(in thousands of currency units)
20X7
20X6
Revenue
390 000
355 000
Other income
20 667
11 300
Changes in inventories of finished goods and  
  work in progress
(115 100)
(107 900)
Work performed by the entity and capitalized
16 000
15 000
Raw material and consumables used
(96 000)
(92 000)
Employee benefits expense
(45 000)
(43 000)
Depreciation and amortization expense
(19 000)
(17 000)
Impairment of property, plant and equipment
(4 000)
–
Other expenses
(6 000)
(5 500)
Finance costs
(15 000)
(18 000)
Share of profit of associates
35 100
30 100
Profit before tax
161 667
128 000
Income tax expense
(40 417)
(32 000)
Profit for the year from continuing operations
121 250
96 000
Loss for the year from discontinued operations
–
(30 500)
PROFIT FOR THE YEAR
121 250
65 500
Profit attributable to:
Owners of the parent
97 000
52 400
Non-controlling interests
24 250
13 100
121 250
65 500
Earnings per share (in currency units):
Basic and diluted
0.46
0.30

Chapter 11  The annual report
303
XYZ Group – Statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income 
for the year ended 31 December 20X7
(illustrating the presentation of profit or loss and other comprehensive  
income in two statements)
(in thousands of currency units)
20X7
20X6
Profit for the year
121,250
65,500
Other comprehensive income:
Items that will not be reclassified  
to profit or loss:
Gains on property revaluation
933
3 367
Investments in equity instruments
(24 000)
26 667
Remeasurements of defined benefit  
  pension plans
(667)
1 333
Share of gain (loss) on property revaluation  
  of associates
400
700
Income tax relating to items that will  
  not be reclassified
5 834
(7 667)
(17 500)
23 000
Items that may be reclassified subsequently  
to profit or loss:
Exchange differences on translating foreign  
  operations
5 334
10 667
Cash flow hedges
(667)
(4 000)
Income tax relating to items that may be  
  reclassified
(1 167)
(1 667)
3 500
5 000
Other comprehensive income  
for the year, net of tax
(14 000)
28 000
TOTAL COMPREHENSIVE INCOME  
FOR THE YEAR
107 250
93 500
Total comprehensive income attributable to:
Owners of the parent
85 800
74 800
Non-controlling interests
21 450
18 700
107 250
93 500
Alternatively, items of other comprehensive income could be presented, 
net of tax.
Source: IAS 1, Presentation of Financial Statements, Extracts from Implementation Guidance

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
304
Figure 11.3
Relationships  
between  
primary  
financial  
statements
Generally speaking, when you first look at a company’s report with a view to 
analyzing the financial statements, we would suggest that you follow this routine:
	
1.	Read the publicity material to get an idea of the company’s activities and 
how it sees them.
	
2.	Check the auditor’s report to see if there are any warnings. There are not 
usually any, because disagreements have been worked out before finalizing 
the financial statements or the auditors have made sure that adequate in-
formation is available elsewhere.
	
3.	Read the summary of the significant accounting policies to see which set of 
accounting principles has been used and whether there is anything special 
you should note about the methods used. If you are looking at a  
European company, remember to check if the company uses IFRS as  
issued by the IASB or as endorsed by the EU.
	
4.	Look at the main statements: Statement of Profit and Loss and Other Com-
prehensive Income, Statement of Financial Position and Statement of Cash 
Flows to get the overall accounting picture.
	
5.	Look at the statement of changes in equity and the notes to the statements 
to get more detail.
Figure 11.3 wraps up the relationships between the primary financial statements 
and related concepts.
Statement of changes in equity
Statement of 
financial position 
at the beginning of
the accounting
period 
Owners’ equity
Cash
Statement of 
financial position
at the end of
the accounting
period 
Owners’ equity
Cash
Statement of cash flows
Statement of 
comprehensive income
Statement of profit or loss
What the IFRS practice statement Management Commentary recommends as es-
sential areas of management discussion of the company’s situation (see earlier in 
this chapter) is quite a good guide to what the analyst is trying to do – to flesh out 
the company’s strategy, the risks it faces, its investment stance, etc. The analyst 
should be trying to provide this kind of strategic overview by analyzing the finan-
cial statements and related material.
Analyzing the annual report

Chapter 11  The annual report
305
Summary
This chapter is a short introduction to the world of the financial information of 
large, multinational companies listed on the main stock exchanges. These com-
panies use the annual report as a major publicity document; it also has to satisfy 
many legal disclosure requirements. While the basic financial statements that you 
already know are still at the core of their financial information package, the MNC 
publishes ‘consolidated’ figures – which bring together the sum of all its subsid-
iaries – to give a world overview. We will look at the techniques for putting these 
together in the next chapter. Their annual reports include a statement of compre-
hensive income which comprises value changes that have not passed through the 
operating earnings statement. The reports also include much more supplemen-
tary information both by way of detail behind the financial statements and of 
other matters concerning company strategy and activities.
Discussion questions
1.	 Identify the users and uses of a multinational group’s financial statements  
as opposed to those of a small company.
2.	 Explain how a management report supplements and complements a  
company’s financial statements.
3.	 Explain how the concept of comprehensive income is related to profit  
of the year.
4.	 Provide some examples of ‘other comprehensive income’.

306
This chapter introduces the concept of consolidated financial statements – also 
known as group accounts or group financial statements – which are the basis of 
figures published by multinational corporations. The chapter deals successively 
with issues such as consolidating wholly owned subsidiaries, goodwill and its 
measurement, non-controlling interest and the accounting treatment of associates 
and joint arrangements.
C H A P T E R   1 2
Consolidated financial 
statements
n	 Introduction
n	 Rationale for consolidated financial statements
n	 Control as the basis for consolidation
n	 Consolidation basics
n	 Acquisition method
n	 Goodwill and its subsequent measurement
n	 Non-controlling interest
n	 Consolidated statement of profit or loss
n	 Associates and joint arrangements
n	 Disclosure requirements
n	 Summary
n	 Discussion questions
n	 Assignments
Chapter Structure

Chapter 12  Consolidated financial statements
307
As discussed in Chapter 11, multinational companies (MNCs) publish an annual 
report whose accounting numbers are consolidated financial statements, often 
known as group accounts or group financial statements. These are an attempt to rep-
resent the whole economic entity which is the MNC. In effect, they are based on 
the assumption of an Anglo-Saxon pyramid style of management structure. That 
is to say that there is a ‘head office’ management team at the top of a chain of 
command which extends to the furthest subsidiary. The central management’s 
authority must be respected in all the companies owned by the group. In prac-
tice, modern group structures do not always correspond to this model in all their 
arrangements. In individual operations they may have all sorts of shifting ar-
rangements with other companies. There are often alliances with other groups in 
particular areas. For example, oil companies may form alliances with each other 
to exploit oil wells or build pipelines, while fighting it out with each other in 
the high street for retail sales of petrol. These kinds of involvement mean that, 
at the margin, group financial statements have some difficulty in reflecting the 
economic realities, but they are still the best implement we have for measuring 
MNC activities.
Your strategy and economics courses will, if they have not already done so, give 
you ideas about why companies are organized in groups. However, it is worth just 
reviewing quickly the main practical reasons. Traditional theory notes that com-
panies tend to develop on either a horizontal or vertical basis. Companies with a 
vertical basis typically have a production chain for a product that involves:
	
1.	extraction of raw materials
	
2.	transport to manufacturing centres
	
3.	manufacture of products
	
4.	distribution through wholesale outlets
	
5.	retailing to consumers.
The description ‘vertical’ relates to the progress from basic raw materials to fi-
nal retailing to the consumer. In theory, a company in the manufacturing sector 
might well expand its activities up and down to control both its raw materials 
and its retailing, and this would be called a vertical group. Examples of this are 
the major oil companies, who not only extract the oil but also own tanker fleets, 
refineries and filling stations.
A horizontal group, by comparison, expands into different industries united by 
some similar process or product. For example, a company might manufacture plas-
tic mouldings for motor manufacturers and thus might expand sideways by moving 
into the manufacture of plastic mouldings for the toy industry. Oil companies may 
sprout chemical offshoots to exploit the by-products of the oil refining process.
These two directions are natural lines of development for companies that wish 
to expand. However, there is a third type of group, the conglomerate. The con-
glomerate diversifies into non-related fields, with the aim of building up a profit-
able group which draws strength from the fact that it consists of many diverse 
elements operating in different economic environments. (Finance theory has the 
concept of a portfolio where diversification across a minimum number of different 
investments reduces the overall risk of the total holding.)
Introduction

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
308
The advantage to a group of being in several different areas is that when one 
product is having a bad year, other products should not be so badly affected. A 
particular disadvantage of the vertical group is that if demand for its final product 
is depressed, it follows that the whole chain of production is similarly depressed. 
However, it should be noted that while the diversified conglomerate looks like a 
good idea on paper, there are few managements that have been equally success-
ful at managing all parts of such groups. But again, this is a question to pursue 
within your strategy courses.
If a company is going to expand, there are three main ways in which the group 
may be built up: the development of new subsidiaries by a company, the acquisi-
tion by takeover of other companies and mergers between companies. Expansion 
by takeover has long been a common practice amongst Anglo-American compa-
nies and is also much more common now in Europe, even if the rules in different 
countries are sometimes an obstacle. There has for some time been a polarization 
of business with large companies needing to become gigantic in order to compete 
on a global scale. The ‘global’ business can command lower costs than smaller, 
national businesses, through economies of scale.
It does also happen that companies form joint ventures with other companies. 
For example, Sony Ericsson Mobile Communication AB was a joint venture estab-
lished in 2001 by the Japanese consumer electronics company Sony ­Cor­poration 
and the Swedish telecommunications company Ericsson to produce and market 
mobile phones. The stated reason for this venture was to combine Sony’s con-
sumer electronics expertise with Ericsson’s technological leadership in the com-
munications sector. The joint venture operated for more than a decade, but ceased 
to exist when Sony acquired Ericsson’s 50 per cent stake in the joint venture in 
February 2012. A joint venture like this provides a different kind of vehicle and 
has its own special accounting rules.
Companies have a need to find new products – business theory suggests that 
products and businesses have a life cycle. When a company’s main product is at 
a ‘mature’ stage (when the market is static or beginning to decline, and margins 
have been pared to the limit) it is time for the company to use the cash the prod-
uct has generated to look for new products or it will decline and disappear. Large, 
international companies are therefore constantly buying new companies which 
either help to build global market share or represent an attempt to find growth 
products.
COMPANY REPORT
The acquisition of Jaguar Land Rover by Tata Motors: Acquisition 
rationale (extract)
We anticipate that our acquisition and operation of Jaguar Land Rover will 
result in benefits to us, including (i) immediate entry to the luxury perfor-
mance car and premium all-terrain vehicle segments; (ii) an improvement in 
our global market position through a combination of resources and strengths;  
(iii) strengthening of technological and product development/ innovation capa-
bilities to address changing market trends; (iv) sharing of best practices in man-
ufacturing and quality assurance systems and processes; (v) enhanced human 
capital and managerial talent; and (vi) potential operational synergies.

Chapter 12  Consolidated financial statements
309
The simplest case of group expansion is where a company forms a subsidiary 
to expand its operations. This may be done for a variety of reasons. For example, 
it may be that the holding company wants to take on borrowing specifically for a 
project, and that can most easily be done by putting the project’s assets and the 
associated lending within a separate subsidiary. It gives the lender a clearer sight 
of the project independently of the rest of the group.
It is often quite useful for management purposes to organize business opera-
tions into separate subsidiaries, since one can delegate management responsi-
bility by making the manager of a specific project a director of that subsidiary, 
thereby giving him or her the legal power to operate the subsidiary effectively; 
whereas, if there were no subsidiary, the manager would have to be a director of 
all the group’s activities, extending his or her legal authority beyond the required 
point.
Once a company extends its operations beyond its home country base there 
are other powerful reasons for forming new subsidiaries in foreign countries. 
Where a company has a foreign operation it will be subject to foreign tax on the 
earnings of the foreign operation. That in itself is a highly complex issue but, if 
there is no local subsidiary, the question of the profit attributable to that opera-
tion is even more complex. In a foreign environment, the limitation of liability 
is still more important and, since the operation is likely to be more remote than 
The acquisition of Jaguar Land Rover enabled us to acquire internationally 
recognized brands with a strong heritage and global presence, and increases 
our product and market diversity. Jaguar Land Rover, which recorded more 
than 75 per cent of its sales in the US, UK and the rest of Europe for the year 
ended December 31, 2007, will expand and diversify our international sales 
market, allowing us to reduce our reliance on the Indian market.
Land Rover provides us an opportunity to broaden our existing portfolio 
of UV, SUV and crossover offerings. Land Rover’s products in the all-terrain 
­vehicle segment are complementary to our products in terms of features, 
­technology and price positioning and as such, allow us to offer a wide range of 
vehicles that satisfies various consumer needs. Additionally, Jaguar’s ­premium 
product offerings will provide us with immediate entry into the luxury performance 
car segment.
The acquisition of Jaguar Land Rover also enables us to leverage Jaguar 
Land Rover’s technology and engineering expertise. For example, Jaguar Land 
Rover’s technological capabilities in petrol engines, Four Wheel Drive technol-
ogy and Aluminium BIW (Body in White) technology will help us further develop 
and strengthen our existing engineering capabilities. Through the acquisition, 
we also gain research and development capabilities of Jaguar Land Rover’s 
strong engineering workforce and its two advanced design centres in the UK.
We believe Jaguar Land Rover will benefit from the acquisition because we will 
be able to leverage our low cost engineering and sourcing capabilities in favour 
of Jaguar Land Rover and thereby support Jaguar Land Rover in its cost reduction 
initiatives and improve profitability. Similarly, in advanced technology areas, we 
will be able to leverage Jaguar Land Rover’s expertise and supply chain.
Source: Tata Motors, Filing 6-K, 2008, p.69

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
310
a domestic subsidiary, the necessity for clear lines of management responsibility 
is even stronger. A foreign operation will have to keep records of its transactions 
in the local currency, and this is sometimes more easily done through a chain of 
subsidiaries.
The more noticeable development of groups occurs when one company 
takes over another pre-existing operation. The reasons for a company to do this 
are also many and various. If a company is bent on rapid expansion, and has 
the finance available, there are obvious advantages in acquiring another com-
pany which is already trading in the field rather than starting up a totally new 
company. By takeover, the expanding company gains in one stroke an estab-
lished market position, working assets and experienced management in that 
field. Against that it may have to pay a premium to persuade the shareholders 
of the acquired company that they would benefit from the takeover. An es-
tablished public company with a good profit record can frequently take over 
another company simply by offering to give the shareholders of the acquired 
company shares in the public company in exchange for their existing shares. 
If it succeeds in persuading them that this is worthwhile, it has only to issue 
more shares rather than actually raise additional finance – a very effective way 
of expanding.
The third form of expansion is that of a merger. Since this is the least com-
mon form we will not devote a great deal of time to considering it, but it dif-
fers in an essential way from acquisition. Under an acquisition, company A buys 
company B. In effect, it is simply acquiring a new asset in the same way as it 
might buy a new factory, but at the same time this raises all the usual questions 
about the valuation of the asset. Under a merger, company A and company B are 
combining their assets to form, in effect, a new, expanded company whose assets 
and liabilities are the sum of A and B. It should be mentioned already that, for 
accounting purposes, IASB (but also the FASB) do not accept the existence of a 
true merger – they claim that it is always possible to identifiy an acquirer and 
an acquiree.
We have implied so far that when a company expands, the new companies it 
acquires will be fully under its control. However, this is not necessarily the case. A 
company may have different levels of influence over another company in which 
it has invested. If company A buys more than 50 per cent of the shares of com-
pany B, the implication is that, since the shareholders elect the directors and the 
directors run the company, company A can fully control company B by exercising 
its majority vote. It follows from this that ‘control’ can exist well short of having 
100 per cent ownership of the shares in a subsidiary.
It also follows, however, that if company A has only 40 per cent of the shares 
in company B and the remaining 60 per cent are owned by company C, company 
A may well have no influence at all, since company C has a voting majority. By 
contrast, if company A had 40 per cent, but the remaining 60 per cent was widely 
dispersed with no one having more than 2 or 3 per cent, company A would have 
effective control except where all the other shareholders joined together to frus-
trate A, which rarely happens in practice.
At the other extreme, Company A might have only a token shareholding of 10 
per cent and have no effective influence whatsoever on Company B. You can see 
that outside a situation where an investor company owns a clear majority of the 
shares in a second company, the question of the degree of influence exerted by 
one company over another is difficult to assess.

Chapter 12  Consolidated financial statements
311
COMPANY REPORT
ROCHE GROUP
Accounting policies (extract)
Consolidation policy
These financial statements are the consolidated financial statements of Roche 
Holding Ltd, a company registered in Switzerland, and its subsidiaries (‘the 
Group’).
The subsidiaries are those companies controlled, directly or indirectly, by 
Roche Holding Ltd, where control is defined as the power to govern the finan-
cial and operating policies of an enterprise so as obtain benefits from its activi-
ties. This control is normally evidenced when Roche Holding Ltd owns, either 
directly or indirectly, more than 50 per cent of the voting rights or currently 
exercisable potential voting rights of a company’s share capital. Special Pur-
pose Entities are consolidated where the substance of the relationship is that 
the Special Purpose Entity is controlled by the Group. Companies acquired 
during the year are consolidated from the date on which operating control is 
transferred to the Group, and subsidiaries to be divested are included up to 
the date on which control passes from the Group. Inter-company balances and 
transactions and resulting unrealized income are eliminated in full. Changes in 
ownership interests in subsidiaries are accounted for as equity transactions if 
they occur after control has already been obtained and if they do not result in a 
loss of control.
Source: Roche Group Annual Report 2011
If we take the basic case of a group which has wholly owned subsidiaries – the 
most common situation – the question arises: ‘What is the purpose of producing 
group financial statements?’ The main argument for consolidated financial state-
ments is that, although a group may operate through a whole network of theo-
retically independent legal entities, the fact of real control by a central holding 
company means that, economically, there may well be only one real entity. (Note, 
though, that the rationale for consolidated financial statements depends upon 
the pyramid concept of management structure where there is centralized con-
trol. It does not work for groups of linked companies with no central economic 
control, such as Japanese Keiretsu.) It follows that to appreciate the strength of 
this economic entity it is not sufficient to look only at the holding company: one 
must look at the total assets and liabilities under the unified control and disre-
gard the legal entities.
A potential investor who looks only at the holding company financial state-
ments might very easily be misled as to the strength of the group. To take a very 
simple case, company H, a holding company, might be constituted so that all its 
Rationale for consolidated financial statements

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
312
trading operations are channelled through a single subsidiary, company X, which 
also contains all the operating assets and liabilities. The statement of financial 
position below shows how the balance sheet of the two companies might look.
Co. H  
€’000
Co. X  
€’000
H Group  
€’000
Non-current tangible assets
   500
1 000
1 500
Investment in subsidiary
   500
—
—
Current assets
   250
   350
   600
Total assets
1 250
1 350
2 100
Share capital
   500
   500
   500
Retained earnings
   300
     (50)
   250
   800
   450
   750
Long-term debt
   300
   700
1 000
Trade payables
   150
   200
   350
Total equity and liabilities
1 250
1 350
2 100
Debt/equity ratio
         37.5%        155%        133%
If a potential investor looks only at company H’s statement of financial position, he 
or she could have no idea of the underlying asset and liability structure. The company 
has a 37.5 per cent debt/equity ratio, so the potential investor would probably 
regard it as a relatively low-risk company. However, if the financial statements are 
consolidated (and in essence this just involves adding together the statements of all 
the companies in the group: the investment cost of the subsidiaries in the parent 
company statement of financial position is replaced by the assets and liabilities 
actually acquired), and the ‘investment in subsidiary’ of €500 000 is replaced by the 
assets and liabilities of company X, the statement of financial position looks very 
different. From the consolidated financial statements, the investor could see that in 
fact the group is very highly geared; that is, it has a large amount of debt outstanding, 
and the losses made by company X are reflected in the group profit and loss.
The view which an investor might have of company H is quite different according 
to whether it is the consolidated financial statements or simply those of the holding 
company which are seen, and this is the reason for preparing consolidated financial 
statements. They give a picture of the economic entity rather than the legal entity: 
they provide information which is more useful in investment decision-making.
The technique of consolidated accounting for groups was not put forward un-
til the early part of the 20th century, by contrast with much of basic accounting 
which stems from the second half of the 19th century. In the EU, consolidated 
financial statements are the subject of the Seventh EC Company Law Directive 
(1983). Consolidated financial statements have become the norm for large com-
panies in the EU. One now commonly finds that the annual report of a European 
company includes two sets of financial statements: the consolidated financial 
statements and the parent company’s statutory financial statements, with the lat-
ter still largely influenced by tax rules.
Meanwhile, with the spread of IFRS, consolidation practices of listed compa-
nies have become globally harmonized to a large extent. The main IFRS rules 

Chapter 12  Consolidated financial statements
313
governing the preparation of consolidated financial statements are covered in 
IFRS 10, Consolidated Financial Statements, and in IFRS 3, Business Combinations.
IFRS 10, Consolidated Financial Statements, identifies control as the basis for con-
solidation. A reporting entity (investor) is required to consolidate an investee, if 
the investor controls the investee. IFRS 10 provides the following definition: ‘An 
investor controls an investee when the investor is exposed, or has rights, to vari-
able returns from the involvement with the investee and has the ability to affect 
those returns through its power over the investee’ (IFRS 10, par.6). Control gives 
rise to a parent-subsidiary relationship.
The IFRS 10 definition of control comprises three essential criteria (see also 
Figure 12.1):
	
1.	Power to direct – Does the investor have the current ability to direct activi-
ties that significantly affect an investee’s returns?
	
2.	Exposure, or rights, to variable returns from an investee, and
	
3.	Linkage between power and returns – Ability of the investor to use its 
power to affect its returns of the investee.
Power to direct
Exposure/rights to 
variable returns
Linkage between 
power and returns
Control
Power – An investor has power over an investee when the investor has existing 
rights that give it the current ability to direct the so-called ‘relevant activities’, 
i.e. the activities that significantly affect the investee’s returns. Power arises from 
rights. Assessing power can be straightforward, such as when power over an in-
vestee derives directly and solely from the voting rights granted by shareholdings 
(control will exist when an investor holds > 50 per cent of an investee’s voting 
rights). In other cases, the assessment will be more complex and require more 
than one factor to be considered, such as when power results from contractual ar-
rangements. For example, a contractual agreement may enable an investor to di-
rect enough other shareholders on how to vote in order to obtain relevant power. 
In another context, an investee could be designed so that voting rights are not 
Control as the basis for consolidation
Figure 12.1
Elements of  
the definition  
of control

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
314
the dominant factor in decision-making, such as when any voting rights relate to 
administrative tasks only and the relevant activities are directed by means of con-
tractual arrangements. Large minority holders may also engender power when 
other shareholdings are widely dispersed, and an investor holds significantly 
more voting rights than any other shareholder or group of shareholders.
Returns – An investor is exposed, or has rights, to variable returns from its 
involvement with the investee when the investor’s returns from its involvement 
have the potential to vary as a result of the investee’s performance. The investor’s 
returns can be positive or negative. Returns can be synergistic as well as more di-
rect such as dividends or changes in the value of an investment.
Linkage – An investor controls an investee if the investor not only has power 
over the investee and exposure or rights to variable returns from its involvement 
with the investee, but also has the ability to use its power to affect the investor’s 
returns from its involvement with the investee.
An investor with decision-making rights regarding an investee also needs to deter-
mine whether he/she acts as a principal or as an agent – does the investor exercise his 
power for its own benefit or on behalf of others (a concept sometimes referred to as 
‘fiduciary control’). An investor acting as an agent does not control an investee when 
it exercises decision-making rights delegated to it. Conversely, an investor should al-
ways consider whether another entity is acting as an agent for the investor, in which 
case the decision-making rights delegated to the agent are to be considered as held 
by the investor directly. This issue is particularly relevant to businesses such as ven-
ture capital firms and fund managers, as such entities often hold direct interests in 
an investee, along with additional holdings in funds managed on behalf of others.
In assessing control, it is also important to take into account the existence of 
potential voting rights, such as share warrants, share call options, debt or ­equity 
instruments that are convertible into ordinary shares, or other similar instru-
ments that have the potential, if exercised or converted, to provide the investor 
incremental voting power or reduce another party’s voting power with regard to 
the investee’s relevant activities.
IFRS 10 requires that consolidation of an investee starts from the date the in-
vestor obtains control of the investee and ceases when the investor loses control. 
IFRS 10 is applicable to all types of investee, including structured entities (the so-
called special purpose vehicles) and more conventional voting interest entities, to 
determine which are to be consolidated.
The essence of the accounting treatment is that the assets and liabilities of the 
holding company and its subsidiaries should be treated as though they were a 
single entity. The rationale is that, if the holding company controls the assets and 
liabilities of other companies, then the difference between the individual legal 
entities should be set aside and the economic whole should be treated as though 
it were a single company.
This means that instead of showing in the holding company’s statement of 
­financial position the amount invested in subsidiaries, we substitute the assets and 
liabilities of the subsidiary companies. In essence, this is simple enough, but it gives 
rise to certain problems where the holding company’s investment is different in 
Consolidation basics

Chapter 12  Consolidated financial statements
315
value to the net worth (net value of assets less liabilities) in the subsidiary, or where 
the holding company owns less than 100 per cent of the shares in the subsidiary.
We will illustrate the accounting solutions in a series of examples which will 
deal with the individual aspects of different situations and will concentrate on the 
balance sheet effects (and deal with the consolidated profit or loss later). First, let 
us look at the basic case, where the holding company’s (Holding) investment in 
the subsidiary (Sub) exactly coincides with the value of the net assets (or equity) 
in the subsidiary. This would happen where the holding company has formed a 
subsidiary and subscribed to the shares at par (i.e. paid the nominal value of the 
shares exactly).
In order to prepare consolidated financial statements the investment by the 
holding company is eliminated and replaced by the assets and liabilities of the 
subsidiary. In the example below, a parent company (Holding) has an investment 
of €25m in a subsidiary (Sub). This investment is represented by €30m of assets 
and €5m of current liabilities which are in Sub’s statement of financial position. 
For consolidation we put Sub’s assets and liabilities into Holding’s statement of 
­financial position to replace the investment asset. We look through the investment 
to the assets and liabilities it represents. In calculating consolidated statements of 
financial position this is usually done by putting the balance sheets alongside each 
other, eliminating the parent company’s investment against the subsidiary compa-
ny’s equity, and then adding the remaining balance sheet items across (see below).
Holding  
€m
Sub  
€m
Elimination 
€m
Group  
€m
Non-current tangible assets
100
20
—
120
Investment in subsidiary
25
—
(25)
—
Current assets
30
10
—
40
Total assets
155
30
(25)
160
Share capital
70
25
(25)
70
Retained earnings
30
—
—
30
100
25
(25)
100
Current liabilities
  15
5
—
20
Long-term liabilities
  40
—
—
40
Total equity and liabilities
155
30
(25)
160
The elimination column shows how the investment in Sub has been cancelled 
out against the net worth of the subsidiary (in this case entirely represented by 
the share capital of the subsidiary) and then the assets and liabilities have been 
added across – thus effectively substituting the assets and liabilities of Sub, which 
have a net value of €25m, for Holding’s investment in Sub of €25m. This kind 
of working paper is classic for consolidation – of course it lends itself easily to a 
computer spreadsheet application.
Presenting a financial picture of a group as if it were a single entity, also means 
that intra-group transactions and intra-group balances need to be eliminated 
(cancelled) as part of the consolidation process. For example, if one company 
within the group sells it products to another company of the same group, the 
seller will record the sale in its revenue and the same amount will end up in the 
cost of sales of the buyer. Moreover, if the invoice has not been paid yet, the buyer 

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
316
will have a trade payable and the seller a trade receivable in its statement of finan-
cial position. Another example would be where a parent company provides an 
interest-bearing loan to a subsidiary. In this case the parent will treat the loan as a 
financial investment with any interest received accounted for as income, whereas 
the subsidiary will show the loan as a financial liability and interest paid as a 
finance cost. From the point of view of the group as a single entity, these transac-
tions do not exist and have to be eliminated: intra-group balances at reporting 
date of receivables and liabilities will be eliminated in the consolidated statement 
of financial position and related income, expenses and profits in the consolidated 
statement of profit or loss (see more later in this chapter).
These consolidation basics have been further developed in a set of rules known 
as the acquisition method. The IFRS acquisition accounting rules are covered in 
IFRS 3, Business Combinations. These complement the IFRS consolidation require-
ments as found in IFRS 10, Consolidated Financial Statements.
The acquisition method (or purchase method of accounting) is the method to 
be used to account for a business combination, defined as an event in which an 
acquirer obtains control of another business (the acquiree). Because a business 
combination always subsumes an acquirer and an acquiree, it is accounted for 
as the acquisition (or purchase) of a set of net assets. Note that these net assets 
do not necessarily have to constitute a legal entity, but they have to represent an 
economically viable bundle of assets and related activities.
An essential element of a business combination is the transition of control (as 
defined in IFRS 10, Consolidated Financial Statements – see above). A business combi-
nation implies the transition of control over a business from one party to another, 
with the acquirer being the one who obtains control. The timing of the transition 
of control is also essential in establishing when exactly the acquisition takes place.
The core principle of IFRS 3 is that the acquirer of a business recognizes the as-
sets and liabilities of the acquired business at their fair values at acquisition date 
and discloses information that enable users to evaluate the nature and the finan-
cial effects of the acquisition. We will explain the main recognition and measure-
ment rules of the acquisition method building on a basic example.
Consolidation difference at acquisition date
The primary example of a business combination is the classic takeover, where 
one company buys the shares of another and takes over the management 
of the acquired company. From a consolidation perspective, this may lead to a 
technical issue when eliminating the acquisition cost of the shares in the par-
ent ­accounts. In the example above the value of the ‘investment in subsidiary’ 
in the parent company agreed with the initial capital of the subsidiary, because 
the parent started the subsidiary and supplied its share capital. However, when a 
company buys the shares of an existing company, it is usually paying the existing 
shareholders to hand over their shares – the money does not go to the acquired 
company and there is no link between the value of the investment as it appears 
in the parent’s statement of financial position and the book value of equity in the 
Acquisition method

Chapter 12  Consolidated financial statements
317
subsidiary. They will be different amounts, and that leaves us with a difference be-
tween the two which is a core issue in preparing consolidated financial statements.
STANDARDs
IFRS 3 – DEFINITION OF A BUSINESS (extract)
A business is an integrated set of activities and assets that is capable of be-
ing conducted and managed for the purpose of providing a return in the form 
of dividends, lower costs or other economic benefits directly to investors or 
other owners, members or participants.
Source: IFRS 3, Business Combinations
When one company takes over another, it usually pays a price for the shares 
which is related to its expectations of future profit potential and not to the book 
value of the shares. Consequently, the book value is usually different from the 
purchase price and an adjustment is required when preparing group financial 
statements to deal with this difference. It is known as consolidation difference, or 
goodwill arising on consolidation.
The acquiree’s equity value has to be assessed at acquisition date, including 
reserves and accumulated profits until that date. When a holding company buys 
another company which has accumulated reserves at the acquisition date, these 
reserves (even though they may be retained earnings within the subsidiary) are 
no longer available for distribution. They are known as pre-acquisition reserves and 
must be offset against the investment in the subsidiary in preparing the consoli-
dated financial statements.
In the following example, we have the statements of financial position of the 
Holding company and its subsidiary Sub at the acquisition date. Holding has paid 
€38m for 100 per cent of the shares in Sub whose net assets value (or equity 
value) is €25m. The consolidation adjustments are as follows:
Holding 
€m
Sub  
€m
Elimination 
€m
Group 
€m
Non-current tangible assets
100
20
—
120
Investment in subsidiary
38
—
(38)
Goodwill
—
—
13
13
Current assets
17
10
—
27
Total assets
155
30
(25)
160
Share capital
70
20
(20)
70
Retained earnings
30
5
(5)
30
100
25
(25)
100
Current liabilities
15
5
—
20
Long-term liabilities
40
—
—
40
Total equity and liabilities
155
30
(25)
160

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
318
Note that the €13m ‘goodwill’ figure is simply the difference between the 
investment in the subsidiary at its worth in the parent company’s financial 
statements and the carrying value of the equity of the subsidiary in its statement 
of financial position at the time of acquisition. Note also that the €5m of retained 
earnings included in equity at acquisition date are frozen for group accounting 
purposes at that moment as pre-acquisition reserves. Retained earnings 
generated later from profits of the subsidiary after acquisition will flow through 
to the consolidated statement of financial position and increase group retained 
earnings, but the €5m at the moment of acquisition will always disappear in the 
consolidation adjustment.
STANDARD PRACTICE
IFRS 3 – THE ACQUISITION METHOD (extracts)
	 4.	An entity shall account for each business combination by applying the 
acquisition method.
	 5.	Applying the acquisition method requires:
(a)	 identifying the acquirer;
(b)	 determining the acquisition date;
(c)	 recognizing and measuring the identifiable assets acquired, the liabili-
ties assumed and any non-controlling interest in the acquiree; and
(d)	 recognizing and measuring goodwill or a gain from a bargain purchase.
	 6.	For each business combination, one of the combining entities shall be 
identified as the acquirer.
	 8.	The acquirer shall identify the acquisition date, which is the date on which 
it obtains control of the acquiree.
	10.	As of the acquisition date, the acquirer shall recognize, separately from 
goodwill, the identifiable assets acquired, the liabilities assumed and any 
non-controlling interest in the acquiree. (. . .)
	18.	The acquirer shall measure the identifiable assets acquired and the liabili-
ties assumed at their acquisition-date fair values.
	32.	The acquirer shall recognize goodwill as of the acquisition date measured 
as the excess of (a) over (b) below:
(a)	 the aggregate of:
	
  (i)  the consideration transferred measured in accordance with this 
IFRS, which generally requires acquisition-date fair value;
	
 (ii)  the amount of any non-controlling interest in the acquiree mea-
sured in accordance with this IFRS; and
	
(iii)  in a business combination achieved in stages, the acquisition-
date fair value of the acquirer’s previously held equity interest in 
the acquiree.
(b)	 the net of the acquisition-date amounts of the identifiable assets acquired 
and the liabilities assumed measured in accordance with this IFRS.
Source: IFRS 3, Business Combinations

Chapter 12  Consolidated financial statements
319
Recognition and fair value adjustments of acquired 
assets and liabilities
At this stage of our basic example, we calculated goodwill based on the carrying 
value of the acquiree’s net assets as they figure in the individual financial state-
ments of the acquired company at acquisition date. IFRS 3 does however demand 
some preliminary adjusting of the acquiree’s net asset position before the con-
solidation process can effectively take place. When first preparing the accounts of 
the new subsidiary for consolidation, the parent must review the individual assets 
and liabilities of the acquired company and make two kinds of adjustment of the 
acquiree’s assets and liabilities:
	
1.	recognize any additional assets and liabilities that are not carried on the 
acquiree’s statement of financial position but represent economic substance 
to the acquirer (IFRS 3, par.10); and
	
2.	adjust the carrying amounts of the acquiree’s assets and liabilities to their 
fair value at acquisition date (IFRS 3, par.18).
Through these additional adjustments, parts of the consolidation difference that 
we determined in the previous section will be allocated to identifiable assets and 
liabilities of the acquired company.
Recognizing additional assets and liabilities
Part of the consolidation difference may relate to intangible assets, such as a 
brand name, a patent or a customer relationship, that the acquiree did not recog-
nize as assets in its financial statements because it developed them internally and 
charged the related costs to expense. Recognizing an additional intangible will, 
however, affect goodwill. For example, company Alfa pays €200m for company 
Beta whose book value of net assets at acquisition date is €100m. Company Beta 
has a single product, HHH, which is a household name. As a first approxima-
tion, the goodwill might be set at €100m. However, if Alfa recognizes the HHH 
brand as an asset in the consolidated statement of financial position at €75m, 
this means goodwill becomes €200m less net assets €100m less brand €75m or 
€25m. In determining whether, at the acquisition date, an item not previously 
recognized by the acquiree but deemed to have economic substance, has to be 
recognized as part of the business combination, one should first check whether 
the item meets the definitions of assets and liabilities in the IASB’s Conceptual 
Framework. For example, reorganization expenses that the acquirer expects to in-
cur in the future to effect its plan to exit an activity of an acquiree or to terminate 
the employment of or relocate employees, is a typical item that tends to pop up 
in acquisitions. However, if the acquirer is not obliged to incur such reorganiza-
tion expenses, there is no present obligation at acquisition date and thus no extra 
liability. Therefore, the acquirer cannot recognize those expected costs as an ad-
ditional reorganization provision in the business combination.
Adjusting acquired assets and liabilities to their  
‘fair value’ at acquisition date
What this remeasurement requirement means is that the bundle of acquired 
assets and liabilities is valued as at the date of the takeover, and that only the 

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
320
remaining difference between the revalued identifiable net assets and the in-
vestment by the parent will finally be accounted for as goodwill. The rationale 
for revaluing the acquired assets and liabilities is that they are being purchased 
by the new parent company and historical cost, viewed from the parent, runs from the 
date the parent acquired them, not the date at which they were acquired by  
the company which the parent has acquired. This seems perfectly reasonable. Re-
call that fair value is a concept near to market value.
Note that both kinds of consolidation adjustment can only appear in the con-
solidated financial statements; they are not entered into the accounting records of 
the subsidiary. This means that they have to be reassessed and re-entered when-
ever after the acquisition subsequent consolidated financial statements are pre-
pared. Moreover, some of these adjustments need a close follow-up in time. For 
example, if a new intangible with a useful life of five years has been recognized as 
part of the business combination, the intangible (existing only in the consolida-
tion files) has to be amortized over its useful life, with the periodic amortization 
expense to be accounted for as an extra consolidation adjustment. As another 
example, assume that one of the fair value adjustments relates to a depreciating 
tangible asset (like PP&E). In the post-acquisition period the depreciation of the 
acquired tangible asset must be based on its fair value at acquisition date. How-
ever, in the subsidiary’s own (individual) financial statements, depreciation will 
go on based on the original historical cost of the asset. So, in the consolidation 
files both the fair value adjustment and a fair value depreciation adjustment are 
required.
To pursue the mechanics of this with our basic example, let us assume that the 
consolidation adjustments at acquisition date involve recognizing an intangible 
asset worth €8m and increasing the value of the non-current tangible assets to a 
fair value of €22m. This would give the adjustments shown below.
Book value  
of Sub  
€m
Adjustment 
€m
Fair value  
balance sheet  
€m
Non-current assets
– intangible
—
8
8
– tangible
20
2
22
Current assets
10
—
10
Total assets
30
10
40
Share capital
20
—
20
Retained earnings
5
10
15
25
10
35
Current liabilities
5
—
5
Total equity and liabilities
30
10
40
When the revised figures are built into the consolidated financial statements 
with the holding company, this will give rise to an adjusted goodwill value. It 
is this figure that will finally end up in the consolidated financial statements as 
goodwill.

Chapter 12  Consolidated financial statements
321
Holding  
€m
Revised  
Sub €m
Elimination  
€m
Group 
€m
Non-current assets
– goodwill
—
—
3
3
– other intangibles
—
8
—
8
– tangible
100
22
—
122
Investment in subsidiary
38
—
(38)
—
Current assets
17
10
—
27
Total assets
155
40
(35)
160
Share capital
70
20
(20)
70
Retained earnings
30
15
(15)
30
100
35
(35)
100
Current liabilities
15
5
—
20
Long-term liabilities
40
—
—
40
Total equity and liabilities
155
40
(35)
160
Being a residual, the question remains as to whether the goodwill figure can really 
be regarded as an asset (i.e. does it meet the definition of an asset and the generic 
recognition criteria?) and, if it is an asset, whether it should be systematically 
depreciated or periodically tested for impairment. One could even take the view 
that there is no relationship between the cost of the investment (the cost which 
the new parent incurred in buying the subsidiary) and the accounting value of 
the subsidiary, so that goodwill is a meaningless figure. It is almost as though 
you said the distance from Zurich to Vienna is 600 kilometres, while the distance 
from Zurich to Geneva is 400 kilometres, so what is the difference of 200? What-
ever it may be, it is not the distance between Geneva and Vienna. If goodwill is 
just a meaningless difference, then it should be labelled as such in the statement 
of financial position, perhaps, and left alone.
However, the standard rationale for accounting for goodwill is that the pur-
chase price of the new subsidiary’s shares represents the cost of acquiring a bundle 
of assets and liabilities. This cost should be allocated over all identifiable assets 
acquired and liabilities assumed and, if there is an excess, this is goodwill and 
represents ‘intangible’ assets such as know-how, client goodwill, etc. to which no 
accounting value can be reliably attributed. In this vein, IFRS 3, Business Combina-
tions, defines goodwill as future economic benefits arising from the acquired assets 
that are not capable of being individually identified and separately recognized. 
Its value stems mainly from the synergies of the net assets of the acquiree and 
from the expected synergies and other benefits from combining the net assets of 
the acquired company with those of the acquirer. This ‘core goodwill’ represents 
resources from which future economic benefits are expected to flow to the entity.
The second question is whether, having identified goodwill as an intangible as-
set, it should be subject to a systematic amortization scheme or to a periodic im-
pairment test. Initially, IFRS opted for an amortization approach, with acquired 
goodwill to be amortized on a systematic basis over the best estimate of its useful 
Goodwill and its subsequent measurement

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
322
life. There was a rebuttable presumption that its useful life did not exceed 20 
years from initial recognition. However, systematic amortization of goodwill has 
been an annoying accounting rule for companies with an aggressive acquisition 
strategy. Clearly, if goodwill is capitalized and amortized, an aggressive company 
will find that its measured profits from an acquisition are being reduced by the 
amortization charge. This is not popular with managements who are trying to 
justify a takeover by showing enhanced profitability (research into takeovers actu-
ally shows that practically all acquirers pay too much money and the people who 
gain most are the original shareholders in the acquired company). The amorti-
zation approach has the advantage of being a well-understood practice, due to 
its simplicity and transparency but, on the other hand, it has the awkward side-
effect of creating too much rigidity in subsequent accounting for the effects of 
goodwill on profit or loss.
IFRS 3, Business Combinations, abandoned the amortization requirements and 
introduced an impairment approach – goodwill is to be tested for impairment 
annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that 
it might be impaired. Consequently, goodwill is measured at cost less any accu-
mulated impairment losses. Note, however, that the Seventh EC Company Law 
Directive and related national GAAP have not been affected by these changes and 
still require goodwill to be amortized over its useful life.
The impairment approach for goodwill introduces quite a fastidious and recur-
rent impairment testing process. We introduced impairment testing in Chapter 6. 
Under IFRS, impairment testing requirements are covered by IAS 36, Impairment 
of Assets. They call for a comparison of the carrying value of the asset with its 
recoverable amount. Where the carrying amount of the asset is higher than its 
recoverable amount, the asset is impaired. Because goodwill, by its nature, does 
not generate cash flows independently from other assets or groups of assets, the 
recoverable amount has to be determined at the level of the cash-generating unit 
(CGU) to which it belongs. This means that goodwill should first be allocated to 
particular CGUs. If this cannot be done on a consistent and reasonable basis, the 
goodwill will be identified with a group of CGUs. The goodwill will then be part 
of the total carrying amount of the group of CGUs, which will be compared with 
the recoverable amount at the same organizational level. An impairment charge 
should be recognized if the carrying value (including the allocated goodwill) is 
higher than the recoverable amount of the group of CGUs. An impairment charge 
calculated at the CGU level will first be allocated to the goodwill associated with 
the CGU (or group of CGUs) and, second, to the other non-monetary assets exist-
ing at that level in proportion to their carrying amounts.
For example, a CGU for which the recoverable amount has been estimated at 
€48m, comprises the following (allocated) assets:
Carrying value  
€m
Goodwill
10
Property
40
Plant and equipment
20
70

Chapter 12  Consolidated financial statements
323
After impairment testing the net carrying values of these assets will become:
Goodwill  
€m
Property  
€m
Plant and  
equipment  
€m
Total  
€m
Carrying value before impairment
10
40
20
70
Impairment loss
(10)
(8)
(4)
(22)
Carrying value after impairment
0
32
16
48
The impairment loss of €22m (i.e. the difference between the recoverable amount 
of the CGU and its carrying value) is first allocated to goodwill (reduced to zero) 
and next to the carrying amount of the other assets pro rata the relative carrying 
value of each asset. The reductions in the carrying amount of the individual assets 
is treated as an impairment loss. However, the carrying amount of any individual 
asset should not be reduced below the highest of its fair value less costs to sell, its 
value in use and zero. If this is the case for an individual asset, the impairment 
loss not allocated to the individual asset will be allocated on a pro rata basis to 
the other assets of the CGU.
The costs of such impairment reviews are likely to be high compared to a rel-
atively straightforward amortization procedure. Especially determining the re-
coverable amount and, more specifically, the value in use of a CGU may be an 
extensive and time-consuming exercise. While the amortization method is quite 
successful in targeting the acquired goodwill and making management account-
able for its expenditures on goodwill, the impairment-only method is more a 
valuation approach rather than an accountability approach. The impairment ap-
proach is arguably inconsistent with IAS 38’s general position that internally gen-
erated goodwill should not be recognized. Across the impairment test, it will be 
quite impossible to separate the acquired goodwill from the internally generated 
goodwill of the acquiring company at the acquisition date and from the internal 
goodwill of the business combination built up after the acquisition date. Also, 
acquired activities are often reorganized and combined into existing activities of 
the acquiring company, making any distinction difficult. If a clean separation is 
not possible, different kinds of goodwill will be mixed, probably leading to cush-
ions against recognizing impairment losses that have in fact occurred in respect 
of the acquired goodwill. If the consumption of the acquired goodwill is not ac-
counted for, this engenders a situation where in fact internally generated good-
will is recognized as an asset up to the amount of the initially recognized acquired 
goodwill. Moreover, if a business combination is so successful that the recover-
able amount of a CGU to which goodwill has been allocated continues to exceed 
its carrying amount, the goodwill allocated to that unit will continue indefinitely 
to be recognized at its fair value at the acquisition date.
On the other hand, if the impairment test of goodwill proves positive, the im-
pact of the impairment on the consolidated statement of profit or loss has to be 
taken at once. At the time of the bursting of the Internet bubble, some groups 
had to take massive write-offs. After impairment testing of the goodwill that had 
arisen when AOL and Time Warner combined, the company had to take a $100 
billion impairment loss against its goodwill account, basically admitting that the 
acquisition had been severely overpriced and that AOL had nearly no value.

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
324
In preparing our consolidations so far we have used an example where the holding com-
pany owns 100 per cent of the shares of its subsidiary (company Sub). Although this is 
often the case, it is not always so – companies may sometimes have less than 100 per 
cent of the shares in the subsidiary. The reason might be political: in some foreign coun-
tries the government insists that where a multinational wishes to set up a local opera-
tion it should be done in partnership with either the foreign government or with local 
business people. Another reason might be operational – the company wishes to work 
in partnership with someone else in order to have access to their technical expertise etc.
As far as accounting treatment goes, ownership of less than 100 per cent of the 
shares presents a problem. If the basic idea is to present an economic picture which 
gives an overview of the group activities, consolidating 60 per cent of a factory 
where one owns 60 per cent of the company which runs it, does not really give the 
whole picture. Showing that the factory is part of the group but is financed in part 
by outside shareholders gives a more complete picture of the situation.
The accounting standards take the view that where a company has control of 
another, then it has effective control of all the assets and liabilities, even though 
the ownership of some part of the company is in other hands. Accordingly, the 
procedure is that the holding company consolidates all the assets and liabilities, 
but acknowledges the outside interest with a separate component of group ­equity, 
called non-controlling interest or minority interest.
But then the question pops up whether the non-controlling interest should af-
fect goodwill or not. In this respect, IFRS 3, Business Combinations, allows two al-
ternatives: the ‘partial goodwill’ method and the ‘full goodwill’ method. Under the 
partial goodwill method, the non-controlling interest is recognized at its share of 
the identifiable net assets and does not include any goodwill. The non-controlling 
interest isv recorded by reference to its share of the fair value of the assets and liabili-
ties of the acquired entity at acquisition date. If any recognition or fair value adjust-
ments are booked in the consolidation process, the non-controlling interest takes 
part in these adjustments. On the other hand, the full goodwill method will recog-
nize goodwill for the non-controlling interest in a subsidiary as well as the control-
ling interest. The full goodwill method implies that the non-controlling interest and 
the goodwill are both increased by the goodwill that relates to the non-controlling 
interest.
Let us first apply the partial goodwill method (which has been the standard 
method in the past). Assuming that the acquiring company L had bought only 80 
per cent of the subsidiary M, paying €600 000 and no additional fair value adjust-
ments, the consolidation would be:
Pre-acquisition equity in the subsidiary is worth €400 000, so L company’s share 
is €320 000 (80 per cent) and the non-controlling interest is worth €80 000 (20 per 
cent), based on the split of share ownership. L company actually paid €600 000, 
so it must recognize goodwill of €280 000 (€600K – €320K). In the consolidation 
adjustments we cancel the pre-acquisition equity of M company as usual, but 
the counter-adjustment is to create a new line called non-controlling interest of 
€80 000, as well as offsetting L’s part of the equity against its investment.
Under the full goodwill method, one would add the difference between the fair 
value (at acquisition date) of the non-controlling interest and the amount estab-
lished under the partial goodwill method to goodwill and to the value of the 
Non-controlling interest

Chapter 12  Consolidated financial statements
325
non-controlling interest. Measuring the non-controlling interest at fair value may 
prove difficult in practice. It does not suffice to extrapolate partial goodwill to 
100 per cent of the outstanding shares, as the fair value of the controlling interest 
usually includes a control premium whereas the fair value of the minority interest 
does not. Sometimes an acquirer will be able to measure it on the basis of active 
market prices for the equity shares not held by the acquirer. In other situations, 
however, an active market price for the equity shares will not be available and 
other valuation techniques will have to be used.
Note that under US GAAP, the non-controlling interest must always be mea-
sured at fair value, and full goodwill is always recognized.
STANDARDs
IIFRS 3 – BUSINESS COMBINATIONS (extract)
Non-controlling interest: the equity in a subsidiary not attributable, directly or 
indirectly, to a parent.
Source: IFRS 3, Business Combinations
We have so far concentrated primarily on the statement of financial position, 
since this is perhaps the more difficult aspect of consolidated financial statements 
to understand, but the consolidated statement of profit or loss (consolidated in-
come statement/consolidated profit and loss account) also has its own technical 
challenges. You will have seen that the consolidated statement of profit or loss 
includes charges such as depreciation of fair value adjustments or impairment 
Consolidated statement of profit or loss
L Co. 
€’000
M Co. 
€’000
Elimination 
€’000
Group 
€’000
Goodwill
—
—
280
280
Non-current tangible assets
1 200
300
—
1 500
Investment in M
600
—
(600)
—
Current assets
550
225
—
775
Total assets
2 350
525
(320)
2 555
Share capital
800
300
(300)
800
Retained earnings
1 150
100
(100)
1 150
Non-controlling interest
80
80
1 950
400
(320)
2 030
Current liabilities
200
125
—
325
Long-term liabilities
200
—
—
200
Total equity and liabilities
2 350
525
(320)
2 555

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
326
losses on goodwill which do not appear in the financial statements of the indi-
vidual companies which make up the group. At the same time, the consolidated 
statement of profit or loss excludes a number of expenses and revenues which 
are to be found in the individual companies – essentially all those which involve 
trading with another group company.
Most groups have quite a large number of transactions which are with other 
members of the same group. If these were not eliminated, the consolidated finan-
cial statements would potentially include the same transaction many times over. 
Imagine a vertically integrated company which grows cocoa beans in subsidiary 
A, manufactures chocolate in subsidiary B and then sells this through wholesaler 
C in another country. You might have the following figures:
Expenses
Revenue
Profit
Subsidiary A
Expenses
1 200
—
—
Sales to B
—
1500
—
Profit
—
—
300
Subsidiary B
Purchases from A
1 500
—
—
Other expenses
5 000
—
—
Sales to C
—
7500
—
Profit
—
—
1 000
Subsidiary C
Purchases from B
7 500
—
—
Other expenses
500
—
—
Sales to retailers
—
8500
—
Profit
—
—
500
Totals
15 700
17 500
1 800
If you aggregate the figures, you will have a consolidated statement of profit or 
loss like this:
Revenue
17 500
Expenses
15 700
Profit
1 800
However, a large part of the revenue and the expenses are within the group and 
are double counted:
Sales from A to B
1 500
Sales from B to C
7 500
Total
9 000
These appear both in the aggregate expenses and the aggregate revenue, so are 
artificial from the perspective of the group as a single economic entity. Had the 

Chapter 12  Consolidated financial statements
327
group been a single legal entity, the internal transactions would have no mean-
ing. It is only the external transactions which should be retained in the consoli-
dated statement of profit or loss. This should be:
Revenue (outside the group)
8 500
Expenses (outside the group)
6 700
Profit
1 800
Notice that this does not change the profit, just the revenue and expenses. From the 
perspective of an outsider, the internal transactions have no meaning and result in 
a false set of figures. For example, the profit margin before eliminations would be:
Profit
1 800
Sales
17 500
Margin
10.3 per cent
After elimination of intra-group transactions:
Profit
1 800
Sales
8 500
Margin
21.2 per cent
The intra-group transactions only exist because of the group structure, and they 
cause the double-counting problem. If they were not eliminated, they would mis-
lead investors (some famous frauds have been engineered this way) and analysts 
would have difficulty comparing figures between groups.
Note that for the financial statements of the individual companies the revenue 
and expenses are valid and for tax purposes, the profits are still dealt with as part 
of the individual companies. Subsidiary A would be taxed on 300, subsidiary B on 
1000 and subsidiary C on 500, which is a factor we shall come back to in relation 
to taxation of groups later (see Chapter 15).
You can see that the group financial accounting system must be able to distin-
guish between transactions with fellow subsidiaries and transactions with outside 
parties, so that the internal transactions can be included in the individual com-
pany accounts but excluded from the group financial statements.
Another adjustment which should be made is to ensure that the account-
ing policies used for the consolidated financial statements are reflected in the 
financial statements of the individual companies which make up the group – 
the consistency principle applies to group financial statements. When a group 
has subsidiaries in different countries, they will be subject to different tax rules, 
which may in turn influence policies such as depreciation or provisions. Equally, 
all the subsidiaries in the same country may not necessarily follow the same rules, 
although they usually do. This sometimes results in a situation where, in the con-
solidation process, the depreciation rates and other aspects of measurement in 

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
328
individual companies have to be adjusted so that the same accounting principles 
are applied consistently throughout the group. To keep this process as simple as 
possible and ensure comparable figures for management purposes throughout the 
group, some companies apply uniform accounting rules worldwide, and then pre-
pare local variants for tax purposes.
In broad terms, the preparation of the consolidated financial statements 
(which can be done on a spreadsheet) involves the stages shown in Figure 12.2.
Adjust recognition criteria and measurements in individual financial statements
of subsidiaries to uniform principles
Aggregation of financial statements of all subsidiaries
Recognition and fair value adjustments on first consolidation
Remove investment in subsidiaries and equity of subsidiaries
Identify goodwill and non-controlling interest
Follow-up of recognition and fair value adjustments on first consolidation
Deduct impairment losses on goodwill
Remove intra-group balances and intra-group transactions
Consolidated financial statements
The accounting principles used in the consolidated financial statements are tra-
ditionally those of the parent company. This aligns with the idea that the consoli-
dated financial statements have the effect of treating all transactions as though 
they have been carried out within the parent. However, the influence of taxation 
and the pressure to align group accounting on the principles used in the major 
financial markets means that in many countries a multinational may in fact draw 
up the consolidated financial statements on principles different to those used in 
the parent; in that case the measurement adjustments (‘restatement’ of figures 
Figure 12.2
Process of 
preparing 
consolidated 
financial 
statements

Chapter 12  Consolidated financial statements
329
in the jargon) may be substantial and sophisticated information systems are  
required to permit the collection of the necessary data.
At the beginning of the chapter we pointed out that there are different kinds 
of relationship possible between an investor and a company it has invested in 
(the investee). The different types of inter-company relationship are presented in 
­Figure 12.3. Accounting regulation recognizes three different categories:
	
1.	The investor has a ‘controlling’ or dominant influence: i.e. the investor can 
dictate the strategy of the investee, appoint its management and so on. In 
this situation, the investee is consolidated, as we have just examined.
	
2.	The investor is not able to determine strategy, but has significant  
influence: i.e. the investor’s views are considered in determining the  
investee’s strategy. This could, for example, be effected through  
representation on the investee’s board of directors
	
3.	The investor is not able to determine strategy and has no influence 
whatsoever.
Type of inter-company
relationship
Amount of
voting rights
Qualiﬁcation of
shareholdings
1
Control
> 50% 
Subsidiary 
2
Signiﬁcant inﬂuence 
≥ 20%
Associated company 
3
No real inﬂuence 
< 20%
Financial investment
The second column of Figure 12.3 indicates the relative amount of voting rights 
which are presumed to lead to a specific type of inter-company relationship. It 
should be noted, however, that the distinctions between these categories are not 
always very clear cut, and depend a lot on the surrounding circumstances. As 
we have discussed, a shareholding representing 40 per cent of the outstanding 
voting rights could put the investor in a dominant position if there are no other 
major concentrations of ownership. However, it would be more likely to put the 
company in a position of significant influence. It could even leave the company 
with no influence – for example, in 1999 LVMH, the French luxury goods com-
pany, made a contested takeover bid for Gucci. The bid was foiled by concerted 
action by the other shareholders which eventually left LVMH with a large minor-
ity holding but no participation whatsoever in the management of the company.
The type of relationship between the investor and the investee will determine 
the way the shareholdings are accounted for in the investor’s financial state-
ments. The link between the type of inter-company relationship and the account-
ing method used is documented in Figure 12.4.
Associates and joint arrangements
Figure 12.3
Inter-company 
relationships

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
330
Type of inter-company
relationship
Qualiﬁcation of 
shareholdings
Accounting method
1
Control
Subsidiary 
2
Signiﬁcant inﬂuence 
Associated company 
3
No real inﬂuence 
Financial investment
Full consolidation/
Acqusition method
Equity method
Fair value (or at cost)
The case of a financial investment where the investor has no real influence is the 
easiest to account for, although the accounting treatment can be different accord-
ing to the applicable accounting regime.
	
n	 Under IFRS, these investments are treated as financial instruments and 
measured at fair value. IAS 39, Financial Instruments: Recognition and Mea-
surement, covers the appropriate accounting rules. The effect on income 
of measuring these investments at fair value will depend on how they 
are classified. If they are classified as ‘held for trading’ (or if the company 
elects to generically designate the investments on initial recognition at 
fair value through profit and loss), the changes in fair value are recog-
nized in profit or loss in the period in which they occur. Classification as 
‘available for sale’ would result in recognizing the changes in fair value 
directly in equity, through the statement of changes in equity, until  
the financial asset is derecognized, at which time the cumulative gain 
or loss previously recognized in equity should be recognized in profit  
or loss.
COMPANY REPORT
ROCHE GROUP
Associated companies (extract)
Investments in associates are accounted for using the equity method. These 
are companies over which the Group exercises, or has the power to exercise, 
significant influence, but which it does not control. This is normally evidenced 
when the Group owns 20 per cent or more of the voting rights or currently exer-
cisable potential voting rights of the company. Balances and transactions with 
associates that result in unrealized income are eliminated to the extent of the 
Group’s interest in the associate.
Source: Roche Group, Annual Report, 2011
	
n	 The Seventh EC Company Law Directive still endorses the cost method 
for investments without significant influence, whereby the financial as-
set is held in the investor’s books at historical cost. If its current value falls 
­below historical cost, then the investment should be written down (and the 
­expense would normally appear in the financial result part of the statement 
Figure 12.4
Inter-company 
relationship 
and accounting 
consequences

Chapter 12  Consolidated financial statements
331
of profit or loss). In some jurisdictions, if the current value exceeds  
historical cost, this information would be disclosed as a note to the 
­accounts. If the investor receives a dividend from the investee company, 
then this is treated as financial income.
The case of associated companies where the investor has ‘significant influence’ 
over the investee, has historically been more controversial with regard to its ac-
counting consequences. For example, suppose you are a French company that 
sells bottled non-alcoholic beverages and you want to expand in Russia. The mar-
ket is difficult, the risk high, so you decide to go into a joint venture with another 
soft drink company and a Russian entrepreneur. You each take a one-third stake 
in a new bottling plant in Moscow which will be managed by the Russian partner 
with technical assistance from the two multinational partners. How is this going 
to appear in your consolidated financial statements?
Since you do not own or run the plant, it will not be consolidated. On the 
other hand, you have a significant input into the decision-making and a signifi-
cant investment which impacts upon the future expansion of your company in 
that market. You could certainly just treat the investment as a financial asset, but 
this does not convey the much closer economic relationship you have in it. What 
can you do?
Essentially, there are two basic methods, known as the equity method and 
the proportionate consolidation method. Under the equity method, the investor 
shows its investment in its consolidated financial statements at the accounting 
value of that investment in the investee’s books. If, for example, the investor has 
25 per cent of the shares in the investee, it shows that investment at 25 per cent 
of the book value of equity in the investee’s financial statements and not at his-
torical cost to the investor or at fair value. Under the proportional consolidation 
method, the investor takes a proportion of all assets and liabilities of the investee 
into the consolidated financial statements.
These two different approaches are probably best understood through a de-
tailed example. Suppose that company A buys 20 per cent of company C, whose 
statement of financial position at the moment of acquisition is as follows:
€m
Assets
Non-current tangible assets
Current assets
600
300
Total assets
900
Financing
Shares
Retained earnings
400
  50
450
Debt
Payables
250
200
Total equity and liabilities
900

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
332
The book value of C’s equity in C’s accounting records is €450m; A owns 20 per 
cent of that, which is therefore worth (450 × 0.2 5 ) €90m. Under the equity 
method, the investment in C which appears in A’s consolidated financial state-
ments should therefore be €90m, and any difference between that and the his-
torical cost of the investment is considered as goodwill. The adjustments to bring 
C into A’s consolidated financial statements at equity value would be as follows:
Company A
Company C
Group
Assets
Goodwill
—
160
60
Non-current tangible assets
1 050
—
1 050
Cost of investment in C
150
2150
—
Equity value of investment in C
—
190
90
Current assets
420
—
420
Total assets
1 620
—
1 620
Financing
—
Shares
300
—
300
Retained earnings
420
—
420
720
—
720
Debt
600
—
600
Payables
300
—
300
Total equity and liabilities
1 620
—
1 620
Again, under IFRS, the goodwill should be reviewed for impairment in the normal 
way. On subsequent consolidations, the book value of C would normally have 
changed, and all changes must also be reflected in the A’s financial statements. So 
if, for example, C made a net profit of €50m in the year after A had acquired its 20 
per cent stake, A would show ‘income from associates’ of €10m as a separate line 
item in its statement of profit or loss and would increase the carrying value of its 
investment in C in its statement of financial position by €10m. Any subsequent 
dividend would decrease the carrying value and increase cash at bank.
If, on the other hand, C were dealt with on a proportional basis, the consolida-
tion would look like this:
Company A
Company C 
(20%)
Adjust
Group
Assets
Goodwill
—
—
160
60
Non-current tangible assets
1 050
120
—
1 170
Cost of investment in C
150
—
150
—
Current assets
420
60
—
480
Total assets
1 620
180
–90
1 710

Chapter 12  Consolidated financial statements
333
Financing
Shares
300
80
–80
300
Retained earnings
420
10
–10
420
720
90
–90
720
Debt
600
50
—
650
Payables
300
40
—
340
Total equity and liabilities
1 620
180
290
1 710
Under the proportionate consolidation method, a part of the underlying assets 
and liabilities of C appears in A’s statement of financial position, as in a normal 
consolidation, and in future years any profits or losses post-acquisition will flow 
through to the consolidated statement of profit or loss.
Both methods have their critics. Critics of the equity method point out that 
only the book value of the equity is shown, and this may conceal a company 
which is heavily indebted. Indeed, associated companies have been used as a 
means of shifting debt off the main balance sheet. In addition, the method in-
volves recognizing income from the associated company which has not been paid 
to the investor and over which the investor does not exercise control – something 
an analyst would be wary of (see ‘quality of earnings’ in Chapter 17). Critics of 
proportionate consolidation, on the other hand, say that a mathematical fraction 
of assets and liabilities has no economic significance – an investor cannot sell  
20 per cent of a factory in case of difficulty, for example – and that the resulting 
consolidation is meaningless.
It is clearly a difficult issue because the relationship between the investor  
and its investment may be highly significant (e.g. the investors in a joint  
venture may draw significant economic benefit from that relationship but none 
has a majority holding) and should therefore not be missing from the group 
­financial statements. From an analyst’s perspective, the equity method is easier to 
decode because profits and losses are separately identified (‘income from associ-
ates’) in published financial statements and can therefore be considered on their 
own merits in relation to the particular company. Evaluating the effect of propor-
tionate consolidation on the financial statements is not usually possible.
STANDARDs
IAS 28 – INVESTMENTS IN ASSOCIATES AND JOINT VENTURES 
(extracts)
Significant influence
	 5.	If an entity holds, directly or indirectly (e.g. through subsidiaries), 20 per 
cent or more of the voting power of the investee, it is presumed that the 
entity has significant influence, unless it can be clearly demonstrated that 
this is not the case. Conversely, if the entity holds, directly or indirectly 
(e.g. through subsidiaries), less than 20 per cent of the voting power of 

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
334
IFRS, however, does not leave a choice and requires the use of the equity 
method for associated companies. The corresponding accounting rules are cov-
ered by IAS 28, Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures. Associated companies 
are defined as those where the investor has ‘significant influence’, which is as-
sumed to be the  case where the investor holds at least 20 per cent of the voting 
rights of the investee. However, the IASB also has a standard which specifically 
addresses joint ventures – IFRS 11, Joint Arrangements – and the provisions of that 
intersect with those for associates.
Joint arrangements
The IASB defines a joint arrangement as ‘an arrangement of which two or more 
parties have joint control’ (IFRS 11, par.4). The parties involved are bound by a 
contractual agreement that provides joint control of the arrangement to two or 
more of those parties. Joint control is ‘the contractually agreed sharing of control 
of an arrangement, which exists only when decisions about the relevant activities 
require the unanimous consent of the parties sharing control’ (IFRS 11, par.7). 
Joint arrangements are quite common in companies operating in the extractive 
industries, property and construction sectors. This might be the case, for exam-
ple, where two or three oil companies build a pipeline for shared use.
Joint arrangements take many different forms and structures. IFRS 11, Joint  
Arrangements, recognizes two kinds of joint arrangement:
	
1.	Joint operations. A joint operation is a joint arrangement whereby the par-
ties that have joint control of the arrangement (i.e. joint operators) have 
rights to the assets, and obligations for the liabilities, relating to the ar-
rangement. Here the joint operators each devote certain assets (and related 
liabilities) to a joint exploitation but retain direct ownership of those assets 
and liabilities. In most cases no special legal vehicle is created. Revenues 
from the sale of the joint product and any expenses incurred in common, 
are usually split – for example, when two airlines both operate on the same 
route and agree to share revenues. A joint operator recognizes and measures 
the investee, it is presumed that the investor does not have significant in-
fluence, unless such influence can be clearly demonstrated. A substantial 
or majority ownership by another investor does not necessarily preclude 
an investor from having significant influence.
	 6.	The existence of significant influence by an entity is usually evidenced in 
one or more of the following ways:
(a)	 representation on the board of directors or equivalent governing 
body of the investee;
(b)	participation in policy-making processes, including participation in 
decisions about dividends or other distributions;
(c)	 material transactions between the investor and the investee;
(d)	interchange of managerial personnel; or
(e)	 provision of essential technical information.
Source: IAS 28, Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures

Chapter 12  Consolidated financial statements
335
the assets and liabilities (and the related revenues and expenses) in relation 
to its interest in the arrangement in accordance with relevant IFRS appli-
cable to the particular assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses.
	
2.	Joint ventures. A joint venture is a joint arrangement whereby the parties 
that have joint control of the arrangement (i.e. joint venturers) have 
rights to the net assets of the arrangement. Joint ventures are usually 
structured through a legal entity. But the existence of a legal structure in a 
joint arrangement does not automatically means that it qualifies as a joint 
venture. They will have to be assessed to determine whether the ventur-
ers’ rights and exposures are to the entity’s net assets, or to its underlying 
(gross) assets and liabilities. The latter category will be classified as joint  
operations because this better reflects the economic substance of the  
arrangement. A joint venture intersects with associates – a company or 
other legal vehicle is created, the venturers make investments in this  
entity which in turn owns assets and undertakes operations. A joint  
venturer recognizes its investment in a joint venture and accounts for it 
using the equity method. IFRS 11 does no longer allow the option of using 
proportionate consolidation for joint ventures as in the former IASB rules.
IFRS 12, Disclosure of Interests in Other Entities, specifies minimum disclosures with 
regard to interests in subsidiaries, joint arrangements, associates and unconsoli-
dated structured entities. The required disclosures aim to provide information in 
order to enable users to evaluate (1) the nature of, and risks associated with the 
reporting entity’s interests in other entities, and (2) the effects of those interests 
on the group’s financial position, financial performance and cash flows.
Special attention will go to structured entities (or special purpose vehicles – see 
also extract from standard below). It should be clear what a structured entity is in 
the context of the operations of the group and how judgement is applied in assess-
ing whether the group is ‘involved’ with a structured entity. Material involvement 
in structured entities may broaden the transactions and relationships to which the 
disclosures may apply, especially for those who sponsor, or perhaps even transact 
with, but do not consider to have control over the structured entities.
Disclosure requirements
STANDARDs
IFRS 12 – DISCLOSURE OF INTERESTS IN OTHER  
ENTITIES (extracts)
Structured entities
B21 A structured entity is an entity that has been designed so that voting or 
similar rights are not the dominant factor in deciding who controls the entity, 
such as when any voting rights relate to administrative tasks only and the rel-
evant activities are directed by means of contractual arrangements.
B22 A structured entity often has some or all of the following features or 
attributes:

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
336
Summary
In this chapter we have reviewed the techniques of preparing consolidated or 
group financial statements. A core theme is the determination, and measure-
ment of goodwill arising on consolidation, with related issues such as the bring-
ing into the statement of financial position of intangibles such as brands which 
are typically missing from individual company balance sheets, the fair valuing 
of newly acquired assets and liabilities and the incorporation of non-controlling 
interests. We have noted the necessity of removing transactions within the 
group since these will distort performance figures and ratios and the necessity 
of ensuring that accounting policies are harmonized. The consolidated finan-
cial statements give a wider economic picture than separate company financial 
statements. The financial statements of a single subsidiary of a group are always 
open to distortion.
Group structures may also include associated companies, joint arrangements 
and financial investments without significant influence. These types of invest-
ment require a different kind of accounting treatment to subsidiaries which are 
under control of a group’s parent company.
(a)	 restricted activities.
(b)	a narrow and well-defined objective, such as to effect a tax-efficient 
lease, carry out research and development activities, provide a source 
of capital or funding to an entity or provide investment opportunities for 
investors by passing on risks and rewards associated with the assets of 
the structured entity to investors.
(c)	 insufficient equity to permit the structured entity to finance its activities 
without subordinated financial support.
(d)	financing in the form of multiple contractually linked instruments to in-
vestors that create concentrations of credit or other risks (tranches).
B23 Examples of entities that are regarded as structured entities include, but 
are not limited to:
(a)	 securitization vehicles.
(b)	asset-backed financings.
(c)	 some investment funds.
B24 An entity that is controlled by voting rights is not a structured entity sim-
ply because, for example, it receives funding from third parties following a 
restructuring.
Source: IFRS 12, Disclosure of Interests in Other Entities

Chapter 12  Consolidated financial statements
337
Discussion questions
1.	 Discuss the differences of the concepts of company, business and business 
combination within the context of IFRS 3.
2.	 Does a controlling interest always imply majority ownership? Does one need 
to know the exact level of a ownership in a subsidiary in order to prepare 
consolidated financial statements?
3.	 In order to account for investments in other companies it is common to 
distinguish different degrees of ownership or influence. Describe these and 
explain the reasoning for the distinctions made. What are the related ac-
counting consequences?
4.	 At acquisition date, the net assets of the acquired subsidiary are included 
in the consolidated financial statements at their acquisition date fair value. 
However, most of the parent’s assets and liabilities are measured on an his-
torical cost basis. Is this consistent?
5.	 Describe the different types of joint arrangements and their respective ac-
counting treatment.
Assignments
The following assignments have answers on the lecturer of the digital support 
resources for the book.
1.	 Dickens Enterprises formed a new subsidiary in March 20X4, called Great 
Expectations (GE). At 31 December 20X4 the statements of financial position 
of the two companies were as shown below. During 20X4 no intra-group 
transactions have been recorded.
	
You are asked to prepare a work sheet for the consolidated finan-
cial statements as of 31 December 20X4.
Dickens
GE
Elimination
Group
Property, plant and  
  equipment (net)
5 200
750
Investment in GE
500
—
Inventories
700
49
Trade receivables
800
60
Cash
1 200
25
Total assets
8 400
884
Share capital
3 000
500
Retained earnings
1 900
Profit for 20X4
700
31
Subtotal
5600
531
Long-term borrowings
1 000
300
Short-term liabilities
1 800
53
Total equity and liabilities
8 400
884

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
338
2.	 Company Alpha has set up a subsidiary to deal with the distribution of its 
products by mail order. At 31 December 20X6 their respective statements of 
financial position were:
Parent
Subsidiary
Property, plant and equipment (net)
980
340
Investment in subsidiary
180
—
Loan to subsidiary
50
—
Current assets
360
195
Total assets
1 570
535
Share capital
800
180
Retained earnings
360
—
Loan from parent
—
50
Long-term borrowings
300
250
Current liabilities
110
55
Total equity and liabilities
1 570
535
Draw up a consolidated statement of financial position at  
31 December 20X6.
3.	 Earduster Company acquired 50 per cent of the share capital of Talebearer 
Company on January 20X6. These shares were acquired at the foundation of 
Talebearer Company.
During the first year after the acquisition there have been no transactions 
between Earduster and Talebearer.
The condensed statements of financial position and income statements of 
both companies at 31 December 20X6 are as follows (all amounts in €):
Earduster
Talebearer
Assets
Property, plant and equipment (net)
4 100 000
300 000
Investment in Talebearer
250 000
—
Other financial assets
100 000
—
Inventories
2 250 000
900 000
Trade receivables
900 000
400 000
Total assets
7 600 000
1 600 000
Share capital
2 000 000
500 000
Retained earnings
2 000 000
—
Profit for the year
400 000
60 000
Short-term debt
—
400 000
Trade payables
2 300 000
440 000
Other payables
900 000
200 000
Total equity and liabilities
7 600 000
1 600 000

Chapter 12  Consolidated financial statements
339
Earduster
Talebearer
Revenue
11 000 000
3 600 000
Cost of sales
–10 000 000
–3 000 000
Gross profit
1 000 000
600 000
Other operating income
1 000 000
300 000
Other operating expenses
–1 600 000
–840 000
Profit for the period
400 000
60 000
Required: Prepare the consolidated financial statements of Ear-
duster group as at 31 December 20X6:
	
(a)	 using the full consolidation method (combined with the partial 
goodwill method);
	
(b)	 using the proportionate consolidation method;
	
(c)	 using the equity method.
4.	 On July 1, 20X5, Omega Company purchased 90 per cent of the outstanding 
shares of Beta Company for 1 000 000. Immediately after the acquisition, 
 the separate statements of financial position of both companies appeared  
as follows:
Omega
Beta
Property, plant and equipment (net)
1 500 000
880 000
Investment in Beta Company
1 000 000
—
Other financial assets
50 000
160 000
Inventories
900 000
520 000
Trade receivables
650 000
240 000
Cash
263 200
48 000
Total assets
4 363 200
1 848 000
Share capital
2 000 000
800 000
Retained earnings
563 200
48 000
Long-term debt
1 000 000
600 000
Current payables
800 000
400 000
Total equity and liabilities
4 363 200
1 848 000
	
Beta’s other financial assets represent a long-term investment in Omega’s long-term 
debt. The debt was purchased for an amount equal to Omega’s carrying amount of 
the debt. On July 1, 20X4 Omega owes Beta 100 000 for services rendered.
	
Required:
	
(a)	 Prepare a consolidated statement of financial position as of the ac-
quisition date (using the partial goodwill method).
	
(b)	 What is the effect on the consolidated statement of financial posi-
tion if, on the acquisition date, the fair value of the property, plant 
and equipment of Beta Company were 980 000?

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
340
5.	 On 1 January 20X5 Invigilator Enterprises acquired 100 per cent of the 
shares of Lemma Company.
The separate condensed statements of financial position immediately after 
the acquisition appeared as shown below (all amounts in €):
Invigilator
Lemma
Assets
Intangible assets
—
2 000
Property, plant and equipment (net)
490 000
80 000
Investment in Lemma
600 000
—
Inventories
230 000
360 000
Trade and other receivables
400 000
240 000
Total assets
1 720 000
682 000
Financing
Share capital
1 000 000
200 000
Retained earnings
140 000
100 000
Provisions
20 000
30 000
Current liabilities
560 000
352 000
Total equity and liabilities
1 720 000
682 000
	Additional information (at acquisition date):
	
(a)	 Lemma owns a patent for the production of a new product. Lemma did 
not recognize the patent in its financial statements. The estimated fair 
value of the patent amounts to €80 000.
	
(b)	 The fair value of Lemma’s main corporate offices is €130 000 (net book 
value of €50 000).
	
(c)	 The fair value of Lemma’s inventories amounts to €320 000.
	
(d)	 On 1 January 20X5, Invigilator Enterprises still has to pay an invoice 
(€100 000) for services rendered by Lemma Company in December 20X4.
	
Required:
	
(a)	 Prepare the consolidated statement of financial position of the 
­Invigilator Group as at 1 January 20X5.
	
(b)	 Prepare the consolidated statement of financial position of the 
­Invigilator Group as at 1 January 20X5, assuming that the invest-
ment in Lemma represents only 90 per cent of the outstanding 
shares of Lemma Company (apply the partial goodwill method).
6.	 On 1 July 20X4 Dabster Company acquired 100 per cent of the share capital 
of company Saltus.
	At the date of acquisition the balances of the equity accounts of Saltus were 
as follows:
Share capital
400 000
Retained earnings
300 000
Profit for the year (interim)
40 000

Chapter 12  Consolidated financial statements
341
The condensed statements of financial position of both companies at 31 
December 20X4 are as follows (all amounts in €):
Dabster
Saltus
Assets
Property, plant and equipment (net)
1 550 000
500 000
Investment in Saltus
800 000
—
Inventories
300 000
200 000
Trade receivables
150 000
200 000
Cash and cash equivalents
50 000
100 000
Total assets
2 850 000
1 000 000
Share capital
1 500 000
400 000
Retained earnings
500 000
300 000
Profit for the year
100 000
100 000
Current liabilities
750 000
200 000
Total equity and liabilities
2 850 000
1 000 000
Additional information:
	
(a)	 At acquisition date the fair value of Saltus’ corporate offices (with a re-
maining useful life of 20 years) implies a surplus value of €50 000 over 
the carrying amount.
	
(b)	 During the fourth quarter of 20X4 Dabster sells some of its inventory to 
Saltus for €125 000, which represents cost plus a mark-up of 25 per cent. 
Half of these goods are still in the inventory of Saltus at the end of 20X4.
	
(c)	 At 31/12/20X4, goodwill recognized on the acquisition turns out to be im-
paired. An impairment loss of 10 per cent should be taken into account.
	
Required:
	
(a)	 Prepare the consolidated statement of financial position of Dabster 
Group as at 31 December 20X4.
	
(b)	 Prepare the consolidated statement of financial position of Dabster 
Group as at 31 December 20X4, assuming that the investment in 
Saltus represents 80 per cent of the outstanding shares. Apply the 
partial goodwill method.
	
(c)	 What would be the impact on the consolidated statement of finan-
cial position if the full goodwill method is applied for the 20 per 
cent non-controlling interest?
7.	 You work in the mergers and acquisitions department of a merchant bank and 
have spotted what you consider to be an attractive acquisition. Northeast Foods 
plc is a small, listed food manufacturer based in Leeds. It has for many years sold 
a well-established range of tinned speciality foods. The market regards it as rather 
sleepy and lacking the management edge necessary to convert to modern tech-
nology, bring in new products and compete generally. The company is slowly 
losing market share as supermarkets bring in own-label products of the kind 
which were Northeast’s strength. The €1 ordinary shares currently trade at €5.25.
You have also identified Wearside Products plc, a relatively young com-
pany which grew rapidly as a result of the success of its tortilla chips. It has 

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
342
broadened its product range but is hungry for more brands and needs to 
grow to be able to compete more effectively in international markets. North-
east would be a good fit for Wearside, and is reasonably cash rich.
You are about to have a meeting with the chairman of Wearside to 
discuss mounting a takeover. You are going to suggest that Wearside of-
fers one of its €1 ordinary shares (market value €4.50) plus €1.50 cash for 
each Northeast share, giving Northeast shareholders a profit of 75cts at 
present prices. You are prepared to take less than 100 per cent if necessary 
but would regard a 60 per cent stake as the minimum acceptable.  
For 60 per cent you would be willing to offer one Wearside share plus 
€1.20 cash.
€m
Wearside
Northeast
Non-current assets
Intangible
200.1
—
Tangible
180.2
67.1
Investments
—
10.5
Current assets
Inventories
37.4
20.2
Receivables
41.8
19.3
Cash
5.9
39.2
Total assets
465.4
156.3
€1 ordinary shares
68.5
24.0
Retained earnings
123.9
79.7
192.4
103.7
Current liabilities
48.3
21.6
Non-current liabilities
224.7
31.0
Total equity and liabilities
465.4
156.3
	
(a)	 You are asked to draw up a post-takeover statement of financial posi-
tion for the group in order to illustrate the effects of the proposed 
takeover, assuming that Wearside would borrow short-term to meet 
the cash element of the bid (and subsequently repay from North-
east’s cash reserves). You should draw up alternative statements of 
financial position on the basis of:
	
	
  (i)  no extra recognition or fair value adjustments
	
	
 (ii)  recognizing a brand worth €40m;
	
	
(iii)  recognizing a brand worth €20m and fair value adjustments of 
tangible non-current assets worth €20m
	
(b)	 You are also asked to draw up a statement of financial position on 
the basis of taking only 60 per cent of the shares, without additional 
asset recognition, using historical cost as fair value and applying the 
partial goodwill method.
(Note: this is a fairly tough case and is designed to introduce you to the reali-
ties of mergers and acquisitions thinking.)

Chapter 12  Consolidated financial statements
343
8.	 Traduct SA produces dictionaries of ancient languages (Latin, Greek, etc.). 
The company has two divisions, Uno and Duo, which constitute two sepa-
rate cash generating units. Uno operates as a legal entity and was acquired by 
Traduct SA at the beginning of 20X4.
Near the end of 20X4, a flooding destroys the paper inventory of Uno and 
damages its ‘Machinery and Equipment’. At 31 December 20X4, the directors of 
Traduct SA decide to carry out a review for impairment of the net assets of Uno.
The net assets of Uno immediately before the impairment review (which 
took place on 31 December 20X4) consisted of the following:
Net assets  
of Uno
Carrying value prior to 
impairment test  
€m
Goodwill arising on acquisition
25
Land
40
Buildings
90
Machinery and Equipment
18
Inventory – paper
10
Inventory – other
30
Net current assets (other than inventory)
65
Total
278
The following information is relevant to the impairment review:
	
n  Discounted cash flow calculations (budgeted future cash flows expected 
to arise from the continuation of Uno’s activities) show that the value in 
use of Uno can be estimated at 228.
	
n  Uno could be sold on 31 December 20X4 for 190.
	
n  The recoverable value of the paper inventory of Uno is zero.
	
n  The recoverable value of the machinery and equipment of Uno amounts 
to two thirds of its book value.
	
n  Due to rising land prices, the market value of the land is higher than its 
book value.
	
n  The net current assets (other than inventory – paper) are stated at the 
lower of cost and fair value less costs to sell.
	
Required:
	
(a)	Compute the amount of impairment of the net assets of Uno 
arising from the impairment review.
	
(b)	Allocate the impairment loss between the components of the 
net assets of Uno.
	
(c)	 Show the values of each of the components of the net assets 
of Uno after the necessary adjustments resulting from the im-
pairment review.

344
This chapter looks into problems arising from multinational operations, including 
the issues of segment reporting and foreign currency translation. Segment reporting 
complements consolidated financial statements in that it disaggregates group level 
data into information by business line, geographical area and/or customer type. 
Company segments often reflect different risk and return profiles, which cannot be 
determined from the aggregated consolidated financial statements. In this chapter 
we also address the special accounting problems of working in several currencies. 
Up until now we have assumed that the financial statements of a group’s subsidiaries 
were all kept in the same currency, but this is rarely the case for a multinational. 
The analyst does not necessarily need to be able to convert financial statements 
for consolidation purposes and in any event cannot break out conversion effects 
from published financial statements. However, conversion or translation from 
several currencies potentially brings in a number of distortions, of which the analyst 
should be aware. In addition, year-on-year comparisons are likely to be affected by 
value shifts in currencies in which a multinational has major operations, assets and 
liabilities. Often companies will bring these to the attention of the analyst.
Operating segments and foreign 
operations
C H A P T E R  1 3
Chapter Structure
n	 Introduction
n	 Stock exchange requirements
n	 Segment reporting

Chapter 13  Operating segments and foreign operations
345
n	 Foreign currency transactions and foreign operations
n	 Primary translation – translating foreign currency transactions 
in the functional currency
n	 Secondary translation – translating foreign currency financial 
statements in a group’s presentation currency
n	 Alternative accounting methods for secondary translation
n	 Functional currency and type of foreign operation
n	 Hedging a net investment in a foreign currency
n	 Summary
n	 Discussion questions
n	 Assignments
The modern multinational corporation typically is present in many countries of 
the world, often operates different lines of business and trades in many curren-
cies. While consolidated financial statements have the advantage of measuring 
and presenting the economic group as a whole, they also have the disadvantage 
of providing highly aggregated data which may be difficult to interpret when a 
group has several disparate types of business activity and works in several differ-
ent economies. This problem is addressed by segment reporting requirements – 
requiring companies to disclose information by operating segments.
Usually a multinational will have subsidiaries in many foreign countries and will 
also have raised finance outside its national base. Quite often multinationals not 
only borrow money outside their home market, but are also listed on several stock 
exchanges in different parts of the world. When preparing consolidated financial 
statements it is obviously necessary that all items are expressed in a single pre-
sentation currency. Given that the values of a group’s assets and liabilities may 
be stated in foreign currencies, and that the exchange rates between currencies are 
changing constantly, there is therefore a considerable accounting problem in con-
verting (translating) amounts expressed in foreign currencies into the presentation 
currency. In addition, different stock exchanges may have different reporting rules.
Clearly, this situation is bound to pose a number of problems, both in interpret-
ing such aggregated data and in expressing annual consolidated financial state-
ments in a single currency. We shall look first at the problems of being listed on 
several stock exchanges, then at the provision of further analysis of company ac-
tivities and finally at the accounting problems of converting to a single currency.
Multinational companies increasingly see a stock exchange listing on all major 
markets as a strategic issue, not necessarily connected with the company’s financ-
ing. A listing gives local credibility, increases awareness of the company and its 
products and enables it to make takeover bids which involve share exchange 
rather than necessarily cash.
Over time the effect of internationalization has been to drive both markets and 
then companies to attempt to harmonize the kind of financial statements which 
Introduction
Stock exchange requirements

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
346
they use and the information disclosures. IFRS, which we are using in this book, 
are accepted by most stock exchanges and are as a consequence used by many 
multinational companies.
However, the major exception to this harmonization still is the United States. 
Although the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) no longer requires that 
foreign companies reporting under IFRS and that wish to be listed on any of the 
US exchanges either prepare additional financial statements according to US GAAP 
or reconcile their IFRS financial statements (net income and shareholders’ equity) 
to US GAAP, domestic US companies are still not allowed to use IFRS for US filing 
purposes. Analysts, when making international cross-sectional comparisons, need 
to check whether companies are using IFRS or US GAAP for their ­financial state-
ments, and decide whether to use a US GAAP-based or an IFRS-based comparison.
Multinational companies usually carry a group of products or business lines, oper-
ate in diverse geographical areas and serve different customer classes. They man-
age different operating segments and these may vary significantly in terms of rates 
of profitability, growth opportunities, risks and future prospects. For example, PSA 
Peugeot Citroën (see Company Report) is well known for its passenger cars but 
the company actually operates in five distinct business segments: ­Automotive (the 
passenger cars and light commercial vehicles), Automotive Equipment (vehicle in-
teriors, automotive seating, etc.), Transportation and ­Logistics (goods transporta-
tion), Finance companies (retail financing to customers and wholesale financing 
to dealers) and Other (e.g. holding company activities). While consolidated finan-
cial statements aggregate accounting data bottom-up to present a picture of the 
Segment reporting
Advantages and disadvantages of foreign markets
For many large corporations the expansion of their international activities is 
one of its most important goals, if not a condition for continuing success in 
international competition.
Developments in the markets for goods and factors are paralleled by de-
velopments in the financial markets. More and more companies are actively 
engaged in the world’s most important capital markets, ranging from holding 
foreign investment accounts or foreign securities to issuing debt and equity. 
The decision to establish or expand a presence on a foreign capital market al-
lows a company to extend its position as a global financial player as well as to 
underline its commitment to that foreign market. This signal is strongest when 
the shares of the company are quoted on the local stock exchange. These ap-
parently rather abstract aims bring with them a number of concrete advantages 
that support foreign ventures and listings.
Wolf Bay and Hans-Georg Bruns, Daimler-Chrysler
Source: Extract from ‘Multinational companies and international capital markets’, in Walton, P., Haller, A. and 
Raffournier, B. (2003) International Accounting, pp. 385–6, London: Thomson Learning
Between the lines

Chapter 13  Operating segments and foreign operations
347
financial position, performance and cash flows of the economic group as a whole, 
they tend to disguise differing risk and return profiles of group components and, 
thus, may be difficult to interpret when a group has several disparate types of busi-
ness activity and works in several different economies. This problem is addressed 
by requiring companies to disclose information by operating segment.
The core principle of IFRS 8, Operating Segments, is that an entity should dis-
close information to enable users of its financial statements to evaluate the nature 
and financial effects of the types of business activities in which it engages and 
COMPANY REPORT
PSA PEUGEOT CITROëN
Note 3 – Segment information (extracts)
n	 Note 3 – Segment information
In accordance with IFRS 8—Operating Segments, segment information is pre-
sented in line with the indicators used internally by management to measure 
the performance of the Group’s different business segments. The disclosures 
below are derived from the internal reporting system and have been prepared 
in accordance with the IFRSs adopted by the European Union. The Group’s 
main performance indicator is recurring operating income.
3.1.  Business Segments
The Group’s operations are organized around five main segments:
n	
The Automotive Division, covering the design, manufacture and sale of passen-
ger cars and light commercial vehicles under the Peugeot and Citroën brands.
n	
The Automotive Equipment Division, corresponding to the Faurecia group 
and comprising Interior Systems, Automotive Seating, Automotive Exteri-
ors and Emissions Control Technologies.
n	
The Transportation and Logistics Division, corresponding to the Gefco 
group comprising Logistics and Vehicle and Goods Transportation.
n	
The Finance Division, corresponding to the Banque PSA Finance group, 
which provides retail financing to customers of the Peugeot and Citroën 
brands and wholesale financing to the two brands’ dealer networks.
n	
Other businesses, which include the activities of the holding company, 
­Peugeot S.A. and Peugeot Motorcycles.
Balances for each segment, as shown in the table below, are on a stand-alone 
basis. Faurecia and Banque PSA Finance publish consolidated financial state-
ments and segment information for these two businesses is therefore presented 
down to the level of net profit. For the other segments, as cash positions and 
taxes are managed jointly in some countries, only operating income and share 
in net earnings of companies at equity are presented by segment. All interseg-
ment balance sheet items and transactions are eliminated and, for the purposes 
of reconciliation with the Group’s financial statements, are shown under the 
heading ‘Eliminations and reconciliations’ together with unallocated amounts.
All intersegment commercial transactions are carried out on an arm’s length 
basis on the same terms and conditions as those applicable to the supply of 
goods and services to third parties. 

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
348
the economic environments in which it operates. Information about the different 
types of products and services provided, possibly in combination with different 
geographical areas in which it operates and/or different customer types, should 
help users of financial statements better assess the company’s risks and returns 
and make more informed judgements about the company as a whole. 
A disaggregation of financial statement data by lines of operations can in-
deed provide significant information on different risk and return profiles, not 
determinable from the aggregated consolidated financial statements. For ex-
ample, segment data could reveal that the larger part of net income is earned 
by a small high performing product group, that only one out of three busi-
ness lines is profitable and thus subsidizes the other two, or that important 
geographical areas have not yet been penetrated, hinting at continued growth 
opportunities.
Operating segments
Disaggregation of consolidated financial statements into operating segments 
should follow the way that management segments the company to make op-
erating decisions. IFRS 8, Operating Segments, requires operating segments to be 
identified on the basis of internal reports about components of the company 
that are regularly reviewed by the chief operating decision maker (CEO, Chief 
Operating Officer or a group of executive officers) in order to allocate resources 
to the segment and to assess its performance. Disaggregated performance ap-
praisal (implying the existence of segment revenues, expenses and assets) drives 
the identification of operating segments. Although segmentation would usually 
be organized by business or product lines, management can also organize it by 
geographical area, by customer type, by legal entity, or on another basis. For ex-
ample, internal management reporting may be structured solely by legal entity, 
3.2  Geographical segments
In the table below, sales and revenue are presented by destination of ­products 
sold, and investments and assets by geographic location of the subsidiary 
concerned.
In accordance with IFRS 8, the Group’s geographical segment analysis 
presents all non-current assets other than financial instruments, deferred tax 
assets and external pension plan assets. 
Source: PSA Peugeot Citroën, Financial Statements, 2010
2010 (in million euros)
Western 
Europe
Central & 
Eastern 
Europe
Latin 
America
Rest of 
the World
Total
Sales and revenue
40 775
4 067
4 770
6 449
56 061
Non-current assets 
(excl. deferred tax  
assets and financial 
instruments):
16 237
1 024
1 141
6 04
19 006

Chapter 13  Operating segments and foreign operations
349
2010 (in million euros)
Automotive
Automotive 
equipment
Transportation  
& logistics
Finance 
companies
Other
Eliminations & 
reconciliations
Total
Sales and revenue
— third parties
41 386
11 760
1 217
1 559
139
—
56 061
— intragroup, intersegment
19
2 036
2 134
293
79
(4561)
—
Total
41 405
13 796
3 351
1 852
218
(4 561)
56 061
Recurring operating income
621
456
198
507
11
3
1 796
Non-recurring operating income
249
87
13
27
—
—
376
Restructuring costs
(77)
(117)
(1)
—
(1)
—
(196)
Impairment losses on CGUs
(230)
—
—
—
(4)
—
(234)
Other non-­recurring operating  
income and ­(expenses), net
—
(6)
—
—
—
—
(6)
Operating income
563
420
210
534
6
3
1 736
Interest income
8
—
78
86
Finance costs
(99)
—
(356)
(455)
Other financial income
5
1
223
229
Other financial expenses
(31)
(3)
(255)
(289)
Net financial expense
—
(117)
—
(2)
—
(310)
(429)
Income taxes
(90)
(140)
(25)
(255)
Share in net earnings of  
companies at equity
184
19
—
2
(1)
—
204
Consolidated profit  
for the year
232
394
1 256
Capital expenditure (excl. sales 
with a buyback commitment)
2 375
460
26
24
4
2 889
Depreciation and amortization
(2 482)
(496)
(49)
(16)
—
(3 043)

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
350
COMPANY REPORT
NESTLE GROUP
Operating segment displays (extracts)
Operating segments: 
Trading operating proﬁt margin
In %
Zone Europe
Zone Americas
Zone Asia, Oceania and Africa
Nestlé Waters
Nestlé Nutrition
Other (a) 
(a) Mainly Nespresso, Nestlé Professional,
Nestlé Health Science, Food and Beverages
Joint Ventures and Pharma Joint Ventures
managed on a worldwide basis.
Operating segments: 
sales and organic growth (OG)
OG (%)
12.0
9.0
6.0
3.0
0
5
10
15
20
CHF bio
In billions of CHF
Zone Europe
Zone Americas
Zone Asia, Oceania and Africa
Nestlé Waters
Nestlé Nutrition
Other (a) 
15.6
18.4 
18.9 
8.0 
20.0 
16.8 
Sales
15.2
26.8
15.3
6.5
7.2
12.6
OG 
4.0%
6.2%
11.9%
5.2%
7.3%
11.4%
Source: Nestlé Group, Annual Report, 2011

Chapter 13  Operating segments and foreign operations
351
resulting in internal segments composed of groups of unrelated products and 
services. The Nestlé Group (see Company report) applies a combination of a geo-
graphic and a product perspective, through three geographic zones and several 
globally managed businesses. Nestlé’s reportable operating segments are: Zone 
Europe, Zone Americas, Zone Asia, Oceania and Africa, Nestlé Waters, Nestlé 
Nutrition, Other (mainly Nespresso, Nestlé Professional, Nestlé Health Science, 
Food and Beverages Joint Ventures and Pharma Joint Ventures managed on a 
worldwide basis). As some operating segments represent geographic zones, infor-
mation by product (powdered and liquid beverages, water, milk products and ice 
cream, nutrition and health care, prepared dishes and cooking aids, confection-
ery, petcare) is also disclosed.
The management approach to identify operating segments has the advantage 
that it builds on the company’s internal organization, highlighting the risks and 
opportunities that management believes are important. The internal reporting fo-
cus probably enhances a user’s ability to predict actions or reactions of manage-
ment that can significantly affect the company’s prospects.
Operating segments can be vertically integrated (think of, for example, highly 
integrated international oil companies). According to IFRS 8, operating segments 
are not limited to those that earn (a majority of) their revenue from external cus-
tomers. An operating segment can be a component of a company that sells pri-
marily or even exclusively to other segments of the company. Different stages of 
vertically integrated operations can become separate reporting segments if the 
company is managed that way.
Not all operations of a company will necessarily be part of an operating seg-
ment. For example, the corporate headquarters or some functional departments 
may not earn revenues or they may earn revenues that are only incidental to the 
activities of the company. These would not be operating segments.
STANDARDS
IFRS 8 – Operating Segments (extracts)
5. An operating segment is a component of an entity:
(a)	 that engages in business activities from which it may earn revenues and 
incur expenses (including revenues and expenses relating to transactions 
with other components of the same entity);
(b)	whose operating results are regularly reviewed by the entity’s chief 
­operating decision maker to make decisions about resources to be 
­allocated to the segments and assess its performance; and
(c)	 for which discrete financial information is available.
An operating segment may engage in business activities for which it has 
yet to earn revenues, for example, start-up operations may be operating seg-
ments before earning revenues.
Source: IFRS 8, Operating Segments

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
352
Reportable segments
Not all operating segments have to be reported, however. To be reportable, an 
operating segment must be significant; that is, it must meet at least one of the fol-
lowing quantitative thresholds (IFRS 8, par.13):
	
n	 its reported revenue, from both external customers and inter-segment sales 
or transfers, is 10 per cent or more of the combined revenue, internal and 
external, of all operating segments;
	
n	 the absolute measure of its reported profit or loss is 10 per cent or more 
of the greater, in absolute amount, of (i) the combined reported profit of 
all operating segments that did not report a loss and (ii) the combined re-
ported loss of all operating segments that reported a loss;
	
n	 its assets are 10 per cent or more of the combined assets of all operating 
segments.
If the total external revenue reported by operating segments constitutes less than 
75 per cent of the company’s revenue, additional operating segments must be 
identified as reportable segments (even if they do not meet the quantitative 
thresholds set out above) (IFRS 8, par.15). Two or more operating segments may 
be aggregated into a single operating segment if the segments have similar eco-
nomic characteristics and are similar in respect of nature of products and services, 
nature of production and distribution processes, type or class of customer, and (if 
applicable) nature of regulatory environment, for example, banking, insurance or 
public utilities (IFRS 8, par.12).
IFRS 8 grants companies a lot of discretion in determining operating segments, 
limited only by internal reporting practices. This discretion entails, however, the 
need to explain to the public how and why reportable segments are identified as 
they are. In this vein, the company has to disclose the factors driving the segmen-
tation, including the basis of organization (for example, whether management 
has chosen to organize the entity around differences in products and services, 
geographical areas, regulatory environments or a combination of factors). More-
over, for each reportable segment, the company has to indicate the types of prod-
ucts and services from which it derives its revenue (IFRS 8, par. 22).
Segment information content
Complete segment financial statements are not required, but for each reportable 
segment, information must be provided on segment revenue, segment profit or 
loss, segment assets and other related segment information, such as a split be-
tween external and internal revenue, depreciation and amortization, liabilities, 
etc. if such information is regularly provided to the chief operating officer.
IFRS 8 does, however, not define the segment information items (revenues, ex-
penses, result, assets, liabilities), nor does it require that accounting policies to be 
used for segment reporting are necessarily the same as those applied in the con-
solidated financial statements. In the end, internal reporting procedures will de-
termine the measurement basis of segment information. In this vein, segment 
reporting rules and practices (with regard to both definition/recognition and mea-
surement) may be highly entity-specific, and, thus, jeopardize the usefulness of seg-
ment information for cross-sectional (inter-company) analysis. In the case of PSA 
Peugeot Citroën (see Company Report) ‘recurring operating income’ is the main 

Chapter 13  Operating segments and foreign operations
353
performance indicator to assess segment performance. For each of the segments the 
following information is available: revenue (external and internal), operating in-
come, non-recurring operating items, capital expenditure, depreciation and amorti-
zation. There is however no information on segment assets and segment liabilities. 
Segment assets and liabilities are only required if they are regularly provided to the 
chief operating decision maker, but are useful for comparative segment ratio analy-
sis (see Chapter 17). The Nestlé Group uses a performance metric labelled ‘trading 
operating profit’, that is after restructuring costs, impairment of all assets except 
goodwill, litigations and onerous contracts, result on disposal of property, plant 
and equipment and specific other income and expenses that fall within the control 
of operating segments. Nestlé does provide segment assets information.
Although the format of segment reporting is entity-specific, in the end the seg-
ment financials have to add up into the consolidated financial statements. That’s 
why the company has to provide reconciliations of the total of the reportable 
segments’ revenues, measures of profit or loss, assets and liabilities (if applicable) 
to the corresponding group level figures in the consolidated financial statements.
Finally, IFRS 8 requires companies to present analyses of revenues from exter-
nal customers and certain non-current assets by geographical area and even to 
disclose revenues/assets by individual foreign country (if material), irrespective 
of the identification of operating segments. In addition, information about the 
STANDARDS
IFRS 8 – OPERATING SEGMENTS (extracts)
Information about profit or loss, assets and liabilities
23. An entity shall report a measure of profit or loss for each reportable seg-
ment. An entity shall report a measure of total assets and liabilities for each 
reportable segment if such amounts are regularly provided to the chief oper-
ating decision maker. An entity shall also disclose the following about each 
reportable segment if the specified amounts are included in the measure of 
segment profit or loss reviewed by the chief operating decision maker, or are 
otherwise regularly provided to the chief operating decision maker, even if 
not included in that measure of segment profit or loss:
(a)	 revenues from external customers;
(b)	revenues from transactions with other operating segments of the same 
entity;
(c)	 interest revenue;
(d)	interest expense;
(e)	 depreciation and amortization;
(f)	 material items of income and expense disclosed in accordance with 
paragraph 97 of IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements (as revised 
in 2007);
(g)	the entity’s interest in the profit or loss of associates and joint ventures 
accounted for by the equity method;
(h)	income tax expense or income; and
(i)	 material non-cash items other than depreciation and amortization.

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
354
An entity shall report interest revenue separately from interest expense for 
each reportable segment unless a majority of the segment’s revenues are 
from interest and the chief operating decision maker relies primarily on net 
interest revenue to assess the performance of the segment and make deci-
sions about resources to be allocated to the segment. In that situation, an 
entity may report that segment’s interest revenue net of its interest expense 
and disclose that it has done so.
Source: IFRS 8, Operating Segments
external revenues for each product and service and about the extent of the com-
pany’s reliance on its major customers, has to be disclosed.
In practice, segment disclosures tend to vary considerably from company to 
company. Note that national accounting rules are usually much less exigent on 
segment disclosures than IFRS or US GAAP. Even the Seventh EC Company Law 
Directive only calls for disclosure of sales by product and geographical area, but 
many companies used to go beyond that. However, it is one of the obstacles to 
clear analysis of the financial statements of multinational companies.
When analyzing the financial statements of multinational companies it is well 
worth trying to assemble as long as possible a time series of segment data to work 
out growth trends by business. This will then provide a picture of which busi-
nesses are expanding, which contracting and so on.
Analysts would like more segment data. They complain that it is very diffi-
cult to forecast future profits of companies if they do not know the relative prof-
itability of different product lines, and are unable to judge what proportion of 
sales is generated by each. Companies on the other hand do not like giving too 
much detailed analysis because they feel it gives away competitive advantage, 
and some argue that analysts do not understand the artificiality which can be 
induced by segment analysis. Where a company trades across the world, there are 
many transactions between subsidiaries, and these take place at relatively artifi-
cial prices which are fixed by the company.
For example, if a new product is developed in the French parent company, but 
the product is manufactured in South Africa, does the African subsidiary pay a roy-
alty on the development cost to the French parent? How do you allocate worldwide 
advertising costs? If you have several different product lines, how do you allocate all 
STANDARDS
IFRS 8 – OPERATING SEGMENTS (extracts)
Information about products and services
32. An entity shall report the revenues from external customers for each prod-
uct and service, or each group of similar products and services, unless the 
necessary information is not available and the cost to develop it would be 
excessive, in which case that fact shall be disclosed. The amounts of reve-
nues reported shall be based on the financial information used to produce the 
­entity’s financial statements.

Chapter 13  Operating segments and foreign operations
355
Information about geographical areas
33. An entity shall report the following geographical information, unless the nec-
essary information is not available and the cost to develop it would be excessive:
(a)	 revenues from external customers (i) attributed to the entity’s country 
of domicile and (ii) attributed to all foreign countries in total from which 
the entity derives revenues. If revenues from external customers attrib-
uted to an individual foreign country are material, those revenues shall 
be disclosed separately. An entity shall disclose the basis for attributing 
revenues from external customers to individual countries.
(b)	non-current assets other than financial instruments, deferred tax assets, 
post-employment benefit assets, and rights arising under insurance 
contracts (i) located in the entity’s country of domicile and (ii) located 
in all foreign countries in total in which the entity holds assets. If assets 
in an individual foreign country are material, those assets shall be dis-
closed separately.
The amounts reported shall be based on the financial information that is used 
to produce the entity’s financial statements. If the necessary information is not 
available and the cost to develop it would be excessive, that fact shall be dis-
closed. An entity may provide, in addition to the information required by this 
paragraph, subtotals of geographical information about groups of countries.
Information about major customers
34. An entity shall provide information about the extent of its reliance on its 
major customers. If revenues from transactions with a single external cus-
tomer amount to 10 per cent or more of an entity’s revenues, the entity shall 
disclose that fact, the total amount of revenues from each such customer, and 
the identity of the segment or segments reporting the revenues. The entity 
need not disclose the identity of a major customer or the amount of revenues 
that each segment reports from that customer. For the purposes of this IFRS, 
a group of entities known to a reporting entity to be under common control 
shall be considered a single customer. However, judgement is required to 
assess whether a government (including government agencies and similar 
bodies whether local, national or international) and entities known to the re-
porting entity to be under the control of that government are considered a sin-
gle customer. In assessing this, the reporting entity shall consider the ­extent 
of economic integration between those entities. 
Source: IFRS 8, Operating Segments
the costs of running the head office, including preparation of group financial state-
ments, stock exchange listing costs, investor relations, etc.? There are many factors 
that impinge upon these decisions, including tax, and the resulting allocations of 
cost are not necessarily economically meaningful (see Chapter 15 on taxation).
Analysts should look closely at the segment data provided by a company, but 
remember that allocations distort the overall picture and that no two groups nec-
essarily make their allocations in the same way. Segment data are probably more 
useful for time series analysis than cross-sectional.

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
356
Any group that operates in different countries is likely to operate in several differ-
ent currencies. Indeed it may be that most of a group’s subsidiaries operate in cur-
rencies other than those of its parent (e.g. how many of Nestlé’s subsidiaries operate 
using the Swiss franc?). This of course means that there is a foreign currency con-
version question to be resolved when preparing consolidated financial statements.
It is worth considering the behaviour of exchange rates briefly in order to un-
derstand the environment within which the accounting decisions have to be 
made. In the early part of the 20th century, exchange rates were relatively stable 
and governments attempted to reinforce this stability by promoting ‘fixed pari-
ties’ between currencies or against the price of gold. Later, economic pressures, 
particularly inflation, made it very difficult to maintain such fixed exchange 
rates. One solution was to go for ‘pegged’ rates, where currencies were allowed to 
move within a narrow tolerance, but this too proved impossible in the economic 
conditions of the 1960s and 1970s.
Today we have a situation where most currencies are allowed to ‘float’; that 
is, they have no fixed exchange rate and can change rapidly from one day to an-
other. This creates a number of severe financial management problems, as well as 
accounting problems, and these are not the least of the reasons for the introduc-
tion of the euro. As we will show in this chapter, having to deal in many curren-
cies introduces very many measurement problems into accounting, quite apart 
from uncertainties in decision-making because values are not stable.
For example, a German company buys an asset in the UK. The asset can be 
bought for £10 000 one day when £1 5 €1.75, and can be stated at €17 500 in 
the German accounts, but next day the rate might move to £1 5 €1.60. Is the 
asset then worth €16 000 and if the rate goes to £1 5 €1.80 the day after, do you 
change the asset once more to €18 000? Rates do not normally move quite as dra-
matically as in the example, but they do move quickly and the movements are 
not necessarily consistently in one direction. A sharp drop in value one day does 
not mean that next day or two years later the value will not gain.
Our purpose in addressing these questions is to consider their impact on the 
financial statements of public companies. This impact can be seen in two differ-
ent areas:
	
1.	translation of foreign currency transactions and related individual as-
sets and liabilities which are denominated other than in the own reporting 
currency;
	
2.	translation of the financial statements of foreign subsidiaries for inclusion 
in consolidated financial statements.
IFRS cover these topics in IAS 21, The Effects of Changes in Foreign Exchange Rates. 
We will address the questions above with this standard as our reference, except 
when noted otherwise.
Primary and secondary translation
When a multinational group, as a reporting entity, prepares consolidated financial 
statements, each individual entity included in the reporting entity first has to de-
termine its specific measurement currency (the functional currency) and mea-
sure its results and financial position in that currency. The functional currency is 
Foreign currency transactions and foreign operations

Chapter 13  Operating segments and foreign operations
357
not necessarily the local currency of the individual entity’s country of residence, 
but in most cases it is. A multinational group will probably comprise individual 
entities with a number of functional currencies and, thus, will have to consolidate 
a number of individual financial statements in different reporting currencies.
If an individual entity within the group entered into foreign currency transactions 
(i.e. transactions that are denominated or require settlement in a currency other 
than the functional currency of the entity), the foreign currency items first have to 
be translated into its functional currency. This is the primary translation process (i.e. 
translation of transactions).
Once the individual entities within a reporting entity (the multinational 
group made up of a parent and one or more foreign subsidiaries and invest-
ments in associated companies) have prepared their financial statements in their 
functional currency, these have to be translated into the currency in which the 
reporting entity presents its consolidated financial statements. If the functional 
currency of the individual entity is not equal to the presentation currency of the 
group, a secondary translation process (i.e. translation of financial statements) has 
to be carried out. The sequence of the currency translation processes and their re-
lationship with the consolidated financial statements is presented in Figure 13.1.
Business transactions,
assets and liabilities
denominated in functional
currency
Individual financial
 statements in functional
currency
Primary translation
Secondary translation
Consolidation
Business transactions,
assets and liabilities
denominated in other than
functional currency
Individual financial
 statements in (group)
presentation
currency
Consolidated financial
statements in (group)
presentation
currency
Figure 13.1
Primary and 
secondary 
translation

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
358
In most cases, the functional currency of the parent will be chosen as the pre-
sentation currency of the group financial statements, but this is not a general 
requirement.
Functional currency
The functional currency concept is central in the translation requirements. Func-
tional currency is defined as ‘the currency of the primary economic environment 
in which the entity operates’ (IAS 21, par.8). The primary economic environment 
in which an entity operates is normally the one in which it primarily generates and 
expends cash. The functional currency is determined separately for each individual 
entity within a group. There is no such thing as a ‘group functional currency’.
IAS 21 provides specific guidance on how to determine a functional currency 
(see IAS 21 extracts). It comments on the factors that an entity must consider in 
determining its functional currency.
It should be clear that determining the functional currency is not a free choice 
and sometimes will ask for professional judgement when evaluating the relevant 
indicators. In general, greater emphasis is given to the currency of the economy 
that determines the pricing of transactions than to the currency in which trans-
actions are denominated (e.g. in the oil industry the US dollar will be considered 
as functional currency for crude oil revenue, even if actual sales are denominated 
in another currency).
STANDARDs
IAS 21 – THE EFFECTS OF CHANGES IN FOREIGN EXCHANGE RATES 
(extracts)
Functional currency
9. The primary economic environment in which an entity operates is normally 
the one in which it primarily generates and expends cash. An entity considers 
the following factors in determining its functional currency:
(a)	 the currency:
(i)   that mainly influences sales prices for goods and services (this will 
often be the currency in which sales prices for its goods and services 
are denominated and settled); and
(ii)  of the country whose competitive forces and regulations mainly de-
termine the sales prices of its goods and services.
(b)	the currency that mainly influences labour, material and other costs of 
providing goods or services (this will often be the currency in which such 
costs are denominated and settled).
10. The following factors may also provide evidence of an entity’s functional 
currency:
(a)	 the currency in which funds from financing activities (i.e. issuing debt 
and equity instruments) are generated.
(b)	the currency in which receipts from operating activities are usually 
retained.

Chapter 13  Operating segments and foreign operations
359
11. The following additional factors are considered in determining the func-
tional currency of a foreign operation, and whether its functional currency is 
the same as that of the reporting entity (the reporting entity, in this context, 
being the entity that has the foreign operation as its subsidiary, branch, asso-
ciate or joint venture):
(a)	 whether the activities of the foreign operation are carried out as an ex-
tension of the reporting entity, rather than being carried out with a signif-
icant degree of autonomy. An example of the former is when the foreign 
operation only sells goods imported from the reporting entity and remits 
the proceeds to it. An example of the latter is when the operation ac-
cumulates cash and other monetary items, incurs expenses, generates 
income and arranges borrowings, all substantially in its local currency.
(b)	whether transactions with the reporting entity are a high or a low pro-
portion of the foreign operation’s activities.
(c)	 whether cash flows from the activities of the foreign operation directly 
affect the cash flows of the reporting entity and are readily available for 
remittance to it.
(d)	whether cash flows from the activities of the foreign operation are suffi-
cient to service existing and normally expected debt obligations without 
funds being made available by the reporting entity.
Source: IAS 21, The Effects of Changes in Foreign Exchange Rates
A foreign currency transaction is simply a business transaction that is denomi-
nated or requires settlement in a foreign currency. Examples include a German 
company buying or selling goods and services on credit for a price expressed in 
US dollars, or a Norwegian company taking out a bank loan denominated in euro. 
On initial recognition of the foreign currency transaction, the transaction will be 
recorded in the functional currency by applying the spot exchange rate at the 
date of transaction, i.e. multiplying the foreign currency amount by the spot ex-
change rate between the functional currency and the foreign currency at the date 
of the transaction. But what happens next at subsequent reporting dates?
The most important single category here is borrowing in foreign currencies – 
loans may be negotiated for a period of several years and need to be restated 
in several statements of financial position between initial receipt and final re-
payment. For example, suppose a UK company borrowed $5m on the eurodollar 
market for five years, and the current value of the liability moved as shown in 
Table 13.1. The accounting question that arises is: what value should be given to 
Primary translation – translating foreign currency 
transactions in the functional currency
If the individual entity is a foreign operation, additional indicators have to be 
considered when determining the functional currency of that entity. A foreign op-
eration is defined as ‘a subsidiary, associate, joint venture or branch of a reporting 
entity, the activities of which are based or conducted in a country or currency 
other than those of the reporting entity’ (IAS 21, par.8).

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
360
Table 13.1
Movements in 
value
Reporting date
Exchange rate £=
Sterling equivalent
01.01.X1
$1.60
3.125m
31.12.X1
$1.55
3.226m
31.12.X2
$1.40
3.571m
31.12.X3
$1.25
4.000m
31.12.X4
$1.30
3.846m
31.12.X5
$1.40
3.571m
the loan liability in the interim statement of financial position between receiving 
the loan (1.1.X1) and repaying it (31.12.X5)? In this transaction the company has 
to repay more than it borrowed and the difference will also need to be recognized 
as a loss at some point. How and when should the loss be recognized?
In terms of providing useful information for shareholders, the only really use-
ful information is the final repayment value and the total loss over the loan pe-
riod. However, this information is only available at the end of the period. Should 
the exchange differences be recognized only at that point?
Potentially there could be a number of responses to the question, but IAS 21 takes 
the view that such items should be translated at the current rate on each reporting 
date (the closing rate) and the resultant difference be taken to the statement of 
profit or loss. The rationale for this is that the current rate provides the best available 
(if poor) approximation of the future repayment date and represents the best avail-
able information. In fact, accounting for foreign currency transactions according to 
IAS 21 depends on the type of asset acquired or liability incurred. More specifically, 
the treatment of foreign currency items depends on whether the item is monetary 
or non-monetary. Monetary items are ‘units of currency held and assets and liabili-
ties to be received or paid in a fixed or determinable number of units of currency’ 
(IAS 21, par.8). Monetary items such as cash, accounts receivable and loans out-
standing derive their value from the number of monetary units into which they are 
convertible. Non-monetary items, such as inventory, equipment, land, buildings and 
cars, derive their value primarily from supply and demand. In our example, the UK 
company incurred a monetary liability and will show it in the financial statements 
at its sterling equivalent using the exchange rate in effect at the reporting date (date 
of the statement of financial position). Monetary assets (like accounts receivable) are 
similarly translated using the exchange rate in effect at reporting date. Foreign cur-
rency non-monetary assets (and liabilities) are translated using the historical rate of 
exchange that was in effect at the time the item was acquired or incurred.
A particularly interesting aspect of IAS 21 is that the standard requires that ex-
change differences arising on translating monetary items at rates different from 
those at which they were translated on initial recognition during the period, or 
in previous statements of financial position. shall be recognized in the statement 
of profit or loss of the period in which they arise, irrespective of whether it is a 
loss or a gain. Such gains are unrealized until the monetary item is settled (in our 
example until the loan is repaid), and this recognition of them in profit or loss is 
one of the few cases where an unrealized gain is taken to the income statement.
(Note that in the rather exceptional case that non-monetary items are measured 
at fair value in a foreign currency (for example in application of IAS 41, Investment 
Property), these should be translated using the exchange rates at the date when 
the fair value was determined. Exchange differences resulting from revaluation of 

Chapter 13  Operating segments and foreign operations
361
non-monetary items carried at fair value will be recognized directly in equity or 
in profit or loss according to the treatment of the original fair value adjustments.)
Hedging foreign currency transactions
By way of background information in this area, we should also mention other as-
pects of dealing in foreign currencies which affect profit measurement but which 
are less immediately germane to an understanding of corporate reports.
One of the ways in which companies minimize the risk of changes in exchange 
rates causing losses is to take out ‘hedges’ against individual transactions. For example, 
where a UK company wants to buy (say) a French machine tool for €10 000 and places 
the order at a time when the exchange rate is £1 5 €1 for delivery in six months’ time, 
there is a risk that the rate could move to (say) £1 5 €0.8 by the time delivery takes 
place, with the result that the expected sterling cost rises from £10 000 to £12 500. The 
company can avoid the risk by buying euro in advance (buying forward) and so fixing 
the rate actually paid. This sort of technique is known as hedging. When such a transac-
tion takes place, the asset would be recognized in the buyer’s books at the exchange 
rate built into the forward contract, not at the rate ruling when the asset was delivered.
In the absence of a hedge, individual transactions are translated at the rate 
ruling when the transaction took place. Suppose the French machine was deliv-
ered on 30 June, when the rate was £1 5 €0.8, but three months’ credit was al-
lowed. Settlement was made on 30 September when the rate was £1 5 €0.85. The 
­accounting transactions would be:
	
1.	Recognize asset 30 June at £12 500 and create creditor.
	
2.	Settle creditor 30 September at £11 765 and recognize in profit or loss an 
exchange gain in of £735.
If hedged by a forward exchange contract, the value of the asset would be ad-
justed for the fair value of the forward contract on delivery date (a value that 
approximates the difference on the contract amount between the spot exchange 
rate on 30 June and the forward rate).
COMPANY REPORT
AngloGold Ashanti – Transactions and balances  
in foreign currency
Foreign currency transactions are translated into the functional currency using 
the approximate exchange rates prevailing at the dates of the transactions. For-
eign exchange gains and losses resulting from the settlement of foreign cur-
rency transactions and from the translation at the year-end exchange rate of 
monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are recog-
nised in the statement of profit or loss, except for hedging derivative balances 
that are within the scope of IAS 39. Translation differences on these balances 
are reported as part of their fair value gain or loss. 
Translation differences on non–monetary items, such as equities classified 
as available-for-sale financial assets, are included in other comprehensive 
­income within equity.
Source: Extract from ‘Summary of significant accounting policies’, AngloGold Ashanti, 
Notes to the Financial Statements, 2010

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
362
Secondary translation – translating foreign currency 
financial statements in a group’s presentation currency
The need for secondary translation arises when a multinational group has to con-
solidate the financial statements of individual entities with different functional 
currencies. The financial position and results of each individual entity within the 
group have to be expressed in a common currency (presumably the functional 
currency of the parent company) so that consolidated financial statements can be 
presented in the group’s presentation currency.
Types of foreign operations
IFRS 10, Consolidated Financial Statements, defines consolidated financial statements 
as the financial statements of a group presented as those of a single economic en-
tity. In other words, we remove the separate legal status of each individual entity 
in the group and treat them as one company. One implication which we might 
draw from that is that we should treat all the transactions of the foreign subsidiary 
as though they had been carried out by the parent company. That would indeed 
be treating the group as a single entity. If we did that, we should then look at the 
individual assets and liabilities of the subsidiary as though they were part of the 
parent and, logically, we should use the exchange rate for each which we would 
have used if the transactions involved had been carried out directly by the parent. 
The approach would be something like that shown in Table 13.2.
This arrangement seems quite logical – it treats every element as though the 
transaction had been carried out by the parent and converted into parent com-
pany currency as though the parent had bought foreign currency to meet each 
Table 13.2
Consolidation 
exchange rates
Balance sheet item
Rate
Assets
Property, plant and 
equipment
Rate at time of acquisition
Receivables
Closing rate at reporting date (best estimate of  
likely proceeds)
Inventory
Rate at time of acquisition
Cash
Closing rate at reporting date
Financing
Equity
Share capital
Rate at time of subscription
Retained earnings
Rate ruling at successive reporting dates when  
each slice of retained earnings was added to the  
statement of financial position
Liabilities
Equity
Trade and other payables
Closing rate at reporting date (best estimate of  
likely payments)
Long-term borrowings
Closing rate at reporting date

Chapter 13  Operating segments and foreign operations
363
transaction. Of course it means that, since different rates are used for different 
elements of the statement of financial position, this statement will not balance. 
A new item, translation difference, has to be added. That in itself poses a further 
problem: is the translation difference (gain or loss) something which should flow 
through the consolidated statement of profit or loss? If the result is a gain, this 
must be an unrealized gain because the parent still owns the subsidiary and pru-
dence requires that this should not be recognized in the statement of profit or 
loss. Against that, unrealized gains on long-term liabilities are recognized.
Then again, is this translation adjustment truly a gain or loss? In so far as rates 
of exchange may fluctuate both up and down, there is no real reason to suppose 
(on first principles) that the translation difference may not be purely temporary, 
an accident caused by the timing of the statement of financial position. For ex-
ample, if the rate of exchange at reporting date is £1 5 €1.60 and the next week 
£1 5 €1.70, how valid would it be to recognize a gain or a loss as at reporting 
date, when the position has already changed at the time the statements are be-
ing prepared? If the gain or loss is temporary, then is it useful to include it in the 
statement of profit or loss? You can see that there are some close analogies here 
with inflation accounting; both issues pose questions of valuation of assets and 
liabilities, and whether or not changes in value should be recognized in the state-
ment of financial position and in the statement of profit or loss.
The other question which we must pursue is whether the agreeably logical solu-
tion of translating the statement of financial position of the foreign subsidiary as 
though the assets and liabilities had been acquired directly by the parent provides 
useful information for investment decisions and for users generally. For example, 
is it an entirely accurate view of the economic relations between a subsidiary and 
parent that the transactions of the subsidiary are seen as relating only to the par-
ent and not having their economic basis in the activities of the subsidiary itself?
The answer to that question must depend to a large degree on the facts in any 
particular case. For example, if a British manufacturing company sets up a Spanish 
subsidiary whose sole purpose is the marketing of the finished goods manufactured 
in Britain, there is a strong case for treating the Spanish subsidiary as nothing other 
than part of the parent’s distribution costs. The separate legal status can be seen 
merely as a convenience, and the entity has no independent existence outside its 
marketing function. Translation of its statement of financial position (consisting 
perhaps of a warehouse, inventory of finished goods and receivables, with its main 
creditor being the UK manufacturing company), as though the transactions were 
those of the parent, would probably reflect the economic substance.
However, what if the Spanish subsidiary were a rather more complex business 
which manufactured its own finished goods (under the group brand name perhaps), 
sold these independently throughout the world (perhaps using other group subsid-
iaries in countries where these existed) and also sold products manufactured in other 
countries by other members of the group (a structure used by Philips, for example)? 
What if, as is often the case, there were local Spanish minority shareholders in the 
company and if, in order to finance its operations, the Spanish company also bor-
rowed on the local capital market? The situation here is rather more complex, since 
the Spanish subsidiary is arguably a complete and independent trading entity in its 
own right and to account for its transactions as though they were carried out by the 
parent is a denial of that. It would not reflect the economic reality of the situation.
Looking at the mechanics of translation, we can argue a case that the assets 
and liabilities of the complex subsidiary have an economic relationship with each 

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
364
other, rather than with those of the parent. For example, the inventory does not 
derive from external manufacturing operations; the manufacturing plant is not 
an extension of an operation by the parent; the long-term loans borrowed on the 
Spanish market relate to the Spanish operation and its assets, not to the parent’s 
global financing needs. If we translate the assets at the rate ruling when they were 
acquired, but the long-term liabilities at the closing rate ruling on reporting date, 
we are using different rates to translate two items whose economic existence is 
interdependent. We are arguably distorting the economic relationships and there-
fore it is questionable whether such an approach does give some approximation 
of the economic relationship. There seems a good reason here for using the same 
rate for both assets and liabilities to preserve their interrelationship.
In practical terms, the ‘independent’ subsidiary could be recognized as a set of 
interrelated assets and liabilities which were translated for consolidation purposes 
at the closing rate ruling at the reporting date when consolidation is taking place. 
In other words, the value used would merely represent a mathematical conver-
sion from one currency to another to enable the group financial statements to be 
stated in a single currency.
Critics point out, though, that there is a major conceptual flaw in this approach: 
by consolidating the subsidiary using the current exchange rate, one is import-
ing current values into historical cost accounts and this represents some form of 
hidden revaluation. According to Purchasing Power Parity theory, exchange rates 
move in response to inflation, and the use of current rates for fixed assets would 
mean that an inflation adjustment was automatically being built into the group 
financial statements. This is not acceptable within the context of pure historical 
cost, but also it would be inconsistent to revalue some assets and not others; re-
valuation should be worked out systematically and not on the haphazard basis of 
currency and differential inflation. The correct rate must be the historical rate.
To illustrate the effect of this, suppose that a German subsidiary of a UK parent 
bought plant for €300 000 on 1.1.20X1 when £1 5 €1.5; at that point the asset, if 
translated, would be worth £200 000. During 20X1 inflation is 10 per cent in the UK 
and 5 per cent in Germany. According to Purchasing Power Parity theory the ex-
change rate at the end of the year should be £1 3 1.1 5 €1.5 3 1.05, or £1 5 €1.43. 
If the asset were translated at the current rate at the year end, it would appear in the 
group financial statements as £209 790.
Alternative accounting methods  
for secondary translation
Over the years regulatory regimes converged towards a motivated choice of two 
methods, based largely upon the rationale we have considered above. Typically, two 
methods are allowed, depending upon the actual conditions under which the for-
eign subsidiary operates. The method which takes the subsidiary as an extension of 
the parent is known as the temporal method, while that which takes the subsidiary as 
a whole is known as the net investment method (also the current or closing rate method). 
These methods figure in the European Accounting Directives, US GAAP and, his-
torically, in IFRS (although somewhat amended in the 2005 revision of IAS 21).
In order to demonstrate the implications of the choice of method on the 
picture presented in the group financial statements, we shall now translate the 
­financial statements of a foreign subsidiary using each of these methods.

Chapter 13  Operating segments and foreign operations
365
Temporal method
The temporal method is based on the assumption that the best way of translating 
the statement of financial position and income statement of a foreign subsidiary 
is by treating the transactions as though they were carried out by the parent, and 
thus using rates which relate to the time when the transaction took place (hence 
‘temporal’). Assets which are carried in the books at historical values are trans-
lated at the rate ruling when the asset was acquired, while assets having a current 
or nominal value (i.e. receivables, cash) are translated at the current rate. The 
broad lines used are shown in Table 13.3.
Table 13.3
Exchange  
rates –  
temporal  
method
Financial position component
Exchange rate
Non-current assets
Property, plant and equipment
Historical
Acc. depreciation
Historical
Current assets
Inventory
Historical
Monetary assets
Current
Liabilities
Current liabilities
Current
Non-current liabilities
Current
Equity
Share capital
Historical
Retained earnings
Historical/Average
Current monetary assets will be received after the reporting date, while current 
liabilities and long-term liabilities will be payable after the reporting date, so all 
are stated at the closing or current rate as being the best approximation. Other 
assets are translated at the historical rate which obtained at the time of acquisi-
tion. Revenue and expenses are translated at the exchange rates prevailing when 
the underlying transactions took place. However, in practice the average rate will 
be used, except for the inventory component of cost of sales and depreciation 
cost which are translated at historical rates to keep the link with the statement of 
financial position intact.
Worked example
The European Trading Co. plc invests CHF3m in a Swiss subsidiary. The subsid-
iary borrows a further CHF2m locally and buys a factory for CHF5m. At the time 
the subsidiary was set up (1 January 20X1) the exchange rate was £1 5 CHF4.00, 
so the European Trading Co. plc invested £750 000 in the share capital of its new 
subsidiary. During 20X1 the Swiss company traded successfully and achieved 
profits of CHF500 000. The exchange rate had been slipping against the pound 
during the year and at the end of the year had reached £1 5 CHF3.00. The aver-
age rate during the year was £1 5 CHF3.50. The statements of financial position 
of the Swiss subsidiary (as expressed in local currency) are shown below.

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
366
During the year the net asset value of the Swiss subsidiary has risen from CHF3m 
to CHF3.5m. If we now take the financial position of the subsidiary at the begin-
ning and end of the year and use the temporal method to translate it into sterling 
in order to prepare consolidated financial statements, the relationship of assets 
and liabilities within the subsidiary will change as shown below:
1 Jan 20X1  
CHF’ 000
31 Dec 20X1 
CHF’000
Property, plant and equipment
5 000
5 000
less Acc. depreciation
—
–250
Net current assets
Inventory
—
—
500
Monetary assets
—
—
750
Current liabilities
—
—
–500
750
5 000
5 500
Long-term liabilities
–2 000
–2 000
Total net assets
3 000
3 500
Financed by equity
Share capital
3 000
3 000
Retained earnings
—
500
Total equity
3 000
3 500
1 Jan 20X1  
£’000
31 Dec 20X1  
£’000
Rate used  
£ =
Property, plant and equipment
1 250
1 250.00
4.0
less Acc. depreciation
—
–62.50
4.0
Net current assets
Inventory1
—
142.86
3.5
Monetary assets
—
250.00
3.0
Current liabilities
—
–166.67
3.0
—
226.19
1 250
1 413.69
Long-term liabilities
–500
–666.67
3.0
Total net assets
750
747.02
Equity
Share capital
750
750.00
4.0
Retained earnings2
—
142.85
3.5
Translation adjustment3
—
–145.83
Total equity
750
747.02

Chapter 13  Operating segments and foreign operations
367
Notes
1.	 This rate is assumed: the temporal method requires use of the actual rate at the 
time the inventory was acquired. For simplicity the example assumes that inven-
tory was acquired uniformly throughout the year.
2.	 Again to simplify, the depreciation cost in retained earnings is translated at the 
average rate and not at the historical rate.
3.	 Under the temporal method the translation adjustment is charged against net 
income and is only shown separately in this example in order to highlight its 
existence.
In applying the temporal method, different exchange rates are used for different 
elements of the statement of financial position, and in this case we can see clearly 
the dilemma which emerges: in Swiss franc terms the subsidiary has grown by 
16.67 per cent in value, but when translated back to sterling using this method 
the net asset value has fallen slightly. Which is the more useful picture from the 
point of view of users?
Probably your immediate reaction will be that this translation method must 
be wrong – but you need to think carefully about it. The major difference be-
tween the sterling result and the Swiss franc result derives from the fact that the 
long-term ­liability is translated at the current rate, while the major asset is trans-
lated at a historic rate. As in this example the rate has moved against sterling, 
the liability has risen considerably in sterling terms while the asset has remained 
at its historic sterling value. This is exactly what would happen if the parent had 
borrowed in Switzerland for repayment ultimately from sterling resources.
The dilemma arises from the fact that the assets and liabilities are being viewed 
from the parent company standpoint, and the application of the prudence prin-
ciple requires that the growth in current value of the liability is recognized while 
the assets are at historical cost. So the question arises as to whether one should 
ignore the prudence principle and state the liability also at a historical cost, or 
whether the asset might be revalued. Revaluation of the asset, though, would be 
inconsistent if other assets owned by the group were not revalued as well.
The strict application of accounting rules designed for accounting within one 
country and one currency to a multi-currency problem leads to this situation, 
and one should consider whether such rules can reasonably be extended in that 
way. The application of the rules ignores the economic reality, which is that the 
Swiss franc loan was negotiated in order to purchase a Swiss franc asset, and it is 
expected that the loan will be repaid out of Swiss franc earnings derived from the 
use of that asset. Does this have anything to do with the parent company other 
than to the extent of its investment?
This use, in the example, of a local loan to back up the purchase of a ­local 
asset is a classic technique in international business. If the parent company 
had not borrowed any capital but had invested CHF5m, its economic exposure 
to rate changes would obviously be much greater than for the investment of 
CHF3m. In effect, it has acquired an asset of CHF5m with a currency risk of 
CHF3m. Economically the loan element is balanced by the asset, since a rate 
change affects both asset and liability in the same way. This is known as a cur-
rency ‘hedge’. The major difficulty with the temporal method is that it fails to 

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
368
recognize the economic existence of the hedge – the rate change is reflected in 
the financial statements only in so far as it affects the liability and not where it 
affects the asset.
Net investment method
The net investment method (or closing rate method) approximates to the alter-
native view of the parent/subsidiary relationship. It assumes that the subsidiary 
should be considered as an entity and the assets and liabilities translated at the 
same rate, thereby in effect showing the results of rate changes on the parent 
company’s net investment in the subsidiary.
If we apply the net investment approach to the same Swiss subsidiary, the 
translation would be made at the rate ruling on reporting date (i.e. closing rate on 
the date of the statement of financial position): in this case therefore the open-
ing statement of financial position would be translated at £1 5 CHF4.00, while 
the closing statement of financial position would be translated at £1 5 CHF3.00. 
Retained earnings are translated at the average rate £1 5 CHF3.50.
1 Jan 20X1 £’ 0000
31 Dec 20X1 £’ 000
Property, plant and equipment
1 250
1 666.67
less Acc. depreciation
—
–83.33
Net current assets
Inventory
—
166.67
Monetary assets
—
250.00
Current liabilities
—
–166.67
—
250.00
1 250
1 833.34
Long-term liabilities
–500
–666.67
Total net assets
750
1 166.67
Equity
Share capital (initial)
750
750.00
(Translation diff.)
—
273.82
Retained earnings
—
142.85
Total equity
750
1 166.67
Note
The original share capital has been translated at the historical rate, with the differ-
ence between that and the closing rate being part of a translation adjustment. The 
average rate has been used for retained earnings.
Use of the net investment method ties in the rate change to both assets and li-
abilities, reflecting a current exchange value for both. The precise differences in the 
results of the two methods may perhaps best be viewed if we now compare the ster-
ling translation of the closing statement of financial position under each method.
The difference in result between the two methods is quite dramatic and em-
phasizes a point we hope you have now fully realized: that the measurement of 
profit is subject to all kinds of quite subjective decisions on accounting principles.

Chapter 13  Operating segments and foreign operations
369
Temporal method  
31 Dec 20X1 £’000
Net investment method 
31 Dec 20X1 £’000
Property, plant and equipment
1 250.00
1 666.67
less Acc. depreciation
–62.50
–83.33
Net current assets
Inventory
142.86
166.67
Monetary assets
250.00
250.00
Current liabilities
–166.67
–166.67
226.19
250.00
1 413.69
1 833.34
Long-term liability
–666.67
–666.67
Total net assets
747.02
1,166.67
Equity
Share capital
750.00
750.00
Retained earnings
–145.84
142.85
Translation adjustment
142.86
273.82
Total equity
747.02
1 166.67
The essential difference in result derives from the fact that the net investment 
method has recognized the increase in sterling value of the asset as a result of a 
rate change, while the temporal method has not done so. Either view of the ster-
ling result of the subsidiary is justifiable, depending upon how you interpret the 
economic relationship between the parent and the subsidiary.
In the example chosen, the rates of exchange used presented a picture where 
sterling was weakening against the foreign currency, and the effect of that on the 
translation was to show up an increased liability under the temporal method. If 
the rate movements had been the opposite, however, the picture would have been 
the exact reverse. Under the temporal method, the asset would have remained at 
its old sterling value while the liability would have diminished, thereby showing 
a positive translation adjustment. Under the net investment method both asset 
and liability would have declined, giving a negative translation adjustment. Do 
not fall into the trap of supposing that the net investment method always gives a 
more profitable result.
One implication of the differences thrown up by translation methods is that 
when assessing the performance of a subsidiary from a parent company view-
point, care must be taken to distinguish the currency effects in the sterling results 
from the real underlying operating results. Using the relationship which profit 
bears to the investment in an operation as a yardstick (return on equity), the re-
sults for the Swiss operation could be interpreted three different ways:
Growth  
in equity
Opening  
equity
Percentage  
growth in year
CHF financial statements
500
3 000
16.67%
Temporal method
–2.98
750
–0.40%
Net investment method
416.67
750
55.56%

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
370
Precisely the same economic situation can yield three different measures of success 
or failure, depending on the perspective chosen. This is clearly a problem for the 
analyst. The effect of translation differences can be highlighted in two ways. First, 
it will be reflected to an extent in the analysis of non-current assets – when the net 
investment method is used (and this is standard practice under IFRS – see next sec-
tion) the translated value of assets will change, as we discussed above. The amount 
of this change will be reflected in the non-current assets notes, and the analyst 
can check whether this is material in relation to total assets or whether a portfolio 
effect applies (what accountants call ‘swings and roundabouts’) and translation 
gains on some items are balanced by losses on others. For example, Agfa-Gevaert 
(see Company Report) shows a negative effect of exchange differences on all prop-
erty, plant and equipment items in 2010, indicating that, on average, the euro got 
weaker in 2010 relative to the functional currencies of its foreign operations. The 
rising value of the US dollar relative to the euro in 2010 probably explains these 
negative effects to a large extent. Second, the analyst should look at the transla-
tion difference taken to equity (‘other comprehensive income’ accumulated in a 
separate component of equity) – is this material? If possible, a five-year or more 
time series should be constructed (back copies of the financial statements would 
be required) in order to see whether there is a definite trend.
IAS 21, The Effects of Changes in Foreign Exchange Rates, avoids the difficult choice 
between alternative secondary translation methods through its guidance for de-
termining the functional currency of a foreign operation. The IASB starts from the 
premise that the functional currency of a foreign operation that is integral to the 
reporting unit and the functional currency of the parent will always be the same, 
because they share the same primary economic environment. It follows that there 
is no need for specific accounting rules to translate the financial statements of an 
integral foreign operation for consolidation purposes, as they will already be mea-
sured in the parent’s functional currency. Consequently, translating a subsidiary’s 
financial statements (in its functional currency) into a different group presenta-
tion currency according to IFRS basically follows the net investment method. IAS 
21 specifies these basic secondary translation rules in par. 39 (see IAS 21 extracts).
If, for example for regulatory purposes, a company keeps its accounting records 
and presents its individual financial statements in a currency which is different from 
its functional currency, the temporal method would, however, still be relevant. For 
consolidation purposes all amounts would have to be re-measured into the func-
tional currency using the historical rate on initial recognition. Subsequent to this, 
only monetary items denominated in a foreign currency should be re-measured. 
This (temporal method-like) procedure produces the same amounts as would have 
occurred had all transactions been recorded initially in the functional currency.
Consistent with the translation logic of the net investment method, secondary 
translation differences do not affect profit or loss on initial recognition, but are 
recognized as other comprehensive income as accumulated in a separate com-
ponent of equity. They will, however, eventually affect profit or loss on (partial) 
disposal of the foreign operation. On the disposal of a foreign operation, the cu-
mulative amount of the exchange differences relating to that foreign operation 
have to be recycled (reclassified) from equity to profit or loss when the corre-
sponding disposal gain (or loss) is recognized (IAS 21, par.48).
Functional currency and type of foreign operation

Chapter 13  Operating segments and foreign operations
371
AGFA-GEVAERT
Notes to the consolidated financial statements (extract)
Exchange differences in Note 13 - Property, plant and equipment
Million euro
Land,  
buildings and 
infrastructure
Machinery 
and technical 
equipment
Furniture  
fixtures 
and other 
equipment
Construction 
in progress 
and advance 
payments to 
vendors and 
contractors
Total
Cost at December 31, 2009
360
1 467
246
18
2 091
Exchange differences
6
22
7
—
35
Change in consolidation scope
1
1
2
—
4
Capital expenditures
3
14
9
22
48
Retirements
(9)
(21)
(15)
—
(45)
Transfers
1
4
0
(11)
(6)
Cost at December 31, 2010
362
1 487
249
29
2 127
Accumulated depreciation 
and impairment losses 
­December 31, 2009
251
1 293
221
—
1 765
Exchange differences
4
16
5
—
25
Change in consolidation scope
—
1
1
—
2
Depreciation during  
the year
8
42
14
—
64
Impairment loss  
during the year
—
1
—
—
1
Retirements
(8)
(21)
(13)
—
(42)
Transfers
—
—
(1)
—
(1)
Accumulated depreciation  
and impairment losses 
­December 31, 2010
255
1 332
227
—
1 814
Carrying amount  
December 31, 2009
109
174
25
18
326
Carrying amount  
December 31, 2010
107
155
22
29
313
Source: Agfa, Annual Report 2010
COMPANY REPORT
With respect to the consolidation process, IAS 21 requires goodwill and fair 
value adjustments to assets and liabilities that arise on the acquisition of a for-
eign entity, to be treated as part of the assets and liabilities of the acquired entity. 
As such, they have to be translated at the closing rate.

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
372
Both primary and secondary exchange differences must be disclosed, including 
the amount of exchange differences recognized in profit and loss and the net ex-
change differences recognized in other comprehensive income and accumulated in 
a separate component of equity. For the secondary exchange differences a reconcili-
ation of the net amount at the beginning and end of the period has to be provided.
COMPANY REPORT
ANGLOGOLD ASHANTI
Notes to the financial statements (extract)
Financial statements in foreign currency
Group companies
The results and financial position of all group entities (none of which has the cur-
rency of a hyperinflationary economy) that have a functional currency different from 
the presentation currency are translated into the presentation currency as follows:
n	
share capital and premium are translated at historical rates of exchange at 
the reporting date;
n	
retained earnings are converted at historical average exchange rates;
n	
assets and liabilities for each statement of financial position presented are 
translated at the closing rate at the date of that statement of financial position;
n	
income and expenses for each statement of profit or loss presented are 
translated at monthly average exchange rates (unless this average is not a 
reasonable approximation of the cumulative effect of the rates prevailing 
on the transaction dates, in which case income and expenses are translated 
at the rates prevailing at the date of the transaction);
n	
all resulting exchange differences are recognized in other comprehensive 
income and presented as a separate component of equity (foreign currency 
translation); and
n	
other reserves, other than those translated above, are converted at the 
closing rate at each reporting date. These resulting exchange differences 
are recognised in retained earnings.
Exchange differences arising from the translation of the net investment in for-
eign operations, and of borrowings and other currency instruments designated 
as hedges of such investments, are taken to other comprehensive income on 
consolidation.
For the company, the exchange differences on such monetary items are re-
ported in the company income statement.
When a foreign operation is sold, such exchange differences are recognized 
in the income statement as part of the gain or loss on sale.
Goodwill and fair value adjustments arising on the acquisition of a foreign 
operation are treated as assets and liabilities of the foreign operation and trans-
lated at the closing rate.
Source: Extract from ‘Summary of significant accounting policies’, AngloGold Ashanti, 2010

Chapter 13  Operating segments and foreign operations
373
There is, though, a major loophole in IAS 21 which concerns dealing with cur-
rency hedges. A multinational company has investments in many countries which 
are therefore denominated in many currencies. This potentially creates many ex-
change exposures and a multinational usually tries to minimize this by borrowing 
in foreign currencies. So if a British company wants to buy a US subsidiary for 
$100m it will try to borrow US dollars to finance the deal, rather than sterling. The 
investment will yield a dollar cash flow which can be used to pay interest and ulti-
mately repay the debt. With a US dollar loan, any move in exchange rates has no 
effect on this closed circuit; a sterling loan would have fluctuating results.
Companies therefore hedge their investments and borrow in currencies which 
reflect the currencies of their future expected cash flows. These debts have not-
withstanding to be translated into functional currency at reporting date at the 
closing rate, while the underlying investment is held in the parent at the histori-
cal rate. Following normal rules this would mean that the two were not balanced, 
but IAS 39, Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement, allows that trans-
lation gains and losses on loans which are hedges of investments may be taken 
directly to equity, without flowing through the statement of profit or loss. This 
is very rational, but has a flaw in that complex multinationals tend not hedge 
individual investments, but rather take out a basket of currency loans to hedge 
Hedging a net investment in a foreign operation
STANDARDs
IAS 21 – THE EFFECTS OF CHANGES IN FOREIGN EXCHANGE RATES 
(extracts)
Translation to the presentation currency
39. The results and financial position of an entity whose functional currency is 
not the currency of a hyperinflationary economy shall be translated into a dif-
ferent presentation currency using the following procedures:
(a)	 assets and liabilities for each statement of financial position presented 
(i.e. including comparatives) shall be translated at the closing rate at the 
date of that statement of financial position;
(b)	income and expenses for each statement of profit or loss and other 
comprehensive income or separate statement of profit or loss presented 
(i.e.including comparatives) shall be translated at exchange rates at the 
dates of the transactions; and
(c)	 all resulting exchange differences shall be recognized in other compre-
hensive income.
40. For practical reasons, a rate that approximates the exchange rates at the 
dates of the transactions, for example an average rate for the period, is often 
used to translate income and expense items. However, if exchange rates fluc-
tuate significantly, the use of the average rate for a period is inappropriate.
Source: IAS 21, The Effects of Changes in Foreign Exchange Rates

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
374
a basket of investments, so one cannot tie down individual assets to individual 
debts. Consequently, it is rather in the hands of the treasury department at year-
end to say which items are trading debts (gains and losses to profit or loss) and 
which are hedges (have no effect on profit), and one does not have to be unduly 
suspicious to see that this system is open to abuse.
Summary
The analysis of multinational operations faces problems of highly aggregated data 
and of financial statements denominated in many currencies. Companies are re-
quired to provide some analysis of business and geographical segments to help 
the analyst.
Fluctuating exchange rates pose a major accounting problem when it comes to 
recognizing transactions denominated in foreign currencies and preparing con-
solidated financial statements which include foreign subsidiaries.
The notion of functional currency plays a key role in the accounting rules on 
foreign currency translation. The functional currency of a company is the cur-
rency of the primary economic environment in which the company operates. The 
functional currency is determined separately for each individual entity within a 
group and each entity has to prepare its individual financial statements in the 
functional currency.
Business transactions denominated in foreign currency are recorded in the 
functional currency by applying the spot exchange rate between the functional 
currency and the foreign currency at transaction date. Subsequently, monetary 
assets and liabilities must be translated at the rate ruling on each successive re-
porting date, as providing the best approximation of their ultimate settlement 
value. Differences arising from translation of such items, whether gains or losses, 
are taken to the statement of profit or loss.
Accounting regulation has traditionally put forward two methods for translat-
ing financial statements of foreign subsidiaries for consolidation purposes. If the 
subsidiary is translated as though the transactions were those of the parent, its ac-
counts are translated at different rates appropriate to the category of asset or lia-
bility concerned. This is known as the temporal method. The translation difference 
is seen as either income or expense for inclusion in the consolidated statement 
of profit or loss. Alternatively, if the subsidiary is considered to be economically 
a whole entity in its own right, its financial statements are translated at the rate 
ruling on reporting date. This is known as the net investment (or closing rate or 
­current rate) method. The use of this method preserves the relationships between 
assets and liabilities within the subsidiary’s statement of financial position. It 
does, however, risk including assets which have, in effect, been revalued, within a 
historical cost oriented statement of financial position on an unsystematic basis.
IAS 21 sets the functional currency of a foreign subsidiary which is heavily in-
tegrated with the operations of the parent and for which the temporal method is 
more appropriate, equal to the functional currency of the parent. As such, it only 
refers to the net investment method as the method to be used when translating 

Chapter 13  Operating segments and foreign operations
375
foreign financial statements to the presentation currency of the group. The trans-
lation difference arising on consolidation is not recognized in profit or loss, but 
is treated as a direct adjustment to shareholders’ equity (other comprehensive 
income accumulated in a separate component of equity).
Discussion Questions
1.	 Discuss why it is important to complement consolidated financial state-
ments with segment reporting.
2.	 A central issue in applying IFRS 8, Operating Segments, is the determination of 
which operating segments should be reported. Explain the tests to determine 
whether or not an operating segment is a reportable segment.
3.	 Explain the difference between primary and secondary translation issues.
4.	 In what circumstances can a company’s local (national) currency be dif-
ferent from its functional currency? If different, what are the accounting 
implications?
5.	 Explain why secondary translation differences are not recognized in 
profit and loss and deferred (as part of equity) under the net investment 
method.
6.	 Discuss the purpose and accounting consequences of currency hedges.
Assignments
The following assignments have answers on the lecturer side of the digital sup-
port resources for the book.
1.	 Norwood Ltd contracts to buy a new machine tool from Illinois Tools Inc. at 
a price of $85 000 on the following terms of payment: 10 per cent on deliv-
ery, 50 per cent after one month and the balance after a further two months. 
The machine is ordered on 1 September 20X1, leaves the Illinois factory on 
1 October and reaches Norwood on 30 November. Norwood makes its pay-
ments on 1 December 20X1, 1 January 20X2 and 1 February 20X2. The £/$ 
exchange rates during this period were:
Date
Exchange rate
1 Sept. 20X1
£1 5 $1.20
1 Oct. 20X1
£1 5 $1.25
30 Nov. 20X1
£1 5 $1.20
1 Dec. 20X1
£1 5 $1.20
31 Dec. 20X1
£1 5 $1.15
1 Jan. 20X2
£1 5 $1.15
1 Feb. 20X2
£1 5 $1.10
	
(a)	 On the assumption that the invoice was denominated in US dollars, 
show the balance sheet entries for Norwood at 31 December 20X1 
and the income statement items for 20X1 and 20X2 which relate to 
this transaction.

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
376
	
(b)	 On the assumption that the invoice was agreed in sterling at £70 000, 
show the same financial statement items for Illinois Tools Inc.
2.	 Continental Holdings borrows CHF20m on 1 July 20X1 for a five-year term, 
at a time when £1 5 CHF4.00. Show the relevant statement of financial 
position­ and profit or loss items relating to this loan for the years 20X1 to 
20X6 inclusive, given the following exchange rate information:
Date
Exchange rate
31 Dec. 20X1
£1 5 CHF4.25
31 Dec. 20X2
£1 5 CHF4.10
31 Dec. 20X3
£1 5 CHF3.50
31 Dec. 20X4
£1 5 CHF3.25
31 Dec. 20X5
£1 5 CHF3.60
30 June 20X6
£1 5 CHF4.10
3.	 Voltaire Industries SA set up a UK subsidiary, Candide Ltd, on 1 July 20X1 
with an investment of €17m. The subsidiary borrowed £500 000 on the UK 
market and purchased a leasehold factory for £300 000 and plant for £1.0m. 
The draft statements of financial position of the two companies as at 30 June 
20X2 are given below. The exchange rates which applied during the year were:
Date
£ 5 €
1 July 20X1
1.7
30 June 20X2
1.5
Average for year
1.6
	
Candide purchased its closing inventories at a time when £1 5 €1.55.
	
Required:
	
(a)	 Apply IAS 21’s secondary translation requirements in order to 
prepare consolidated financial statements for Voltaire Industries as 
at 30 June 20X2.
	
(b)	 Comment on how the use of the temporal method (secondary 
translation) would affect the consolidated financial statements.

Chapter 13  Operating segments and foreign operations
377
4.	 On 1 January 20X1 Flubdub Company set up Yabber Company with a share 
capital of LC200 million (LC 5 local currency) and acquired 100 per cent of 
the outstanding shares of Yabber. At that date the exchange rate was LC1 5 
€4, so the acquisition cost of the investment in the books of Flubdub amounts 
to €800 million. LC is Yabber’s functional currency.
During 20X3 Flubdub grants a loan of €600M to Yabber, refundable at 
nominal value in € after a period of ten years. On granting date, the ex-
change rate was LC1 5 €3. At the end of 20X5 the exchange rate amounts to 
1LC 5 €2. The average rate for 20X5 is LC1 5 €2.5.
Voltaire
Candide
€’000
€’000
£’000
£’000
Non-current assets
Leaseholds
315 000
3 000
Acc. depreciation
–75 000
240 000
–300
2 700
Plant
850 000
10 000
Acc. depreciation
–375 000
475 000
–2000
8 000
Investment in Candide
17 000
732 000
10 700
Current assets (A)
Inventories
85 000
1 750
Receivables
120 000
2 500
Cash
163 000
2 500
368 000
6 750
Creditors due in  
less than 1 year (B)
–250 000
–1250
Net current assets (A – B)
118 000
5 500
Creditors due in  
more than 1 year (C)
–100 000
–5 000
Total net assets
750 000
11 200
Financed by equity
Share capital
400 000
10 000
Reserves
250 000
—
Profit for the year
100 000
1 200
Total equity
750 000
11 200

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
378
Yabber’s property, plant and equipment were acquired at foundation date 
and have been financed by the share capital funds and short-term liabilities. 
These short-term liabilities have been replaced by Flubdub’s long-term loan 
in 20X3. Yabber’s non-current financial assets were acquired at the beginning 
of 20X4, when the exchange rate was LC1 5 €3. The historical cost of inven-
tories acquired and used during 20X4 follows the year-average pattern. The 
reserves reflect the accumulation of retained profits. The historical exchange 
rate of the reserves corresponds to LC1 5 €3 for 20X1 until 20X4.
	
Required:
	
Translate the statement of financial position and the statement of profit 
or loss of Yabber into euro according to:
	
(a)	 the net investment method (cfr. IAS 21);
	
(b)	 the temporal method.
	 The condensed statement of financial position and statement of profit or 
loss of Yabber at the end of 20X5 are as follows (all amounts in LC million):
Statement of financial position at 31 December 20X5
Yabber  
(LC million)
Assets
Property, plant and equipment (net)
560
Non-current financial assets
40
Inventories
300
Trade receivables
300
Cash and cash equivalents
200
1 400
Equity and liabilities
Share capital
200
Reserves
280
Profit for the year
40
Provisions
40
Long-term liabilities – Flubdub
300
Long-term liabilities – others
200
Short-term liabilities
340
1 400
Statement of profit or loss of 20X5 – Yabber
Revenue
1 800
Raw materials and consumables used
–600
1 200
Staff costs
–800
Depreciation and amortization expense
–80
Profit from operations
320
Other expenses
–280
Profit for the year
40

379
Issues in financial reporting 
by multinationals
C H A P T E R  1 4
The object of this chapter is to review what are currently considered to be problems 
either in understanding corporate reports or in the quality of the information given 
in them. A financial analyst is likely to encounter some of these in looking at different 
companies. The subjects are not necessarily related to each other, and you might 
regard this as a reference section for advanced problems in financial reporting.
Chapter Structure
n	 Introduction
n	 Values in accounting
n	 Measurement attributes
n	 The IASB’s mixed-attribute model
n	 Financial instruments
n	 Investment property and agriculture
n	 Pension obligations
n	 Provisions
n	 Post reporting period events
n	 Discontinued operations
n	 Environmental disclosures
n	 Intellectual capital
n	 Summary
n	 Discussion questions
n	 Assignments

Part 4  THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
380
The object of this chapter is to provide a few bridges towards further study of 
measurement and disclosure in financial reporting. It explores some basic notions 
of value and how they are related to measurement attributes of assets and liabili-
ties and to the IASB’s mixed-attribute model.
Historical cost accounting has been perceived to be inadequate in reporting 
some transactions and circumstances and has been significantly modified in spe-
cific reporting domains . . . the boundaries of the traditional accounting model are 
moving. Similarly, supplementary disclosures in the notes to the accounts, and in 
the annual report in general, have been expanding considerably. We will review 
a number of significant disclosure domains such as contingent liabilities, discon-
tinued operations, pension benefits, and environmental and intellectual capital 
dis-closures. A financial analyst is likely to encounter some of these in looking at 
different companies. The disclosure items are not necessarily related to each other, 
and you might regard this as a reference section for advanced topics in financial 
reporting.
Introduction
Values in accounting
We think it is useful first to remind you that the value of anything cannot be 
stated without some sort of qualification as to the context. For example, what is 
the value of your computer? First we have to specify: are we looking at its value 
to you as a tool? As a fashion accessory? As a social symbol? Or some form of eco-
nomic value? In management, we are usually looking at the economic value of 
an asset and trying to put a financial measurement on that. But even that needs 
further qualification: is the relevant value what it cost you to buy the computer 
originally? Or what it would cost you to buy a new one now? Or how much you 
could sell it for? (Another way of looking at that is to ask in which market you are 
making the valuation.)
In thinking about values, it is useful in the first place to distinguish between 
entry value, exit value and value in use. Entry values are those that relate to acquir-
ing something (how much can you buy it for?), exit values are those that relate 
to selling or liquidating something, whereas value in use is the incremental firm 
value from continuing use of the item (which can be seen as a variant of the exit 
value – an asset can disappear either through being sold, or through being used up 
within the company). Entry and exit values are both market values, i.e. all similar 
assets have the same value, whereas value in use is a value specific to the com-
pany that uses the item – it is an entity-specific value. An entry value represents 
a market buying price, while an exit value is a market selling price. When market 
values are used, they provide comparable information between companies. Value 
in use, however, incorporates information about management intentions and is 
therefore subjective and unique to the particular asset. In fact, the company is 
asked to estimate the future net cash flows expected to arise from the continuing 
use and ultimate disposal of the asset and then discount these to present value. 
Different people have different views as to whether the user of accounts finds the 
comparable market measure more useful than the unique entity-specific measure.
An investor is looking at a company and asking whether the price of the secu-
rity is justified in the light of the cash flows which will accrue to the owner of the 

Chapter 14  Issues in financial reporting by multinationals
381
securities. In effect, this is the assessment which the analyst is making – what are 
the future cash flows which the investment will generate (what is the exit value? 
What is the value in use?) and do these justify paying the purchase price of the 
security (entry value)?
The basic accounting model is concerned above all with entry values. Under 
the historical cost model, the gross value of an asset in the statement of financial 
position is what it cost to acquire it. This is usually the market value at the time it 
was acquired (initial measurement) and if there is no subsequent remeasurement, 
this is called historical cost. However, in more sophisticated accounting, one may 
also consider whether it could be useful to remeasure assets at subsequent report-
ing dates. If this were done, one would have to prescribe a value principle: decide 
on what basis a new value was to be derived.
Measurement could be a revised entry cost – what would it cost to acquire now 
an asset in the same age and condition as an existing asset? This is known as ‘re-
placement cost’. Someone who is trying to value a company might approach it 
on the basis of what it would cost to acquire a similar bundle of assets at today’s 
prices. That might be a current entry value. In an economy where there is rapid 
inflation, historical cost values soon become irrelevant, and replacement cost 
might be a more useful measurement approach in some circumstances.
Value in use is based on what benefits can be generated from owning and using 
the asset. As an entity-specific value, it probably will differ from company to com-
pany. Estimating value in use comes down to estimating and discounting the net 
cash flows that the asset can generate. Accounting uses value in use as a control 
measure only. Recall that IAS 36, Impairment of Assets, demands the calculation of 
value in use as a threshold value to arrive at an estimate of the recoverable amount 
of an asset. Long-term assets which are held for use rather than resale are held 
at cost unless the cash flows which are expected to be generated by their use are 
lower than cost.
Accounting uses exit values both as a control and as a measurement base for 
subsequent measurement after initial recognition of a specific set of balance sheet 
items. Recall that inventories must be held at the lower of cost (normal conven-
tion) or net realizable value (the exit value of the inventories). The exit value 
provides a ceiling for the carrying value of the inventory. However, market exit 
values could also be used for subsequent measurement of any asset, not just those 
held for resale.
An interesting additional value concept is the idea of deprival value ­(Figure 14.1). 
It rests on a comparison of a current entry value (replacement cost) and a recov-
erable amount which is consistent with IAS 36. Deprival value is known in UK 
standard setting as value to the business. It is what the loss to the business would 
be if it were obliged to forfeit the asset in question. Deprival value asks: if the as-
set were lost, what would the company do? Would it buy a replacement asset? If 
the answer to that question is yes, then replacement cost is the appropriate value 
Figure 14.1
Deprival value
Deprival
value
lower of
=
Replacement cost
Higher of Net realizable
value or Value in use

Part 4  THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
382
to appear in the statement of financial position. If the answer is no (perhaps the 
asset is no longer used, the product is not profitable, etc.) then the balance sheet 
value is the present value of the future cash flows from sale of the asset or from 
remaining use (whichever is the higher).
The application of this rule would normally provide a balance sheet value 
which is the cost of replacing the company’s assets (and liabilities) at reporting 
date, subject to the proviso that unprofitable assets which would not be replaced 
are included at a lower value reflecting the economic benefits expected to derive 
from the asset, either through use or sale. Deprival value was proposed as the 
valuation approach appropriate in an inflationary situation as providing a current 
value of an asset, while the recoverable amount limitation is intended to pre-
vent presentation of unrealistic asset values in the statement of financial position. 
Most assets would therefore still be measured at an entry value (how much to buy 
the assets, not how much to sell) but at the same (current) value date.
In the past, however, annual income was defined as the change in wealth from 
the beginning to the end of the year, which could be translated in accounting 
terms into using the statement of financial position as the measurement focus 
instead of the statement of profit or loss. As discussed earlier, much of European 
regulation derives from a 17th-century requirement for businesses to prepare an 
annual ‘inventory’ of their worth. There was a period of experimentation as fi-
nancial reporting evolved in the 19th century when the statement of financial 
position was the focus of corporate reporting in a number of countries, where, to 
put it in a simple form, a railway company might have had the following state-
ments of financial position:
1 Jan 1870
31 Dec 1870
Current value of track, buildings, rolling stock
100 000
135 000
Net current assets
20 000
30 000
Loans 
–40 000
–50 000
Net worth 
80 000
115 000
Difference in net worth 5 35 000 5 profit for year
This approach uses re-measurement of assets and is consistent with a definition of 
income which is grounded in economic theory: that a company’s income can be 
objectively determined from the change in its wealth plus what is consumed dur-
ing the period (Hicks, J., Value and Capital, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1946). Under 
this approach the measurement issue becomes the valuation of assets and liabili-
ties at a given moment with market exit values as the measurement attribute.
There are a couple of points to bear in mind here. The most important is that 
in accounting the statement of profit or loss (income statement/profit and loss 
account) articulates (as the jargon puts it) with the statement of financial position 
(balance sheet). The statement of profit or loss is an explanation of changes in the 
internal value of equity as a result of operations; it explains a change in equity, 
but it is also directly linked, through accruals, depreciation and provisions, to the 
balance sheet value of assets and liabilities. Balance sheet values and values in the 
statement of profit or loss are not derived independently of each other. Either you 

Chapter 14  Issues in financial reporting by multinationals
383
measure balance sheet values independently on different dates and the difference 
is the profit or loss for the intervening period, or you measure income, and the 
statement of financial position represents unabsorbed costs (assets) and antici-
pated expenditure (current liabilities) and financing.
In practice, things are less straightforward. Recall the IASB definitions of financial 
statement elements (Chapter 3): it is clear that at a conceptual level the primacy 
given to the definitions of assets and liabilities supports only a balance sheet view 
on income determination. However, financial reporting as it evolved in the 20th 
century has been oriented around reporting completed transactions, using entry 
measurement values, without any subsequent remeasurement or much acknowl-
edgement of possible changes in the economic status of assets other than through 
depreciation.
Measurement attributes
Is the analyst trying to measure future cash flows from the company’s operations 
or the value of the company’s assets? We would say that the investor is interested 
in the future cash flows that she or he is going to receive (dividends plus growth 
in the market value of the company) and that the company’s ability to deliver 
(increasing) annual profits is the surrogate which is used (it is assumed that if 
the company produces increasing profits these will generate positive cash flows 
which will be used for dividends and investment in capacity, which will be re-
flected in higher market value). The current stock exchange value of a listed com-
pany is held, therefore, to represent the present value of the expected future cash 
flows of the company.
There is a general belief that current accrual-based income measures are a bet-
ter predictor of future cash flows than are current cash flows. The logic behind 
this is that in making accrual adjustments, management build in their view of 
the long-term likely outcomes. This lends to the earnings figures more predictive 
value than is in the current cash flow figures which include random events. In 
fact, this general belief is supported by empirical accounting research that shows 
that current accrual earnings outperform current cash flows in forecasting future 
cash flows. Moreover, market returns of shares are empirically better correlated 
with accrual earnings than with actual cash flow measures. These arguments sup-
port an analyst’s measurement focus on the statement of profit or loss.
Expanding the boundaries of the accounting model
Evolution of the accounting standards of both the IASB and FASB (Financial Ac-
counting Standards Board) has had the effect of challenging the historical cost 
base. The standard-setters have been expanding the boundaries of the accounting 
model with the idea that economically significant changes may take place ahead 
of a completed transaction, sometimes many years ahead, and that more of these 
changes should be recognized than was previously the case. This is accompanied 
by the use of economic measurement techniques. This does not change what is 
ultimately recognized as profit or loss, but rather changes in which accounting 
periods something is recognized. Some would argue that it is a sufficiently sub-
stantial change to imply quite a radical reorientation of financial reporting, to 

Part 4  THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
384
give much more emphasis on representing the current economic status of the 
entity’s assets and liabilities in addition to its completed transactions.
The recognition and measurement rules inherent in any accounting model 
impose artificial boundaries on what is reported in financial statements. It is a  
common-place in teaching accounting to acknowledge that there are many as-
pects of the company, especially intangibles such as customer loyalty, acquired 
knowledge of a particular business, etc., which escape recognition as they do not 
meet the definition of balance sheet elements: they have no historical cost or 
their value cannot be measured with sufficient reliability. In recent years, it has 
become apparent from financial scandals that the information (economic facts 
and circumstances) that escapes the historical cost model (based on completed 
transactions) is more economically important than in the past. This discovered 
economic significance may derive from changes in circumstances or from changes 
in understanding of business and business measurement. The effect of the change 
in perceptions is to drive towards earlier recognition of (changes in) assets and li-
abilities than takes place under the completed transaction approach.
The most obvious example of a shift in circumstances is the growth in the use 
of derivatives (such as futures contracts) to manage currency and interest rate ex-
posures and sometimes commodity prices. The rapid rise in this kind of economic 
activity brought about a situation where companies (and sometimes municipali-
ties) were engaged in contracts whose outcomes were uncertain and which were 
largely unrepresented in the statement of financial position, because they were 
incomplete transactions which escaped the measurement model and there was 
no historical cost to begin with. A number of high-profile losses arising from such 
contracts (e.g. Orange County, Proctor and Gamble in the US, Metallgesellschaft 
in Germany) occurred within a relatively short period.
Executory contracts
The recognition issue here is the accounting treatment of executory contracts: 
binding contracts between two parties where performance is not complete. The 
traditional accounting model largely ignores executory contracts, except in the 
context of accounting for long-term contracts (and only if the percentage-of-
completion method is applied). The problems with financial instruments used 
in these corporate scandals highlighted that the executory contract has potential 
value (positive and negative) for the business and challenged accounting to move 
the boundaries of its measurement model to acknowledge this.
IAS 37, Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets (originally is-
sued in 1998), has the notion of an onerous contract (‘the unavoidable costs 
of meeting the obligations under the contract exceed the economic benefits ex-
pected to be received from it’, par.10), and represents a first step towards bringing 
executory contracts within the boundaries of financial reporting. The scope of 
IAS 37 excludes contracts for financial instruments and all executory contracts 
other than onerous ones. IAS 37 reflects the prudent bias of the traditional model, 
recognizing executory contracts as significant but addressing only those that are 
liabilities and not those that are assets. IAS 39, Financial Instrument: Recognition 
and Measurement (first published as a standard in 1999) and its successor, IFRS 9, 
go much further, however, by recognizing both assets and liabilities that arise 
from executory contracts that are financial instruments.
Closely related to this is the issue of recognizing changes in economic value 
in general. The EU Accounting Directives have long had this idea of recognizing 

Chapter 14  Issues in financial reporting by multinationals
385
value changes both on the downside and on the upside through the possible 
revaluation of assets. International accounting standards have been equivocal 
about revaluation. The 1998 crop of IAS also produced IAS 36, Impairment of  
Assets, which calls for assets to be reassessed in the event that some indicator 
suggests that they might be impaired. Recognition of negative changes in value, 
not linked to any transaction, were therefore brought into the IASB measurement 
model. The model was then extended on the upside in 2000 with two industry 
specific standards: both IAS 40, Investment Property, and IAS 41, Agriculture, allow 
for assets to be remeasured at subsequent reporting dates.
Fair value measurement
The change in the boundary of what should be measured has been accompanied 
by a change in the boundary of how one might measure. This appears to be partly 
as a result of better measurement models, and partly as a result of established 
techniques in economics being more fully exploited in accounting. In this vein, 
recent IASB rules have sometimes required companies to carry assets and liabili-
ties in the statement of financial position at ‘fair value’. The IASB defines ‘fair 
value’ as ‘the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a li-
ability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement 
date’ (IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement, para 9). This fair value definition is essen-
tially current market value.
Fair value has been introduced either as a means of putting a value on an in-
complete transaction (i.e. simulating a completed transaction by asking what 
would be the exit value if one quit the transaction at that point) or as the mea-
surement attribute for subsequent measurement in a number of significant ac-
counting standards. In some ways, the use of fair value can be seen as a logical 
extension of the traditional transaction model: if one wanted to value an execu-
tory contract or other asset or liability because the information is necessary ahead 
of the transaction being complete, fair value in effect simulates a transaction at 
reporting date. In other words, if the asset were sold or the liability settled, this 
would be done in the market, so by going to the market for a price, one is staying 
with the transaction model but applying it in a notional sense.
Measurement hierarchy
Conceptually, fair value is a market-based measurement and as such is not  
affected by factors specific to a particular company. In that sense, it can be con-
sidered to be an unbiased measurement that is consistent from period to period 
and across companies. The US standard-setter believes that this makes it a supe-
rior reporting basis to historical cost.
If available, an observable market price in an active market is the best evidence 
of fair value and should be used wherever possible as the fair value measurement. 
In an efficient market the market price of an asset or liability at any point in time 
reflects all available information and represents the market’s assessment of all rel-
evant economic factors and events . . . a perfect fair value.
The difficulties that present themselves for accountants in arriving at fair value 
are what to do when (a) there is more than one market price; (b) the market is 
very illiquid; (c) there are no recent prices; or (d) there is no market for the spe-
cific asset or liability one is trying to measure. Clearly as soon as you move away 
from a current, liquid market in exactly the same kind of asset or liability, the 

Part 4  THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
386
extent to which the value ascertained can be relied upon starts to diminish. The 
IASB and FASB intend to provide guidance in 2012 on some of these application 
issues, especially as concerns emerging markets.
In 2006 the FASB issued a standard, SFAS 157, on making fair value measure-
ments. The IASB issued a very similar standard in 2011 – IFRS 13. Both standard-
setters felt that as fair value is used as the measurement attribute in a number of 
standards, it was simpler to put the guidance on how to calculate it in one place.
IFRS 13 identifies three levels of fair value measurement (see Figure 14.2). 
Level 1 is where exactly the same transactions can be seen in an active market 
­(using this is sometimes described as ‘marking to market’). Level 2 fair value is 
based on similar but not exactly the same transactions being observable in an ac-
tive market which can be adjusted reasonably. Level 3, however, is where there are 
no market transactions and the company must use a financial model to estimate 
market values (some people refer to this as ‘marking to model’). IFRS 13 discusses 
various accounting models that are available. Since the market price is believed to 
reflect the market’s estimate of expected future cash flows, discounted to present 
value, then this is an obvious model to use. Clearly Level 3 valuations are more 
uncertain since they are based on estimates. The standard responds to this by re-
quiring disclosures of assumptions and sensitivities to variations in those.
IFRS 13 specifies that fair value should be an exit price, but also that both en-
try and exit price are the same. Many people find this peculiar, since they think 
the price at which you bought something is not the same as that at which you 
could subsequently sell it. The explanation is that the standard-setters consider 
these are two different markets. If you buy a new car, the price you pay is the 
same as the price the dealer will receive (his exit price is the same as your entry 
price). If you immediately decide to sell it, you enter a different market, that of 
second-hand cars, which in turn can be segmented into the market at which 
a dealer might buy a second-hand car, and also the market in which a private 
individual sells to another private individual. The standard says you have to cor-
rectly identify what is the principal market for the asset or liability whose fair 
Figure 14.2
Fair value 
measurement 
hierarchy
Level 1. Quoted prices (unadjusted) at measurement date in an active market for
identical assets/liabilities
Level 2. Other observable inputs, including quoted prices for similar 
assets/liabilities (adjusted) and market-corroborated inputs
Level 3. Unobservable inputs—the entity’s own assumptions about market
participant assumptions developed based on the best information
available in the circumstances (might include the entity’s own data)

Chapter 14  Issues in financial reporting by multinationals
387
value you are calculating. In the absence of a principal market, you use ‘the most 
advantageous market’.
Linked to this is the notion of highest and best use. Fair value of non-financial 
assets, for the IASB, is not necessarily the value of the asset in its current use. If 
there is a use that the market values more highly, then this is the fair value. For 
example, if you were operating a cinema on a town centre site, it might be that 
the highest and best use for the asset would be to sell it to a property developer.
A continuing debate on innovation
Fair value has many critics, but the debate is often confused between the issue of 
(a) whether accounting should recognize assets and liabilities earlier in the trans-
action cycle and, if so (b) what measurement attribute is appropriate. Recogni-
tion earlier in the cycle is much criticized by banks and insurance companies for 
creating instability in financial statements. The argument seems to be that where 
there is a long-term transaction (for example a life assurance policy) the impor-
tant issue is the final settlement values, and recognizing parts of the transaction 
ahead of final settlement is no guide to the final outcome. Others would say that 
information about long-term commitments is relevant to current investors.
However, the usefulness of the earlier recognition is also a function of the vi-
ability of the current measurement. The ‘core deposits’ issue on IAS 39 demon-
strates this conundrum. Many retail banks use customer deposits as a significant 
part of their overall financing. While in theory the depositor may withdraw their 
money at any time, in practice there is a core amount that remains permanently 
available to the bank. The economic value of the liability is less than face value, 
because no interest is paid to the depositor, but to recognize this would be to gen-
erate a profit every time someone deposits money in their bank account.
Standard-setters claim that fair value is the most relevant measure for some 
balance sheet categories, especially financial instruments, and that a market-
based value is capable of being both objective and consistent. However, critics 
argue that market prices fluctuate rapidly, and reflecting day-to-day movements 
in the accounts just creates gratuitous instability rather than reflecting long-term 
economic value. Given that analysts are trying to value the individual entity, one 
might have thought that entity-specific values were more useful, but analysts 
frequently say that they want to make their own entity-specific estimates, based 
on objective information, so market values are useful and also allow more direct 
inter-firm comparisons, a mainstay of stock selection.
The standard-setters acknowledge that concerns have been expressed about 
the reliability of fair value measurements but point out that they are aware 
that there are problems in its use, which is why it is used only in limited 
circumstances.
The sub-prime loans crisis that started in 2007 stress-tested fair value measure-
ment for financial instruments. Banks continued to announce regular write-offs 
from their asset portfolios. These were caused by falling fair values of the assets. 
This in turn created pressure to abandon fair value measurement, using the argu-
ment that what was important was the ultimate outcome of each of the loans, 
not what you could currently sell them on for.
In response to this the IASB set up a working group to discuss the practical ap-
plication of fair value in a declining market. Their final report was that the guid-
ance in IAS 39 was satisfactory and the main issue was identifying market prices 

Part 4  THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
388
when the market had in practice ceased to exist. Their report highlights practi-
cal difficulties in making fair value measurements and confusion about appro-
priate disclosures. The IASB subsequently amended IFRS 7 Financial ­Instruments: 
­Disclosures to clarify the disclosure requirements.
Subsequent analysis seems to suggest that the greater accounting problem in 
the financial crisis was that provisions for impairment were not applied early 
enough. IAS 39 calls for impairment to take place only when a particular loan 
can be seen to be impaired. However, when bankers issue a portfolio of loans, 
experience suggests that a proportion will fail in some way, and that as ­economic 
circumstances change, that proportion will change. IAS 39 meant that these ex-
pected losses were not recognized in any way until they took place, creating a cliff 
effect. The IASB and FASB are now working on a model that ­anticipates loss.
How fair is fair value? (extract)
We believe that the standard-setters now face a significant dilemma: how can 
they continue to pursue their mark-to-model approach to asset/liability mea-
surement and, at the same time, promulgate accounting standards that will lead 
to a style of financial reporting that enables investors to evaluate management 
performance, assess enterprise value and make sound investment decisions?
Perhaps the answer lies in a return to reality and a limitation on the applica-
tion of the fair value model to those assets and liabilities that have real and 
determinable market values. Where reliable fair values are not readily available, 
ranges of possible fair values (together with assumptions and sensitivity analy-
ses) could be provided in the form of note disclosure. In our view, the IASB has 
a responsibility to define clearly the boundaries between fair value information 
that is sufficiently reliable to be incorporated in the primary financial statements, 
and supplementary fair value information to be provided in the notes to the ac-
counts in the form of ranges of possible outcomes and sensitivity analyses. This 
is not a difficult path – but is one that the IASB has so far chosen not to follow.
Source: Ernst & Young, IFRS Stakeholder Series, pp.8–9, 2005
Between the lines
The IASB’s mixed-attribute model
Within the set of IASB standards, fair value accounting has come to complement 
historical cost accounting mechanisms in several domains leading to what is 
called a mixed-attribute model.
IFRS 3, Business Combinations, requires that assets and liabilities acquired in a 
business combination deal should be measured at fair value at acquisition date. 
The standard includes guidelines for arriving at fair value which include market 
value for assets and present value for pension obligations and other financial li-
abilities. Estimates of market value should be used when no market exists.
IAS 36, Impairment of Assets, contains the notion of recoverable amount, which 
it defines as the higher of the asset’s fair value less costs to sell and its value in 
use. The recoverable amount is the value to be used in the statement of financial 

Chapter 14  Issues in financial reporting by multinationals
389
position if it is lower than the carrying amount. The guidance suggests that the best 
evidence is a binding sale agreement for a similar asset. Failing that, IAS 36 discusses 
similar assets trading in an active market and finally the best estimate of the price 
that could be obtained between a willing buyer and willing seller at arm’s length.
The mixed attributes for measurement are also present in IAS 37, Provisions, 
Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets. The standard says the amount to be 
recognized as a provision should be ‘the best estimate of the expenditure required 
to settle the present obligation at the balance sheet date’ (para.36). It goes on to 
specify that this would be the amount required to settle or to pay to a third party 
to have them accept responsibility. The third party payment suggests a market 
transaction and therefore a fair value. However, the standard suggests that esti-
mates of outcomes ‘are determined by the judgment of the management’ and an 
example in the text makes clear that a provision will be based on expected values – 
the cost of the different outcomes weighted by the probability of their occurrence.
Financial instruments
A specific problem which has become increasingly important in the past two de-
cades is the ability of companies to enter into forward deals to buy or sell, to bor-
row or lend, to issue shares or buy back shares, etc. This is the world of financial 
instruments where the markets are in theory being used to reduce risk because 
they enable companies to match their risk with a company which has an opposite 
risk. For example, your company has a US dollar loan to repay in five years, and 
has revenues in euros. The market matches that with another company which 
has a euro loan to repay in five years and has revenues in US dollars – you agree 
an acceptable rate and swap the obligation to repay. This enables both companies 
to cancel the risk of the exchange rates moving against them. Certainly they lose 
the potential for gain at the same time, but this is normal – the lower the risk, the 
lower the potential gain (and the lower the potential loss).
However, this idyllic scenario is an oversimplification and the markets do not 
always work out the problems correctly. As far as commercial operating compa-
nies are concerned, sometimes they receive bad advice and make losses (famously 
this happened to Procter and Gamble). Sometimes executives look at the upside 
potential of the currency or commodity markets and are tempted to think they 
could be making money for their company. They stop trying simply to reduce 
the company’s risk and start trying to bet against the market, occasionally with 
disastrous results. This happened in the 1990s with Sumitomo Corporation and 
its copper trader who tried to influence the copper markets by taking major posi-
tions, and lost the company millions of dollars in the end (as well as conducting 
various frauds to obtain the cash resources to pay for the trading). It also hap-
pened with Metallgesellschaft and oil futures.
The position is much more serious with banks, although these are fortunately 
outside the scope of this book. The banks are often the intermediaries in the  
market-place and sometimes take on risks expecting to be able to find a counter-
risk and not doing so, or occasionally just betting on the way the market was 
moving (e.g. Nick Leeson and the collapse of Barings Bank, or more recently  
Société Générale).
Fortunately, most commercial companies are not heavily involved in finan-
cial instruments, but the publicity given to the major losses which have been 

Part 4  THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
390
run up in this sort of area have caused investors and analysts to call for much 
more information about company involvement. Unfortunately this has proved 
very difficult to regulate, not least because companies which make widespread 
use of commodity markets, for example, see it as unnecessarily onerous and po-
tentially damaging in competitive terms, to disclose their dealings. Equally there 
are problems about (a) how to value futures contracts and (b) whether a relevant 
current valuation should be brought into historical cost accounts. Preparers argue 
that the final settlement value of a futures contract cannot be known until settle-
ment because the markets are volatile. Consequently, potential losses recognized 
prior to settlement may never be realized and are misleading. The current value 
of a contract is not necessarily any guide to its future value. (But efficient market 
theorists say that the current price embodies everything known about the future 
at that point).
Another problem in this area is the question of whether a financial instrument 
has been entered into as a hedge for another transaction. For example, if a com-
pany has to pay a US dollar sum in two years, it could enter into a forward con-
tract to buy US dollars. This would in effect be a hedge of its exchange rate risk and 
would enable it to lock into the exchange rate guaranteed by the forward contract. 
The economic argument is that transactions and their related hedges should be 
accounted for the same way and balancing gains and losses be offset against each 
other. This means that in regulating financial instrument disclosures one should 
potentially have one rule for financial instruments which are either entered into 
for speculative reasons or as part of general trading policy and another rule for 
those which are entered into as hedges of specific transactions. Regulators do not 
like rules which enable corporates to defer accounting for losses, even if there is 
a related profit due at the end of the contract, but corporates resent recognizing 
­‘paper losses’ when the overall arrangement is neutral in profit and loss terms.
IAS 39, Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement (which is being re-
placed over a period of years by IFRS 9, but key aspects of IFRS 9 are still being 
developed. The new standard may be applied voluntarily but its use is unlikely to 
be mandatory before 2015), covers financial assets, financial liabilities and some 
commodity contracts (contracts to buy and sell non-financial items like oil, corn, 
electricity, etc.). Financial instruments include cash, receivables, payables, equity 
and debt securities as well as financial derivatives. IAS 39 establishes principles 
for recognizing and measuring financial instruments, whereas IFRS 7 Financial In-
struments: Disclosures deals with supplementary information disclosure require-
ments. More specifically, IAS 39 provides recognition and measurement rules for 
derivative instruments, such as foreign currency options and forwards, commod-
ity futures or interest rate swaps, which were mainly kept off-balance under the 
historical cost model as their initial cost is often zero or very small. Derivatives are 
defined as financial instruments exhibiting three characteristics:
	
1.	their value changes in response to a change in some market-related 
­underlying variable, such as an interest rate, a commodity price or a ­foreign 
exchange rate
	
2.	they require no or a relatively small initial investment
	
3.	they are settled at a future date.
These characteristics make derivatives risky contracts with potentially signifi-
cant future cash flow consequences. The potential cash flow effects imply future 

Chapter 14  Issues in financial reporting by multinationals
391
economic benefits or sacrifices and bring derivative contracts within the scope 
of the asset and liability definitions. Fair value is generally considered to be the 
most relevant measurement attribute of derivatives. IAS 39 also contains an op-
tion for companies to designate a qualified financial instrument (asset or liability) 
on initial recognition as one to be measured at fair value with fair value changes 
in profit or loss (the ‘fair value option’).
IAS 39 defines four categories of financial instrument:
	
a.	 A financial asset or liability at fair value through profit or loss. This category 
encompasses both financial instruments held for trading (financial instru-
ments acquired and held with a view to short-term profit taking and deriva-
tives) and designated financial instruments (fair value option).
	
b.	Held-to-maturity investments (and liabilities): non-derivative financial assets 
and liabilities and financial liabilities) that the entity intends to hold to 
maturity.
	
c.	 Loans and receivables: non-derivative financial assets with fixed payments 
that are not quoted in an active market.
	
d.	Available-for-sale assets: non-derivative financial assets that are available for 
sale and not classified as a., b. or c. above.
These different categories of financial instruments (financial assets and financial 
liabilities) are measured and reported (treatment of fair value changes) differently 
after initial recognition. Figures 14.3, 14.4 and 14.5 illustrate the main differences. 
IFRS 9 reduces this to only two categories: assets that are held for their underly-
ing contractual cash flows (measured using historical cost) and all other financial 
assets (fair value through profit or loss). 
Hedge accounting rules will apply if the financial instrument (usually a deriva-
tive) qualifies as an effective hedging instrument. The hedge accounting rules 
will try to match any gain or loss that arises due to movements in the hedged 
item (the result of a hedged risk) with corresponding (but opposite) movements 
in the hedging instrument.
Figure 14.3
IAS 39—
Measurement 
bases of 
financial  
assets
General:
Fair value
Loans and
receivables
If no reliable
fair value estimate
determinable
Measurement of financial
assets
Specific:
Amortized cost
(historical cost)
Exception:
Hedge accounting
Held-to-maturity
investments

Part 4  THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
392
Figure 14.4
IAS 39—
Measurement 
bases of 
financial 
liabilities
General:
Amortized cost
(historical cost)
Held for trading
liabilities
(including derivatives)
Those designated
using the fair value
option
Measurement of financial
liabilities
Specific:
Fair value
Exception:
Hedge accounting
Figure 14.5
IAS 39—
Accounting 
for changes 
in fair value 
of financial 
instruments
Remeasurement gains or losses
on financial instruments
(changes in fair value)
Held for trading
(including
derivatives)
Fair value option
Available-for-sale
Special treatment
Hedge accounting
Directly in equity
(through statement of Changes in Equity)
Recycling of cumulative gain or loss to profit or loss on disposal or impairment
Profit or loss of period
in which fair value
changes occurs
Investment property and agriculture
IAS 40, Investment Property, covers tangible non-current assets of property which 
are held as an investment for the purpose of earning rental or for capital appre-
ciation (expected increase in value). IAS 40 requires a company to choose be-
tween a fair value model and a historical cost model and to apply the chosen 
model consistently across all investment properties. Under the fair value model, 
­investment property should be periodically remeasured at fair value and the 
changes in the fair value should be recognized in the statement of profit or loss. 

Chapter 14  Issues in financial reporting by multinationals
393
Where the historical cost model is chosen, the fair value of the investment prop-
erty has still to be established and disclosed in the notes to the accounts.
IAS 41, Agriculture, is an industry-specific standard and covers valuation of bio-
logical assets and agricultural produce at the point of harvest, but does not apply 
to products that are the result of processing after harvest. IAS 41 requires mea-
surement at fair value less estimated point-of-sale costs from initial recognition 
up to the point of harvest. The change in the fair value of the biological assets 
must be included in the net profit or loss of the period up to harvest. There is a 
general presumption that the fair value of a biological asset can be measured reli-
ably. If not, the company should apply cost minus accumulated depreciation and 
minus any impairment losses.
The EU Accounting Directives incorporated these fair value accounting trends 
through the so-called Fair Value Directive, which is part of the EU’s objective of 
enabling companies to use modern, more transparent accounting practices that 
are consistent with IFRS, in particular IAS 39. The Fair Value Directive requires 
member states to permit or require companies to account for some of their finan-
cial instruments and a limited number of other balance sheet items at fair value. 
This directive had to be implemented in national legislation by 1 January 2004. 
Changes in the value of financial instruments which are fair valued will go to the 
statement of profit or loss (a change in the current position) or, in certain circum-
stances, to a specific reserve called the fair value reserve.
STANDARDS
IFRS 7 – FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS: ­DISCLOSURES (extract) 
1.   The objective of this IFRS is to require entities to provide disclosures in 
their financial statements that enable users to evaluate:
(a)	 the significance of financial instruments for the entity’s financial posi-
tion and performance; and
(b)	the nature and extent of risks arising from financial instruments to which 
the entity is exposed during the period and at the end of the reporting 
period, and how the entity manages those risks.
Source: IFRS 7, Financial Instruments: Disclosures
COMPANY REPORT
BAYER – NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS (extract)
30. Financial instruments
The system used by the Bayer Group to manage credit risk, liquidity risk and the various types 
of market risks (interest-rate risk, currency risk and other price risks), together with its objectives, 
methods and procedures, is outlined in the Risk Report, which forms part of the Management 
Report.

Part 4  THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
394
Dec.31, 2011
Carried at  
­amortized cost
Carried at fair value
Non- 
financial 
assets/ 
liabilities
€ million
Carrying 
amount 
Dec.31, 
2011
Fair value  
for 
­presentation
Based  
on quoted 
prices in 
active 
markets
Based  
on  
market- 
derived  
data
Based  
on indi-
vidual 
valuation 
parameters
Carrying 
amount  
in the 
statement 
of  
financial 
position
Carrying 
amount
Carrying 
amount
Carrying 
amount
Carrying 
amount
Trade accounts 
receivable
7 061
7 061
Loans and receivables
7 061
7 053
7 061
Other financial assets
2 920
716
477
35
4 148
Loans and receivables
2 920
2 781
2 770
Available-for-sale 
­financial assets
41
716
757
Held-to-maturity 
­financial assets
109
114
109
Derivatives that qualify 
for hedge accounting
220
220
Derivatives that do not 
qualify for hedge 
accounting
257
35
292
Other receivables
713
1 340
2 053
Loans and receivables
713
712
713
Non-financial assets
1 340
1 340
Cash and cash 
equivalents
1 770
1 770
Loans and receivables
1 770
1 770
1 770
Total financial assets
12 464
716
477
35
13 692
  Of which loans and 
receivables
12 314
12 314
Financial liabilities
11 149
530
11 679
Carried at amortized 
cost
11 149
11 661
11 149
Derivatives that qualify 
for hedge accounting
211
211
Derivatives that do not 
qualify for hedge 
accounting
319
319
Trade accounts payable
3 466
313
3 779
Carried at amortized 
cost
3 466
3 466
3 466
Non-financial liabilities
313
313
Other liabilities
953
167
5
979
2 104
Carried at amortized 
cost
953
954
953
Carrying amounts and fair values of financial instruments

Chapter 14  Issues in financial reporting by multinationals
395
Derivatives that qualify 
for hedge accounting
140
140
Derivatives that do not 
qualify for hedge 
accounting
27
5
32
Non-financial liabilities
979
979
Total financial liabilities
15 568
697
5
16 270
  Of which carried at 
amortized cost
15 568
15 568
  Of which derivatives 
that qualify for hedge 
accounting
351
351
  Of which derivatives 
that do not qualify 
for hedge accounting
346 
346
Source: Bayer AG, 2011 Annual Report, Note 30
Another issue related to financial instruments is that of a company’s obliga-
tions to pay pensions to former employees. Pension arrangements differ widely 
between countries and companies. In some countries, such as France, ultimate 
pension provision is in the hands of the government and is funded by social se-
curity charges. Private pension pools are paid out proportionately to those with 
an interest and there are no guaranteed payments. However, in many countries 
employers have played a significant role in the past in providing pensions in 
excess of state benefits. Typically such pension schemes are funded by the com-
pany putting money into a separate fund (which accumulates pension assets or 
plan assets), and the fund pays out the pension. The pension schemes are gen-
erally classified as either defined contribution plans or defined benefit plans. Under 
a ­defined contribution plan, the company pays fixed contributions to the 
fund and has no obligation to pay further contributions if the fund does not 
hold sufficient plan assets to pay the pension benefits. The kind of scheme that 
gives the most difficulty is the defined benefit pension scheme. Defined ben-
efit plans are very common in Europe and North America. The pension scheme 
guarantees to provide a pension to the retired employee which is a proportion 
of their final salary or some average of their latter years working at the company. 
The employee accumulates rights to a bigger and bigger proportion with each 
year of work.
IAS 19, Employee Benefits, sets the rules for pension plan accounting. De-
fined contribution plans are relatively easy to account for: contributions pay-
able to the plan are recognized as an expense as the employee provides services. 
For defined benefit plans, IAS 19 requires the company to make an estimate of 
the pension obligation at reporting date (the present value of its defined 
­benefit ­obligations for current and past service of employees) and to recognize 
a ­defined benefit liability (a kind of provision), net of the fair value of the 
Pension obligations

Part 4  THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
396
funded plan assets. As for the statement of profit or loss effect (pension cost), the 
underlying principle of IAS 19 is that the cost of providing retirement benefits 
should be recognized in the period when the benefit is earned, not when it is 
paid. Broadly, the pension cost for the current year is determined as the change 
in the defined benefit liability for the year and charged to the statement of profit 
or loss. Pension plans need not be fully funded; they may even be unfunded. The 
funding rate does affect the defined benefit liability as recognized in the state-
ment of financial position (through the fair value of the plan assets), but not the 
defined benefit obligation (DBO).
There are a number of problems with defined benefit schemes. The central 
problem is that the defined benefit obligation is estimated based on a set of 
­actuarial assumptions. The company (or its actuaries) have to forecast how 
long employees will work for the company, what their final salary will be and 
how long they will live after retirement. In assessing how much funding to put 
aside for this, they similarly have to forecast what the return will be on invest-
ments (plan assets) over the expected life of the employee. Obviously, both these 
areas of forecasting involve some quite distant time horizons and some very sig-
nificant unknowns, even if the law of large numbers does reduce the forecast risk. 
The actuarial assumptions encompass demographic and financial assumptions: 
demographic assumptions about future characteristics of current and former em-
ployees (and their dependents), such as mortality during and after employment, 
rates of employee turnover and early retirement, and financial assumptions deal-
ing with items such as the discount rate (to calculate present value over a rela-
tively long period of time), future salary and benefit levels (defining the target 
pension) and the expected rate of return on plan assets. Defined benefit calcu-
lations are quite sensitive for these actuarial assumptions, meaning that if the as-
sumptions prove to be wrong, current shareholders may find themselves making 
extra provision for employees who stopped work years before. Recent years have 
proved to be very difficult for companies with defined benefit schemes, precisely 
because their calculation of the funding requirements has been seriously wrong, 
leaving a number of schemes acutely underfunded. The primary reasons for this 
are (a) a considerable increase in life expectancy (50 years ago a European man re-
tiring at 65 would very likely die before reaching the age of 67, whereas he would 
now probably live to about 75 or 80 years old); (b) the volatile performance of the 
stock markets in recent years; and (c) the low rates of interest on loans, affecting 
the discount rate to be used in the present value calculations. This has left some 
companies facing considerable deficits.
Actuarial assumptions have to be best estimates and financial assumptions 
must be based on market expectations at the balance sheet date for the period 
over which the obligations are to be settled. Changes in actuarial estimates (for 
example for greater life expectancy) will affect the accumulated benefit obliga-
tion. These changes in actuarial assumptions, but also unexpected changes in the 
fair value of the plan assets, result in actuarial gains and losses.
IAS 19 is in a transitional phase. An amendment was issued in June 2011 which 
will be mandatory from January 2013 but which may be applied earlier. The re-
vised standard requires service cost and interest to be reported in the statement 
of profit and loss with changes in actuarial assumptions being shown in Other 
Comprehensive Income.
The original standard provided for deferral of changes in actuarial estimates, 
this allowed for a corridor of 10 per cent of the DBO or value of the plan assets 

Chapter 14  Issues in financial reporting by multinationals
397
COMPANY REPORT
STORA ENSO – ANNUAL REPORT 2011
Note 1 – Accounting Principles (extract)
Employee benefits
The Group operates a number of defined benefit and contribution plans throughout 
the world, the assets of which are generally held in separate trustee administered 
funds. The pension plans are generally funded by payments from employees and 
by the relevant Group companies, taking into account the recommendations of in-
dependent qualified actuaries. Group contributions to the defined contribution pen-
sion plans are charged to the Income Statement in the year to which they relate.
For defined benefit plans, pension accounting costs are assessed using the 
projected unit credit method. Under this method, the cost of providing pen-
sions is charged to the Income Statement so as to spread the regular cost over 
the service lives of employees in accordance with the advice of qualified actu-
aries who carry out a full valuation of the plan every year. The pension obliga-
tion is measured as the present value of estimated future cash outflows using 
interest rates of highly rated corporate bonds or government securities as ap-
propriate that match the currency and expected duration of the related liability.
The Group immediately recognizes all actuarial gains and losses arising 
from defined benefit plans directly in equity, as disclosed in its Statement of 
Comprehensive Income. Past service costs are however identified at the time of 
any plan amendments and, where vested, are shown in the income statement, 
whilst unvested amounts are amortized systematically over the vesting period. 
In the Group Statement of Financial Position, the full liability for all plan deficits 
is recorded, as adjusted for any past service costs still to be amortized.
Note 21 – Post-Employment Benefits (extract)
Amounts recognized on the Statement of Financial Position – Defined Benefit Plans
As at 31 December
2011
2010
2011
2010
2011
2010
(EUR million)
Total defined  
benefit plans
Defined benefit 
pension plans
Other post-employ-
ment benefits
Present value of  
funded obligations
807.0
760.3
807.0
760.3
—
—
Present value of  
unfunded obligations
296.0
287.4
275.0
268.5
21.0
18.9
Defined Benefit  
Obligations (DBO)
1 103.0
1 047.7
1 082.0
1 028.8
21.0
18.9
Fair value of plan assets
773.5
743.1
773.5
743.1
—
—
Effect of asset ceiling
1.9
—
1.9
—
—
—
Net Liability in  
Defined Benefit Plans
331.4
304.8
310.4
285.7
21.0
18.9
Unrecognized prior  
service costs
0.7
1.0
—
—
0.7
1.0
Net Liability
330.7
303.6
310.4
285.7
20.3
17.9

Part 4  THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
398
within which such actuarial gains and losses need not be immediately recog-
nized. This provided a sort of cushion against short-term fluctuations. Where 
a change went outside the corridor, this had to be recognized, but it might be 
expensed over the remaining service life of the employees concerned. This treat-
ment will be visible in some financial statements for 2012 but will disappear 
thereafter.
The discount rate which is used to calculate the present value should be the 
market rate on high-quality corporate bonds. Companies must disclose the 
As at 31 December
2011
2010
2011
2010
2011
2010
(EUR million)
Total defined  
benefit plans
Defined benefit 
pension plans
Other post-em-
ployment benefits
Current service cost
9.7
10.4
8.6
9.4
1.1
1.0
Interest cost
45.8
47.4
45.0
46.6
0.8
0.8
Expected return on  
plan assets
37.9
34.7
37.9
34.8
—
0.1
Past service cost 
­recognized in the year
0.4
0.1
0.2
—
0.2
0.1
Total included in 
personnel expenses
18.0
23.2
15.9
21.2
2.1
2.0
As at 31 December
2011
2010
2011
2010
2011
2010
Finland
Germany
Sweden
Discount rate %
4.25
4.75
4.25
4.75
3.50
4.00
Expected return on 
plan assets %
4.25
w4.60
4.50
4.50
5.00
6.00
Future salary  
increase %
3.5
3.5
2.5
2.4
3.0
3.0
Future pension  
increase %
2.1
2.1
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
Average current  
retirement age
63.8
64.0
65.0
65.0
64.9
64.8
Weighted average 
life expectancy
88.00
88.00
85.00
84.80
87.00
86.84
Amounts recognized in the income statement
Defined benefit plans: Country assumptions used in calculating obligations
Source: Stora Enso,Annual Report, 2011

Chapter 14  Issues in financial reporting by multinationals
399
discount rate, since use of a high rate has the effect of reducing the present value 
very significantly. Analysts should compare the discount rate used with that used 
by other companies.
The disclosures also include the fair value of plan assets. This should be the 
current market value, where there is one. However, if there is no market, then 
the fair value has to be estimated by discounting forecast future cash flows. The 
IASB also introduced extra disclosures calling for a breakdown of the investments 
included in plan assets by class of investment and a note of the expected rate of 
return. This too is aimed at allowing analysts to gauge the reasonableness of the 
assumptions behind the figures.
The IASB and the FASB have agreed a joint project to revise pension account-
ing, but this is likely to be a long drawn out and controversial project, and has 
not even been started yet. The standard-setters would like to introduce revised 
recognition rules to take account of plans where the risks are shared between the 
employee and the employer. As companies have tended to withdraw from de-
fined benefit plans because the costs are now very high, in light of growing life 
expectations, they have in some cases introduced schemes where they (and pos-
sibly the employee) pay into a fund. The employee receives the fund (or an an-
nuity bought with its proceeds) on retirement, but the employer guarantees a 
minimum return to the fund while it is accumulating. This is similar to a defined 
contribution scheme, but with some additional risk for the employer.
Provisions and related issues are covered in IAS 37, Provisions, Contingent Liabilities 
and Contingent Assets. IAS 37 refers to a contingency as a condition or situation, 
the ultimate outcome of which, gain or loss, ‘will be confirmed only by the oc-
currence, or non-occurrence, of one or more uncertain future events not wholly 
within the control of the entity’ (see box below on IAS 37, definitions). In a sense 
all provisions are contingent because they are uncertain in timing or amount. 
We have already dealt with the borderline between provisions and contingent 
liabilities in Chapter 6. Recall that IAS 37 retains a specific distinction between 
provisions and contingent liabilities. Provisions imply a present obligation where 
an outflow of resources is probable, whereas a contingent liability reflects a possible 
obligation or a present obligation where the outflow of resources is not probable 
or cannot be measured with sufficient reliability.
Generally speaking, any company has an ongoing bundle of obligations, con-
tracts and operations. It is the fact that the company is a continuing business 
which makes the annual profit of necessity an estimate based on a number of 
assumptions about the future. IAS 37 in effect says that as long as future foresee-
able events are expected to be profitable there is no need to reflect them in the 
financial statements, and indeed prudence requires that future profits are not rec-
ognized in advance. However, future losses are another matter entirely.
If a company has a loss-making division, this would not generally qualify as re-
quiring a contingency note disclosure, but one would expect that the chairman’s 
statement or review of operations would make clear that this is the case and 
would outline what action is being taken to deal with it. However, the outcome 
Provisions

Part 4  THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
400
STANDARDS
IAS 37 – PROVISIONS, CONTINGENT LIABILITIES AND CONTINGENT 
ASSETS (extracts)
Definitions
10.  A contingent liability is:
(a)	 a possible obligation that arises from past events and whose existence will 
be confirmed only by the occurrence or non-occurrence of one or more 
uncertain future events not wholly within the control of the entity; or
(b)	a present obligation that arises from past events but is not recognized 
because:
(i)	 it is not probable that an outflow of resources embodying 
economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation; or
(ii)	 the amount of the obligation cannot be measured with suf-
ficient reliability.
A contingent asset is a possible asset that arises from past events and whose 
existence will be confirmed only by the occurrence or non-occurrence of one 
or more uncertain future events not wholly within the control of the entity.
Source: IAS 37, Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets
of a legal case such as being pursued for anti-competitive behaviour by the Euro-
pean Commission would certainly qualify as something which needs treatment 
in the financial statements. The question which next arises is, if there is a foresee-
able future loss, should we disclose it in the financial statements or do we need 
actually to recognize the amount of the loss in the accounts?
IAS 37 explicitly states that future operating losses cannot be provided for. 
Such losses do not meet the IASB definition of liability and, consequently, the 
recognition criteria set out for provisions in IAS 37. Future operating losses have 
to be reported in the future in the same way as future operating profits. An ex-
pectation of future operating losses constitutes, however, a primary indication 
that certain operating assets might be impaired and thus could trigger extensive 
impairment testing of assets. An exception is made for onerous contracts, which 
could be executory contracts.
An executory contract is a contract where the company has entered into an 
agreement but fulfilment of the terms has not been completed (and perhaps not 
even started). Most businesses have many of these and, if the business is con-
tinuing, you might expect at any given moment that there would be sales agree-
ments, supplier purchase contracts, capital commitments, etc. at varying stages 
of completion. IAS 37 says that these contracts need no special treatment except 
if such a contract is particularly ‘onerous’ – i.e. where the expected unavoidable 
costs of meeting the contract are greater than the benefits expected to be received 
from it. In general, if a contract is onerous, the company should recognize the 
present obligation under the contract as a provision in the balance sheet. An ex-
ample of an onerous contract could be a non-cancellable operating lease for 
office space which is no longer needed by the company.

Chapter 14  Issues in financial reporting by multinationals
401
Recall that IAS 37 acknowledges the following categories of (potential) liabilities:
	
4.	Clear liability, but where the amount and timing of future expenditure is un-
certain. Here the company should make a provision – expense an estimated 
figure in the statement of profit or loss and carry forward a provision in the 
balance sheet, against which the expense will be offset when it arises.
	
5.	Possible liability, or liability where the amount involved is so uncertain as to 
make a reliable estimate impossible. The company should disclose a contin-
gent liability in the notes to the accounts.
	
6.	A liability which is possible but unlikely to cause an outflow of assets – no 
disclosure.
Related information is clearly important to the analyst in forming an opinion 
about the future profitability of the business. At the same time, it is sometimes 
quite sensitive information whose disclosure may have wider consequences for 
the company than simply influencing analysts’ forecasts. A disclosure that the 
company is being pursued in the courts for causing environmental damage or 
infringing other company patents would have a considerable negative public re-
lations impact.
Contingent assets on the other hand arise where events give rise to the pos-
sibility of an inflow of economic benefits to the company. Suppose, for example, 
that the company pursues a claim through legal processes, but the outcome is still 
uncertain. Prudence considerations prohibit in this case the recognition of an as-
set in the financial statements since it would probably result in the recognition 
of income that may never be realized. However, when the inflow of economic 
resources is probable, the contingent asset (material contingent gains) should be 
disclosed in the notes. If the inflow of resources is either possible or remote, the 
contingent asset is not even disclosed. Qualification for disclosure is thus more 
tight for contingent liabilities than for contingent assets.
The approach with regard to contingent assets and contingent liabilities may, 
however, change drastically in the future. Indeed, the IASB took the tentative de-
cision (June 2005) to abandon the notion of contingent assets and contingent 
liabilities altogether. However, many constituents were not happy with the pro-
posals, which included measuring a provision at its fair value. As a result of the 
financial crisis the project was put to one side but may be revived in the future. A 
fundamental question is whether the provision should be measured at the value 
the entity thinks it is most likely to settle, discounted back, or whether the mea-
surement should be based on expected value (the combination of a probability-
weighted range of estimates). 
Post reporting period events
A more specialist disclosure is events occurring after the reporting period (also re-
ferred to as events after the balance sheet date). While multinationals try to pub-
lish their financial statements as quickly as possible after the financial year-end, 
it is difficult to finalize the financial statements of all subsidiaries, obtain auditor 
approval and then consolidate the statements in under two months, and many 
continental European companies take up to four months to do this. Potentially 

Part 4  THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
402
this means that events may take place between the financial year-end and the 
publication date of the financial statements which have a significant bearing 
upon the future of the company. IAS 10, Events after the Reporting Period, addresses 
more specifically events (both favourable and unfavourable) occurring between 
the end of the reporting period and the date when the financial statements are 
authorized for issue.
IAS 10 distinguishes between adjusting and non-adjusting events after the 
reporting period. Adjusting events are those that provide evidence of con-
ditions that existed at the end of the reporting period. These events shall be re-
flected in the financial statements by adjusting the amounts recognized in the 
financial statements. Examples are:
	
n	 after the reporting period a court decision confirms that the entity had a 
present obligation at reporting date – in this case a new provision will be 
recognized or an existing one will be adjusted
	
n	 the discovery of fraud that shows that the financial statements are incorrect
	
n	 the bankruptcy of a current customer after the end of the reporting period 
probably confirms an impairment loss on a trade receivable at reporting 
date – in this case the company will have to adjust the carrying amount of 
the trade receivable.
Non-adjusting events after the reporting period will not affect the 
amounts recognized in the statement of financial position or statement of 
profit or loss but, if material, their nature and an estimate of their financial 
effect should be disclosed. Examples of such events might be that after the re-
porting period a fire destroys a major production plant or a restructuring plan 
is announced. These events could influence the economic decisions of users 
taken on the basis of the financial statements and thus have to be disclosed. 
IAS 10 also explicitly states that dividends declared after the reporting period 
are not recognized as a liability because at the end of the reporting period they 
do not constitute a present obligation. They should, however, be disclosed in 
the notes.
STANDARDS
IAS 10 – EVENTS AFTER THE REPORTING PERIOD  
(extract)
Definitions
3.  Events after the reporting period are those events, favourable and 
­un-favour-able, that occur between the end of the reporting period and the date 
when the financial statements are authorized for issue. Two types of events can 
be identified:
(a)	 those that provide evidence of conditions that existed at the end of the 
reporting period (adjusting events after the reporting period); and
(b)	those that are indicative of conditions that arose after the reporting pe-
riod (non-adjusting events after the reporting period).
Source: IAS 10, Events after the Reporting Period

Chapter 14  Issues in financial reporting by multinationals
403
COMPANY REPORT
‘NESTLE - ANNUAL REPORT 2011’ 
24.  Events after the balance sheet date
At 15 February 2012, date of approval of the Financial Statements by the Board 
of Directors, the Group had no subsequent events that warrant a modification 
of the value of the assets and liabilities or an additional disclosure.
Source: Nestlé, Annual Report 2011
Discontinued operations
Multinational companies are in effect usually a bundle of businesses that are not 
necessarily related to each other except by ownership. Often they will sell off 
parts of the group that they have decided are no longer ‘strategic’, or they will 
buy another group and hive off some of its businesses. IFRS require that informa-
tion about a business that either has already been discontinued or is about to be 
sold should be shown separately in the financial statements.
STANDARDS
IFRS 5 – NON-CURRENT ASSETS HELD FOR SALE AND DISCONTINUED 
OPERATIONS (extract)
31.  A component of an entity comprises operations and cash flows that can 
be clearly distinguished, operationally and for financial reporting purposes, 
from the rest of the entity. In other words, a component of an entity will have 
been a cash-generating unit or a group of cash-generating units while being 
held for use.
32.  A discontinued operation is a component of an entity that either has been 
disposed of, or is classified as held for sale, and
(a)	 represents a separate major line of business or geographical area of 
operations,
(b)	is part of a single co-ordinated plan to dispose of a separate major line 
of business or geographical area of operations, or
(c)	 is a subsidiary acquired exclusively with a view to resale.
33.  An entity shall disclose:
(a)	 a single amount in the statement of comprehensive income compris-
ing the total of:
(i)	 the post-tax profit or loss of discontinued operations and
(ii)	 the post-tax gain or loss recognized on the measurement to fair 
value less costs to sell or on the disposal of the assets or disposal 
group(s) constituting the discontinued operation.
(b)	an analysis of the single amount in (a) into:
(i)	 the revenue, expenses and pre-tax profit or loss of discontinued 
operations;

Part 4  THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
404
It is very useful for analysts who are trying to predict future profits to have the 
profits or losses from businesses that are being sold or have been sold stripped out 
of the Statement of Comprehensive Income. When that has been done they can 
see what are the profits from the continuing business. IFRS 5 therefore requires a 
separate presentation of this as set out in the extract from the standard.
The standard also requires that assets and liabilities that are being sold should 
be separately identified in the statement of financial position. A bundle of assets 
and liabilities representing a business to be sold is called a disposal group. The 
accounting for this is another case where prudence is overriding matching. When 
the multinational has decided to sell this business, it must work out what is the 
fair value. If this is lower than the book value, then an impairment loss has to be 
taken, and the disposal group shown in the statement of financial position at fair 
value less costs to sell. However, if fair value is higher than book value, no gain is 
recognized at this point.
Environmental disclosures
Part of this change in attitudes involves the company’s relationship with 
­society in general and in particular how the company impacts upon the physi-
cal environment. Environmental disclosures by companies are still at an early 
stage, but very few large companies do not make reference somewhere to their 
environmental policies. Companies exhibit a range of different strategies in 
pursuing environmental disclosure: from adapting reactive positions in debates 
on environmentally damaging issues to taking proactive positions, mainly 
in relatively less sensitive sectors. The less discretionary part of environmen-
tal reporting relates to environmental costs being brought into the financial 
statements.
Accounting standard-setters have so far not addressed the broader issue of cor-
porate environmental reporting, but a number of professional accounting bodies 
have produced guidelines and the United Nations Intergovernmental Working 
Group of Experts on International Standards of Accounting and Reporting (ISAR) 
(ii)	 the related income tax expense as required by paragraph 81(h) of 
IAS 12;
(iii)	 the gain or loss recognized on the measurement to fair value less 
costs to sell or on the disposal of the assets or disposal group(s) 
constituting the discontinued operation; and
(iv)	 the related income tax expense as required by paragraph 81(h) of 
IAS 12.
The analysis may be presented in the notes or in the statement of compre-
hensive income. If it is presented in the statement of comprehensive income 
it shall be presented in a section identified as relating to discontinued opera-
tions, i.e. separately from continuing operations.
Source: IFRS 5, Non-current Assets Held for Sale and Discontinued Operations

Chapter 14  Issues in financial reporting by multinationals
405
published detailed recommendations in 1998 which remain the most thorough 
review of the area but have no regulatory authority. In the EU, environmental ac-
countability and reporting has increased through new initiatives of the European 
Commission, like the publication of recommendations on the recognition, mea-
surement and disclosure of environmental issues (Official Journal of the European 
Communities, June 13, 2001, L 156/33–42).
The absence of comprehensive regulation leaves companies with a free hand 
in determining what they publish, with the consequence that information is 
generally quite specific to the reporting company and is not audited. The ma-
jority of the environmental disclosures appear in the directors’ report or an 
equivalent operating and financial review section of the annual report. Alter-
natives are a stand-alone report or a stand-alone environmental section in the 
annual report. Financially oriented environmental disclosures figure primarily 
COMPANY REPORT
NESTLÉ
Creating shared value Key performance indicators 
GRI
2010
2011
Environmental sustainability
Production volume
Total production volume (million tonnes)
43.74
45.21
Materials
Raw materials used (million tonnes)
EN1
23.27
22.87
Materials for packaging purposes (million tonnes)
EN1
4.59
4.58
Packaging source optimization (kilotonnes saved)
70.8
39.3
Energy
Total on-site energy consumption (petajoules)
88.6
90.1
Total on-site energy consumption (gigajoules per 
tonne of product)
2.03
1.99
On-site energy generated from renewable sources 
(% of total)
12.3
11.6
Total direct energy consumption (petajoules)
EN3
63.0
64.3
Total indirect energy consumption (petajoules)
EN4
67.6
70.1
Water
Total water withdrawal (million m3)
EN8
144
143
Total water withdrawal (m3 per tonne of product)
EN8
3.29
3.17
Biodiversity
Total size of manufacturing sites located in 
­protected areas (hectares) (l)
EN11
44.2
Source: Nestlé, Creating Shared Value, 2011, extract

Part 4  THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
406
in the notes to the accounts and deal mainly with environmental liabilities and 
contingencies in compliance with financial reporting requirements. The bulk 
of the environmental reporting is, however, voluntary. The aspects of environ-
mental management that are reported most often include capital expenditures 
for anti-pollution equipment, recycling and conservation policy, environmental 
management and audit practices, and the costs of complying with governmental 
emissions standards.
Should analysts be interested in this information? Well, yes, because viewed 
from a strictly capitalist standpoint, we are moving further into a political en-
vironment where governments are insisting that ‘the polluter pays’. This means 
that any company which has caused pollution, intentionally or otherwise, may 
become liable to clean up the countryside and compensate people who are badly 
affected. Hidden pollution is therefore, aside from social considerations, very bad 
from an investor’s point of view because it may mean a severe drain on future 
earnings. An extreme case in point is the settlements reached in the US between 
state governments and the tobacco industry for large payments to be made to 
compensate the government for health care costs caused by treating smoking-
related diseases.
Decommissioning liabilities
This brings us back to formal accounting. A potential clean-up or compensation 
liability should be addressed in compiling the financial statements as either the 
object of a provision or disclosure of a contingent liability. At a more advanced 
level, it is worth looking at how companies have to account for decommission-
ing costs. Decommissioning liabilities arise if a company, when it purchases or 
constructs an asset, takes on a contractual or statutory obligation to decommis-
sion the asset or restore the asset site to certain minimum standards or both, 
at the end of the asset’s life. For nuclear power plants, for example, there usu-
ally exists a statutory obligation to dismantle the operational facilities at the 
end of their useful life. Such future dismantling expenditure and accompanying 
site restoration costs can be profound. Also oil companies now provide for de-
commissioning costs alongside the depreciation of mineral resources. In other 
words, they now recognize that they cannot just close down a well and go away, 
they need to make good the land as far as possible. Since this cost of using the 
mineral resource can be estimated, it should be spread over the period when 
the asset is used. Increasingly we should expect this approach to be applied to 
factories as well.
There has been some disagreement as to how such decommissioning provi-
sions should be applied. Previous practice was to charge an amount each year 
to the statement of profit or loss and build up the required provision year on 
year over the life of the operational facility. However, IAS 37 says that if there 
is a dismantling obligation, a full provision should be recognized as soon as the 
obligation exists, usually at construction date or commencement of operations. 
Additionally, the IASB considers these decommissioning and site restoration costs 
necessary expenditure in order to access the economic benefits expected to flow 
from the asset. Therefore, these costs have to be capitalized as part of the acqui-
sition cost of the asset at the date on which the company becomes obligated to 
incur them.

Chapter 14  Issues in financial reporting by multinationals
407
COMPANY REPORT
SIBIR ENERGY
Decommissioning provision – accounting policies (extract)
Oil field and other asset retirement obligations including 
­decommissioning costs
The Group makes full provision for the future cost of decommissioning oil and 
gas production facilities and related pipelines on a discounted basis upon the 
installation of those facilities. Provisions for environmental remediation are 
made when a clean-up is required under the Group’s licence obligations, in ac-
cordance with Russian state or federal law, or when the requirement is prob-
able and the amount can be reasonably determined
The provision for the costs of decommissioning and environmental reme-
diation of these production facilities and pipelines at the end of their economic 
lives has been estimated using existing technology, at current prices increased 
by forecast future Russian inflation and discounted using a real discount rate 
of 10 per cent (2006: 10 per cent). These costs are expected to be incurred over 
the next 20 to 30 years. While the provision is based on the best estimate of 
future costs and the economic lives of the facilities and pipelines, there is un-
certainty regarding both the amount and timing of incurring these costs. In 
addition, there is additional uncertainty regarding the scale of any possible en-
vironmental contamination, the timing and extent of future corrective actions 
and changes in Russian state or federal requirements.
Source: Sibir Energy plc, Annual Report, 2003
However, one of the key differences between decommissioning costs and other 
costs of acquisition is the timing of the related expenditures. Decommissioning 
costs will not become payable until some future date, possibly several decades 
in the future. Consequently, there is likely to be uncertainty over the amount 
of costs that will be incurred and the issue of the time value of money undoubt-
edly will be very significant. Management should record its best estimate of the 
company’s obligations and will have to use discounting to address the impact of 
the delayed cash flows. The amount capitalized as part of the asset’s cost will be 
the amount estimated to be paid, discounted to the date of initial recognition. 
The related counterpart is recognized in provisions. Thereafter, the asset (capital-
ized decommissioning costs included) is depreciated over its useful life, while the 
discounted provision is progressively unwound. With the passage of time the in-
crease in the decommissioning provision is recognized as a borrowing cost. From 
this, it should be clear that accounting for decommissioning costs will have a 
profound impact on the statement of financial position and statement of profit or 
loss as it affects long-term assets, provisions, operating and finance expenses over 
a long period of time.
If we look further than the financially oriented disclosures on environmen-
tal liabilities it becomes, however, apparent that the content and quality of 
environmental reports varies widely across companies. The heterogeneity of 

Part 4  THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
408
environmental disclosures makes them in fact incomparable. Today, initiatives 
aimed at converging the practices are being taken by, for example, the Global Re-
porting Initiative (GRI), which has received considerable support and acceptance 
worldwide for its guidelines on sustainability reporting. The GRI provides globally 
applicable guidelines for organizations wishing to report separately on the envi-
ronmental (as well as social and economic) aspects of their activities. The core 
issue for most environmental reporting standards is for the reporters to ­ascertain 
who the stakeholders of the company are and to adjust the report thereafter. The 
same goes for other types of corporate social (or societal) reporting.
Intellectual capital
One of the issues the analyst needs to review in addition to assets and liabilities 
that appear in the statement of financial position is the existence and relevance 
of the ‘intellectual capital’ of a group. Essentially the argument is that, while 
physical assets (such as a city centre sales location or an efficient factory) may 
be important for the group, intellectual assets (patents, brands, staff know-how, 
research and development, customer loyalty) are possibly even more so: you can 
build a new factory in a few months for a finite amount of money, but a brand 
takes years and the cost cannot be forecast reliably. Intellectual capital is even 
more important, obviously, in a service industry where it relates to the quality 
and nature of the service, which in turn is the product you are selling. Increas-
ingly there is a perception that business now changes rapidly, and the ability to 
develop new products or adapt methods quickly is considered to be part of the 
intellectual capital of the group. Intellectual capital fits into the framework of 
analyst’s concerns about assessing the quality of the management and the quality 
of the assets under their control.
How do companies convey this information? We discussed the difficulties of 
measuring intangible assets in a historical cost framework in Chapter 5. There are 
several problems. First, a company incurs costs often over several years in product 
research, staff development and related areas, without being able to tie these costs 
to an identifiable asset (source of future cash flows) until towards the end of the 
process, so these costs are taken directly to the statement of profit or loss. Second, 
where staff development is concerned, the company does not ‘control’ the as-
set: a trained person usually has the right to leave the company, so money spent 
training them cannot be regarded as an asset in accounting terms. Third, a com-
pany may hire people who have the skills needed (who have themselves invested 
in their personal development by doing an MBA) and so there is no acquisition 
cost available to be capitalized.
Clearly, traditional accounting does not provide the techniques for this kind 
of asset, and that is not surprising when you remember that financial reporting 
was developed in the 19th century. So far there is therefore no way of reflecting 
this through accounting measures in the annual report. However, it is an issue 
which some companies are trying to address internally and where some discus-
sion should be expected somewhere in the annual report.

Chapter 14  Issues in financial reporting by multinationals
409
The measurement and management of intellectual capital: an introduction
It is recognized that the intellectual capital of a firm plays a significant role in 
creating competitive advantage, and thus managers and other stakeholders 
in organizations are asking, with increasing frequency, that its value be mea-
sured and reported for planning, control, reporting and evaluation purposes. 
However, at this point, there is still a great deal of room for experimentation in 
quantifying and reporting on the intellectual capital of the firm.
Source: IFAC Handbook 1999, extract from summary of study published by the 
International ­Federation of Accountants, New York, in October 1998.
BETWEEN THE LINES
Summary
In this chapter we have looked at more advanced measurement issues and at a 
number of domains of supplementary disclosures. An overview of the IASB’s cur-
rent fair value accounting requirements makes clear that the boundaries of the 
traditional accounting model are moving. It seems that the age of financial in-
struments has ushered in incremental changes which tend in the direction of 
earlier recognition of assets and liabilities in the transaction cycle, as well as re-
measurement within the cycle. This change does not change the measurement 
of profit in an absolute sense – the lifetime profits of the business will still be the 
same in total – but it does change the period in which profits are recognized.
We also noted that the fashion is for more and more disclosures. In particu-
lar, we have looked at the problem of anticipating future costs, both in a gen-
eral sense as provisions or disclosure of contingencies, and explored the reporting 
headlines of financial instruments, pension benefits, post reporting period events 
and discontinued operations. Moreover, we noted that environmental disclosure 
and intellectual capital reporting has increased over time, but remains largely 
fragmentary and lacks comparability across companies.
Discussion Questions
1.	 Explain the differences between the following value concepts: exit value, 
value-in-use and deprival value.
2.	 What is meant by an executory contract? Do executory contracts affect 
­financial statements?
3.	 Discuss why the existence of contingencies is important to the financial 
statement analyst, making reference to environmental issues and financial 
instruments.

Part 4  THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
410
4.	 Explain what is meant by intellectual capital and discuss what an analyst can 
do to make an assessment of the intellectual capital of a particular group.
5.	 Describe the categories into which IAS 39, Financial Instruments: Recognition 
and Measurement, requires financial assets and liabilities to be classified. For 
each category, explain how they should be measured in the statement of 
financial position. If measured at fair value, the explanation should include 
how changes in fair value of the financial instruments are treated in the 
­financial statements.
Assignments
The following assignments have answers on the lecturer side of the digital support 
resources for the book.
1.	 On 31 December 20X8 (fiscal year end), Bruinzee NV is in the process of de-
fending a legal case brought against it for damages caused by the use of some 
of its products. Bruinzee’s legal advisors provided the following estimates of 
the likely outcome of the litigation:
n  60 per cent probability of defending the case successfully;
n  30 per cent probability of being required to pay €4m in damages;
n  10 per cent probability of being required to pay €6m in damages.
Given these estimates, a provision of €1.8m (60 per cent × nil 1 30 per 
cent × €4m 1 10 per cent × €6m) has been recognized in the 20X8 financial 
statements. Moreover, the Board of Directors of Bruinzee NV estimate that 
total legal costs of defending the case will amount to €300 000 (of which 
€200 000 has already been invoiced by the legal advisors covering fees up 
to and including 31 December 20X8). The legal fees of €200 000 have been 
expensed but the remaining expected future legal costs have not yet been 
provided for at the end of 20X8.
	 In the event of successfully defending the litigation case, the legal costs 
will be recovered, but this has not yet been reflected in the 20X8 financial 
statements of Bruinzee NV.
Required
	
(a)	 Evaluate the accounting treatment applied by Bruinzee NV. If you do 
not agree, propose and explain appropriate adjustments.
	
(b)	 Idem, considering the following revised estimates of Bruinzee’s 
legal advisors and provision amount: ‘30 per cent probability of 
defending the case successfully – 60 per cent probability of being 
required to pay €4 million in damages – 10 per cent probability of 
being required to pay €6 million in damages. Given these estimates, 
a provision of €3m (30 per cent 3 nil 1 60 per cent 3 €4m 1 10 per 
cent 3 €6m) has been recognized in the 20X8 financial statements.’
2.	 On 2 January 20X0 Philippo Tist Corporation brought into use an industrial 
site that had been constructed at a total cost of €50m. The company has the 
legal right to use the site for a ten-year period, at the end of which the site 
has to be returned to the legal owner in its original condition. The directors 
of Philippo Tist estimate that the cost of restoring the site on 31 December 
20X9 will be €15m (in 20X9 prices). The construction cost includes the right 
to use the site without further payment for the ten-year period. The rate to 

Chapter 14  Issues in financial reporting by multinationals
411
use in any discounting calculations is 8 per cent. The present value of €1000 
receivable in ten years when the cost of capital is 8 per cent is €463.
Required
Show the amounts that will appear in the statement of financial 
position of Philippo Tist Corporation as at 31 December 20X0 in respect 
of the site and the amounts that will appear in the statement of profit 
or loss for the year ended 31 December 20X0. Indicate where in the 
statement of financial position and where in the statement of profit or 
loss the relevant amounts should be presented.
(ACCA adapted)
3.	 Omega follows the cost model when measuring its property, plant and 
equipment. One of its properties was carried in the statement of financial 
position at 31 March 20X7 at $6m. The depreciable amount of this property 
was estimated at $3.6m at 31 March 20X7 and the estimated future eco-
nomic life of the property at 31 March 20X7 was 18 years. Omega depreci-
ates its properties on a monthly basis. On 1 January 20X8 Omega decided 
to dispose of the property as it was surplus to requirements and began to 
actively seek a buyer. On 1 January 20X8 Omega estimated that the market 
value of the property was $7.1m and that the costs of selling the property 
would be $80 000. These estimates remained appropriate at 31 March 20X8.
	
The property was sold on 1 June 20X8 for net proceeds of $7m.
Required
Explain, with relevant calculations, how the property would be treated 
in the financial statements of Omega for the year ended 31 March 20X8 
and the year ending 31 March 20X9.
(ACCA adapted)

412
The object of this chapter is to give you a working overview of taxation. Generally 
speaking, governments have a bigger stake in companies than do shareholders (in 
terms of receiving cash flows from the company), and yet not all companies pay as 
much attention to tax minimization as they might, nor do company executives have 
a clear idea of where tax bites in a company’s cost structure.
This chapter will first look at the different kinds of tax and how they are levied 
within a single jurisdiction and then focus on corporate income taxes and the 
allocation of income tax expense to accounting periods. The chapter ends with 
a specific look at tax issues which concern multinationals and cross-border activities.
C H A P T E R  1 5
International taxation
	 Introduction
	 Corporate income tax and dividends
	 Deferred taxation
	 International taxation
	 Transfer pricing
	 Tax havens
	 Summary
	 Discussion questions
Chapter Structure

Chapter 15  international taxation
413
The number of taxes to which a company is subject varies considerably from 
country to country and depends partly upon political structure and partly upon 
historical precedent. The way in which taxes are collected varies widely as well. 
From a company perspective, we can identify the main types of taxation which 
are ‘costs’ to the company, as follows:
	
1.	social security charges
	
2.	local/regional taxes
	
3.	national corporate income taxes.
Some accountants would say that corporate income-based taxes are not a cost as 
such because they are not made in exchange of goods and services specific to the 
company and are only levied when there is profit, so they are a distribution of 
profit to the government as a priority stakeholder in the success of the company.
However, assuming that we expect a company to be profitable to sharehold-
ers, we should try to maximize after-tax cash flows for them, and tax represents 
a negative flow. In practice, accounting standards-setters do not adhere to the 
distribution view of corporate income taxation and deal with income-based taxes 
as a business expense.
Within the European Union, Value Added Tax (VAT) is a major source of tax 
income and companies collect this for the government, but technically this is a 
tax on the consumer, not on the company, in the same way as sales taxes are in 
the US and other countries.
	
n	 Social security charges. Here there is a great difference between countries in 
the extent to which they levy contributions from employers and employ-
ees based on the amount of pay. In Switzerland, for example, the deduc-
tions are relatively low but the employee is obliged to take out compulsory 
private medical insurance, whereas in France the deductions are high and 
relatively little is left to the individual. There is also a great variation in 
contributions to pension schemes, with some countries preferring a system 
in which the state plays a major role and others preferring to participate 
in private sector schemes. This means that in some countries payroll-based 
charges can amount to an additional 50 per cent on top of gross salaries, 
whereas in others the employee expects to pay more – and may expect a 
higher salary. Payroll-based taxes and contributions to pension schemes 
are generally accounted for in the financial statements as part of personnel 
cost, and are therefore invisible both to the external analyst and often the 
internal manager.
	
n	 Local/regional taxes. Here again there is a wide variety of taxes and methods 
of collecting them. In federations, such as Germany or Switzerland, ­regional 
political units (Länder, Cantons) are able to levy taxes on cor-por-ate profits, 
as also are municipalities. This means that corporate income taxes may be 
split three ways: local municipality, regional political unit and ­federal gov-
ernment (and they are not necessarily calculated off the same profit base). 
All of these taxes, since they are profit based, will appear in the financial 
statements as a deduction from shareholder profit.
Introduction

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
414
However, in other countries there are different ways of channelling 
money to municipalities. In France they receive the proceeds from annual 
vehicle taxes, and also levy a tax which is based on the capital structure of 
the company. In the UK, municipalities receive tax based on the value of 
property occupied by people in their jurisdiction. These are not income taxes 
as such and do not therefore normally appear in the statement of profit or 
loss as a tax but as a cost of property or of running motor vehicles, etc.
	
n	 National corporate income taxes. These are the most visible part of company 
taxation. Governments use this kind of taxation both to raise funds and 
to encourage (or to penalize) particular kinds of behaviour by companies. 
The calculation of taxable profit is done according to tax rules, rather than 
­accounting rules, but one of the most important shaping forces in account-
ing is the relationship between these and in particular the degree to which 
in any jurisdiction, the calculation of taxable profit is limited by what is in 
the published accounts.
	
n	 Value Added Tax is applied throughout the European Union and the ­European 
Commission in fact receives a small proportion (less than 2 per cent) of the 
proceeds of the national rate. VAT is imposed on customers at each stage of a 
product’s value-added chain, based on the value added at that point. For ex-
ample, suppose that in a country with a 20 per cent VAT rate, a manufacturer 
sells its product for €1000 to a retailer. If the seller’s cost to manufacture the 
product is €800, the VAT is 20 per cent of (€1000 – €800) or €40. In practice, 
companies do not charge the net VAT amount, but charge VAT to their cus-
tomers on the full amount of the sales and are themselves charged VAT on 
their purchases. Afterwards the company separates out VAT received from cus-
tomers and VAT paid to suppliers in its accounting and ­every month (or three 
months depending upon jurisdiction) pays the difference between the two 
to the tax authorities. Consequently, a company’s accounts exclude VAT for 
income reporting purposes, both inside and outside the company. In general, 
where taxes are simply collected from customers on behalf of a third party, 
they are not part of the company’s revenue and, by implication, are not an 
expense of the company paying the taxes to its suppliers.
VAT is therefore not a tax as such upon companies, but it does bear upon them 
to an extent. First, there is the administration of VAT which involves elaborate ac-
counting systems to measure and control VAT payments. Second, there is the cost of 
maintaining the knowledge of staff and using outside experts to deal with changes 
and complex transactions. And, third, there is the cash flow problem. A company 
that sells on credit and is obliged to settle monthly with the VAT authorities will 
be in effect paying to the authorities VAT from customers which has been invoiced 
but which the customer has at that time not paid. There is a disguised cash flow ef-
fect which can increase a company’s capital requirements considerably.
In most countries, even those such as Germany or France which are reputed 
to have a very close relationship between accounting profit and tax profit, the 
Corporate income tax and dividends

Chapter 15  international taxation
415
calculation of taxes on profits is based on an approach where there is a reconcilia-
tion statement between accounting profit and taxable profit:
Accounting profit before tax
Add back: disallowed expenses such as entertaining, fines, excess depreciation, 
excess provisions
Deduct: special allowances for capital investment, environmental protection, 
etc., non-taxable income
= Taxable profit
A particular problem in corporate taxation is that of the potential double tax-
ation of dividends. Double taxation arises from concurrent corporate and per-
sonal income taxation. Suppose a country levies 30 per cent corporate income 
tax and then the company pays what is left as dividend to its shareholders. Sup-
pose ­further that personal income tax is 50 per cent. That means that the divi-
dend (70 per cent of the original pre-tax profit) will be subject to a supplementary 
50 per cent personal income tax, which amounts to another 35 per cent of the 
original profit. The pre-tax profit has therefore been taxed in total at 65 per cent. 
This is a major disincentive to investors and different countries find different so-
lutions to the problem. One way is to tax profits which are to be paid to share-
holders at a lower rate than those retained in the company. Another way is to 
give shareholders a tax credit with their dividend.
A tax credit is intended to remove double taxation and to ensure that only per-
sonal income is taxed. Suppose in the above example that the company earns a 
pre-tax profit of €200 000 and decides that the whole post-tax profit will be made 
payable to shareholders as a dividend. The government first collects €60 000 as 
corporate income tax, but gives the shareholders a full tax credit for the same 
amount. The €60 000 tax credit allows the shareholders to pay no more than an 
additional €40 000 to comply with their tax obligation of a 50 per cent personal 
tax rate on €200 000 pre-tax income. In practice, governments will often grant 
tax rebates equivalent to a partial tax credit and therefore only partially remove 
double taxation of dividends.
The objectives of measuring (accounting) income for financial reporting pur-
poses are quite different from the basic tax raising motives of measuring taxable 
profit. Consequently, the income tax expense reported in the statement of profit 
or loss will probably not be equal to the amount that is actually paid. The topic of 
deferred taxation arises from these differences. In general, deferred taxation rules 
will require companies to account for the tax consequences of transactions when 
the transactions are recognized in the financial statements. To understand the 
process of recognizing the tax expense in the statement of profit or loss, it is im-
portant to realize that the accounting rules that govern the reporting of income 
taxes in the financial statements, essentially attempt to apply the matching con-
cept, where expenses (income tax expenses included) are matched to the period 
in which related revenues are reported. In this context specific rules are needed to 
allocate tax expense between accounting periods.

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
416
The more advanced sets of accounting rules require that the tax effects of trans­
actions are recognized in the financial statements in the same period as the 
transactions themselves. Deferred taxes arise in the statement of profit or loss 
when the amount of taxes paid in the current period does not correspond with 
the amount of tax expense for the period based on the pre-tax profit reported in 
the financial statements. Evidently, deferred taxation will also affect the state-
ment of financial position: deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities 
will reflect the ­future tax consequences of transactions which were not treated 
identically for taxation and financial reporting purposes.
Over the years, different sets of rules for accounting for deferred taxation have 
evolved. The earlier sets of rules were grounded in a statement of profit or loss 
perspective on deferred taxes. They focused on ‘timing differences’ or differences 
between the timing of the recognition of items of income and expenditure for 
financial reporting purposes (in the statement of profit or loss) and tax purposes. 
Inconsistencies with the conceptual framework of the IASB (and US GAAP) led 
in the 1990s to the development of a temporary differences approach where the 
deferred taxation reasoning starts from an analysis of the tax consequences of bal-
ance sheet components and not from a tax reconciliation of statement of profit 
or loss items.
A statement of profit or loss view on deferred taxes
The intuitively most appealing way to illustrate the concept of deferred taxes is, 
however, still the statement of profit or loss approach. Later we will comment on 
the balance sheet perspective of deferred taxation which underlies current inter-
national reporting rules on income taxes.
Starting from the statement of profit or loss, there are in effect two kinds of 
differences between the accounting measure of profit and the tax authorities’ 
measure:
	
1.	permanent differences
	
2.	reversing timing differences.
The permanent differences arise because, for example, the tax authorities do not 
accept some expenses as a deduction from profits. Examples of this would be 
fines, in some countries bribes, sometimes entertaining or what the authorities 
consider to be unnecessarily expensive consumption such as supplying managers 
with luxury cars or holding board meetings in holiday resorts. These are simply 
‘disallowed’, they cause taxable profit for the year to be higher than accounting 
profit and do not call for any special accounting. Permanent differences can also 
work in the opposite direction, for example when items of income recognized in 
the financial statements will never be taxable or where items are recognized as 
deductible for tax purposes but will never enter the statement of profit or loss as 
expenses.
Timing differences arise because the timing of the recognition of revenue, 
­expenses, gains and losses in the statement of profit or loss occurs in a differ-
ent period from taxable profit. Timing differences are differences between taxable 
profit and accounting profit that originate in one period and reverse in one or 
Deferred taxation

Chapter 15  international taxation
417
more subsequent periods. These timing differences lead to specific presentational 
issues in the financial statements. For example, some jurisdictions offer high tax 
depreciation at times, either just to encourage business to invest in general or to 
encourage a particular kind of investment which the government thinks is im-
portant (environmental protection, high technology, etc.). If this tax deductible 
­accelerated depreciation can be claimed without using the high rate in the finan-
cial statements, this gives rise to a reversing temporary difference. The asset 
will be fully depreciated over its useful life in the financial statements; however, 
the tax paid by the company will be artificially low early in the asset’s life, but 
later the asset will be depreciated in the accounts with no tax deduction available.
COMPANY REPORT
PHILIPS
Income taxes disclosures (extracts)
The tax expense on income before tax amounted to EUR 283 million (2010: EUR 
499 million, 2009: EUR 99 million).
The components of income tax before taxes and income tax expense are as 
follows:
2009
2010
2011
Netherlands
206
952
244
Foreign
292
1 007
(753)
Income before taxes of 
continuing operations
498
1 959
(509)
Netherlands:
(17)
(103)
(40)
Current tax income (expense)
(72)
(144)
44
Deferred tax income (expense)
(89)
(247)
4
Foreign:
(201)
(210)
(360)
Current tax income (expense)
189
(52)
149
Deferred tax income (expense)
(12)
(262)
(211)
Income tax expense of  
  continuing operations
(99)
(499)
(283)
Income tax expense of  
  discontinued operations
(2)
(10)
76
Income tax expense
(101)
(509)
(207)
Philips’ operations are subject to income taxes in various foreign jurisdic-
tions. The statutory income tax rates vary from 12.5 per cent to 41.0 per cent, 
which causes a difference between the weighted average statutory income 
tax rate and the Netherlands’ statutory income tax rate of 25.0 per cent (2010: 
25.5 per cent; 2009: 25.5 per cent).
Source: Philips, Annual Report 2011 – Note 3

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
418
COMPANY REPORT
PHILIPS
A reconciliation of the weighted average statutory income tax rate to the effec-
tive income tax rate of continuing operations is as follows:
2009
2010
2011
Weighted average statutory income tax rate
18.1
26.6
55.4
Tax rate effect of:
Changes related to:
– utilization of previously reserved loss 
carryforwards
(0.2)
(0.5)
3.9
– new loss carryforwards not expected to be 
realized
9.3
2.1
(17.6)
– addition (releases)
(0.4)
0.3
2.9
Non-tax-deductible impairment charges
2.8
—
(98.3)
Non-taxable income
(23.3)
(7.5)
11.1
Non-tax-deductible expenses
23.6
3.9
(22.4)
Withholding and other taxes
4.2
1.2
4.5
Tax rate changes
(0.1)
0.2
(0.1)
Prior year tax results
(28.1)
(1.4)
4.5
Tax expenses due to other liabilities
7.5
(0.4)
(9.0)
Tax incentives and other
6.5
1.0
18.5
Effective tax rate
19.9
25.5
(55.6)
The weighted average statutory income tax rate increased in 2011 compared to 
2010, as a consequence of a change in the country mix of income tax rates, as 
well as a significant change of the mix of profits in the various countries, which 
resulted in a loss recorded for the period.
Source: Philips, Annual Report 2011 – Note 3
To illustrate the problem let us look at an exaggerated model. Let us say that a 
company buys an asset in 20X1 for €10 000, intending to depreciate, for financial 
reporting purposes, over two years, but the tax authorities will allow the whole 
depreciation in the first year. If the company’s profit before depreciation is €25 000 
in each year, the accounting profit in both years would be €20 000 (€25 000 less 
€5000 depreciation on asset). However, the tax computations would be:
20X1
       €
Net profit before tax
20 000
add back Depreciation
    5 000
deduct Capital allowance
–10 000
Taxable profit
15 000
Tax due at 50 per cent
7 500

Chapter 15  international taxation
419
20X2
        €
Net profit before tax
20 000
add back Depreciation
5 000
deduct Capital allowance
0
Taxable profit
25 000
Tax due at 50 per cent
12 500
Returning to the statement of profit or loss, the figures would be:
20X1
20X2 
Net income before tax
20 000
20 000
Corporate income tax
–7 500
–12 500
Net income after tax
12 500
7 500
The result of the timing difference is that the same net income before tax yields 
quite different results over the two years. So the question is: should that be 
­reported in the financial statements as given above, or should the tax saving in 
year 1 (€2500 or 50 per cent of the depreciation difference) be set aside and car-
ried forward to year 2 to offset against the year 2 tax charge and equalize the 
accounting charge for tax?
Deferred tax accounting rules require that the future tax consequences of this 
difference is recognized in the financial statements. So in the case above, the 
statement of profit or loss for 20X1 should be constructed:
Net profit before tax
20 000
Taxes due
7 500
Deferred tax expense
2 500
Total tax expense
–10 000
Net profit after tax
10 000
The €2500 deferred taxation expense will appear in the balance sheet at the 
end of 20X1 as a deferred tax liability. The following year the timing difference 
­reverses and the deferred tax liability is released to the statement of profit or loss:
Net profit before tax
20 000
Taxes due
12 500
Deferred tax expense
–2 500
Total tax expense
–10 000
Net profit after tax
10 000 
For analytical purposes, all you need to know is that a deferred tax liability in 
the statement of financial position represents the fact that accounting profit for 

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
420
COMPANY REPORT
financial reporting purposes has in the past been higher than that for tax pur-
poses and the liability is there to compensate for future taxation on that differ-
ence. The tax liability reflects in fact the postponement of tax payments to future 
accounting periods.
Deferred taxes will normally arise in individual company accounts in juris-
dictions where the relationship between accounting profit and taxable profit is 
reasonably loose. It should also normally appear in group financial statements 
prepared according to IASB rules. Companies based in jurisdictions like Germany 
or France where there is a close relationship between accounting profit and tax-
able profit should restate the individual company accounts for consolidation 
purposes. Excess depreciation or provisions which have been introduced for tax 
minimization purposes should normally be corrected during the consolidation 
process, and deferred tax liabilities introduced if appropriate.
(EURm)
2009
2010
2011
Income tax
Expense (1)/benefit (–) at statutory rate
–250
464
–311
Permanent differences
–96
4
–22
Non tax deductible impairment of goodwill (i)
236
—
283
Taxes for prior years
–17
–48
–7
Taxes on foreign subsidiaries’ profits in excess  
  of (lower then) income taxes at statutory rates
–145
–195
–73
Changes in losses and temporary differences  
  with no tax effect (ii)
577
221
280
Nokia
Income taxes disclosures (extracts)
12. Income taxes
(EURm)
2009
2010
2011
Income tax
  Current tax
–736
–798
–752
  Deferred tax
34
355
462
Total
–702
–443
–290
Finland
76
–126
–97
Other countries
–778
–317
–193
Total
–702
–443
–290
The differences between income tax expense computed at statutory rate (in 
Finland 26 per cent) and income taxes recognized in the consolidated income 
statement is reconciled as follows at December 31, 2011:

Chapter 15  international taxation
421
Net increase (1)/decrease (–) in tax  
  contingencies
–186
24
7
Change in income tax rates
4
2
39
Deferred tax liability on undistributed  
  earnings (iii)
111
–31
62
Other
–32
2
32
Income tax expense
702
443
290
  (i)  See note 8.
 (ii)  This item primarily relates to Nokia Siemens Networks’ losses and 
temporary differences for which no deferred tax was recognized. In 
2010 it also includes benefit of EUR 52 million from reassessment of 
recoverability of deferred tax assets in Nokia Siemens Networks.
(iii)  In 2010 the changes in deferred tax liability on undistributed earnings 
mainly relates to changes in tax rates applicable to profit distributions.
Certain of the Group companies’ income tax returns for periods ranging from 
2004 through 2010 are under examination by tax authorities. The Group does 
not believe that any significant additional taxes in excess of those already pro-
vided for will arise as a result of the examinations.
Source: Nokia, Annual Report 2011, Note 12
A balance sheet perspective on deferred taxes
IAS 12, Income Taxes, deals with the current set of accounting rules for deferred 
taxation. Although the original IAS 12 required a company to account for de-
ferred tax using the statement of profit or loss approach, IAS 12 (revised) requires 
the application of a method that is known as the asset–liability approach. The 
current approach of IAS 12 to deferred taxes (and of the corresponding US GAAP 
rules for that matter) is balance sheet oriented. Essentially it addresses what it 
calls ‘temporary differences’ between the carrying value of assets and liabilities 
and their tax value. Every asset or liability is assumed to have a tax base, the 
amount at which the asset or liability concerned is recognized for tax purposes. 
Temporary differences are differences between the tax base of an asset or liability 
and its carrying amount in the statement of financial position. Based on these 
temporary differences, the deferred tax position is calculated as the taxes that 
would be paid (or received) if the assets of the company were to be realized and 
its liabilities settled at their current book value.
It is important to note that the timing differences between pre-tax accounting 
profit and taxable profit do result in assets and liabilities having different valua-
tion bases for financial reporting purposes than for taxation purposes at the end 
of a given accounting period. Therefore, timing differences will probably be the 
major source of temporary differences. But the point is that IAS 12 starts from an 
analysis of carrying values of assets and liabilities to identify temporary differ-
ences and not from a detailed review of the eligibility of revenues and expenses 
for tax purposes. Additional temporary differences may occur because specific tax 
law rules create different tax bases for taxation purposes to those used for finan-
cial reporting purposes. Many of these additional temporary differences, however, 

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
422
relate to more complex taxation issues and are outside the scope of this course. 
Under the asset–liability approach there is no such thing as a permanent differ-
ence. Any difference between the book value of an item in the statement of finan-
cial position and its tax base is a temporary difference.
IAS 12 acknowledges two types of temporary differences:
	
1.	taxable temporary differences that result in deferred tax liabilities (i.e. 
taxable amounts in determining taxable profit of future periods), or
	
2.	deductible temporary differences that will result in deferred tax ­assets 
(i.e. amounts that are deductible in determining taxable profit in future 
periods).
STANDARDS
IAS 12 – INCOME TAXES – DEFINITIONS (extracts)
5.	 The following terms are used in this Standard with the meanings specified:
Accounting profit is profit or loss for a period before deducting tax expense. 
Taxable profit (tax loss) is the profit (loss) for a period, determined in ac-
cordance with the rules established by the taxation authorities, upon which 
­income taxes are payable (recoverable).
Tax expense (tax income) is the aggregate amount included in the determina-
tion of profit or loss for the period in respect of current tax and deferred tax.
Current tax is the amount of income taxes payable (recoverable) in respect of 
the taxable profit (tax loss) for a period.
Deferred tax liabilities are the amounts of income taxes payable in future peri-
ods in respect of taxable temporary differences.
Deferred tax assets are the amounts of income taxes recoverable in future 
periods in respect of:
(a)	 deductible temporary differences;
(b)	the carry forward of unused tax losses; and
(c)	 the carry forward of unused tax credits.
Temporary differences are differences between the carrying amount of an 
­asset or liability in the statement of financial position and its tax base. Tempo-
rary differences may be either:
(a)	 taxable temporary differences, which are temporary differences that 
will result in taxable amounts in determining taxable profit (tax loss) 
of ­future periods when the carrying amount of the asset or liability is 
­recovered or settled; or
(b)	deductible temporary differences, which are temporary differences that 
will result in amounts that are deductible in determining taxable profit 
(tax loss) of future periods when the carrying amount of the asset or 
­liability is recovered or settled.
The tax base of an asset or liability is the amount attributed to that asset or 
liability for tax purposes.
Source: IAS 12, Income Taxes

Chapter 15  international taxation
423
The recognition criteria for deferred tax assets are, however, somewhat tougher than 
for deferred tax liabilities. A deferred tax asset should only be recognized for all de-
ductible temporary differences to the extent that it is probable that taxable profit 
will be available against which the deductible temporary difference can be utilized, 
i.e. there should be a valid expectation of sufficient future taxable profits against 
which the deductions can be offset. The deferred tax asset or deferred tax liability is 
measured as the temporary difference multiplied by the tax rate. The tax rate to be 
used is the rate that is expected to apply when the asset is realized or the liability is 
settled, based on tax rates that have been enacted by the end of the reporting period.
Returning to the previous accelerated tax depreciation model, we can apply 
the temporary differences approach as follows:
20X1
20X2
(a) Accounting balances
Asset carrying amount 1 January
—
5 000
Additions
10 000
0
Accounting depreciation
–5 000
–5 000
Asset carrying amount 31 December
5 000
0
(b) Tax values
Asset tax base 1 January
—
0
Additions
10 000
0
Tax depreciation
–10 000
0
Asset tax base 31 December
0
0
(c) Temporary differences
5 000
0
(d) Deferred tax balance (50 per cent tax rate)
2 500
0
In 20X1 the accounting depreciation is €5000 (50 per cent of the asset’s historical 
cost or €10 000). The tax depreciation amounts to the full historical cost (€10 000). 
At the end of 20X1 the temporary difference between carrying amount of the asset 
in the financial statements and its tax value is €5000, and the asset has a carrying 
value that is greater than its tax base. At that time the tax authorities have allowed a 
bigger tax deduction than recognized for financial reporting purposes. In 20X2 this 
situation will reverse when the accounting deduction becomes greater than the tax 
deduction. This means that it is a taxable temporary difference, and therefore this 
will give rise to a deferred tax liability. The deferred tax liability amounts to €2500, 
being 50 per cent (tax rate) of the temporary difference. Recognizing the deferred tax 
liability requires a deferred tax expense in the statement of profit or loss of 20X1. 
In 20X2 the temporary difference disappears (accumulated accounting depreciation 
equals accumulated tax depreciation) and the deferred tax liability will be released, 
implying a deferred tax income (or negative deferred tax expense) of €2500 in 20X2.
This brings us back to essentially the same statement of profit or loss effect as un-
der the statement of profit or loss approach to deferred taxes. It would, however, be 
wrong to conclude that the statement of profit or loss approach and the asset–­liability 
approach will always produce the same result. In more complex multinational group 
structures and when we consider the instances where temporary differences are not 
timing differences, the two approaches can produce quite different results.
The asset–liability approach also implies that every time there is a subsequent 
change in tax rates, the deferred tax asset/liability will change.

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
424
COMPANY REPORT
NESTLÉ
Deferred tax assets and liabilities
14.3 Reconciliation of deferred taxes by type of temporary differences recognized in the balance 
sheet
Property 
plant and 
equipment
Goodwill 
and 
intangible 
assets
Employee 
benefits
Inventories 
receivables 
payables 
and 
provisions
Unused 
tax losses 
and 
unused tax 
credits
Other
Total
At 1 January 2010
(1068)
(1089)
1965
822
307
(139)
798
Currency retranslations
116
87
(149)
(88)
(28)
(18)
(80)
Deferred tax (expense)/ 
  income
(134)
(157)
(98)
101
39
68
(181)
Modification of the scope
Of consolidation
(7)
(7)
8 
2
 —
7
3
At 31 December 2010
(1093)
(1166)
1726
837
318
(82)
540
Currency retranslations
5
(12)
(24)
(24)
(15)
4
(66)
Deferred tax (expense)/ 
  income
(223)
(46)
408
10
62
90
301
Modification of the scope
Of consolidation
(36)
(360)
10
14
1
12
(359)
At 31 December 2011
(1347)
(1584)
2120
837
366
24
416
Source: Nestlé Group, Consolidated financial statements 2011
Presentation of deferred taxes in the financial statements
Deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities are presented separately from all other 
assets and liabilities in the statement of financial position. They are classified as 
non-current items. Tax expense (or income) related to profit or loss from ordinary 
activities should be presented on the face of the statement of profit or loss. Addi-
tionally, a set of supplementary information is to be disclosed in the notes to the fi-
nancial statements, such as details on the major components of tax expense. One of 
the more prominent disclosures is an explanation of the relationship between tax 
expense and accounting profit as a numerical reconciliation between ­either tax ex-
pense and the product of accounting profit multiplied by the applicable tax rate(s) 
or between the average effective tax rate (i.e. tax expense divided by accounting 
profit) and the applicable tax rate. In practice, these disclosures can be quite exten-
sive, although not always easily accessible for a multinational group due to aggrega-
tion of tax information related to sometimes divergent taxation regimes.
The general rule in taxation is that a profit is taxed in the country where the trans-
action takes place, although this is obviously more complicated for cross-border 
International taxation

Chapter 15  international taxation
425
trading and Internet sales. Generally it is then the country where the buyer re-
sides which determines tax, even if for the moment Internet sales are largely 
untaxed. From a corporate perspective, tax is administered on a company-by-
company basis, and calculated on individual subsidiaries’ accounts, not on the 
group accounts as a whole. This is sometimes an issue that MBA students find bi-
zarre. While the whole point of consolidated financial statements is to look at the 
company as an economic whole, and from a management perspective one should 
never lose sight of the overall group, from a tax perspective, the focus is exactly 
the opposite: tax sees the group as a collection of more or less unconnected activi-
ties and deals with it subsidiary by subsidiary.
Consequently, it is useful for a multinational to try to compartmentalize its ac-
tivities within each tax jurisdiction by forming separate companies and retaining 
clear records of transactions for discussion with different tax authorities. As noted 
earlier, many corporations use worldwide systems for uniform internal account-
ing but then retain local specialists in each country to recalculate the figures in 
line with local measurement rules and tax needs.
International business presents both threats and opportunities as far as tax is 
concerned. The fact that national tax authorities cannot go outside their jurisdic-
tion enables the corporation to structure international transactions in the most tax 
efficient way. On the other hand, mishandling can cause a revenue to be taxed in 
two different countries, or an expense not to be accepted as a deduction from profit.
Leaving aside tax havens, most countries have entered into double tax treaties 
with main trading partner nations. These deal with issues like the taxation of in-
ternational transactions, the rules for withholding taxes on royalties, interest and 
dividends and similar items. So if a company is thinking about doing business in 
a country other than its main base, one of the first things to do is check whether 
there is a double tax treaty and what its content is.
The double tax treaty will normally have a section dealing with transfer prices. 
These are the prices, often very difficult to calculate, at which goods and services 
change hands between subsidiaries of the same group. Artificially fixing the trans-
fer prices is a way of determining where profits are taxed.
Supposing a company makes a machine in country A (corporate income tax rate 
of 50 per cent) for a cost of €10 000 and sells it to a fellow subsidiary in country 
B (tax rate 25 per cent) for €11 000. This subsidiary sells it in turn to a subsidiary 
in country C (tax rate 40 per cent) for €18 000 and that subsidiary sells it to the 
­customer for €20 000. The taxable profit will be distributed over the three countries:
Taxable profit
Rate
Income tax
Country A
1 000
50
500
Country B
7 000
25
1 750
Country C
2 000
40
800
Total
10 000
30.5
3 050
The group has been able to reduce consolidated tax by artificially fixing the trans-
fer prices and flowing the transaction through a low tax country. Of course, the 
Transfer pricing

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
426
tax authorities are well aware of this possibility, so the double tax treaty usu-
ally states that transfer prices must be ‘at arms’ length’ (i.e. what an independent 
buyer would have to pay) or at market rates. It is not always easy to prove these 
prices and companies are well advised to reflect carefully on these issues because 
most tax jurisdictions can go back many years in a tax investigation and levy 
­penal rates of tax if they do not agree the basis of the transfer price. It remains, for 
all that, an interesting corner of profit management.
Related to this is the issue of what expenses can be charged by head office 
or other corporate service centres against subsidiaries. Typically, a multinational 
has regional management centres which are not themselves revenue generating. 
Equally, it has research and development activities which probably involve costs 
being incurred in one jurisdiction and subsequently a new product or process 
being exploited in other jurisdictions. The same is true of advertising – maintain-
ing a worldwide brand is expensive and has effects everywhere. If your company 
takes advertising at (say) the World Cup in South Africa which is televised all over 
the world, does the South African subsidiary pay that, or head office, or who?
This is a problem for internal management purposes in terms of relating costs 
to revenues, but it is also a problem with the tax authorities. If your R&D is based 
in the UK but exploited in the US, the UK tax authorities are not likely to accept 
that the cost should all be offset against UK tax. But the US authority may refuse to 
accept any expenses either in the sense that the costs were not incurred in the US.
Transfer-pricing: The key international issue?
There is little doubt that (government tax) authorities have become more adept 
at countering the ‘profit-shifting’ aspects of transfer-pricing practices and are 
strengthening their statutory powers with ever more extensive and complex 
legislation and regulations.
To strengthen the tax authorities’ position, regulations typically introduce 
specific rules to determine arm’s length prices and require that taxpayers main-
tain very extensive records documenting the methods used to determine their 
transfer prices (which often necessitates the employment of teams of both in-
house and outside counsel, accountants and economists). Provision is made as 
well for the imposition of very stringent penalties in case of non-compliance.
Source: Richard Casna, ‘Transfer-pricing: The key to international issue?’, 
extract from article in Accounting & Business, February 1998, p.30
BETWEEN THE LINES
Basically, flows between subsidiaries in different countries are easiest when struc-
tured according to the tax treaty: transfer prices for goods and services (but may 
be subject to justification, which is not always easy), royalties for use of intellec-
tual property (brands, product manufacturing processes) and interest (in relation 
to financing). All of these are, though, with the proviso that the company may 
need to persuade the tax authorities that the level of charge is justified.

Chapter 15  international taxation
427
Tax havens have a small place in the corporate world, but they may well be 
­expensive to use (you usually need to work through a local lawyer or accountant) 
and other tax jurisdictions usually have extensive powers to stop you sheltering 
profits in a haven. For example, if the UK considers that you have a controlled 
foreign corporation (CFC) in a jurisdiction which is on its list of havens, it will 
feel free to tax you in the UK on the profits of that CFC. If you do not provide 
accounts for the CFC, it will simply estimate the profits and tax accordingly. Tax 
havens do not generally benefit from double tax treaties with other countries.
Tax havens typically offer low tax or flat rate tax for companies which are 
resident there but whose activities are external to the haven (hence ‘off-shore’ 
companies). These can be used legitimately and effectively by a multinational to 
provide international services such as finance or insurance to itself. For example, 
an offshore finance vehicle will borrow on the international markets (guaranteed 
by the group) and then lend to fellow subsidiaries.
The tax haven lends itself also to the Internet business and it is surprising that 
more companies such as Internet sales companies or those with international 
transactions such as tour operators do not site themselves in tax havens. The 
costs are not negligible and therefore the throughput needs to be substantial to 
create a saving on tax after professional costs.
In recent years a new kind of tax minimization opportunity has appeared – 
what are known as ‘offshore financial centres’. These are a near relative of the 
tax haven, but with the difference that they have double tax treaties with major 
trading countries – they have a foot in both camps, as it were. Like a tax haven, 
their object is to attract corporate business whose operations take place outside 
the financial centre. Unlike the tax haven, they levy corporate taxes on income, 
but these are at a level which is sufficiently high for developed countries not to 
treat the financial centre as a haven, but sufficiently low so as to still be attractive 
to companies. Dublin is a financial centre in this sense, and Botswana has just 
joined the club, hoping to attract business as a regional centre for multinationals 
operating in sub-Saharan Africa.
Tax havens
Summary
This has been a short tour through the rather strange land of corporate taxation. 
The principal points to retain are that individual companies pay taxes to govern-
ments in a number of different ways. These can impact substantially upon busi-
ness costs and need to be thoroughly reviewed at the project stage, not left until 
a new operation is up and running. Corporate income tax is calculated in quite 
a complicated way and is linked to accounting profit through a reconciliation 
exercise. Where accounting profit and taxable profit differ, deferred taxes arise. 

Part 4  The financial statements of multinational companies
428
Deferred taxation for financial reporting purposes relates to the basic accounting 
question of how to allocate the income tax expense between accounting periods.
Tax is levied on a country-by-country basis, which calls for a good deal of 
­expenditure of resources to compile tax data. The fact that multinationals usually 
have transactions which run through several subsidiaries and different countries 
presents tax planning opportunities and some risks in that national tax authori-
ties do not necessarily agree with the company’s way of calculating profits, nor 
with that of other tax authorities. Multinationals can make a limited use of tax 
havens and offshore financial centres to reduce their taxation.
Discussion Questions
1.	 Is all the tax which a group pays visible in the financial statements?
2.	 Contrast the deferred tax concepts of ‘timing differences’ and ‘temporary 
differences’.
3.	 On January 3, 20X1 Foldet SA purchased equipment for €1.4m. The equip-
ment has a useful life of four years and will be depreciated using the straight-
line method for financial reporting purposes. The residual value is estimated 
at €200 000. For tax purposes the following tax depreciation amounts are 
allowed: €450 000 (20X1), €350 000 (20X2), €250 000 (20X3) and €150 000 
(20X4). The enacted income tax rate is 20 per cent for 20X1 and there-
after. How would you account for this transaction from a deferred taxation 
perspective?
4.	 ZZ consultants have won a contract from the Russian government to advise 
on small company accounting regulation and to provide training for govern-
ment officials and educators. Some of the contract will be performed by staff 
in ZZ’s Moscow office, but they will be helped by staff transferred from their 
offices in Germany, the UK and Switzerland. If the rate of corporate income 
tax in Russia is 80 per cent, in Germany 60 per cent, in the UK 35 per cent 
and in Switzerland 25 per cent, how would you advise them to structure 
their internal transactions? Should all the staff to be used be transferred to 
the Moscow office or should Moscow be invoiced from other locations with 
staff flown in and out to meet specific assignments?
5.	 For what purposes may a tax haven be profitably used by a multinational 
group?

429
The subject of auditing and auditors was covered in Chapter 2 of this book. The object 
of this chapter is to set out a little more background information concerning external 
audit and the framework of corporate governance as they impact upon multinational 
groups. The chapter does not bear directly on the techniques of financial statement 
analysis, but is intended to broaden the knowledge base of analysts in respect of the 
financial statements and the constraints on corporate reporting. It will deal first with 
the subject of corporate governance, then the audit of group financial statements and 
related issues of independence, audit committees and finally internal control and risk 
management.
C H A P T E R  1 6
Chapter Structure
n	 Corporate governance
n	 Statutory audit
n	 Issues in international audit
n	 Auditor independence
n	 Internal control and risk management
n	 Audit committee
n	 Summary
n	 Discussion questions
Auditing and corporate governance

Part 4  THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
430
In a small or medium-sized business, the owners are very often also the manag-
ers of the business and prior to the Industrial Revolution most businesses were 
run this way. It was only in the 19th century that a major change took place, as a 
result of the Industrial Revolution, and businesses started to become much larger. 
This had two consequences: large companies were financed by larger numbers of 
shareholders and so were less and less dominated by individual or family share-
holders, and the ‘professional manager’ started to appear. This gave rise to what 
is known as an ‘agency problem’ – the owners of the business (principals in the 
jargon) had to find means to ensure that those whom they appointed to run the 
business (agents) did so in a way that matched with shareholders’ needs.
There are a number of ways of addressing this problem. One of the most fre-
quent in the Anglo-Saxon world is to give top managers contracts under which 
their salaries vary according to how well they meet key shareholder objectives, 
such as increase in share price or return on equity. However, accounting and ­audit 
also play a highly significant role. Historically the accounting statements were a 
means through which professional managers reported to shareholders on what 
they had done with the company over a 12-month period, and in many countries 
audit was introduced as a means whereby a representative of the shareholders 
checked the accuracy of the financial statements on behalf of the shareholders. It 
is not clear that this was originally a very effective way of checking on managers, 
and the evolution of accounting regulation and the audit profession has in part 
been a response to the need to create transparency in the financial statements 
and confidence in their accuracy.
In current times the agency problem has been broadened out into the concept 
of corporate governance. On the one hand, the corporate governance debate puts 
increased emphasis on the effectiveness and accountability of corporate boards of 
directors, while, on the other hand, it tends to extend the shareholder perspective 
to wider stakeholder concerns.
The latter is an important shift in focus and involves a cultural change in 
what is expected of companies and their management. What it means is that 
the company can no longer be seen as an isolated unit whose central task is to 
make money for shareholders and whose other obligations can be summarized as 
­simply to meet legal requirements in all other areas, if they cannot be got round. 
Increasingly, society is saying that multinationals are extremely powerful and 
rich entities, many of them more so than the governments of the world’s smaller 
or economically weak states, and they are able to escape control because their 
structure is international while law is basically constrained to national boundar-
ies. Such companies must be constrained to take into consideration the public in-
terest as well as that of their shareholders, and there must be transparent systems 
of corporate governance to see that this is done.
Since the beginning of the 1990s many countries have been revising national 
corporate governance rules or endorsed corporate governance guidance after ex-
tensive public consultation and debate (Viénot I and II in France, the Cromme 
Report in Germany, the Cardon Report in Belgium, the Peters Report in the 
­Netherlands, the early Cadbury Report of 1992 and the Higgs Report of 2003 in 
the UK and many others). On the international level, the OECD (Organization 
for Economic Co-operation and Development) has been particularly active in the 
Corporate governance

Chapter 16  Auditing and corporate governance
431
debate with its report of 2004 on principles of corporate governance. The OECD 
Principles of Corporate Governance have been widely adopted as a benchmark 
for achieving good corporate governance in OECD countries and elsewhere. They 
are intended to assist governments in their efforts to evaluate and improve the 
regulatory framework for corporate governance, and to provide guidance and 
suggestions for stock exchanges, investors, corporations and other parties that 
have a role in the process of developing good corporate governance.
Corporate governance regimes
Different countries have different views about corporate governance. Governance 
regimes are heavily influenced by the institutional environment. The ­Anglo-Saxon 
environment, characterized by large liquid capital markets, a growing concentra-
tion of power within institutional investors and an active market for corporate 
takeovers, has been generally supportive of the development of strong investor 
protection and of shareholder primacy in the corporate governance debate. On 
the other hand, for example, the continental European institutional environ-
ment is characterized by less liquid markets and greater concentration of power 
with banks, employees and governments, and stronger family ties. For example, 
in German companies with their two-tier board system, banks are often repre-
sented on the supervisory boards and own large shareholdings in many listed 
companies. Employee organizations play a significant role in corporate gover-
nance through their direct involvement with works councils and, indirectly, in 
supervisory boards. The stakeholder model of corporate governance in continen-
tal Europe tends to give greater attention to the social dimension and the longer 
term effect of corporate governance issues.
Although those differences in the governance environment and structures 
have a significant effect on governance practices at company level, economic 
globalization tendencies and pressures from cross-border investment with 
Defining corporate governance – OECD Principles of Corporate Governance 
(extract)
Corporate governance involves a set of relationships between a company’s 
management, its board, its shareholders and other stakeholders. Corporate 
governance also provides the structure through which the objectives of the 
company are set, and the means of attaining those objectives and monitor-
ing performance are determined. Good corporate governance should provide 
proper incentives for the board and management to pursue objectives that are 
in the interests of the company and its shareholders and should facilitate ef-
fective monitoring. The presence of an effective corporate governance system, 
within an individual company and across an economy as a whole, helps to pro-
vide a degree of confidence that is necessary for the proper functioning of a 
market economy. As a result, the cost of capital is lower and firms are encour-
aged to use resources more efficiently, thereby underpinning growth.
Source: OECD Principles of Corporate Governance, 2004
BETWEEN THE LINES

Part 4  THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
432
investors increasingly seeking opportunities outside their domestic markets, seem 
to weaken the distinction between governance models and promote convergence, 
especially on the issue of the effectiveness and accountability of corporate boards.
Reporting on internal control
An effective system of internal control is generally seen as crucial for good gover-
nance. The US Sarbanes–Oxley Act (2002) made executive management respon-
sible not just for establishing, evaluating and assessing over time the effectiveness 
of internal control over financial reporting and disclosure, but also for periodi-
cally asserting its effectiveness. To this effect, each annual report filed with the 
SEC (Securities and Exchange Committee) has to include an internal control re-
port. In this report management should state its responsibility for establishing 
and maintaining an adequate internal control structure and procedures for finan-
cial reporting and assess, as of the end of the company’s fiscal year, the effective-
ness of the internal control system with regard to financial reporting. Moreover, 
the company’s independent auditors must attest to and report on the assessments 
made by company management. In this context, the COSO (Committee of Spon-
soring Organizations of the Treadway Commission) framework is considered to 
offer an established set of control criteria to assess the effectiveness of internal 
control over financial reporting. Related guidance on internal control can be 
found in the Turnbull (UK) and the CoCo (Canada) frameworks which build on 
the COSO framework of internal control.
STANDARDS
OUTLINE OF THE SARBANES–OXLEY ACT OF 2002
The Sarbanes–Oxley Act (SOX) affects corporate managers, independent au-
ditors and other players who are integral to capital formation in the United 
States. This omnibus regulation will forever alter the face of corporate report-
ing and auditing. SOX titles and key sections are outlined herein.
	 1.	Title I – Public Company Accounting Oversight Board: Section 101 estab-
lishes an independent board to oversee public company audits. Section 
107 authorizes oversight and enforcement of the board to the Securities 
and Exchange Commission (SEC).
	 2.	Title II – Auditor Independence: Section 201 prohibits a CPA Firm that 
audits a public company to engage in certain non-audit services with 
the same client. Most relevant to accounting information systems is the 
prohibition of financial information systems design and implementation 
services to audit clients. Section 203 requires audit partner rotation in 
their fifth, sixth, or seventh year, depending on the partner’s role in the 
audit.
	 3.	Title III – Corporate Responsibility: Section 302 requires a company’s 
chief executive officer (CEO) and chief financial officer (CFO) to certify 
quarterly and annual reports. They are certifying the following: they re-
viewed the reports; the reports are not materially untruthful or mislead-

Chapter 16  Auditing and corporate governance
433
ing; the financial statements fairly reflect in all material respects the 
financial position of the company; and they are responsible for design-
ing, establishing, maintaining, and monitoring corporate disclosures, 
controls and procedures. Section 303 makes it unlawful for corporate of-
ficers or directors to fraudulently influence, coerce, manipulate or mis-
lead any independent auditors who are engaged in auditing the firm’s 
financial statements.
	 4.	Title IV – Enhanced Financial Disclosures: Section 404 requires each an-
nual report filed with the SEC to include an internal control report. The 
report shall: state the responsibility of management for establishing 
and maintaining an adequate internal control structure and procedures 
for financial reporting and assess, as of the end of the company’s fiscal 
year, the effectiveness of the internal control structure and procedures 
of the company for financial reporting. The company’s independent au-
ditors must attest to and report on the assessments made by company 
management.
	 5.	Title V – Analysts’ Conflicts of Interests: Requires financial analysts to 
properly disclose in research reports any conflicts of interest they might 
hold with the companies they recommend.
	 6.	Title VI – Commission Resources and Authority: Authorizes the SEC to 
censure or deny any person the privilege of appearing or practicing be-
fore the SEC if that person is deemed to: be unqualified, have acted in an 
unethical manner, or have aided and abetted a violation of federal securi-
ties laws.
	
7.	Title VII – Studies and Reports: Authorizes the General Accounting Office 
(GAO) to study the consolidation of public accounting firms since 1989 
and offer solutions to any recognized problems.
	 8.	Title VIII – Corporate and Criminal Fraud Accountability: Section 802 
makes it a felony to knowingly destroy, alter or create records and/or doc-
uments with the intent to impede, obstruct or influence an on-going or 
contemplated federal investigation. Section 806 offers legal protection to 
whistle-blowers who provide evidence of fraud.
	 9.	Title IX – White-Collar Crime Penalty Enhancements: Section 906 sets 
forth criminal penalties applicable to CEOs and CFOs of up to $5 million 
and up to 20 years in prison if they certify and file false and/or misleading 
financial statements with the SEC.
	10.	Title X – Corporate Tax Returns: Section 1001 conveys a ‘sense of the Sen-
ate’ that the corporate federal income tax returns are signed by the CEO.
	 11.	Title Xl – Corporate Fraud and Accountability: Section 1102 provides for 
fines and imprisonment of up to 20 years to individuals who corruptly 
alter, destroy, mutilate or conceal documents with the intent to impair the 
document’s integrity or availability for use in an official proceeding, or to 
otherwise obstruct, influence or impede any official proceeding. Section 
1105 authorizes the SEC to prohibit anyone from serving as an officer or 
director if the person has committed securities fraud.
Source: Sarbanes–Oxley Act, 107 P. L. 204, § 1, 116 Stat. 745, July 30, 2002

Part 4  THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
434
With the passage of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act, company executives in the US must 
now personally certify the accuracy of the financial statements as well as to the re-
lated controls. This requirement has produced a strong incentive for top manage-
ment to familiarize themselves with the processes underlying financial reporting 
and to give priority to internal control issues. Applying section 404 – ‘Manage-
ment assessment of internal controls’ – of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002 has 
been proven to be a challenging experience. Section 404 calls on companies filing 
with the SEC to identify financial reporting risks, ascertain related controls, as-
sess their effectiveness, fix and control deficiencies, rework documentation and 
ensure continued monitoring of the controls. This has been a daunting task, espe-
cially for companies with complex organizational structures and extensive foreign 
operations. Practical experience showed that internal control related roles and 
responsibilities were often poorly defined and not well incorporated into daily 
business routines. Risk assessment (although an essential component of a system 
of internal control according to the COSO framework) was generally underdevel-
oped with the effect that it becomes quite difficult to prioritize control activities: 
without proper risk assessment control goals remain vague and criteria to assess 
the effectiveness of control measures arbitrary. Without proper risk assessment it 
is impossible to discern obsolete or redundant controls from those that mitigate 
true financial reporting risks. In practice, applying section 404 of SOX has had 
the effect of dramatically increasing the responsibilities of the average line man-
ager engaged in the processing of transactions that feed the financial statements.
In the EU, no equivalent of the SOX requirements on internal control cur-
rently exists, but it can be expected that internal control related requirements will 
be strengthened in the future.
Independent directors
The role of independent non-executive directors features prominently in recent 
corporate governance codes. The presence of independent representatives on the 
board, capable of challenging the decisions of the management, is widely consid-
ered as a means of protecting the interests of shareholders and, where appropri-
ate, other stakeholders.
Good corporate governance practices are considered to involve the presence 
in the central decision-making unit of the company of a number of external or 
independent directors. In a system such as that of Germany where large com-
panies have two boards, an executive or management board and a supervisory 
board, this function already exists, with the supervisory board exercising over-
sight over what the executive directors are doing. In countries where a unitary 
board is the norm such as France, Belgium and Italy, the recommendation is that 
a board should include a proportion of non-executive or independent directors 
whose function is simply to attend board meetings on a regular basis and monitor 
corporate behaviour. A mixture of executive and non-executive directors has the 
advantage of combining the executives’ in-depth knowledge of the daily opera-
tions of the company with the wider experience of non-executive directors. In 
the best companies the monitoring function of non-executive directors offers an 
opportunity for the company to emphasize its ethical behaviour by appointing 
high-profile figures who are completely independent of the business. Indepen-
dent directors should be selected on their merits and for the greater good of the 
company as a whole, not to represent concerns of specific interest groups.

Chapter 16  Auditing and corporate governance
435
However, neither the dual board system nor the unitary board with indepen-
dent directors is foolproof. Famously, the supervisory board of Metallgesellschaft 
in Germany were unaware of the dealings of its US subsidiary in oil futures which 
cost it many millions of dollars to unwind. The supervisory board of Ahold in the 
­Netherlands was not informed on the specifics of revenue dealings of its US oper-
ations, leading to the embarrassment of very significant revenue restatements in 
Ahold’s financial statements in 2002/2003. A report on accounting frauds by SEC-
registered companies identifies what it calls ‘grey’ directors which it defines as 
independent directors who have a business connection with either the company 
or its executive directors. Although independence is a matter of judgement, it is 
reasonable to expect that independent directors are free of personal and business 
Fraudulent financial reporting: 1998–2007 (extract)
A large body of academic research finds that board and audit committee in-
dependence affects the effectiveness of board and audit committee oversight. 
We examined the relation between board independence and fraud. In analyzing 
board member independence, the following definitions were used to categorize 
individual members of the board of directors into one of three categories:
n	
Inside director – A director who was also an officer or employee of the 
company or a subsidiary or an officer of an affiliated company.
n	
Grey director – A director who was a former officer or employee of the 
company, a subsidiary or an affiliate; relative of management; professional 
advisor to the company; officer or owner of a significant supplier or cus-
tomer of the company; interlocking director; officer or employee of another 
company controlled by the CEO or the company’s majority owner; owner 
of an affiliate company; or creditor of the company.
n	
Outside director – A director who had no disclosed relationship (other than 
stock ownership) between the director and the company or its officers.
The average percentage of inside directors on the board for fraud firms was 
30 per cent as compared to 25 per cent for no-fraud firms. This difference was 
statistically significant (p-value 5 0.010). There was no significant difference in 
the percentage of outside directors for fraud firms (60 per cent of the board) ver-
sus no-fraud firms (63 per cent of the board). There was no statistical difference 
between the two groups in the average percentage of grey directors. We were 
able to analyze the types of grey directors serving on the board of directors for 
63 fraud and 63 no-fraud firms. The most common types of grey directors were 
former company officers, consultants and outside legal counsel. Differences in 
types of grey directors serving on fraud and no-fraud firms were not statistically 
significant, except for the difference in the percentage of grey directors who were 
relatives of management. 7 per cent of fraud firm grey directors were relatives 
of management as compared to 18 per cent for no-fraud firms (p-value 5 0.086).
Source: Fraudulent Financial Reporting 1998–2007. An Analysis of US Public Companies, published by the 
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) 2010
BETWEEN THE LINES

Part 4  THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
436
connections with the companies of which they are a director. In that sense, for-
mer executive (or employee) status, close family relationships with an executive 
director or representation of a major shareholder would be an indication of an 
absence of independence.
Aside from generally monitoring what the company is doing, the independent 
directors are increasingly asked to participate in subcommittees to deal with par-
ticular tasks. The most important are the remuneration committee and the audit 
committee. The idea of the remuneration committee is that executive directors 
should not be in a position to fix their own salaries; this should be done by inde-
pendent directors who make comparisons with other companies and ensure that 
the package offered is in line with the market and the good of the shareholders 
and others. It is not clear how well this works either, and the existence of remu-
neration committees has not stopped major shareholder criticisms of some pay 
proposals.
The audit committee is responsible for overseeing the financial reporting pro-
cess and increasingly for monitoring the effectiveness of the system of internal 
control as well. It acts as an intermediary between the board and the external 
auditors (and possibly internal auditors as well) on the basis that auditors should 
not be reporting management failings directly to the managers potentially con-
cerned. The audit committee may need to challenge management decisions or 
take a position that is not in concert with that of executive directors. That is why 
independence is an essential quality for audit committee members. We will look 
at audit committees in more detail later in this chapter.
The European Commission’s Action Plan to modernize company law and en-
hance corporate governance in the EU announced the adoption in the short term 
of a Commission Recommendation on the role in listed companies of (indepen-
dent) non-executive or supervisory directors.
Chairman of the board and chief executive officer
Most corporate governance codes recommend a clear division of responsibilities 
at the top of the company between the chairman of the board of directors and 
the chief executive officer (CEO) to ensure a balance of power and authority. The 
running of the board of directors (the chairman’s role) should be separated from 
the executive responsibility of running the company’s business (the CEO’s role). 
Concentration of both functions within one person is seen as undermining the 
accountability of corporate boards.
In two-tier boards (as in Germany and in the Netherlands) the concentration 
of power issue is less acute. In two-tier boards, the management board is respon-
sible for management of the company while the supervisory board is responsible 
for overseeing the management board.
Institutional shareholders
It has been argued that part of the need for formal corporate governance frame-
works arises from the fact that the major shareholders in large multinationals 
are typically financial institutions (banks, insurance companies, fund manag-
ers, pension funds, etc.). In the US, institutional investors hold more than 50 
per cent of all listed corporate shares (about 60 per cent in the largest 1000 

Chapter 16  Auditing and corporate governance
437
corporations), while the largest 25 pension funds accounted for 42 per cent of 
the foreign ­equity held by all US investors. Historically this kind of shareholder 
has considered that they should not intervene in the management of the com-
pany directly. They have taken the view that they are making an investment to 
get a return; if that return is not delivered, they take their investment elsewhere. 
This kind of passive shareholder approach is blamed for creating an environment 
where company management felt they could do what they liked as long as the 
share price held up.
However, this situation is changing, partly because the investment industry 
has wanted to respond to the criticisms and partly because the individuals 
who invest in pension funds and collective investment vehicles are increas-
ingly wanting an assurance that their money is not being used to invest in 
companies with whose behaviour they do not agree. The personal finance 
press is increasingly vociferous in raising these issues and individuals are in-
creasingly demanding that their money goes into ‘ethical’ investments. As a 
consequence, institutional investors are drawing up codes of conduct for com-
panies, and some are now asking company boards to sign up to a code of con-
duct before the investment fund will buy any shares. This is, of course, another 
sign of the change in society’s values and increases the pressure on companies 
to address these issues.
Statutory audit
The independent auditor has always had a role to play in corporate governance, 
and never more so than now when the multinational has subsidiaries all over 
the world and only the Big Four audit firms have similar organizations which 
can check on the existence and activities of these vast networks. Essentially, the 
signature of a Big Four audit firm on a multinational’s audit report is taken to be 
the guarantee of the accuracy and validity of the financial statements, and an as-
surance that there is nothing nasty hidden behind the bland comments of the 
chairman. The investment market places a very heavy reliance on the auditor’s 
assurance – the analyst may modify the figures to compare with other companies, 
may make all sorts of adjustments for forecasting purposes, but the very existence 
of all the company’s assets, its activities and their legality, and the main board’s 
control over these is attested to by the auditor.
In fact the audit of a multinational group is a very difficult task and one which 
carries with it a great deal of legal and moral responsibility. In essence the audit of 
a multinational is no different from that of an individual company, since the con-
solidated accounts are simply a reworking of the financial statements of all the 
individual companies that make up the group. However, it is more complicated 
in that the subsidiaries are working in different legal environments, and the more 
complex the accounting web, the easier it is to ‘lose’ transactions. The auditor of 
the group accounts is responsible for any error in the group audit, even if such 
an error has arisen because of a mistake by the auditor of a subsidiary. Equally, 
multinationals are under pressure to publish their results as soon as possible after 
the year-end, which means that the process of auditing and agreeing the accounts 
of the individual subsidiaries may have to take place within two months of the 

Part 4  THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
438
year-end, leaving a further month to consolidate and agree the consolidation 
adjustments.
This leads to a situation where the large audit firms like to be the exclusive 
auditor of a multinational and all its subsidiaries. Critics say this is simply to 
build up their fee base, which may be true, but it is also true that using several 
different firms of auditors is necessarily more expensive because they need to 
have meetings to liaise with each other and necessarily more risky because there 
is no one with an overview of the whole group. The Bank of Credit and Com-
merce International (BCCI) is a famous example of a group which operated as 
two separate but related networks, each network audited by a different Big Four 
auditor. After the collapse of BCCI it became apparent that there had been a 
‘black hole’ between the two networks which was used to conceal fraudulent or 
illegal transactions.
Typically the audit of a multinational is a continuing operation where one 
year’s audit leads into the next, and if doubtful issues are identified one year, they 
may well be subjected to a more intensive scrutiny the following year and so on. 
The auditor will attempt to identify the areas of the group which have the highest 
audit risk (operations in a difficult trading and credit environment, such as ­Russia, 
high volume of cash transactions, poor control environment, poor local account-
ing systems, high volume of foreign currency transactions, etc.) and devote most 
resources to checking these. The auditor will also each year select particular areas 
for special investigation. These might be selected in response to worries expressed 
by the group’s internal audit or accounting units, or may be selected more or less 
at random so that even a low-risk part of the group is occasionally subject to an 
intense scrutiny.
Fortunately the rules for the conduct of an international audit are less likely 
to be radically different from country to country than for accounting. While 
audit rules may differ quite radically even between developed countries, there 
is a set of international audit rules put out by the International Federation of 
Accountants (IFAC – see Chapter 2) which are often used for multinational au-
dits, and in particular when the accounting rules used are those of the IASB. 
Analysts should check the audit report carefully, however, to see what rules 
have been applied. The standard audit report should specify both what ac-
counting rules have been applied by the company and what auditing rules have 
been used by the auditor in conducting the audit. Beware terms such as ‘have 
been prepared subject to professional standards’ which do not specify which 
professional standards. While auditing standards are much the same in devel-
oped countries, they are not uniform and in developing countries may be fairly 
rudimentary.
Issues in international audit
That brings us to a delicate subject in international audit – how much reliance 
should you place on the financial statements of companies headquartered in de-
veloping or newly industrialized countries? These have been the subject of quite 
a lot of criticism, mostly as a consequence of the financial crisis in South-East 

Chapter 16  Auditing and corporate governance
439
Asia in the late 1990s. Here it became apparent that a number of companies had 
had their financial statements audited by Big Four firms, but had either used ­local 
accounting standards with a low degree of transparency or used International 
­Accounting Standards while not complying fully with their requirements – using 
what is known as ‘IAS-lite’ in the trade.
It became clear that many relevant bits of information had not been dis-
closed to investors – in particular, issues such as unhedged loans in strong 
currencies to finance investments which would generate cash flows in weak 
currencies. This was an important cause of a flight from the Asian markets 
and the economic depression and collapse of many companies which fol-
lowed. These deficiencies in reporting and auditing raised a number of ques-
tions. First, should the Big Four sign clean audit reports of financial statements 
which do not conform to high quality international standards? The Big Four 
pointed out that the accounts made it clear that local standards had been fol-
lowed and analysts should be reminded that the first thing to do when looking 
at a company report is indeed to check what rules have been applied. However, 
the market sentiment was rather that the Big Four should maintain certain 
minimum standards.
This in turn raises another issue – to what extent is an audit by the same Big 
Four firm the same the world over? Or, put another way, are the Big Four firms 
uniformly run and directed? In fact the firms are not multinational compa-
nies with pyramid-style reporting and authority chains. They are networks of  
national partnerships or similar structures which work together through 
varying­ mechanisms, but which lack any formal or legal means whereby an 
international board, as it were, can impose its will on a national partnership on 
all questions. It is rather like running a franchise operation such as McDonald’s 
where some outlets are directly owned by head office and some are franchises, 
both regional and local, but without the right to specify in detail what is sold 
or how it is prepared.
Auditor independence
A perpetual policy issue in audit is the independence of the auditor. Of course, 
the value of the modern audit depends partly upon the technical skills of the 
auditor and partly upon the independence and ethical qualities of the auditor. 
Without the competence and the distance from the management of the com-
pany, the audit report is worthless.
In some countries, such as Germany and France, the governments take the 
view that independence can only be obtained if the auditor performs only audit 
for the client and has no other relationship with the management. However, in 
many other countries, including Switzerland, the UK and the Netherlands, the 
auditor is free to sell other services to the same client, although in the UK the 
company must publish details of how much it paid for the audit and what other 
fees it paid the auditor.
There is a good deal of discussion about the effect of this on independence. 
Audit firms say that independence is a state of mind and does not vary directly 

Part 4  THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
440
with the commercial relationship. The Big Four also point out that they are ­bigger 
than many of their clients, and independence is much more a problem for a 
single partner firm than one with thousands of partners. However, there is also 
evidence that over time, audit partners come to identify fairly closely with their 
clients, and in this connection, the old firm of Coopers & Lybrand, for example, 
were sanctioned for having been too ready to listen to Robert Maxwell, whose 
companies they audited for many years.
In France the audit appointment is for six years, and a listed company must 
appoint two auditors. In Italy the appointment is for three years and may only 
be renewed twice, leading to a maximum of nine years for the audit engagement. 
However, auditors point out that statistically the most likely time for a fraud is 
when there is a new auditor – it takes time for a new firm to understand thor-
oughly the workings of a large multinational. There is clearly no magic solution 
to the independence problem.
Following the requirements of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002, SEC rules fur-
ther restrict (but do not completely eliminate) the types of non-audit services that 
FTSE 100 group Audit Fees – UK top 20
Company
Year-end
Auditors
Audit fee £m
Other fees £m
BP
31 Dec. 05
E&Y
44.2
11.6
HSBC
31 Dec. 05
KPMG
36.5
11.4
Shell T&T
31 Dec. 05
PwC
30.3
3.7
WPP Group
31 Dec. 05
Deloitte
17.9
3.6
Barclays
31 Dec. 05
PwC
17.0
12.0
Royal Bank of Scotland
31 Dec. 05
Deloitte
16.9
7.4
SAB Miller
31 Mar. 06
PwC
13.8
2.9
GlaxoSmithKline
31 Dec. 05
PwC
11.9
2.6
Unilever
31 Dec. 05
PwC
11.7
3.4
Aviva
31 Dec. 05
E&Y
10.0
3.1
Lloyds TSB
31 Dec. 05
PwC
8.9
3.2
Anglo American
31 Dec. 05
Deloitte
8.7
3.7
HBOS
31 Dec. 05
KPMG
7.7
3.7
Rio Tinto
31 Dec. 05
PwC
7.6
1.4
Standard Chartered
31 Dec. 05
KPMG
7.2
1.8
BAT
31 Dec. 05
PwC
6.9
3.9
Prudential
31 Dec. 05
KPMG
6.8
5.6
BT
31 Mar. 06
PwC
6.6
2.6
BHP Billiton
30 Jun. 05
KPMG
6.5
1.7
Old Mutual
31 Dec. 05
KPMG
6.4
4.6
AstraZeneca
31 Dec. 05
KPMG
6.4
0.6
Source: Financial Director, October 2006 pp.43/44

Chapter 16  Auditing and corporate governance
441
The new corporate governance framework generally stresses the role and implica-
tions of an effective system of internal control. It sees internal control as part of the 
accountability of a company’s board of directors and management to stake-holders 
and extends the internal control logic to enterprise-wide risk management. Profit-
able corporate performance is more and more recognized as the result of successful 
risk-taking. Corporate activity necessarily involves taking risks and corporate re-
turns are expected to reflect rewards for considered risk-taking. In that sense, effec-
tive risk management is essential as good business practice to enable companies to 
take risks with more confidence and in a rational and informed manner.
Those charged with governance of a company are expected to systematically 
identify, evaluate and respond to the company’s risks. These risks relate to strat-
egy and business operations a well as to compliance with laws and regulations 
and financial reporting. Stakeholders, and shareholders in particular, expect those 
charged with governance of the company to inform them about the risks the 
company faces and also to put the necessary controls in place to deal with these 
risks. This emphasis on risk control and risk accountability was the result of a 
number of recent corporate failures where investors were not informed about dis-
proportionate levels of risks incurred by corporate management.
Enterprise-wide risk management and control is particularly important in large 
multinational groups. In such groups there are many parts that senior execu-
tives never see. Decisions are passed up and down the management pyramid, but 
only an effective internal financial reporting system shows that those decisions 
are carried out, and only an effective risk management and internal control en-
vironment ensures that the risks being taken by the company are being clearly 
identified, measured and monitored.
In September 2004, COSO published its Enterprise Risk Management – Integrated 
Framework, which in fact extends its internal control framework to risk manage-
ment and strategic risks. COSO’s definition of enterprise risk management is as 
follows:
Internal control and risk management
Enterprise risk management is a process, effected by an entity’s board of directors, 
management and other personnel, applied in strategy setting and across the enter-
prise, designed to identify potential events that may affect the entity, and manage 
risk to be within its risk appetite, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the 
achievement of entity objectives.
an auditor is allowed to provide to audit clients, and the employment of former 
audit firm employees by the audit client, and provide for audit partner rotation 
after a period of five years. If an audit firm provides non-audit services that are 
not prohibited for public company audit clients, such as tax services, these must 
be pre-approved by the company’s audit committee.

Part 4  THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
442
The COSO ERM Integrated Framework sees internal control as a subset of risk 
management. Risk management extends the scope of internal control as it is con-
cerned with wider external and internal risks relevant to the determination and 
execution of a company’s strategy to reach the company’s objectives than the set 
of risks focused on within the internal control framework. Nevertheless, internal 
control is seen as highly instrumental in achieving these objectives. As we have 
observed before, it is the absence of good internal controls which permits execu-
tives to carry out transactions against company policy and without the financial 
consequences being immediately visible, as Ahold, Parmelat, Enron and others 
can testify, and hence its importance in corporate governance discussions. There 
is no point in central management having the right policies in place if they are 
unable to monitor their application. Internal control is however only one of the 
means to manage risk exposures. Other devices include transferring risk to third 
parties, risk-sharing, contingency planning and consciously excluding activities 
deemed too risky.
A good system of risk management provides the means for central manage-
ment to effectively deal with uncertainty and associated opportunities, with the 
ultimate goal of achieving the company’s objectives. The ERM framework pro-
vides integrated ERM principles, common risk-related terminology and practical 
implementation guidance to help companies develop and benchmark risk man-
agement practices. An effective risk management system will be beneficial to ex-
ternal auditors also as they assess the company’s business risks.
In the UK, the Turnbull Report has been quite influential in this  respect. It 
reinforced the awareness of disciplined risk management as being crucial to good 
corporate governance and UK boards are nowadays significantly more involved 
in risk management than before.
A logical extension of a governance perspective on risk management is the 
development of a set of risk disclosure requirements empowering shareholders 
to use disclosures to bring companies to adopt more elaborate risk management 
standards. Currently, however, there exist no EU disclosure requirements regard-
ing risk management and internal control. European directives do require disclo-
sure of a company’s principal risks, but not how they are managed or controlled. 
Further risk disclosures could relate to the overall process of risk management and 
internal control, the management of specific risks and information on the assess-
ment of the effectiveness of risk management and internal control. Moreover, in 
the EU there is no equivalent to the Sarbanes–Oxley requirements on effective-
ness disclosures. Recall, however, that the Sarbanes–Oxley Act only requires the 
disclosure of opinions about the effectiveness of internal control over financial 
reporting. It contains no disclosure requirements on compliance risks and opera-
tional/strategic risks, although the SEC asks for disclosures of specific risks faced 
by a company in the Management Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) section of 
the mandatory filings.
The board of directors is expected to provide oversight of enterprise risk man-
agement, but they tend to delegate responsibility and accountability on these 
matters to one or more committees. The audit committee is a likely candidate. 
With its focus on internal control over financial reporting, the audit commit-
tee is already well positioned to assume this task. Some companies have how-
ever established a specific risk committee to focus directly on enterprise risk 
management.

Chapter 16  Auditing and corporate governance
443
COMPANY REPORT
LUFTHANSA – RISK MANAGEMENT AT LUFTHANSA
Opportunity and risk management system (extracts)
Lufthansa
Executive Board
Supervisory Board/
Audit Committee
Corporate
Risk Controlling
Risk controlling
in Group
companies
Group-wide standards,
uniform procedures
Risk Management
Committee
Internal Audit
Auditors
Unified integration
in planning and
management processes
Bilateral talks
Risk management
officers for Group
companies
Monitoring
of risk management
system
reports
report
Risk management at Lufthansa
Line managers (Risk owners)
As an international aviation company Lufthansa is exposed to macro-
economic, sector-specific and Company risks. Our management systems 
are constantly updated and enable us to identify both risks and oppor-
tunities at an early stage and act accordingly. Our proven risk strategy 
allows us to take advantage of business opportunities as long as a risk-
adjusted return can be realised on market terms.
The calculated management of opportunities and risks is an integral fac-
tor in the management of our Company. Our risk management is therefore 
integrated into our business processes. The system enabling operational 
risks to be identified and managed at an early stage is composed of sev-
eral modules. These modules are linked systematically with each other – 
with the exception of financial risk management, for which responsibility 
is organised centrally. This enables homogenous risks to be identified in 
their entirety and responsibly managed with the necessary economic com-
petence. The functions of trading, settlement and financial controlling are 
strictly separated and are based in independent organisational units. The 
risk management system for financial instruments is part of central finan-
cial management. It is described in the section ‘Financial opportunities 
and risks’ and in the Notes to the consolidated financial statements under 
‘Note 47’.
Our Risk Management Committee ensures on behalf of the Executive 
Board that business risks are permanently identified and evaluated across 
all functions and processes. The committee is made up of the eight direc-
tors of Corporate Controlling, Legal Affairs, Corporate Finance, Corporate 
Accounting, Corporate Audit (permanent member without voting rights), 
Corporate IT, Controlling Lufthansa Passenger Airlines and Delvag Group. It 

Part 4  THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
444
is responsible for continuously improving the effectiveness and efficiency of 
the risk management system.
An important instrument for doing so is the risk map: it lists all material 
risks which could endanger the Company’s earnings and its continued exis-
tence. At the same time it identifies all the instruments for managing these 
risks. Risks count as material if they are capable of causing damage of at least 
one third of the operating result necessary for maintaining the value of the 
Company. For 2011 this amount was again determined to be EUR 300m for 
the Lufthansa Group. The materiality threshold is calculated individually 
for each of the business segments according to the same principle.
The risk map is updated regularly and its structure is aligned with the 
entire process of risk management, identification, coordination, communi-
cation and control. Lufthansa applies uniform risk management standards 
throughout the Group. The managing directors of all Group companies also 
appoint risk managers in all business segments. They are responsible for im-
plementing the Group guidelines within their respective companies and are 
in close, regular contact with the Risk Management Committee. This also 
enables the rapid integration of new subsidiaries, as occurred with Austrian 
Airlines for instance.
Opportunity and risk controlling in the course of the planning and co-
ordination processes is a further component of the system. This primarily 
identifies the potential risks and opportunities that could impact earnings 
targets in an analysis of the market and competition landscape, evaluates 
them and initiates steps to manage them.
As both positive and negative departures from plan are covered, this 
means that the same instruments are used to identify, evaluate, manage and 
control risks and opportunities.
Over the course of the year we track the opportunities and risks identi-
fied in relation to the planned result with the help of the quarterly Oppor-
tunity and Risk Report. Potential departures from the planned operating 
result are quantified by the risk experts in order to focus attention on the 
most important risks. Both positive and negative variations, i.e. opportuni-
ties and risks, are evaluated in the form of a best case/worst case analysis. 
A discussion of risks and opportunities is also a fixed element of the regular 
meetings between Group controlling and the managing directors of Group 
companies.
Additionally, the potential departures from plan are also examined in 
separate meetings with departments exposed to risk. The focus here is on 
identifying the action required and the status of steps taken to manage the 
corresponding opportunities and risks systematically.
The auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers Aktiengesellschaft Wirtschaftsprü-
fungsgesellschaft (PwC) examined the early risk warning system in place 
at Deutsche Lufthansa AG in the light of statutory requirements during 
the annual audit. It satisfies all the statutory requirements made of such a 
system.
Source: Lufthansa Annual Report, 2011, extract from Combined Management Report

Chapter 16  Auditing and corporate governance
445
This brings us back to the question of the audit committee. The idea of an audit 
committee originated in the US more than 30 years ago and initially spread only 
slowly to Europe. Companies listed on US exchanges were obliged to have an 
­audit committee, and this of itself means that European companies listed in the 
US needed to have one. However, as the corporate governance movement has 
gathered pace, so has an indigenous insistence upon the merits of an audit com-
mittee in different European countries.
Where an audit committee functions effectively, it has the potential not only 
to improve the quality of financial reporting as such, but also to reinforce the 
quality of the control environment and strengthen the position of both the inter-
nal audit function and of the external auditor. Essentially, the idea is that the au-
dit committee should provide a quasi-independent forum where those concerned 
with checking the effectiveness and quality of the company’s accounting and 
control should be able to meet and discuss with shareholder representatives (in-
dependent directors) and raise issues of concern. In theory this is a fine idea, and 
helps encourage an open discussion about the group’s effectiveness and protect 
the ‘whistle-blower’ from inside the company who is concerned about manage-
ment fraud, ecological damage, tax fraud or whatever. It also helps preserve the 
independence of the external auditors from management. However, it depends 
upon the independent directors being willing to listen and to take action where 
they think this is necessary. Clearly in practice there is a risk that the audit com-
mittee will think it is there to defend the executives, or that it will not follow 
up the issues raised with the executives. In other words, the success of the audit 
committee is not guaranteed at all – it depends very much on the quality of the 
people concerned.
Audit committee
NOKIA – AUDIT COMMITTEE
Committees of the Board of Directors in 2011 (extracts)
The Audit Committee consists of a minimum of three members of the Board 
who meet all applicable independence, financial literacy and other require-
ments of Finnish law and the rules of the stock exchanges where Nokia shares 
are listed, i.e. NASDAQ OMX Helsinki and the New York Stock Exchange. 
Since May 3, 2011, the Audit Committee consists of the following three mem-
bers of the Board: Risto Siilasmaa (Chairman), Jouko Karvinen and Isabel 
Marey-Semper.
The Audit Committee is established by the Board primarily for the purpose 
of overseeing the accounting and financial reporting processes of the com-
pany and audits of the financial statements of the company. The Committee is 
responsible for assisting the Board’s oversight of (1) the quality and integrity 
of the company’s financial statements and related disclosure, (2) the statu-
tory audit of the company’s financial statements, (3) the external auditor’s 
COMPANY REPORT

Part 4  THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
446
qualifications and independence, (4) the performance of the external auditor 
subject to the requirements of Finnish law, (5) the performance of the com-
pany’s internal controls and risk management and assurance function, (6) the 
performance of the internal audit function and (7) the company’s compliance 
with legal and regulatory requirements, including also the performance of its 
­ethics and compliance program. The Committee also maintains procedures 
for the receipt, retention and treatment of complaints received by the com-
pany regarding accounting, internal controls or auditing matters and for the 
confidential, anonymous submission by employees of the company of con-
cerns regarding accounting or auditing matters. Nokia’s disclosure controls 
and procedures, which are reviewed by the Audit Committee and approved 
by the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer, as well as 
Nokia’s internal controls over financial reporting, are designed to provide rea-
sonable assurance regarding the quality and integrity of the company’s finan-
cial statements and related disclosures. The Disclosure Committee chaired by 
the Chief Financial Officer is responsible for the preparation of the quarterly 
and annual results announcements, and the process includes involvement by 
business managers, business controllers and other functions, like internal au-
dit, as well as a final review and confirmation by the Audit Committee and the 
Board. (...)
Under Finnish law, Nokia’s external auditor is elected by Nokia’s share-
holders by a simple majority vote at the Annual General Meeting for one fis-
cal year at a time. The Audit Committee makes a proposal to the shareholders 
in respect of the appointment of the external auditor based upon its evalu-
ation of the qualifications and independence of the auditor to be proposed 
for election or re-election. Under Finnish law, the fees of the external auditor 
are also approved by Nokia’s shareholders by a simple majority vote at the 
Annual General Meeting. The Committee makes a proposal to the sharehold-
ers in respect of the fees of the external auditor, and approves the external 
auditor’s annual audit fees under the guidance given by the Annual General 
Meeting. (...)
In discharging its oversight role, the Audit Committee has full access to all 
company books, records, facilities and personnel. The Committee may retain 
counsel, auditors or other advisors in its sole discretion, and must receive ap-
propriate funding, as determined by the Committee, from the company for the 
payment of compensation to such outside advisors.
The Audit Committee meets at least four times a year based upon a schedule 
established at the first meeting following the appointment of the Committee. 
The Committee meets separately with the representatives of Nokia’s manage-
ment, heads of the internal audit and ethics and compliance functions, and 
the external auditor in connection with each regularly scheduled meeting.  The 
head of the internal audit function has at all times a direct access to the Audit 
Committee, without involvement of management.
The Audit Committee had eight meetings in 2011. The attendance at all meet-
ings was 100 per cent. In addition, any directors who wish to may attend Audit 
Committee meetings as non-voting observers.
Source: NOKIA, Annual Report, 2011, 

Chapter 16  Auditing and corporate governance
447
In the EU, the Statutory Audit Directive (2006) requires all public interest enti-
ties, essentially companies whose securities are trading on a regulated market, 
to have an audit committee composed of non-executive directors or supervisory 
directors and/or members appointed by the general meeting of shareholders. At 
least one of the members of the audit committee should be independent and 
have competence in accounting and/or auditing. The proposed amendments 
(published in 2011) to the Fourth and Seventh Company Law Directives include a 
requirement for all public interest entities in the EU to provide a corporate gover-
nance statement in their management report which would contain a description 
of the company’s internal control and risk management systems.
Meanwhile in the US, the Sarbanes–Oxley Act has increased the role and in-
dependence of the audit committee. It made the audit committee explicitly and 
directly responsible for the appointment, compensation and oversight of the 
work of the external auditor, including resolution of disagreements concerning 
financial reporting issues between management and the external auditor. More-
over, the audit committee must pre-approve all audit and non-audit services of 
the auditor.
Summary
The object of this chapter was to give you a certain amount of background informa-
tion on current corporate governance issues and their relationship with, in particu-
lar, the effectiveness and accountability of corporate boards, internal control and 
external audit. The tenets of recent corporate governance developments are that 
good governance and internal control must become integrated into the mission, 
culture and daily operations of the company. This background information should 
serve to make you better understand the context within which the financial state-
ments have been prepared and some of the information that is published in the 
annual report. If, as an analyst, you have the opportunity to attend company inves-
tor briefings, you should not hesitate to ask companies about the independent di-
rectors, the composition and mandate of the audit committee and the functioning 
and effectiveness of the internal control and risk management system. These are all 
indications of the transparency of company management and their effectiveness.
Discussion questions
1.	 What is the current state of the corporate governance debate in the country 
in which you are based? Try to identify from the different sources of regula-
tion (stock exchange, government, accounting profession, etc.) current guid-
ance in your country.
2.	 Compare the audit committee disclosures of a US corporation (see SEC 
­EDGAR database) with that of a company based in your country.
3.	 Do you think that the independence of auditors is an issue about which you 
should be concerned? What are the rules in your country?
4.	 Explain the relationship between enterprise risk management and internal 
control.


P A R T  F I V E
Advanced financial 
statement analysis
This last section consists of two chapters addressing different issues. Chapter 17 
takes up from Chapters 8 and 9 and goes further into the art of financial statement 
analysis. Chapter 18 looks ahead at what changes are to be expected in IFRS in the 
short to medium term.

450
This is the second chapter to look at how users draw information from financial 
statements. The first part of the chapter reviews the relationship between the 
company and its investors, and how information flows from the company to the 
investors. The second part extends the work done in Chapter 9 on the tools and 
methods of financial statement analysis.
C H A P T E R  1 7
Financial statement analysis II
Introduction
Chapter Structure
n	 Introduction
n	 Investor relations
n	 Income smoothing
n	 Why earnings fluctuate
n	 Professional analysts
n	 Quality of earnings
n	 Analytical techniques
n	 Strategic ratio analysis
n	 Shareholder value
n	 Summary
n	 Assignments
In this chapter we intend to take your analytical skills a stage further, introduc-
ing some more analytical concepts and tools which provide further insights into 
a company’s financial statements. By the end of it, you should know what other 

Chapter 17  Financial statement analysis II
451
inputs are used by analysts to arrive at their opinions about companies. You 
should have considered what is implied by the quality of a company’s earnings, 
and learned new methods to use ratios dynamically as a clue to the strategic posi-
tioning of a company.
Investor relations
A problem for the financial markets is that, although stock exchanges require 
companies to publish widely any information that is likely to affect the market 
price of a share (this is often done by sending a release to the stock exchange it-
self), in practice not all investors have access to the same information. The bulk of 
investment in the market comes from collective investment vehicles and not di-
rectly from private individuals. Many people save for retirement by buying shares 
in a unit trust or investing in a life assurance policy or an independent pension 
scheme. Employer schemes are frequently handed over to professional manag-
ers. Consequently, the individual intervenes less and less directly in the market 
and the vast majority of investment is channelled through different institutional 
investors. This means that a company seeking investors can address most of the 
market in effect by talking with professional fund managers and analysts.
This has given rise to the investor relations function. Large companies main-
tain a department whose job is to communicate, often on a one-to-one basis, 
with investment organizations. This department is somewhere between a public 
relations unit and a financial reporting unit. Their job is to maintain continuing 
relations with market professionals, to respond to their questions and to organize 
‘road shows’: visits to different cities around the world to explain results and usu-
ally to enable investors to meet the chief financial officer or chief executive and 
talk about the company. Company websites often provide their financial data via 
a link on the home page entitled ‘investor relations’, rather than (say) financial 
statements. Analysts are invited to contact the ‘corporate communications direc-
tor’, not the finance director.
At the same time, professional analysts will follow individual companies very 
closely and aim to become a specialist in that company. They will attend company 
presentations but also make visits to company sites and will constantly be updat-
ing their knowledge of the company and their future expectations. Evidently, such 
analysts have a much more detailed knowledge of the company than the average 
private individual and this creates an imbalance of knowledge in the market.
That said, the Internet is modifying that a little. Nowadays more and more  
brokers sell shares to private individuals on the Internet and a market is developing 
where TV companies will screen business reports early in the morning, often with 
soundbites from well-known analysts. Private investors then turn to their com-
puter and buy and sell on the basis of that morning’s comments. They then check 
the market regularly through the day to see how their gamble is paying off – all 
the excitement of betting on horse races or whatever, with the added psychologi-
cal boost that what you are doing is seriously managing your finances, not amus-
ing yourself. Private investors are coming back to direct buying and selling, but 
they are taking advice from professional brokers and others. In some ways this is 
likely to bring further complications to regulating the market because most effort 
currently goes into ensuring quality information to the professional investor and 
regulators may yet feel they have to step in to regulate the advice being given to 
private individuals in order to protect them and preserve confidence in the market.

Part 5  Advanced financial statement analysis
452
There is a basic problem in financial reporting that the net earnings of a com-
pany are likely to vary from year to year because they are the result of many 
different factors, whereas the financial markets want earnings to increase progres-
sively from year to year. This means that company financial executives are un-
der some pressure to ‘manage’ the reported earnings so that they meet analysts’ 
expectations.
Let us look at this proposition in more detail. First, why are earnings important 
to analysts? Second, why do they fluctuate? Third, how are they managed?
We talked in Chapter 9 about the price/earnings (P/E) ratio. This is a ratio that 
reflects the degree of risk which the market considers inherent to a particular 
company within a particular business sector. The relationship is expressed:
INVESTOR RELATIONS MEETINGS
The analysts sought to make the best qualitative judgment on the company. 
Factors of particular interest about the company which were said to make a 
strong contribution to this qualitative judgment may be summarized as:
n	
quality of management
n	
performance indicators
n	
quality of assets
n	
verification and assurance.
What was clear from the analysts’ comments was that relatively little of this 
information came directly from the annual report. Company meetings were the 
key source of qualitative information and the annual report was the confirma-
tion in terms of financial outcomes.
Source: ICAS, Corporate Communications: Views of Institutional Investors and Lenders 
(Research Committee, Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland, 1999)
BETWEEN THE LINES
Income smoothing
This relationship is fundamental to the stock market. When investment man-
agers are looking for shares to buy, what they are seeking is a share which is 
undervalued, i.e. whose market price is below its real value. The current market 
price is determined by analysts as a function of the historic P/E for that com-
pany, multiplied by forecast earnings per share. If the share is undervalued, that 
means that the market is either underestimating future earnings or overesti-
mating the riskiness of the company (the higher the risk, the higher the return 
necessary to compensate investors for running the risk, and so the lower the 
P/E and price).
  P/E ratio = Market price of share
	
Earnings per share

Chapter 17  Financial statement analysis II
453
The P/E ratios for the sector often fluctuate together (many aspects of risk will 
affect all companies in the same sector similarly) but the P/E for the individual 
company within that tends to be fairly stable in relation to other companies in 
the same sector.
It is changes in expected earnings which are the more frequent cause of fluc-
tuations in price which affect individual companies. During the accounting year, 
professional analysts will visit the company and will try to obtain information 
which will give them as good as possible an idea of the likely outcome for the 
year’s earnings. A forecast increase in earnings will cause them to buy more shares 
(market currently undervalues shares) whereas a drop in forecast earnings will 
cause them to sell shares (market overvalues the company at current price). There 
is therefore a direct link between accounting earnings and the market price.
The accounts are now so complex that most users need someone else to ex-
plain them. But financial analysts are only interested in earnings per share 
and the price/earnings ratio. Les Cullen, a director of Inchcape, said ‘Standard-­
setters must realize there is a limit to the complexity which preparers can put 
up with’. He added: ‘The City is not using the more complex information. It is 
still seeing the company as a sort of annuity’. He explained that the markets are 
more interested in stable earnings patterns and this creates a pressure on pre-
parers to smooth earnings, even though in the modern economy earnings are 
becoming more volatile. ‘There is a disconnection at present between account-
ing principles and the financial market.’
Source: Accounting & Business, July/August 1999, p.20
BETWEEN THE LINES
Why earnings fluctuate
The net profit after tax of a multinational is subject to an enormous number of 
different variables – temporary changes in turnover as a result of local conditions, 
the arrival of competing products on the market, unexpected losses as a result of, 
for example, civil unrest, tax changes and so on. A multinational may well be op-
erating in over 100 countries and selling many different types of products, so the 
number of factors which contribute to the shape of the consolidated statement of 
profit or loss (income statement/profit and loss account) is inevitably substantial. 
While there may be a portfolio effect (i.e. if you have enough different risk factors 
they may cancel each other out), there are many circumstances which can influ-
ence the final outcome.
Another issue is that net profit after tax is a small percentage of revenues. For 
example, if you take the results of Amazon for 2007, the revenues were $14 835m 
(2006: $10 711m) but net profit before tax was $660m (2006: $377m) which is 
4.45 per cent (2006: 3.52 per cent). This means that operating expenses and inter-
est amounted to 95.55 per cent of revenues (2006: 96.48 per cent). In this context 
sales have gone up by 28 per cent but income before tax has gone up 75 per cent. 
The difference is a one per cent decrease in costs.

Part 5  Advanced financial statement analysis
454
You can see that a small shift in costs has a major effect on profits. This has two 
consequences: first, profits are likely to move up and down, year on year, in an 
apparently arbitrary fashion but, second, that management can influence profits 
by relatively small manipulations of costs. If management want the share price 
to rise steadily year on year, they have to ensure, given the market’s dependence 
upon P/E ratios, that profits rise steadily year on year.
How do managers manipulate profits?
There are a number of classic ways in which this can be done legally and they are 
all difficult for the analyst to recognize. The most difficult to detect is the man-
agement of what are sometimes called discretionary costs. These are costs which 
the group can stop incurring without having any immediate effect on profitabil-
ity, such as research and development, staff training, advertising. Of course, it is 
suicide for the company in the medium to long term and also has a bad effect on 
company morale in the short term, but it is frequently practised. Most groups op-
erate an internal monthly reporting system which compares actual performance 
with budget and many add to that a forecast for the year-end profit which is 
updated every month. If this forecast shows that the target profit for the year 
is unlikely to be achieved, it is possible that the call will go out from head of-
fice to abandon advertising campaigns, halt product development or simply defer 
these until the start of the next accounting year. Any of these tactics will increase 
short-term profits and there is little or nothing visible on the outside to warn the 
analyst. Where a company discloses its annual research and development expen-
diture, this may show a decrease. But even here, the classification as to what is 
development expenditure and what ordinary running costs is not that clear, and 
a little creative redefinition could hold the figure up even when real expenditure 
has dropped.
A second area of action is closure of loss-making divisions. Suppose that a com-
pany has five divisions with forecast results as follows:
Division 
Profit 
      €m
A
140
B
120
C
80
D
75
E
50
Group
225
If you close division B, group profit jumps immediately from €225m to €345m. 
This may or may not be a good idea. It may just hasten the demise of a division 
which had no future – the product was near the end of its life cycle and could 
no longer make an adequate contribution. On the other hand, it may cause the 
company to close a unit which is in a start-up situation. Many operations lose 
money in their early days – you have only to look at companies like Amazon and 
other very visible Internet start-ups to see that. The very difficult trick for central 
management is to decide how long to continue to nurse a start-up (potentially 

Chapter 17  Financial statement analysis II
455
up to five years) and when to decide to cut one’s losses and stop the experiment. 
In this situation, pressure to help the group profit can result in a start-up being 
abandoned too early because its losses are causing aggregate group profit to suffer. 
This tactic is usually not all that difficult to spot because there is likely to be some 
mention of the closure in the notes to the accounts or the management report, 
but there may be only hints which require interpretation.
A variant on this involves an accounting manipulation: consolidated account-
ing rules may allow the group to exclude from the consolidation any subsidiary 
which is to be disposed of. Flagging division B as a disposal would mean that it 
could be held out of the group result without even closing it down. Until recently 
this kind of practice was even common for groups applying IAS rules. With the 
introduction in 2004 of IFRS 5, Non-current Assets Held for Sale and Discontinued 
Operations, however, the exemption from consolidation for subsidiaries acquired 
and held exclusively with a view to resale has been removed from IFRS.
The third way of smoothing profits is what the Securities and Exchange Com-
mittee (SEC) has called ‘cookie jar accounting’. This involves using unrealistic 
assumptions to estimate liabilities for such items as sales returns, litigation costs, 
product warranty costs, etc. In doing so, they stash accruals (or sometimes un-
earned revenues) in ‘cookie jars’ during the good times and reach into them when 
needed in bad times. Making provisions when profits are higher than expected 
and releasing them when times are difficult is a classic example. The basic tactic 
is to create a provision by making a charge against profits and carrying forward 
a credit in the statement of financial position (go back to Chapter 6 if you want 
to review the basic technique). This charge will generally not be accepted for tax 
purposes, but that does not matter since its function is to deceive the market not 
the taxman. The more difficult problem is to convince the group auditors.
The way this would work might be:
Year 1
Market expectations of profit
150
Actual revenues
3 400
Actual costs
3 200
Actual profit
200
Create provision
45
Reported profit
155
Year 2
Market expectations of profit
170
Actual revenues
3 450
Actual costs
3 300
Actual profit
150
Release part of provision
20
Reported profit
170
When the results are announced, the slight increase against analysts’ forecasts 
would generate a slight increase in share prices.

Part 5  Advanced financial statement analysis
456
Had the group reported the actual result for Year 1 of €200m and, a year later, the 
actual result of €150m, the share price would first have rocketed, and the market 
might have expected profits of €250m in Year 2, leading to a steep decline in the 
share price once the actual result was announced.
Is this manipulation visible to the analyst? Well, up to a point. In the state-
ment of financial position, the manipulation would show up as a change in the 
balance for provisions. Provided this is well enough analyzed in the notes to the 
accounts, the analyst can see whether there has been a net increase or decrease 
in provisions, without necessarily having enough information to know what ex-
actly has happened – but an analyst attending a road show could ask questions. 
Equally, the statement of cash flows usually includes a reconciliation between  
accounting net profit and operating cash flows. The effect on the statement of 
profit or loss of changes in provisions will also be visible here, because they do 
not affect cash flows and have therefore to be highlighted in the reconciliation 
between profit and operating cash flow.
A variant on this technique is known as ‘big bath’ accounting. This is most 
frequently applied when a group takes over a new subsidiary but may also occur 
when there is a change of chief executive. Typically, the company sets up large 
charges associated with a restructuring operation. These charges help the com-
pany to ‘clean up’ the balance sheet – giving it a so-called ‘big bath’. The idea is 
that the acquiring group or the new chief executive identifies over-valued assets 
(and under-valued liabilities) and makes a once and for all adjustment for these. 
This involves major charges and tends to put a crater in the year’s profit, but is 
explained to analysts as an exceptional year where a major cleaning-up exercise 
(big bath) has been done.
Cookie jar reserves
One of the accounting ‘hot spots’ that we are considering this morning is ac-
counting for restructuring charges and restructuring reserves. A better title 
would be accounting for general reserves, contingency reserves, rainy day re-
serves or cookie jar reserves.
Accounting for so-called restructurings has become an art form. Some com-
panies like the idea so much that they establish restructuring reserves every 
year. Why not? Analysts seem to like the idea of recognizing as a liability to-
day, a budget of expenditures planned for the next year or next several years 
in down-sizing, right-sizing, or improving operations, and portraying that 
amount as a special, below-the-line charge in the current period’s statement 
of profit or loss. This year’s earnings are happily reported in press releases as 
‘before charges’. CNBC analysts and commentators talk about earnings ‘be-
fore charges’. The financial press talks about earnings before ‘special charges’. 
(Funny, no one talks about earnings before credits – only charges). It’s as if spe-
cial charges are not real. Out of sight, out of mind . . .
The occasion of a merger also spawns the wholesale establishment of re-
structuring or merger reserves. The ingredients of the merger reserves and 
merger charges look like the makings of a sausage. In the Enforcement Divi-
sion, I have seen all manner and kind of things that ordinarily would be charged 
to operating earnings instead of being charged ‘below the line’. Write-offs of the 
BETWEEN THE LINES

Chapter 17  Financial statement analysis II
457
The advantage of this is that future depreciation charges will be lower (and there-
fore future profits higher) or that excess provisions are available to boost future 
profits, but at the same time the current share price is often not affected. In fact, 
if analysts accept the argument they have been given, they tend to look beyond 
the one-time loss and focus on future earnings. The share price may even rise de-
spite the disastrous immediate effect on profit or loss of the write-offs or accrued 
expenses, because the market expects even better results in the future.
Is income smoothing a good thing or a bad thing?
This is difficult to say. On the positive side, theorists argue that clean surplus account-
ing (profits after smoothing) is a very good guide to long-term profitability, even if 
the year-on-year result has been managed. They say that the management have the 
best grasp of the real underlying capabilities of the group, and they will manipu-
late the profits to fit into their view of the long-term growth of the group. Conse-
quently the ‘managed’ profits are a reliable indicator of long-term performance.
On the negative side, people point out that the markets are misled by income 
smoothing. They claim that often when a company goes broke or is taken over in 
disastrous circumstances, this follows on a period of profit manipulation which 
built up market expectations well beyond the capabilities of the company. Some 
standard-setters work to correct this, saying that the market should have as much 
information as possible and be allowed to make up its own mind.
carrying amounts of bad receivables. Write-offs of cost of obsolete inventory. 
Write-downs of plant and equipment costs, which, miraculously at the date of 
the merger, become non-recoverable, whereas those same costs were consid-
ered recoverable the day before the merger. Write-offs of previously capitalized 
costs such as goodwill, which all of a sudden are not recoverable because of 
a merger. Adjustments to bring warranty liabilities up to snuff. Adjustments to 
bring claim liabilities in line with management’s new view of settling or litigat-
ing cases. Adjustments to bring environmental liabilities up to snuff or in line 
with management’s new view of the manner in which the company’s obliga-
tions to comply with EPA will be satisfied. Recognition of liabilities to pay for 
future services by investment bankers, accountants and lawyers. Recognition 
of liabilities for officers’ special bonuses. Recognition of liabilities for moving 
people. For training people. For training people not yet hired. For retraining 
people. Recognition of liabilities for moving costs and refurbishing costs. Rec-
ognition of liabilities for new software that may be acquired or written, for ulti-
mate sale to others. Or some liabilities that go by the title ‘other’.
It is no wonder that investors and analysts are complaining about the cred-
ibility of the numbers.
Source: Speech by Walter P. Schuetze, Chief Accountant, Enforcement Division, 
US Securities and Exchange Commission, 22 April 1999 
(www.sec.gov/news/speeches/spch276.htm)
Professional analysts
Accounting numbers are not the only input into the assessment of a company’s 
prospects. Analysts use many other factors, mostly economic, about the state of 
the economies where the company operates, the state of the industry, etc. to help 

Part 5  Advanced financial statement analysis
458
predict future performance. An example of this type of information is provided 
by Moody’s.
Moody’s is one of a number of firms that offer a bond rating service – they 
assess the riskiness of individual companies and then publish their risk rating, 
which in turn impacts upon a company’s cost of borrowing. Moody’s use inputs 
from the following areas (not given in any priority ranking) in order to determine 
their risk rating:
	
n	 industry
	
n	 company
	
n	 capital structure
	
n	 sovereign risk
	
n	 bond instrument
	
n	 financial flexibility
	
n	 capital expenditure
	
n	 internal cash flow
	
n	 competitors
	
n	 use of debt capacity
	
n	 customers
	
n	 management risk appetite.
Not all the information comes from financial statements! Moody’s talk to com-
pany management and since they provide ratings for all large companies, talk 
to all the competing managements too, and therefore have a broad picture of 
competition and patterns of development. Moody’s offer the ‘rating pyramid’ 
­(Figure 17.1) which shows how they approach the rating decision.
It is our intention within this book to provide some of the skills necessary for 
quantitative analysis, and you will draw from other books and courses insights into 
economics, finance, business strategy, etc. which can be used to refine your analysis.
All expert users showed a clear desire to identify what drove cash flow and 
profits, together with the expert users’ application of a mixture of systematic 
search and intuition for the likely answer. The systematic search followed the 
route of considering:
n	
the economy
n	
product market
n	
industry
n	
the business of the company
n	
quality of management; and
n	
quality of assets
Source: ICAS, Corporate Communications: Views of Institutional Investors and Lenders 
(Research Committee, Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland, 1999)
BETWEEN THE LINES

Chapter 17  Financial statement analysis II
459
As far as accounting analysis goes, though, you should note the increasing use 
of investor briefings by companies as a means of obtaining explanations. Inves-
tor relations departments in large companies are generally also willing to respond 
to individual queries, provided that they know the analyst. In this context, the 
analyst carries out a series of technical measures, calculating ratios and so on, 
and uses the ratios to form a view about what is going on in the company or to 
recognize that the expected patterns do not emerge and further information is 
necessary to explain this anomaly. For example, if sales are increasing, you would 
Sovereign macro-economic analysis
Industry sector analysis
Regulatory environment (national and global)
Competitive trends in sector
Market position
Quantitative analysis, financial statements,
past performance, future projections
Qualitative analysis, management strategic
direction, financial flexibility
Rating
Figure 17.1
Moody’s rating 
pyramid

Part 5  Advanced financial statement analysis
460
expect the level of inventories and receivables to increase as well. If this is not the 
case, you should ask the investor relations department to comment.
Another point is that analysis frequently involves comparing companies in the 
same industrial sector. As a consequence the analyst gains insights into what are 
the typical financial structures and operating margins in the industry.
Quality of earnings
An analyst is looking for sustainable profit and growth of that profit. So a key 
question to start with is to assess the extent to which the current earnings are 
subject to short-term influences or accounting manipulations. You should check 
for such things as:
	
a.	 changes of accounting policies or accounting estimates
	
b.	pension holidays
	
c.	 unusual asset disposals
	
d.	distortions caused by buying and selling business segments
	
e.	 changes in the consolidation scope and of the interest percentages in asso-
ciates and joint ventures
	
f.	 anything else which suggests that short-term results will not be replicated 
in the long term.
This kind of subjective assessment of earnings is generally referred to as ‘quality 
of earnings’ and involves posing the question (as far as it is possible to tell) to 
what extent are the earnings revealed by the financial statements sustainable in 
future years? Some analysts will compare, in a longitudinal fashion, operating 
profit to net operating cash flow to identify and analyze the effect of accruals 
games on operating earnings. This is computed as follows:
A ratio of higher than 1 means that each currency unit of operating profit is sup-
ported by one currency unit or more of positive cash flow and can be considered 
to reflect high-quality operating earnings.
Increasingly, accounting standards try to restrict and regulate what informa-
tion companies should provide about unusual transactions or changes in the 
components of the group. This information is important in helping analysts fore-
cast future earnings, but in the past has been manipulated by some companies 
to try to mislead analysts. IAS 1, Presentation of Financial Statements, prohibits 
the distinction of ordinary activities and extraordinary items on the face of the 
statement of profit or loss. The IASB reasoned that extraordinary items are not 
that special in the sense that they result from the normal business risks faced by 
the company and, thus, do not warrant presentation in a separate caption of the 
profit and loss account. Disclosures in the notes to the accounts (and even on the 
statement of profit or loss) may, however, hold significant information to iden-
tify and analyze the effect of special and non-recurrent items and transactions. 
Indeed, IAS 1 requires that when items of income and expense are material, their 
nature and amount should be disclosed separately.
 
Quality of operating earnings =
 Net operating cash flow
	
Net operating profit

Chapter 17  Financial statement analysis II
461
Critical accounting judgements and estimates
IAS 1, Presentation of Financial Statements, also requires that companies explain crit-
ical judgments and estimates that impact the financial statements significantly 
(see Standards box). These are in effect the IASB’s response to Enron.
STANDARDS
IAS 1 – PRESENTATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (extracts)
Separate disclosure of material items of income and expense
97. When items of income and expense are material, an entity shall disclose 
their nature and amount separately.
98. Circumstances that would give rise to the separate disclosure of items of 
income and expense include:
(a)	 write-downs of inventories to net realizable value or of property, plant 
and equipment to recoverable amount, as well as reversals of such 
write-downs;
(b)	restructurings of the activities of an entity and reversals of any provi-
sions for the costs of restructuring;
(c)	 disposals of items of property, plant and equipment;
(d)	disposals of investments;
(e)	 discontinued operations;
(f)	 litigation settlements; and
(g)	other reversals of provisions.
7.  Material Omissions or misstatements of items are material if they could, 
individually or collectively, influence the economic decisions that users make 
on the basis of the financial statements. Materiality depends on the size and 
nature of the omission or misstatement judged in the surrounding circum-
stances. The size or nature of the item, or a combination of both, could be the 
determining factor.
Source: IAS 1, Presentation of Financial Statements
STANDARDS
IAS 1 – PRESENTATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (extracts)
Judgements and sources of estimation uncertainty
122.  An entity shall disclose, in the summary of significant accounting poli-
cies or other notes, the judgements, apart from those involving estimations 
(see paragraph 125), that management has made in the process of applying 
the entity’s accounting policies and that have the most significant effect on 
the amounts recognized in the financial statements.
125. An entity shall disclose information about the assumptions it makes 
about the future, and other major sources of estimation uncertainty at the end 

Part 5  Advanced financial statement analysis
462
This is very useful information for analysts, assuming that the company has cor-
rectly identified and discussed these. The nature of the expenses of each company 
and those that are subject to major uncertainties will vary considerably, so this is a 
helpful note pointing the analyst to issues that may help in assessing the quality of 
earnings and in forecasting future earnings.
of the reporting period, that have a significant risk of resulting in a material 
adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next 
financial year. In respect of those assets and liabilities, the notes shall include 
details of:
(a)	 their nature, and
(b)	their carrying amount as at the end of the reporting period.
Source: IAS 1, Presentation of Financial Statements
COMPANY REPORT
RYANAIR – USE OF ESTIMATES AND JUDGEMENTS
Critical accounting policies (extracts)
The preparation of the Company’s financial statements requires the use of esti-
mates, judgments, and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets 
and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts 
of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. Actual results may dif-
fer from these estimates. The Company believes that its critical accounting poli-
cies, which are those that require management’s most difficult, subjective and 
complex judgments, are those described in this section. These critical ­accounting 
policies, the judgments and other uncertainties affecting application of these 
policies and the sensitivity of reported results to changes in conditions and as-
sumptions are factors to be considered in reviewing the consolidated financial 
statements included in Item 18 and the discussion and analysis below. For ad-
ditional detail on these policies, see Note 1, ‘Basis of preparation and significant 
accounting policies’, to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 18.
Long-lived Assets
As of March 31, 2011, Ryanair had €4.9 billion of long-lived assets, virtually all 
of which were aircraft. In accounting for long-lived assets, Ryanair must make 
estimates about the expected useful lives of the assets, the expected residual 
values of the assets, and the potential for impairment based on the fair value of 
the assets and the cash flows they generate.
In estimating the lives and expected residual values of its aircraft, Ryanair 
has primarily relied on its own and industry experience, recommendations from 
Boeing, the manufacturer of all of the Company’s aircraft, and other available 
marketplace information. Subsequent revisions to these estimates, which can 
be significant, could be caused by changes to Ryanair’s maintenance ­program, 

Chapter 17  Financial statement analysis II
463
changes in utilization of the aircraft, governmental regulations on aging of air-
craft, changes in new aircraft technology, changes in new aircraft fuel efficiency 
and changing market prices for new and used aircraft of the same or similar 
types. Ryanair evaluates its estimates and assumptions in each reporting pe-
riod, and, when warranted, adjusts these assumptions. Generally, these adjust-
ments are accounted for on a prospective basis, through depreciation expense.
Ryanair periodically evaluates its long-lived assets for impairment. Factors 
that would indicate potential impairment would include, but are not limited to, 
significant decreases in the market value of an aircraft, a significant change in 
an aircraft’s physical condition and operating or cash flow losses associated 
with the use of the aircraft. While the airline industry as a whole has experienced 
many of these factors from time to time, Ryanair has not yet been seriously 
impacted and continues to record positive cash flows from these long-lived as-
sets. Consequently, Ryanair has not yet identified any impairments related to 
its existing aircraft fleet. The Company will continue to monitor its long-lived 
assets and the general airline operating environment.
The Company’s estimate of the recoverable amount of aircraft residual val-
ues is 15 per cent of current market value of new aircraft, determined periodi-
cally, based on independent valuations and actual aircraft disposals during the 
current and prior periods. Aircraft are depreciated over a useful life of 23 years 
from the date of manufacture to residual value.
During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2009, accelerated depreciation of 
€51.6 million arose in relation to aircraft disposals during the year and an agree-
ment to dispose of additional aircraft in the 2010 fiscal year. In particular, this 
charge arose due to an adverse change in the exchange rate between the US 
dollar and the euro between the accounting periods in which the aircraft were 
purchased and March 31, 2009. There was no such accelerated depreciation rec-
ognized in the 2010 or 2011 fiscal years.
Source: Ryanair, Annual Report 2011
Common accounting base
Moving on to the techniques used to analyze the accounting data, when compar-
ing two or more companies it may be necessary to adjust the statements because 
of accounting differences. Of course, there are often elements for which the ana-
lyst is unable to adjust because insufficient information is available, but the more 
one is comparing like with like, the more useful is the analysis. Many analysts 
try, when carrying out cross-sectional analysis, to eliminate any major account-
ing differences between companies or, for that matter, convert all companies to 
a common accounting base. The most obvious examples of this are reducing all 
revalued assets back to historical cost or treating goodwill as an asset instead of 
writing it off. As discussed before, the first thing to do when analyzing a com-
pany is to look at the notes to the accounts dealing with accounting policies. 
When comparing two different companies, you should compare their policies on 
Analytical techniques

Part 5  Advanced financial statement analysis
464
major issues such as accounting for goodwill, depreciation rules, accounting for 
R&D costs, and valuation generally. You should also look at their provisions to see 
whether they are comparable.
The analyst can often usefully put pro-forma statements on to a spreadsheet, 
using an adjusted, common accounting base to make comparisons. Indeed this is 
a technique which is virtually essential when analyzing the financial statements 
of companies which are based in different countries. This is a subject which is be-
yond the scope of this book, but it is easy to see that common assumptions – or as 
near as the analyst can get – are essential to make valid comparisons.
Common size
Ratios have the characteristic that they do away with size considerations so that 
quite different companies may be compared. You will remember that this may 
also be done by the preparation of common-size financial statements – these consist 
of a statement of profit or loss and a statement of financial position expressed in 
percentages (i.e. profit or loss items expressed as a percentage of sales, balance 
sheet items as a percentage of total assets). Common-size financial statements are 
usually a good starting point in the financial statement analysis process. They 
allow a straightforward internal or structural analysis of the company’s financial 
position and performance and can be easily used for comparisons in time or in 
space (industry comparisons).
EBITDA
EBITDA sounds like some strange mantra, and certainly some analysts can be 
heard chanting it at times, but this is simply a rough proxy for net operating cash 
flows. EBITDA stands for ‘earnings before interest, taxation, depreciation and 
amortization’.
While multinational companies have largely harmonized their cash flow re-
porting and produce statements of cash flows in line with IAS 7, Statement of 
Cash Flows, and therefore provide operating cash flow data, some analysts prefer 
a measure drawn directly from the statement of profit or loss. The idea is that the 
analyst is trying to assess operating cash flows before non-cash accounting allo-
cations of cost (depreciation, provisions and amortization) and before returns to 
lenders and taxation. How much cash is the business generating on a day-to-day 
basis? This measure may be subject to technical criticism, but it has the advantage 
that it strips out – as far as possible – subjective accounting adjustments from the 
income measure and enables a more robust comparison of performance year on 
year or company to company.
Objectives of analysis
As we have discussed, there are many potential uses and users of annual financial 
statements, but for the immediate purpose of financial statement analysis we are 
addressing only the needs of the two main groups for whom the financial state-
ments are formally prepared: investors and creditors. These two groups are con-
cerned with similar but different investment decisions about the company.
Investors (whether actual or potential) face a buy/sell/hold decision. They re-
ceive a return on their investment in the form of a flow of dividends and the 

Chapter 17  Financial statement analysis II
465
difference between buying and selling price of the shareholding. There is no es-
tablished pattern of behaviour amongst long-term shareholders as to whether 
they prefer income by way of dividends or by way of holding gain. (Clearly short-
term holders are only interested in a speculative holding gain.) Finance theory 
suggests that shareholders should be indifferent, on the assumption that if a 
company restricts its dividend payments the share price will rise, so shareholders 
wanting cash flow can realize this by selling a part of their holding.
The evidence suggests that some companies pay high dividends in the belief 
that their shareholders want this, while others believe that shareholders prefer 
capital gains and restrict dividends. The way in which unit trusts are sold suggests 
that fund managers believe these are different markets. Some companies attempt 
to satisfy both types of shareholder and offer the option of taking the dividend in 
the form of new shares.
Professional investors have varying points of view. US pension funds often 
look at dividend flows (over as much as a 50-year time horizon) while many UK 
brokers sell to institutional investors on the basis of expected holding gains. For 
example, Ian Hay Davison, chairman of Alexander Lang & Cruikshank, wrote the 
following:
At 8.15 each weekday morning the security salesmen and analysts in my firm meet 
to consider the ideas that will be put to our 300 or so institutional customers during 
the day. Analysts responsible for following companies in various sectors of the mar-
ket give their recommendations for specific shares: buy, hold or sell. It is these rec-
ommendations, together with similar conclusions reached at 20 or so other security 
houses, that collectively drive prices in the market. The single most important fig-
ure affecting the analyst’s – and hence the market’s – view is forecasted earnings per 
share. I know that accountants deplore the fact that judgements about the worth of 
a share turn largely on one number. Nonetheless that is what happens, and you and 
I know that it is accounting rules that determine earnings per share.
The way this works is that brokers expect the price/earnings (P/E) ratio of a com-
pany to be stable (subject to economic changes, management changes, etc.) and 
the market price to be a function of the forecast earnings and the P/E ratio (as 
discussed in earlier in this chapter).
For example, if a hotel company is forecast to have earnings per share of €4 
and a P/E of 12, its market price should be €48. If an analyst who follows the ho-
tel sector believes that the company is actually going to achieve significantly bet-
ter than €4, say €5, this would mean that she or he would expect the price to rise 
to €60, and the securities house would issue a buy recommendation to its clients. 
These recommendations can themselves move the market.
The professional investor will look at indicators which are predictors of future 
performance on the assumption that growth in profits will lead to high dividends 
or high share price rises. Clearly these indicators may be to do with the state of 
the economy or may be based on some inside information (investor relations de-
partments of large companies hold special briefings for brokers and institutional 
shareholders) about new products etc. However, this course is concerned directly 
only with the information which can be gleaned from the published financial 

Part 5  Advanced financial statement analysis
466
statements, so while acknowledging that investors use many different informa-
tion sources, we will concentrate on financial statement information.
Growth in profits may be predicted from the financial statements based on a 
number of factors such as evidence of management skill, or evidence of high in-
vestment. Other factors such as a high debt/equity ratio will provide indicators of 
some aspects of the degree of risk in investing in the company.
The investor wishes (a) to predict the level of future returns and (b) to evaluate 
these against competing investment opportunities in the light of the riskiness of 
the investment (the higher the risk, the higher the expected return to compen-
sate for the investment).
The creditor (the supplier of loans rather than short-term trade credit) is also 
concerned with predicting performance but from a slightly different angle. The 
creditor’s main risk is default risk but ordinarily the creditor will also be con-
cerned to assure themselves that the company’s likely future cash flows will be 
sufficient to meet interest payments and finally repay the debt. The creditor will 
have more interest in the financial structure and prospective cash flows of the 
company. But then again, it is earnings that ultimately generate cash flows, bring-
ing us back to earning power or profitability as a fundamental concern for both 
(prospective) shareholders and creditors.
Broadly, both investor and creditor will use much the same indicators, but the 
relative importance of specific indicators will be different. The indicators may also 
serve different purposes at different times. The investor may use indicators which 
lead to a buy decision. Having already bought a holding, the release of new account-
ing data will prompt a hold/sell decision. In making this decision the investor will 
look not only for the indicators of the future, but will also look for feedback into his 
or her own decision-making process. She or he will examine how the company actu-
ally performed during the period an investment was held, as compared with the pre-
dictions made at the time of making the investment, to improve future predictions.
Strategic ratio analysis
A further development in financial statement analysis has been the attempt to 
develop (combinations of) ratios which will give insights to a company’s strategic 
positioning in terms of the kind of analysis proposed by authors such as Porter or 
Peters. These authors introduced a strategic analysis framework centred around 
ideas such as the life cycle phases of products and firms, whether the company 
operates in a market where entry is difficult (margins should be large) or entry is 
easy (margins are tight), whether its products are specialist, niche products (low 
volume, high margin) or bulk (high volume, low margin) and many other consid-
erations. Again, detailed discussions of business strategy should be looked for in 
specialist publications or courses, but our point is that proper analysis of financial 
statements can provide significant inputs for strategy analysis.
Sustainable growth
Most analysts will start their analysis by looking at growth of key items of finan-
cial statements, such as sales, net fixed assets, net profit and EPS (earnings per 
share). Trend analysis will automatically deliver the necessary data to determine 

Chapter 17  Financial statement analysis II
467
a year-to-year growth rate or an average growth rate over a longer period. Growth 
rates are often compared with the rate of inflation to determine ‘real’ growth. 
Point of departure usually is sales growth, with the co-variation of sales and net 
working capital, net long-term assets, operating margins, net profit and operating 
cash flows being primary material for further analysis. It makes sense to try to 
differentiate organic growth and acquired growth as they tend to have quite dif-
ferent implications for further analysis. Organic growth is fuelled by the company’s 
own operations, whereas acquired growth is the result of buying the assets and 
operations of other companies (through mergers and acquisitions). Sales growth 
is not always an indicator of successful performance and its relationship with op-
erating efficiency and liquidity concerns needs careful attention.
The concept of sustainable growth looks at growth from an overall shareholder 
profitability perspective and measures the rate at which a company can grow 
while keeping its profitability and financing structure unchanged. The sustainable 
growth rate ratio is calculated as:
Sustainable growth rate = Return on equity × (1 – Dividend payout ratio)
The dividend payout ratio is:
Dividend
Profit attributable to shareholders
Sustainable growth stands for the internally generated growth potential if the com-
pany’s profitability, dividend payout policy and level of debt financing are kept 
constant. Equity is, of course, equal to the net worth of a company, so the ROE 
(return on equity) ratio would tell you by what proportion the company would 
grow if it retained its profits and reinvested them. This is then reduced by the divi-
dend payout, since clearly the dividend involves returning cash to shareholders, to 
show the proportion of net worth retained in the company each year out of that 
year’s earnings. This is described as ‘sustainable growth’. It ignores the fact that 
depreciation has been charged in arriving at this figure because that is regarded as 
a surrogate for the cash outflow required to sustain the company at its present size.
Put another way, a company which is breaking even after depreciation charges 
(which reflect the economic life of the assets) should be able to replace its assets 
and stay the same size; a company which makes a profit (i.e. makes a positive 
return on equity) but pays it all out to shareholders by way of dividend will simi-
larly stay the same size; but to the extent that a company has profits which are 
greater than the dividend, it will have internal growth potential.
This potential growth rate can be used as one basis of comparison. Clearly 
companies can also borrow, but ultimately that increases risk and is subject to 
fairly finite limits which link back to the company’s equity base and the growth 
of that equity base. It is therefore a useful growth indicator to compare compa-
nies. If comparing companies within the same industry, one might predict that 
a company with a higher than average sustainable growth rate would be able to 
increase its market share.

Part 5  Advanced financial statement analysis
468
ROI decomposition
There is a conventional relationship between management performance ratios 
which links return on investment, profit margin and asset turnover as follows:
Profit margin × Asset turnover = ROI
A ROI (return on investment) ratio can be analyzed as a combination of two fac-
tors: overall profitability of sales and asset utilization.
If we apply this reasoning to the ROA (return on assets) ratio, we arrive at the 
following algebraic equality:
	
Profit before interest  
×      Sales	
   =  Profit before interest
	
Sales	
 Total assets	
 Total assets
Each of the terms on the right-hand side of the equation has its own meaning. 
Profit before interest divided by sales is a variant of the net profit margin (an over-
all profitability measure). Sales divided by total assets is the total asset turnover 
ratio. In fact, we decompose the ROA ratio into other financial characteristics that 
can be examined individually.
The ROA decomposition suggests two ways to improve the ROA: by increas-
ing either the net profit margin or the turnover of total assets (or both). The net 
profit margin will increase by earning more profit per currency unit of sales. The 
total asset turnover will increase in either of two ways: (a) by generating more 
sales volume with the same amount of assets, or (b) by reducing the amount of 
assets required for a given volume of sales (for example, by disposing of or decreas-
ing less productive assets). The total asset turnover ratio can be analyzed further 
through the component measures of total assets turnover (inventory turnover, 
fixed asset turnover, receivables turnover, etc.). Profit margins will improve by 
(a) reducing cost of sales and other operating costs for a given volume of sales or (b) 
increasing unit sales prices.
The ROI decomposition logic underscores the fact that an overall ROI measure 
is the combined effect of a large number of factors and responsibilities. It can 
be used by external analysts as a guide to drill-down to specific policy areas and 
identify areas of concern.
To a certain extent the relationships among the decomposed ratios/factors are 
industry specific. Industries that are capital intensive are likely to have a low 
asset turnover ratio. However, such an industry is also usually characterized by 
high margins because it is difficult for new companies to enter the market. A 
company which is capital intensive but also has low margins will be on a declin-
ing trend in its life cycle. Industries that have little capital involved will have 
higher asset turnover ratios. However, they will normally be highly competitive 
because of the lack of barriers to entry into the market and will therefore show 
lower margins.

Chapter 17  Financial statement analysis II
469
Financial leverage
Taking the analysis one step further, the ROE can be analytically linked to the 
return on assets ratio with the introduction of the concept of financial leverage.
ROA × Financial leverage = ROE
Starting with the ROA ratio, we arrive at the following algebraic equality:
Financial leverage coefficient = ROE% / ROA%
In both formulae financial leverage is defined as the proportion of total assets 
acquired with funds supplied by the shareholders. It measures how many euro 
of assets are employed for each euro invested by shareholders. Financial leverage 
will increase if debt financing increases or if part of the shares outstanding are re-
purchased. The essential message of the ROE decomposition is that both financial 
leverage and ROA are drivers of the return to shareholders: debt financing can be 
used to lever shareholder profitability.
A related, but somewhat different, concept is the financial leverage coefficient 
ratio, defined as ROE divided by ROA:
  Profit before interest  ×  Total assets  =  Profit before interest
	
Total assets	
Equity	
Equity
  Net profit for the period  ×  Total assets  =  Net profit for the period
	
Total assets	
Equity	
Equity
Alternatively, we can start from the original ROE definition and get the following:
Leverage is positive (or financial leverage coefficient greater than one) if the com-
pany’s rate of return on total assets exceeds the average after-tax interest rate on 
its debt. In that case, the company lends money at one rate and uses that money 
productively at a higher rate of return. The excess of the after-tax rate of return on 
assets and the after-tax interest rate on the borrowed funds, accrues to the benefit 
of the shareholders. Note that financial leverage can be a disadvantage too: if the 
company does not succeed to earn a rate of return on assets which is higher than 
the after-tax cost of debt, the shareholders will have to support the deficit.
Debt financing will increase the financial leverage effect. If leverage is positive, 
the financial leverage coefficient will increase with gearing. We illustrate this ef-
fect in Table 17.1 under three different gearing assumptions with total assets, ROA 
and after-tax cost of debt being held constant.
The higher the debt/equity ratio, the higher the effect (positive or negative) of 
debt financing on the ROE. Note that in this scenario analysis we kept the cost 
of debt constant. In practice, however, increasing gearing will undoubtably have 
an effect on the cost of debt too. Increased debt financing will bring lenders to 
demand a higher risk premium and, thus, a higher interest rate, possibly up to the 
level where leverage becomes negative (financial leverage coefficient 1).

Part 5  Advanced financial statement analysis
470
Combining ROI decomposition and financial leverage brings us to the follow-
ing overall model (also called the DuPont model):
or:
Table 17.1
Financial 
leverage effect 
at different 
debt/equity 
ratios
Total assets 5 1000
ROA 5 10%
After-tax cost of debt 5 7%
Debt/Equity
100%
150%
300%
Profit before interest
100
100
100
Cost of debt
35
42
52.5
Net profit
65
58
47.5
ROE
13%
14.5%
19%
Financial leverage coefficient
13%/10% 5 1.30
1.45
1.90
This model allows an integrated profitability analysis with the three factors as 
profit drivers and by linking these to underlying competitive mechanisms and 
managerial coping behaviour.
Segment profit margin =     Segment result
	
Segment revenue
Segment operating cash flow (EBITDA) margin =
(Segment operating result + Depreciation and amortization expense)
Segment revenue
Segment asset turnover = Segment revenue
	
Segment assets
Segment data analysis
The analysis of the consolidated financial statements, using ratio analysis and 
related techniques, is important to evaluate company performance through time 
and relative to its peers. However, it does not shed light on the inner dynam-
ics of the company’s performance. In that sense, examining the performance of 
the company’s operating segments through an analysis of the segment reporting 
data may deepen the understanding of the factors and operations that drive the 
group’s consolidated performance.
Given the nature of the operating segment information provided, a number of 
segment ratios can be computed, such as:
 Net profit for the period 
=
 Net profit for the period  
×
       Sales       
× 
Total assets
	
Equity	
Sales	
   Total assets	       Equity
ROE = Net profit margin × Asset turnover × Financial leverage

Chapter 17  Financial statement analysis II
471
Comparing these ratios through time and across segments will increase the 
understanding of the factors driving overall company performance. They are use-
ful in comparing risks and returns of different operations within a company and 
among investment alternatives.
The segment ROA can be further analyzed by performing a DuPont type of 
analysis in the following way:
Segment ROA = Segment profit margin × Segment asset turnover
Taking into account inter-company differences in segment reporting formats, 
segment data analysis could also be used to analyze and benchmark comparable 
segments of peer companies within the same industry. This type of comparison 
probably makes more sense than comparing high-level, aggregated data of peer 
companies where similarities are usually much less evident than at operating seg-
ment level. But then again, one should keep in mind that segment reporting ac-
cording to IFRS 8, Operating Segments, is entity-specific, not only with regard to 
information items reported, but also in respect of the measurement bases used.
Operational gearing
Another aspect of a company’s competitive position is the flexibility of its cost 
structure: companies with high fixed costs cannot react easily to downturns and 
generally need to seek high market share to maximize their fixed capacity. Com-
panies in the same industry but which organize themselves with higher variable 
costs are more flexible, but may need to site themselves in a high price niche 
rather than look for large market share.
This can be illustrated graphically. The convention in management accounting 
is that a company’s costs are either fixed or variable in the short to medium term 
(this is an oversimplification, but useful for analytical purposes). Thus a company 
with high fixed costs would have the relationship between volume and profit 
shown in Figure 17.2.
Value
Sales
Costs
Volume
Figure 17.2
The relationship 
between volume 
and profit in a 
company with 
high fixed costs
Segment ROA =  Segment result
	
Segment assets
Segment gearing =Segment liabilities
	
Segment assets

Part 5  Advanced financial statement analysis
472
Clearly, the higher the volume, the more profit, and such a company has some 
interest in reducing prices to gain market share, because that will lead to more 
than proportionately higher profits. Conversely, a company with low fixed costs 
and high variable costs is not very sensitive to volume changes and has much 
more interest in increasing prices. Such a company should therefore seek niche 
products, or highly differentiated products, where a small volume can be sold at 
high price.
Analytically, the concept of operational gearing refers to the volatility of profit as 
a function of changes in sales while taking into account the company’s cost struc-
ture. Operational gearing can be interpreted as the percentage change in profit as 
sales changes 1 per cent. It can be measured as follows:
or:
Let us look at the following illustration with two companies (company A and 
company B) with identical sales and total costs, but with a different cost structure 
(mix of fixed and variable costs):
  
 
Sales
Fixed  
costs
Variable  
costs
Profit before  
tax
Operational 
gearing
Company A
100
20
70
10
3:1
Company B
100
70
20
10
8:1
If sales increase by 10 per cent, net profit of company A will increase by 30 per 
cent (increase in sales minus proportionate increase of variable costs, or 10 minus 
7), while net profit of company B would increase by 80 per cent. Conversely, if 
sales decline, this would have a much more dramatic impact on the profitability 
of the company with high operational gearing (company B).
Unfortunately, the split between fixed and variable costs is not transparent 
from financial statements and the external analyst will have to settle with a rough 
proxy for operational gearing (a proxy for fixed costs to total costs), or the ratio:
  Operational gearing =  Sales – Variable costs
	
Profit before tax
  Operational gearing =  Profit before taxes + Fixed costs
	
Profit before tax
 Long-term assets  or  Long-term assets
	
Total asset	
Current assets
This assumes that the fixed cost element comes from plant costs (labour and 
materials being relatively variable). The high variable cost operator will buy 

Chapter 17  Financial statement analysis II
473
semi-finished goods, for example, rather than process raw materials in house, so 
variable costs are higher and the asset base is lower.
Z scores
Some analysts like to use computerized models for assessing company performance. 
The best known in this kind of area are Altman in the US and Tafler in the UK. Es-
sentially their technique consists of comparing the past financial statements of suc-
cessful companies with those of similar but unsuccessful companies from which 
they derive a model against which to assess other companies. To give a simplified 
example, such a model typically works on a weighted series of ratios such as:
0.2 ROE + 0.5 Debt/equity + 0.25 Current ratio ≥ 1
If a company scores below a certain value, it is deemed to be at risk. These models 
are known generically as ‘Z scores’ after Altman’s original work. Declining profit-
ability and liquidity ratios typically have a significant effect in business failure 
models.
Such models may well be useful to audit firms and to banks to assess the vi-
ability of clients, and have the merit that they are an objective test. Critics on the 
other hand point out that the models are derived from statistical relationships 
which existed between particular companies in the past in particular industry sec-
tors and particular economies and there is no guarantee that other companies at 
other times and in other circumstances will replicate the same relationships. The 
method does not, as it were, attempt to harness together data about actual eco-
nomic circumstances as such.
It is a complex technique which is beyond the scope of this book. A number of 
proprietary versions are available on the market and there is an extensive research 
literature.
Shareholder value
An alternative approach to analyzing financial statements is the concept of share-
holder value, which appeared in the US during the 1980s, but does not really 
have a generally agreed rationale or working methodology. Our intention here is 
to provide an introduction to the subject, which students can take forward when 
they study the related material in the finance literature. The underlying idea is 
that instead of looking at earnings per share and the P/E ratio to arrive at the 
value of a company, the analyst should look at the discounted present value of 
forecast earnings.
In principle the idea is excellent and in effect simply uses the definition of in-
come which is used in economics. However, in practice the idea is more difficult 
because it involves forecasting future earnings over at least a ten-year horizon and 
determining the appropriate discount rate to use.
The basis normally used for imputing value in economics is the discounted 
value of the future cash flows that a project presents. You will normally cover the 
concepts of discounting and present values in the context of a finance or business 
statistics course. The essence is covered below.

Part 5  Advanced financial statement analysis
474
By way of a simplified example, supposing that a listed company was forecast to 
have a life cycle of five years, the cost of capital for a company at that level of risk 
is 10 per cent and it is forecast to generate the following cash flows after meeting 
its operating costs:
Present value
Present value calculations are used in economics, finance and financial man-
agement to assign a value to future cash flows after adjusting for the time value 
of money. The essence of present value is that a rational person will prefer to 
have a receipt sooner rather than later because the money can be used to gen-
erate more money.
For example, if a company has a choice of receiving $1000 now or $1000 in 
a year’s time, it would prefer to have the cash now because it could be invested 
and earn a return. If the money was put into risk-free securities where it could 
earn 15 per cent, then $1000 now would be worth $1150 in a year’s time.
Extending that, the $1000 to be received after a year is worth $1000/1.15 (or 
$870) today, because $870 invested today at 15 per cent would yield $1000 in a 
year’s time. Similarly, $1000 to be received in two years’ time is worth $1000/
(1.15 3 1.15) $756 at present (i.e. compound interest at 15 per cent for two years 
would be $244).
BETWEEN THE LINES
1
2
3
4
5
€m
€m
€m
€m
€m
Net cash flows
100
250
250
200
50
Discount factor:
0.909
0.826
0.751
0.683
0.621
Present values
90.9
206.6
187.8
136.6
31.0
The present value of the company – or the shareholder value – is €652.9m. Sup-
posing that it has 200m shares in issue, the share price should be (€652.9/200) 5 
€3.26. If the actual share price is €2.70, then the investor should buy or hold, 
whereas if the actual market price was €3.50, the investor should sell (if holding 
shares) or simply not buy, on the basis in both cases that the share price will be 
likely to move towards €3.26.
If the management of the company is performing well, they will be increas-
ing the future net cash flows of the company and therefore increasing shareholder 
value. The concept of shareholder value as a means of evaluating investments is 
very useful; however, the methodology involves a considerable amount of subjec-
tive inputs. These revolve around two key points: (1) the forecast cash flows of 
the company; and (2) the discount rate.

Chapter 17  Financial statement analysis II
475
Forecast cash flows
The cash flow forecast needs to consider both the likely cash flows from exist-
ing operations and the capital expenditure necessary to renew existing equip-
ment and expand capacity. The cash flow statement gives cash flows both from 
operations and outflows to pay interest and tax (the dividend stream is part 
of shareholder value, since this is being directed to the shareholder), the net 
after these is in effect the cash available for the shareholder or for reinvest-
ment. In forecasting the future, it is necessary to make assumptions about the 
rate of inflation and the rate of real growth (which derive partly from obser-
vation of economic indicators and partly from an estimate of management’s 
performance).
Estimating the capital expenditure rate is even more difficult. In the future, 
given a long time series of cash flow statements, it will be possible to produce a 
long-term average correlation between profit growth and investment growth. At 
this time, the analyst could take annual depreciation as a surrogate for maintain-
ing existing equipment, and add to that a year-on-year change in net fixed assets 
and net working capital. The longer the time series, the more reliable an average 
figure would be.
Discount rate
There is an extensive literature on this subject. The discount rate should reflect 
the cost of capital as adjusted for inflation and the risk associated with the partic-
ular activities of that company. Alternatively, the analyst might use the weighted 
average cost of capital for the individual company.
There are many different formulations which might be used, both to forecast 
cash inflows (e.g. starting from forecast sales and using profit margins) and cash 
outflows, and the question of discount rate is contentious, since a small differ-
ence in discount rate usually gives a large difference in present value. However, it 
is a valuation model which best approximates the real cash flows of the company 
and is particularly useful in cross-sectional analysis of companies in the same in-
dustry, since the same basic assumptions can be used.
Summary
In this chapter we have aimed to expand your knowledge of financial statement 
analysis and put it in closer touch with the actual practices of securities houses. 
We have looked at the evaluation model which examines the surrounding eco-
nomic environment and we have quality of earnings considerations and account-
ing adjustments which should be considered in making financial information 
more directly comparable. We have seen that the analyst’s forecast of earnings 
and the market P/E ratio are used to forecast the future share price and make buy/
sell/hold decisions by investors.

Part 5  Advanced financial statement analysis
476
We then went on to look at how financial statement analysis can give inputs 
into the strategic analysis of a company. We looked at a ratio for sustainable 
growth, ROE decomposition as well as indicators of how capital intensive an in-
dustry is and its operating gearing. Finally, we looked also at the evolving concept 
of shareholder value.
Assignments
The following questions have answers on the lecturer side of the digital support 
resources for the book.
1.	 Cleaney Inc.
	
You are an analyst working for the American venture capital firm Docker 
Warden (DW). DW has received a request from a company called Cleaney 
Inc. to provide the latter with additional venture capital. Should DW 
accept to do so, then Cleaney will issue new shares to which DW will 
subscribe.
However, before discussing the terms of the potential transaction, the 
board of DW wishes to obtain an objective image of Cleaney Inc. Thus, 
it is your assignment to conduct a preliminary analysis on the basis of 
the available financial data (including segment information). The board 
of DW has asked you to prepare a report that includes:
	
(a)	 an analysis of Cleaney’s investment and financing policy;
	
(b)	 a review of Cleaney’s management as evidenced by the financial 
statements;
	
(c)	 an executive summary, including your assessment of the situation 
and recommendations.
To complete this task, you are provided with the company’s annual finan-
cial statements from 20X4 to 20X8, as well as with the following additional 
information: the principal activity of Cleaney, incorporated at the start of 
20X0, consists of the production of card- and coin-operated washing ma-
chines. These are subsequently sold or leased out either to commercial 
launderettes or to laundry rooms on the multi-housing market. The lat-
ter consists of apartments, condominium units, colleges and universities. 
Since 20X1, Cleaney has been generating additional revenue from the sell-
ing and leasing out of card- and coin-operated reprographics equipment 
(i.e. mainly photocopiers) to schools, colleges, universities, libraries and 
government institutions. Up until the end of 20X5, Cleaney simply traded 
in such reprographics equipment. At the beginning of 20X6, Cleaney’s 
management decided, however, that the company would manufacture 
the equipment itself in an attempt to strengthen its position in that par-
ticular market as well as increase the profitability of that activity segment. 
As a result, Cleaney now no longer purchases any finished photo-copiers  
from other manufacturers: all the reprographics equipment that it sells or 
leases out is own manufacture.

Chapter 17  Financial statement analysis II
477
Annual financial statements Cleaney Inc. (in US$’000)
Income statements
 
    20X8
    20X7
    20X6
    20X5
    20X4
Sales
158 268
150 260
134 200
81 400
64 400
Cost of sales
–120 345
–114 926
–102 400
–61 200
–48 600
Gross operating margin
37 923
35 334
31 800
20 200
15 800
Distribution costs
–17 100
–16 863
–10 200
–6 500
–5 300
Administration expenses
–9 230
–8 607
–7 100
–3 400
–2 500
Operating income
11 593
9 864
14 500
10 300
8 000
Interest expense
–8 270
–7 085
–4 000
–2 300
–2 100
Income before tax
3 323
2 779
10 500
8 000
5 900
Taxation
–1 662
–1 727
–5 400
–2 700
–500
Net income
1 661
1 052
5 100
5 300
5 400
Dividends proposed
–332
–0
–1 020
–1 060
–0
Statements of financial position
 
    20X8
    20X7
    20X6
    20X5
    20X4
Non-current assets
Tangible assets
82 435
78 440
67 382
35 300
33 250
Intangible assets
59 840
61 516
60 482
22 500
12 850
Current assets
Inventories
3 391
6 521
3 800
2 900
1 500
Receivables
7 992
8 551
6 500
4 300
1 600
Cash and cash equivalent
13 559
6 047
8 506
7 576
9 700
Total assets
167 217
161 075
146 670
72 576
58 900
Current liabilities
Loans (interest-bearing)
17 840
9 454
0
0
0
Trade payables
13 932
16 840
15 330
9 776
13 600
Taxes payable
1 662
1 727
5 400
2 700
500
Non-current liabilities
Long-term debt
88 550
89 482
82 400
20 600
25 300
Equity
Ordinary shares
($1 nominal value)
2 000
2 000
2 000
2 000
1 300
Share premium
25 400
25 400
25 400
25 400
11 400
Dividend (proposed)
332
0
1 020
1 060
0
Retained earnings
17 501
16 172
15 120
11 040
6 800
Total liabilities and equity
167 217
161 075
146 670
72 576
58 900

Part 5  Advanced financial statement analysis
478
Analysis of non-current assets
 
    20X8
    20X7
    20X6
    20X5
    20X4
Acquisition cost
Balance 1 January
185 470
157 450
78 380
62 260
62 470
Additions
22 710
29 660
89 640
16 970
130
Disposals
–2 630
–1 640
–10 570
–850
–340
Balance 31 December
205 550
185 470
157 450
78 380
62 260
Acc. depreciation
Balance 1 January
45 514
29 586
20 580
16 160
13 820
Disposals
–1 769
–1 120
–7 334
–600
–240
Depreciation expense
19 530
17 048
16 340
5 020
2 580
Balance 31 December
63 275
45 514
29 586
20 580
16 160
Net book value 
31 December
 
142 275
 
139 956
 
127 864
 
57 800
 
46 100
Segment information
 
    20X8
    20X7
    20X6
    20X5
    20X4
Sales
Laundry services
114 251
114 186
105 822
72 015
58 965
Reprographics services
44 017
36 074
28 378
9 385
5 435
Gross operating margin
Laundry services
27 490
26 210
23 580
16 470
13 240
Reprographics services 
10 433
9 124
8 220
3 730
2 560
NBV of non-current assets
Laundry services
93 659
95 367
85 516
46 166
40 128
Reprographics services
44 327
40 825
38 479
9 691
4 492
Distribution and 
administration
4 289
3 764
3 869
1 943
1 480
2.	 Gloucester Gardens plc.
	
You are an analyst working for an American investment bank, Insecurity 
International (II). You are called in by a junior associate in the Mergers and 
Acquisitions department to comment on a particular case.
II has been approached by a venture capital firm, Kindly Keep Repaying 
(KKR), which wants to dispose of a small investment in a company (Glouces-
ter Gardens) which runs a chain of garden centres in south-west England. 
Gloucester Gardens (GG) started out as a nursery growing plants for direct 
sale to the public and also selling to the trade. Over a period of 20 years it 
first expanded its retail activities to sell a wide range of garden products be-
yond its own plants, and then took on more and more new retail units, sup-
plied partly from its own nursery.
The company is now operated as two divisions: nursery and retail. All the 
output from the nursery is sold through the GG retail division, although for 
internal control purposes it is sold at market prices by the nursery division to 
retail.

Chapter 17  Financial statement analysis II
479
The KKR representative says that GG is family run but the founder is near-
ing retirement and is quite interested in selling out, although his daughter 
is also involved in managing the business and would like to stay on and 
participate in the expansion of the business, assuming that some satisfac-
tory package could be worked out. The family knows that KKR is making this 
approach.
KKR thinks that the GG operation has potential as the basis of establish-
ing a national chain of such centres, but thinks that the existing family 
management do not have the necessary expertise to grow any further. KKR 
would like to see their stake bought out by a major national retailer, possi-
bly with the potential to slot the GG operation alongside a chain of out-of-
town DIY or similar stores. KKR itself paid £1 400 000 for a 25 per cent stake 
in GG early in 20X8 and is looking for upwards of £3 000 000 for its stake.
The M&A associate thinks that possible targets would include WH Smith 
(Do It All), Kingfisher (B&Q), Ladbroke’s (Texas) or Sainsbury’s (Homebase) 
and wants you to prepare an analysis of the figures for the last five years for 
GG for presentation to a potential client.
When the KKR representative has left, the M&A associate provides the 
attached figures and asks you to prepare a report for her to include:
	
(a)	 an analysis of the company’s investment and financing policy;
	
(b)	 a review of its management as evidenced by the financial statements 
(including segment information);
	
(c)	 an executive summary, including your assessment of the situation 
and recommendations.
£’000
    20X5
    20X6
    20X7
    20X8
    20X9
Statements of profit or loss
Sales
2 220.0
2 941.3
3 537.8
4 573.0
5 584.0
Cost of sales
–1 344.7
–1 766.8
–2 105.0
–2 697.4
–3 262.5
Gross margin
875.3
1 174.5
1 432.8
1 875.6
2 321.6
Distribution expense
–116.0
–130.0
–147.0
–160.0
–171.0
Administration expense
–245.0
–268.0
–304.0
–337.0
–383.0
514.3
776.5
981.8
1 378.6
1 767.6
Interest expense
–83.0
–146.0
–232.3
–269.0
–332.6
Disposal income
0.0
2.0
–4.0
0.0
3.6
Profit before tax
431.3
632.5
745.5
1 110.6
1 438.6
Taxation
–125.1
–202.4
–246.0
–388.7
–517.9
Profit after tax
306.2
430.1
499.5
721.9
920.7
Dividends declared
–75.0
–100.0
–140.0
–190.0
–240.0

Part 5  Advanced financial statement analysis
480
£’000
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
Statements of financial position
Non-current assets (A)
Retail premises
2 086.0
3 006.0
4 478.0
5 847.0
6 774.0
Acc. depreciation
–208.8
–284.0
–395.9
–542.1
–711.4
Nurseries
3 200.0
3 200.0
3 200.0
4 400.0
4 400.0
Acc. depreciation
–624.2
–730.9
–837.6
–984.3
–1 131.0
Plant and equipment
91.0
109.0
158.0
296.0
278.0
Acc. depreciation
–56.4
–68.0
–82.8
–142.0
–146.4
Vehicles
49.0
65.0
122.0
176.0
194.0
Acc. depreciation
–19.7
28.6
246.9
290.9
296.3
 
4 516.9
5 268.5
6 594.8
8 959.7
9 560.9
Current assets (B)
Inventories – retail
139.4
233.2
350.3
546.5
799.0
– nurseries
440.0
530.0
588.6
699.8
761.6
Receivables
111.0
147.1
212.3
320.1
446.7
Cash at bank
56.3
101.7
108.4
15.2
13.1
 
746.7
1 012.0
1 259.6
1 581.6
2 020.4
Short-term liabilities (C)
Trade payables
–269.0
–353.4
–484.1
–701.3
–880.9
Taxes payable
–125.1
–202.4
–246.0
–388.7
–517.9
Overdraft
0.0
0.0
0.0
–182.2
–182.8
 
–394.1
–555.8
–730.2
–1 272.2
–1 581.6
Sub-total (A1B–C)
4 794.5
5 624.7
6 984.2
9 079.1
9 759.7
Long-term liabilities (D)
–1 500.0
–2 000.0
–3 000.0
–3 200.0
–3 200.0
Net Assets (A1B–C–D)
3 369.5
3 724.7
4 124.2
6 069.1
6 799.7
Equity
Ordinary shares
1 800.0
1 800.0
1 800.0
2 400.0
2 400.0
Share premium
784.0
784.0
784.0
1 547.0
1 547.0
Retained profit
785.5
1 140.7
1 540.2
2 122.1
2 852.7
Total equity
3 369.5
3 724.7
4 124.2
6 069.1
6 799.7

Chapter 17  Financial statement analysis II
481
Analysis of non-current assets
20X5
 
 
Retail 
premises 
£’000
Nursery 
premises 
£’000
Plant  
and equipt 
£’000
Motor 
vehicles 
£’000
 
Total 
£’000
Cost
Cost: 1 Jan
1 369.0
3 200.0
82.0
26.0
4 677.0
Additions
717.0
0.0
24.0
31.0
772.0
Disposals
0.0
0.0
–15.0
–8.0
–23.0
Cost: 31 Dec
2 086.0
3 200.0
91.0
49.0
5 426.0
Depreciation
Balance 1 Jan
156.7
517.5
49.2
13.5
736.9
Disposals
0.0
0.0
–11.0
–6.0
–17.0
Additions
52.1
106.7
18.2
12.2
189.2
Balance 31 Dec
208.8
624.8
56.4
19.7
909.1
Net book value 31 Dec
1 877.2
2 575.8
34.6
29.3
4 516.9
20X6
  
 
Retail 
premises 
£’000
Nursery 
premises 
£’000
Plant and 
equipt 
£’000
Motor 
vehicles 
£’000
 
Total 
£’000
Cost
Cost: 1 Jan
2 086.0
3 200.0
91.0
49.0
5 426.0
Additions
920.0
0.0
32.0
28.0
980.0
Disposals
0.0
0.0
–14.0
–12.0
–26.0
Cost: 31 Dec
3 006.0
3 200.0
109.0
65.0
6 380.0
Depreciation
Balance 1 Jan
208.8
624.2
56.4
19.7
909.1
Disposals
0.0
0.0
–10.2
–7.4
–17.6
Additions
75.2
106.7
21.8
16.3
220.0
Balance 31 Dec
284.0
730.9
68.0
28.6
1 111.5
Net book value 31 Dec
2 722.0
2 469.1
41.0
36.4
5 268.5
20X7
  
 
Retail 
premises 
£’000
Nursery 
premises 
£’000
Plant and 
equipt 
£’000
Motor 
vehicles 
£’000
 
Total 
£’000
Cost
Cost: 1 Jan
3 006.0
3 200.0
109.0
65.0
6 380.0
Additions
1 472.0
0.0
83.0
72.0
1 627.0
Disposals
0.0
0.0
–34.0
–15.0
–49.0
Cost: 31 Dec
4 478.0
3 200.0
158.0
122.0
7 958.0

Part 5  Advanced financial statement analysis
482
20X7
  
 
Retail 
premises 
£’000
Nursery 
premises 
£’000
Plant and 
equipt 
£’000
Motor 
vehicles 
£’000
 
Total 
£’000
Acc. depreciation
Balance 1 Jan
284.0
730.9
68.0
28.6
1 111.5
Disposals
0.0
0.0
–16.8
–12.2
–29.0
Additions
111.9
106.7
31.6
30.5
280.7
Balance 31 Dec
395.9
837.6
82.8
46.9
1 363.2
Net book value 31 Dec
4 082.1
2 362.4
75.2
75.1
6 594.8
20X8
  
 
Retail 
premises 
£’000
Nursery 
premises 
£’000
Plant and 
equipt 
£’000
Motor 
vehicles 
£’000
 
Total 
£’000
Cost
Cost: 1 Jan
4 478.0
3 200.0
158.0
122.0
7 958.0
Additions
1 369.0
1 200.0
138.0
54.0
2 761.0
Disposals
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Cost: 31 Dec
5 847.0
4 400.0
296.0
176.0
10 719.0
Acc. depreciation
Balance 1 Jan
395.9
837.6
82.8
46.9
1 363.2
Disposals
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Additions
146.2
146.7
59.2
44.0
396.1
Balance 31 Dec
542.1
984.3
142.0
90.9
1 759.3
Net book value 31 Dec
5 304.9
3 415.7
154.0
85.1
8 959.7
20X9
  
 
Retail 
premises 
£’000
Nursery 
premises 
£’000
Plant and 
equipt 
£’000
Motor 
vehicles 
£’000
 
Total 
£’000
Cost
Cost: 1 Jan
5 847.0
4 400.0
296.0
176.0
10 719.0
Additions
927.0
0.0
46.0
56.0
1 029.0
Disposals
0.0
0.0
–64.0
–38.0
–102.0
Cost: 31 Dec
6 774.0
4 400.0
278.0
194.0
11 646.0
Acc. depreciation
Balance 1 Jan
542.1
984.3
142.0
90.9
1 759.3
Disposals
0.0
0.0
–51.2
–33.4
–84.6
Additions
169.3
146.7
55.6
38.8
410.4
Balance 31 Dec
711.4
1 131.0
146.4
96.3
2 085.1

Chapter 17  Financial statement analysis II
483
Net book value 31 Dec
6 062.6
3 269.0
131.6
97.7
9 560.9
Segment information
  
20X5 
£’000
20X6 
£’000
20X7 
£’000
20X8 
£’000
20X9 
£’000
Sales
Nursery
1 100.0
1 325.0
1 415.0
1 620.0
1 700.0
Retail
2 220.0
2 941.3
3 537.8
4 573.0
5 584.0
Gross margin
Nursery
220.0
265.0
283.0
324.0
340.0
Retail
655.3
909.5
1 149.8
1 551.6
1 981.6

484
This chapter will analyze the origins of the IASB, and the rapid global spread of IFRS 
as the accounting basis of choice in international capital markets, and it will review 
likely changes in international standards that will arise in the short to medium term.
IFRS and the future
C H A P T E R  1 8
n	 Introduction
n	 Strategic evolution
n	 The IASB’s first decade
n	 The 2007 financial crisis
n	 The next five years
n	 Summary
Chapter Structure
This book is based on the financial reporting standards of the International Ac-
counting Standards Board (IASB). We have given you, we believe, enough informa-
tion about the structure and workings of the IASB to enable you to work with their 
standards. However, for those who are curious about the organization, its origins, its 
work and the possible future direction of its standards, this final chapter is offered to 
provide more depth to your understanding. It falls into three sections. The first deals 
with the origins of the IASB, as the International Accounting Standards Commit-
tee that started work in the 1970s, and its mutation into the IASB. The second sec-
tion reviews the work of the new organization in the first decade of this century and 
the effects of the financial crisis and then the final section looks at the IASB’s work 
­programme and the likely changes to its standards up to 2015.
Introduction

Chapter 18  IFRS and the future
485
The International Accounting Standards Committee (IASC), the founder body 
from which the IASB developed, had its first meeting in June 1973. It was the 
brain child of Sir Douglas Morpeth (at the time president of the Institute of Char-
tered Accountants in England and Wales – ICAEW – and a partner in the UK prac-
tice of Touche Ross, now Deloitte), and Lord Benson (chairman of the Overseas 
Relations Committee of the ICAEW and partner in Coopers & Lybrand).
The genesis of the IASC was a telephone conversation in the margins of the 
five-yearly world congress of accountants which took place in Australia in 1972. 
Benson was a well-known figure in international circles and played a role in the 
organization of the world congress. Morpeth was leading the British delegation 
and was also the deputy chairman of the newly-formed Accounting Standards 
Committee in the UK. Following a presentation by Benson to the congress, Mor-
peth remarked to him that it was odd that the world organization in considering 
its future structure had not thought to establish a standard-setting mechanism. 
Morpeth later commented that, in a world where standard-setting was in its in-
fancy, it seemed to him that the work of the new British standard-setter could be 
adapted for international use.
Benson was a highly dynamic figure. He was born into the accounting aris-
tocracy as the grandson of one of the four Cooper siblings who created the firm 
Cooper Bros in the 19th century. Apart from the Second World War, Benson 
spent his whole life in the firm (he joined when he was 16 and was a partner 
at 25) and was one of the principal architects of its overseas expansion, leading 
ultimately to the merger with Lybrand, Ross Bros and Montgomery, the US firm, 
to create Coopers & Lybrand (subsequently merged into PricewaterhouseCoo-
pers). Benson had been president of the ICAEW in 1966/67 and had established 
the Accountants International Study Group to work with Canada and the US 
to try to harmonize practices. Benson seized on the notion of an international 
­standard-setter and took it forward, becoming its founder chairman. Amongst 
other things, Benson arranged that the IASC would be based in London, where it 
has remained ever since.
The IASC was funded and run by national accounting professional bodies, but 
although people were enthusiastic about the IASC, none of these bodies ever ac-
tually used its standards as a substitute for national standards. In the 1970s and 
1980s the IASC created a body of standards but these were used by teachers as an 
illustration of best practice and were also used by developing countries as a tem-
plate for their own national standards: the IASC lacked a clear role.
This was to change in 1987 when the then Secretary General, David Cairns, 
started to build a relationship with the International Organization of Securities 
Commissions (IOSCO). This organization, largely under the influence of the US 
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), was trying to improve and harmo-
nize stock exchange regulation across the world. At that time all major stock ex-
changes had their own listing requirements, including accounting requirements, 
that had to be followed by companies that wanted to offer their securities on that 
market. There were of course many different sets of requirements, and IOSCO 
wanted to remove some of the difficulties and costs implicit in this. It set out 
to create a stock exchange ‘passport’ – an internationally-accepted set of listing 
Strategic evolution

Part 5  advanced financial statement analysis
486
requirements that would be used by all IOSCO members for secondary listings. 
In other words, each company had a primary listing, usually in its home country, 
where the national requirements would be followed and the national regulator 
would be the primary regulator of the company. However, such companies could 
apply to list their securities in other stock exchanges using the IOSCO listing 
rules. As long as the company met the IOSCO requirements, regulators in markets 
being used for secondary listings would not impose additional requirements.
IOSCO needed a set of financial reporting standards as part of its passport and 
entered into a relationship with the IASC that their standards would be devel-
oped for international capital market use. It should be understood that over this 
time stock exchanges were becoming more liberal about their approach to list-
ing and some already accepted secondary listings using International Accounting 
Standards, and within the EU there were ‘mutual recognition’ arrangements that 
each country accepted financial statements drawn up using other member state’s 
GAAP. The most significant underlying issue was that the SEC did not accept 
­foreign companies’ financial reports drawn up under foreign GAAP except with 
a reconciliation. This is known as the ’20-F reconciliation’ after the annual report 
filing required of foreign registrants by the SEC. This reconciliation is a costly 
item to prepare and involves sometimes quite dramatic differences between the 
US measure of equity and earnings and those under national GAAP, which in 
turn provides an awkward platform to explain company performance to analysts. 
Many non-US companies hoped and expected that if the IASC’s standards were 
accepted by IOSCO, then companies using them would be able to have a second-
ary listing in the US without a reconciliation. The US capital markets dominate 
the world’s supply of capital to commercial companies and many companies also 
believe that a US listing is a key component of being regarded as a serious inter-
national organization (for a discussion of this see Bay and Bruns discussion of 
Daimler-Benz’s listing in the US, details in Further reading list).
There followed a decade of highs and lows in the relationships between IOSCO 
and the IASC and the IASC and its supporters. At the end of 1998 the IASC finally 
delivered a set of much improved and extended standards and submitted them to 
IOSCO for evaluation. In May 2000, IOSCO delivered its verdict – International 
Accounting Standards (IAS) would be accepted as the secondary listing require-
ment, but national regulators could ask for further information if they wanted 
it. This meant that the SEC was not obliged to abandon its reconciliation and 
indeed that organization issued a Concept Release (i.e. a discussion paper) asking 
constituents to comment. It pointed out that having a set of standards was not in 
itself enough, they had to be applied rigorously and be audited consistently across 
the world. It would wait for more experience of the use of the standards to emerge 
before making a decision. People felt that the IOSCO endorsement was a success, 
but not the success that had been hoped for. More work needed to be done.
However, this was immediately followed by a bombshell from the European 
Commission (EC), dropped in June 2000. The EC announced that it had de-
cided to adopt IAS for all listed companies in the EU. This radically changed the 
­political framework: by 2005, IAS would be the generally accepted accounting 
principles of a major slice of the world’s economy. IOSCO’s limited success paled 
into insignificance as the IASC gained a major politicalally.
Why did the EC do this? The official explanation was that it was part of the 
initiative to create an EU-wide single capital market, and it was also intended to 

Chapter 18  IFRS and the future
487
give EU companies easier access to world markets (for which read the US market). 
The EC had been taking initiatives since 1966 to harmonize accounting as part of 
its objective of creating a market in which there was freedom of movement across 
national boundaries. Its programme had achieved limited success, and in 1995 
it had more or less abandoned the attempt to create EU-wide rules in the face 
of resistance from companies and governments. The 2000 announcement was a 
major change of official policy and ultimately gave the EC the power to override 
national requirements.
So the international standard-setter entered the first decade of the 21st ­century 
on a completely different footing. Not only was its status much enhanced by EC 
endorsement, but the whole structure of the organization was changed. The old 
IASC, funded by the accounting profession, disappeared (formally agreed at a 
meeting in Edinburgh in July 2000) to be replaced by a private sector organiza-
tion funded from a Delaware foundation. The new structure put the IFRS Founda-
tion in overall charge, with a mission to raise funds and appoint Board members. 
The standard-setter became the International Accounting Standards Board, whose 
members were professionals hired for their knowledge and experience. The ­focus 
was clearly writing high quality financial reporting standards for the interna-
tional capital markets.
When the IASB sat down to its first public standard-setting meeting in April 2001 
its attention was split between several priorities:
	
n	 legacy projects from the old IASC
	
n	 improving the existing IAS
	
n	 preparing the standards for 2005 and application in the EC
	
n	 converging with the US
	
n	 leadership projects.
The IASB had inherited a draft discussion paper on accounting for insurance con-
tracts. The worldwide insurance industry uses widely divergent standards and the 
objective was to create something that would introduce a single approach. In ret-
rospect the IASB probably should have shelved this, but in fact it worked on it for 
many months before accepting that it would take years to resolve and must be 
put to one side. The IASB continues to work on it, but the technical problems are 
difficult, and they put stress on cross-cutting issues such as revenue recognition, 
the measurement of liabilities and the recognition of intangibles. An interim stan-
dard authorizing companies to continue to use national GAAP subject to certain 
constraints was issued in 2004 to smooth the adoption of IFRS. The insurance 
project became a joint project with the US, but continues to have problems, not 
least that the FASB and IASB disagree on the precise mechanism to release profit. 
It is possible the IASB will have a final standard in place for 2015 and likely that 
this will not be converged with the US.
The old IAS had been prepared over a 25-year period by large, volunteer com-
mittees. Despite initiatives to improve the standards for IOSCO purposes, the 
IASB felt there were a number of inconsistencies that could be picked off quickly 
and improve the standards further. Consequently many of the old standards were 
The IASB’s first decade

Part 5  advanced financial statement analysis
488
amended slightly, and some quite radically. In particular the IASB introduced into 
IAS 8 Accounting Policies, Changes in Estimates and Errors a hierarchy of actions to 
be taken when seeking a policy for a transaction that was outside the existing 
standards.
This improvements process was also linked to the imperative of having work-
able standards ready for EU adoption. Although the official adoption date was 
2005, companies had to publish comparative figures and so the effective date was 
2004. Much pressure was in particular brought by the EU to change some aspects 
of IAS 39 Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement on the measurement 
of financial instruments. The IASB introduced the fair value option which allows 
companies to choose to value any financial instruments at fair value through 
profit and loss. The European Central Bank intervened because it felt the option 
was too wide. Overall, the imperative of reaching the adoption deadline (which 
was not only for the EU but also for Australia and South Africa) dominated the 
agenda during 2002 and 2003. The IASB produced a new standard, IFRS 1 First-
time Adoption of IFRS, to address the practicalities of how companies should treat 
the transition from national GAAP to IFRS.
Nonetheless, the IASB also put some effort into converging with the US. In 
September 2002, it signed the Norwalk agreement with the Financial Accounting 
Standards Board (FASB) which set out the basis of future cooperation, including 
working on joint projects. This was facilitated in all probability by the appoint-
ment of Robert Herz as chairman of the FASB earlier that year. Mr Herz, formerly 
a partner in PricewaterhouseCoopers in New York, had been a part-time member 
of the IASB prior to his FASB appointment. Curiously, although a US citizen, he 
had been educated in England, and had first qualified as a member of the ICAEW 
before returning to the US and becoming a CPA. He had subsequently been very 
active on international committees, particularly within the International Federa-
tion of Accountants.
At the inaugural standard-setting meeting, Sir David Tweedie also talked about 
the necessity for the IASB to establish credibility for itself as initiating standards 
that would change national practice. The IASB chose to address share-based 
payment, a subject that had caused the FASB considerable political difficulties 
in the 1990s. The issue was that management could be paid by granting them 
­options to buy company shares at reduced prices. This just caused cash to come 
into the company when the shares were issued and equity to be increased by a 
corresponding amount. However, since the shares were issued at reduced prices, 
the transfer of value was much greater than that shown in the balance sheet, and 
no remuneration expense appeared in the income statement. This was very popu-
lar, especially in the US, given that the true cost of senior executives’ remunera-
tion was not revealed.
The IASB rapidly issued IFRS 2, Share-based Payment, which requires the fair 
value of share options to be calculated at grant date and then be expensed over 
the related service period. The FASB in turn amended its own standard to reflect 
the tougher IASB standard. Some people, notably Financial Executives Interna-
tional, warned that the sky would fall in. However, in practice Enron and the 
other financial scandals that burst just after the turn of the century had changed 
the world’s appetite for listening sympathetically to large corporations. The IASB 
scored an early success.
Once 2005 was out of the way, attention was more clearly focused again on 
the 20-F reconciliation. While the IASB was busy improving its standards and 

Chapter 18  IFRS and the future
489
converging with the US, the EC was also active negotiating with the SEC. In a 
dramatic development the EC and SEC agreed a ‘road map’ for removal of the rec-
onciliation requirement for companies using IFRS. A provisional date of 2009 was 
set for IFRS compliant companies to drop the requirement, and the EC generously 
agreed that it would not introduce a reconciliation requirement for US companies 
listed in the EU.
A key part of this road map was not that the IASB had to achieve a given level 
of convergence but that the SEC needed to be sure that a system was in place that 
would give continuing convergence, and also milestones were set to be achieved 
by the beginning of 2008. The FASB and IASB translated this into a document is-
sued in 2006 called the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) which set targets 
for what had to be achieved, and in so doing fixed the ongoing work priorities.
In fact, the IASB did not achieve the targets that it had agreed. A significant is-
sue was feedback from constituents that they wanted more projects to start with 
the issue of a preliminary views discussion paper. In theory, the idea was that the 
issue of an exposure draft gave people the opportunity to comment and for the 
standard-setter to respond. However, the perception was that the standard-setter 
was reluctant to move much away from what had been published in the exposure 
draft. The IASB members responded more flexibly to comments on discussion 
­papers. The IASB therefore changed its practice to more routinely start the con-
sultation process with a discussion paper. As far as the MoU was concerned this 
meant that, for example, the FASB standard on fair value measurement was issued 
as a discussion paper rather than an exposure draft. In general terms this also 
meant that the process of issuing a standard from scratch would be likely to take 
at least four years (see Figure 1.3 on standard-setting due process in Chapter 1).
Although the IASB throughput slowed down, the political pace accelerated and 
the SEC did not even wait for the end of the roadmap period or the MoU deadline. 
In November 2007, it announced that it would accept IFRS financial statements 
as the equivalent of US GAAP and there would be no reconciliation requirement. 
This was a very significant breakthrough, achieved actually after about 20 years 
of efforts. The SEC did the IASB another favour at the same time by pointing out 
that this relaxation referred to companies using IFRS as issued by the IASB. It did 
not refer to those using IFRS subject to a carve-out, as in the EU.
The IASB’s reasonably steady progress was to be knocked off course by the finan-
cial crisis that started in 2007. Jointly with the FASB it had told constituents that 
it would leave financial instruments alone for a while to give companies time to 
get used to applying IAS 39, the measurement standard. They also put out a paper 
discussing the complexities of financial instrument accounting and what might 
be options for making it more simple.
As the financial crisis started to bite, banks started complaining that using fair 
values in their financial statements was making them record exaggerated losses as 
the markets fell away. The standard-setters shrugged and suggested they were just 
the messenger, the problem was the markets. However, a groundswell of opin-
ion started to form to the effect that using fair value to measure financial instru-
ments had exacerbated the crisis or even maybe caused it. In 2008 the G8 and 
G20 groups of world leaders started to get onto the case and told the FASB and 
The 2007 financial crisis

Part 5  advanced financial statement analysis
490
IASB they should review their standards, simplify the accounting for financial in-
struments and get substantially converged by June 2011.
This triggered a crisis period in standard-setting, with the two boards meeting 
physically or by videolink at least once a month and generally much more often. 
While the sense of crisis is now past, and the pace is reverting to normal, the 
FASB and IASB are still working on financial instruments. Under different pres-
sures, the two standard-setters took different paths to revising their standards. 
The IASB ­determined to replace all aspects of IAS 39 with a new standard, IFRS 9, 
which at the moment is due to come into force in 2015. The June 2011 deadline 
was totally missed and at the moment it is likely that further changes will be 
made. With the benefit of hindsight, the main failure of the accounting standards 
was thought to be not fair value, but the method of recognizing loan losses. The 
standard-setters are still working on this.
Looking at technical issues, the two boards have been working on joint standards 
on leasing and revenue recognition, both of which are likely to come into force 
in 2015. The leasing standard is intended to reduce the use of leases as a form of 
off balance sheet financing. It will require all leases (not including real estate) of 
longer than a year to be capitalized. Revenue recognition aims to provide a single 
standard to cover all aspects and be applicable to all industry sectors. It will have 
little impact on many industries but may affect those who provide bundled goods 
and services and long-term contracts. The seller has to recognize a performance 
liability when a contract is signed, and an equal and opposite contract asset. The 
contract is split into separate ‘performance obligations’ if there are several differ-
ent parts to it. The IASB also completed IFRS 13, Fair Value Measurement, which 
provides a converged set of rules for measuring fair value when another standard 
requires that.
The IASB has been conducting an agenda consultation to provide guidance on 
what constituents think it should be doing once the US convergence projects and 
financial instruments revisions are finished. The answer seems to be that people 
think there should be a period of calm, during which the IASB could sensibly 
concentrate on finishing the revision of its conceptual framework, and looking at 
taking a more active role in implementation.
The more problematical issues seem to be those of endorsement of IFRS by 
further countries. The EU, Australia and South Africa adopted the standard in 
2005 and China set out to write its own standards closely aligned on IFRS. There 
has been a second wave of endorsements starting in 2011 with Canada and Brazil 
moving to IFRS, followed by South Korea and Mexico. India and Japan are still 
hesitating, although Japan already allows its listed companies to use IFRS if they 
want to. The ‘elephant in the room’ is the US. The SEC said it would make a deci-
sion in 2011, after it had performed detailed studies of the IFRS world. It missed 
the deadline, saying it had not yet finished, and no new deadline has been estab-
lished, although some people seem fairly sure a decision will be made in 2012.
However, as the SEC has worked on the topic, it has advanced the public 
­debate. From these signals, it would appear that the likelihood is that the US will 
not adopt IFRS in the way the EU did, it will do something nearer to the ­Chinese 
approach, which is to maintain its own standards while bringing these very 
The next five years

Chapter 18  IFRS and the future
491
close to IFRS. The SEC calls this ‘condorsement’, and it appears that they would 
maintain the ‘US GAAP’ label as opposed to referring to IFRS, but would set the 
FASB the task of amending US GAAP to conform to existing IFRS over a five-year  
period. Thereafter the FASB would look at each new standard individually and 
decide how to address it.
The big question about this approach is that it is left pretty well to the FASB 
to decide how close to get. As the current IASB chairman, Hans Hoogervorst, has 
said, the key issue is whether non-endorsement should be a major exception, or 
whether it is routine. There are many advantages to the US in going this route, 
not least that there is no transition moment, and no obvious conversion cost. It 
also avoids disturbing the many references in the law and elsewhere to US GAAP. 
It is a low impact way for US companies of getting to global standards. The disad-
vantage is the impact on the IASB – would the FASB be able to unduly influence 
new standards by threatening not to endorse? It does seem that a clean endorse-
ment or not decision is unlikely to be made, and it could be years before the 
­effects of the compromises that are reached can be fully understood.
Summary
In this chapter we have tried to give you some insights into the work of the 
IASB. We have discussed briefly where it came from and where it is going to. The 
­chapter falls into three sections. The first dealt with the origins of the IASB and 
the work of the IASC. We have shown where it came from and how it ended up 
in its role today. In the second section we have analyzed the work of the IASB and 
the objectives it has had in mind in its key formative years. The final section is 
a discussion of the next decade of the international standard-setter, the growing 
use of its standards and the possibility of use of IFRS by the US.

492
F U R T H E R  R E A D I N G
Adams, C. A. (2004) ‘The ethical, social and 
environmental reporting-performance portrayal 
gap’, Accounting, Auditing and Accountability Journal 
17(5):731–57.
Aerts, W. (2005) ‘Narrative accounting disclosures’, 
in C. L. Cooper (ed.) The Blackwell Encyclopedia of 
Management, 1: Accounting, 2nd edn (pp. 312–318), 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Aerts, W., Cormier, D. and Magnan, M. (2007) 
‘The association between web-based corporate 
performance disclosure and financial analyst 
behaviour under different governance regimes’, 
Corporate Governance: An International Review 
15(6):1301–29.
Aerts, W. and Cormier, D. (2009) ‘Media legitimacy 
and corporate environmental communication’, 
Accounting, Organizations and Society 34(1), 1–27.
Aerts, W. and Tarca, A. (2010) ‘Financial performance 
explanations and institutional setting’, Accounting 
and Business Research 40(5):421–450.
Aerts, W. and Cheng, P. (2012) ‘Self-serving causal 
disclosures on earnings and short-term IPO 
valuation – Evidence from Chinese initial public 
offerings’, Accounting and Business Research 
42(1):49–75.
Aisbitt, S. (2006) ‘Assessing the effect of the transition 
of IFRS on equity: the case of the FTSE 100’, 
Accounting in Europe 3:117–34.
Alexander, D. and Jermakowicz, E. (2006) ‘A true and 
fair view of the principles/rules debate’, Abacus 
42(2):132–64.
Armitage, S. and Marston, C. (2008) ‘Corporate 
disclosure, cost of capital and reputation: Evidence 
from finance directors’, British Accounting Review 
40(4):314–366.
Barth, M., Clinch, G. and Shibano, T. (1999) 
‘International accounting harmonization and 
global equity markets’, Journal of Accounting and 
Economics 26(1–3):201–35.
Barth, M. E. and Landsman, W. R. (2010) ‘How did 
financial reporting contribute to the financial 
crisis?’, European Accounting Review 19(3):399–423.
Bay, W. and Bruns, H-G. (2003) ‘Multinational 
companies and international capital markets’, 
in P. Walton, A. Haller and B. Raffournier (eds) 
International Accounting, 2nd edn (pp. 385–403), 
London: Thomson Learning.
Beaver, W. H. (1991) ‘Problems and paradoxes in the 
financial reporting of future events’, Accounting 
Horizons 5(4):22–35.
Benston, G., Bromwich, M., Litan, R. E. and 
Wagenhofer, A. (2006) Worldwide Financial 
Reporting: The Development and Future of Accounting 
Standards, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bocqueraz, C. and Walton, P. (2006) ‘Creating a 
supranational institution: the role of the individual 
and the mood of the times’, Accounting History 
11(3):271–88.
Boerner, H. (2005) ‘Are corporate accounting systems 
out-of-date?’, Corporate Finance Review 10(2):35–41.
Bradbury, M. (2007) ‘An anatomy of an IFRIC 
Interpretation’, Accounting in Europe 4:109–22.
Brown, P. (2011) ‘International Financial Reporting 
Standards: what are the benefits?’, Accounting and 
Business Research 41(3):269–285.
Cairns, D. (2006) ‘The use of fair value in IFRS’, 
Accounting in Europe 3:5–22.
Camfferman, K. and Zeff, S. (2007) Financial Reporting 
and Global Capital Markets: A History of the 
International Accounting Standards Committee, 1973–
2000, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chen, J. J. and Zhang, H. (2010) ‘The impact of 
regulatory enforcement and audit upon IFRS 
compliance – Evidence from China’, European 
Accounting Review 19(4):665–692.
Cheng, P., Aerts, W. and Jorissen, A. (2010) ‘Earnings 
management, asset restructuring, and the threat of 
exchange delisting in an earnings-based regulatory 
regime’, Corporate Governance: An International 
Review 18(5):438–456.
Colley, J. L. Jr, Doyle, J. L., Logan, G. W. and 
Stettinuis, W. (2005) What is Corporate Governance? 
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Cooper, S. (2007) ‘Performance measurement for 
equity analysis and valuation’, Accounting in Europe 
4:1–50.
Cormier, D., Ledoux, M. J., Aerts, W. and Magnan, 
M. (2010) ‘Corporate governance and information 

FURTHER READING
493
Hunter, L., Webster, E. and Wyatt, A. (2005) 
‘Measuring intangible capital: a review of current 
practice’, Australian Accounting Review 15(2):4–21.
James, S. and Nobes, C. (2006) The Economics of 
Taxation, Harlow: Prentice Hall.
Johnson, L. T. and Petrone, K. R. (1998) ‘Is goodwill 
an asset?’, Accounting Horizons (September): 
293–304.
Kvaal, E. and Nobes, C. (2010) ‘International 
differences in IFRS policy choice: A research note’, 
Accounting and Business Research 40(2):173–187.
Lamb, M. (1995) ‘When is a group a group? 
Convergence of concepts of “group” in European 
Union corporation tax’, European Accounting Review 
4(1):33–78.
Larson, K. (2007) ‘Constituent participation and 
the IASB’s International Financial Reporting 
Interpretations Committee’, Accounting in Europe 
4:207–54.
Leuz, C. (2010) ‘Different approaches to corporate 
reporting regulation: How jurisdictions differ 
and why’, Accounting and Business Research 
40(3):229–256.
Nobes, C. W. and Parker, R. (2002) Comparative 
International Accounting, 7th edn, Harlow: Pearson 
Education.
Nobes, C. W. and Schwencke, H. R. (2006) ‘Modelling 
the links between tax and financial reporting: A 
longitudinal examination of Norway over 30 years 
up to IFRS adoption’, European Accounting Review 
15(1):63–87.
Penman, S. H. (2003) ‘The quality of financial 
statements: perspectives from the recent 
stock market bubble’, Accounting Horizons 17 
(supplement):77–96.
Pope, P.F. and McLeay, S.J. (2011) ‘The European 
IFRS experiment: objectives, research challenges 
and some early evidence’, Accounting and Business 
Research 41(3):233–266.
Power, M. (2010) ‘Fair value accounting, financial 
economics and the transformation of reliability’, 
Accounting and Business Research 40(3):197–210.
Richard, J. (2004) ‘The secret past of fair value: 
lessons from history applied to the French case’, 
Accounting in Europe 1:95–108.
Sarens, G., De Beelde, I. and Everaert, P.(2009) 
‘Internal audit: A comfort provider to the audit 
committee’, British Accounting Review 41(2):90–106.
Schipper, K. (2005) ‘The introduction of International 
Accounting Standards in Europe: implications for 
international convergence’, European Accounting 
Review 14(1):101–26.
Shortridge, R. T. and Myring, M. (2004) ‘Defining 
principles-based accounting standards’, The CPA 
Journal 74(8):34–8.
asymmetry between managers and investors’, 
Corporate Governance 10(5):574–589.
Dao, T. H. P. (2005) ‘Monitoring compliance with 
IFRS: some insights from the French regulatory 
system’, Accounting in Europe 2(1):107–35.
Daske, H. (2006) ‘Economic benefits of adopting IFRS 
or US-GAAP – have the expected costs of equity 
capital really decreased?’, Journal of Business Finance 
and Accounting 33(3/4):329–73.
Dellaportas, S., Gibson, K., Alagiah, R., Hutchinson, 
M., Leung, P. and Homrigh, D. V. (2005), Ethics, 
Governance and Accountability: A Professional 
Perspective, Brisbane: John Wiley and Sons.
Delvaille, P., Ebbers, G. and Saccon, C. (2005) 
‘International financial reporting convergence: 
evidence from three continental European 
countries’, Accounting in Europe 2:137–64.
Denning, B. (2004) ‘Adopting International Financial 
Reporting Standards: the tax implications’, 
Accountancy Ireland 36(4):19–22.
Dick, W. and Walton, P. (2007) ‘The agenda of the 
IASB: a moving target’, Australian Accounting Review 
17(42):8–17.
Erchinger, H. and Melcher, W. (2007) ‘Convergence 
between US GAAP and IFRS: acceptance of IFRS 
by the US Securities and Exchange Commission’, 
Accounting in Europe 4:123–40.
Faux, J. and Wise, V. (2005) ‘Financial reporting 
policy in a dynamic environment’, International 
Review of Business Research Papers 1(2):1–9.
Fearnley, S. and Hines, T. (2006) ‘Rules are a big 
problem for small companies’, Financial Times, 19 
January, p. 12.
Gélard, G. (2004) ‘What can be expected from 
accounting standards?’, Accounting in Europe 1:17–20.
Gorman, J. F. and Hargadon, J. M. (2005) ‘Accounting 
futures: Healthy markets for a time-honored 
profession’, Journal of Financial Service Professionals 
59(1):74–9.
Hague, I. P. (2004) ‘IAS 39: underlying principles’, 
Accounting in Europe 1:21–6.
Haller, A. (2003) ‘Segmental reporting’, in P. Walton, 
A. Haller and B. Raffournier (eds) International 
Accounting, 2nd edn (pp. 444–470), London: 
Thomson Learning.
Henderson, S., Peirson, G., Herbohn, K. and Ramsay, 
A. (2006) Issues in Financial Accounting, 12th edn, 
Sydney: Pearson-Prentice Hall.
Hooghiemstra, R. (2012) ‘What determines the 
informativeness of firms’ explanations for 
deviations from the Dutch corporate governance 
code?’, Accounting and Business Research 42(1):1–27.
House, J. (2004) ‘Financial reporting: national 
standard-setters – endangered species’, Accountancy 
133(1327):86–7.

FURTHER READING
494
Van Caneghem, T. and Aerts, W. (2011) ‘Intra-
industry conformity in dividend policy’, Managerial 
Finance 37(6):492–516.
Walton, P. (1993) ‘The true and fair view in British 
accounting’, European Accounting Review 2:49–58.
Walton, P. (1998) ‘Benson’s projects take a decisive 
turn’, Accountancy and Finance Update (South 
Africa) 3(5):7–9.
Walton, P. (1998) ‘Henry Benson’, in M. Warner 
(ed) The IEBM Handbook of Management Thinking 
(pp. 482–486), London: International Thomson 
Publishing.
Walton, P. (2003) ‘European harmonisation’, in  
F. D. S. Choi (ed.) International Accounting and 
Finance Handbook, 2nd edn (pp. 17.1–17.17), New 
York: John Wiley and Sons.
Walton, P. (2004) ‘IAS 39: where different accounting 
models collide’, Accounting in Europe 1:5–16.
Walton, P. (2006) ‘Fair value and executory contracts: 
moving the boundaries in international financial 
reporting’, Accounting and Business Research 
36(4):337–43.
Walton, P. (ed.) (2007) The Routledge Guide to 
Fair Value and Financial Reporting, Abingdon: 
Routledge.
Whittington, G. (2005) ‘The adoption of 
International Accounting Standards in the 
European Union’, European Accounting Review 
14(1):127–53.
Wüstemann, J. and Kierzek, S. (2005) ‘Revenue 
recognition under IFRS revisited: conceptual 
models, current proposals and practical 
consequences’, Accounting in Europe 2:69–106.
Sloan, R. G. (2001) ‘Financial accounting and 
corporate governance: a discussion’, Journal of 
Accounting and Economics 32:335–47.
Soderstrom, N. and Sun, K. J. (2007) ‘IFRS adoption 
and accounting quality’, European Accounting 
Review 16:675–702.
Stanton, P. A. and Stanton, P. J. (2002) ‘Corporate 
annual reports: research perspectives used’, 
Accounting, Auditing and Accountability Journal 
15(4):478–500.
Sunder, S. (2011) ‘IFRS monopoly: the Pied Piper 
of financial reporting’, Accounting and Business 
Research 41(3):291–306.
Sutton, T. (2003) Corporate Financial Accounting and 
Reporting, 2nd edn, London: Prentice Hall.
Tarca, A., Street, D. L. and Aerts, W. (2010) 
‘Improving MD&A: A national necessity’, Financial 
Executive 26(10):53–56.
Tarca, A., Street, D. L. and Aerts, W. (2011) ‘Factors 
affecting MD&A disclosures by SEC registrants: 
Views of practitioners’, Journal of International 
Accounting, Auditing and Taxation 20(1):45–59.
Taylor, P. A (2003) ‘Foreign currency translation’, 
in P. Walton, A. Haller and B. Raffournier (eds) 
International Accounting, 2nd edn (pp. 405–442), 
London: Thomson Learning.
Tokar, M. (2005) ‘Convergence and the 
implementation of a single set of global standards: 
the real life challenge’, Accounting in Europe 2:47–68.
UNCTAD Secretariat (2003) ‘Accounting needs of 
developing countries’, in P. Walton, A. Haller and 
B. Raffournier (eds) International Accounting, 2nd 
edn (pp. 366–384), London: Thomson Learning.

495
G L O S S A R Y
accounting policies  The specific principles, bases, con-
ventions, rules and practices applied by an entity in 
preparing and presenting financial statements.
accounting profit  Profit or loss for a period before de-
ducting tax expense.
acquiree  The business or businesses that the acquirer ob-
tains control of in a business combination.
acquirer  The entity that obtains control of the acquiree.
acquisition date  The date on which the acquirer obtains 
control of the acquiree.
active market  A market in which transactions for the 
asset or liability take place with sufficient frequency 
and volume to provide pricing information on an 
ongoing basis.
actuarial gains and losses  The changes in the present 
value of the defined benefit obligation resulting from 
(a) Experience adjustments (the effects of differences 
between the previous actuarial assumptions and what 
has actually occurred); and (b) the effects of changes 
in actuarial assumptions.
adjusting events after the reporting period  See ‘events 
after the reporting period’.
agricultural activity  The management by an entity of 
the biological transformation and harvest of biologi-
cal assets for sale or for conversion, into agricultural 
produce, or into additional biological assets.
agricultural produce  The harvested product of the en-
tity’s biological assets.
amortization (depreciation)  The systematic allocation of 
the depreciable amount of an asset over its useful life.
asset  A resource: (a) controlled by an entity as a result 
of past events; and (b) from which future economic 
benefits are expected to flow to the entity.
associate  An entity over which the investor has signifi-
cant influence.
biological asset  A living animal or plant.
borrowing costs  Interest and other costs that an entity 
incurs in connection with the borrowing of funds.
business  An integrated set of activities and assets that is 
capable of being conducted and managed for the pur-
pose of providing a return in the form of dividends, 
lower costs or other economic benefits directly to in-
vestors or other owners, members or participants.
business combination  A transaction or other event in 
which an acquirer obtains control of one or more 
businesses. Transactions sometimes referred to as 
‘true mergers’ or ‘mergers of equals’ are also business 
combinations as that term is used in this IFRS.
carrying amount  The amount at which an asset is recog-
nized in the statement of financial position.
cash  Cash on hand and demand deposits.
cash equivalents  Short-term, highly liquid investments 
that are readily convertible to known amounts of 
cash and which are subject to an insignificant risk of 
changes in value.
cash flows  Inflows and outflows of cash and cash 
equivalents.
cash-generating unit  The smallest identifiable group 
of assets that generates cash inflows that are largely 
independent of the cash inflows from other assets or 
groups of assets.
change in accounting estimate  An adjustment of the 
carrying amount of an asset or a liability, or the 
amount of the periodic consumption of an asset, that 
results from the assessment of the present status of, 
and expected future benefits and obligations associ-
ated with, assets and liabilities. Changes in account-
ing estimates result from new information or new 
developments and, accordingly, are not corrections 
of errors.
closing rate  The spot exchange rate at the end of the 
reporting period.
compensation  Includes all employee benefits (as defined 
in IAS 19) including employee benefits to which IFRS 
2 applies. Employee benefits are all forms of consid-
eration paid, payable or provided by the entity, or on 
behalf of the entity, in exchange for services rendered 
to the entity. It also includes such consideration 
paid on behalf of a parent of the entity in respect of 
the entity. Compensation includes: (a) short-term 
employee benefits, such as wages, salaries and social 
security contributions, paid annual leave and paid sick 
leave, profit-sharing and bonuses (if payable within 12 
months of the end of the period) and non-monetary 
benefits (such as medical care, housing, cars and free 
or subsidized goods or services) for current employees; 
(b) post-employment benefits such as pensions, other 
retirement benefits, post-employment life insurance 
and post-employment medical care; (c) other long-
term employee benefits, including long-service leave 
or sabbatical leave, jubilee or other long-service ben-
efits, long-term disability benefits and, if they are not 

GLOSSARY
496
currency risk  The risk that the fair value or future cash 
flows of a financial instrument will fluctuate because 
of changes in foreign exchange rates.
current asset  An entity shall classify an asset as current 
when: (a) it expects to realize the asset or intends to sell 
or consume it in its normal operating cycle; (b) it holds 
the asset primarily for the purpose of trading; (c) it ex-
pects to realize the asset within 12 months after the re-
porting period (d) the asset is cash or a cash equivalent 
(as defined in IAS 7) unless the asset is restricted from 
being exchanged or used to settle a liability for at least 
12 months after the reporting period.
An entity shall classify all other assets as 
non-current.
current liability  An entity shall classify a liability as 
current when: (a) it expects to settle the liability in 
its normal operating cycle; (b) it holds the liability 
primarily for the purpose of trading; (c) the liability is 
due to be settled within 12 months after the report-
ing period; or (d) the entity does not have an uncon-
ditional right to defer settlement of the liability for at 
least 12 months after the reporting period.
An entity shall classify all other liabilities as 
non-current.
current tax  The amount of income taxes payable (recov-
erable) in respect of the taxable profit (tax loss) for a 
period.
deductible temporary differences  Temporary differences 
between the carrying amount of an asset or liability 
in the balance sheet and its tax base that will result in 
amounts that are deductible in determining taxable 
profit (tax loss) of future periods when the carrying 
amount of the asset or liability is recovered or settled.
deferred tax assets  The amounts of income taxes recov-
erable in future periods in respect of: (a) deductible 
temporary differences; (b) the carry-forward of un-
used tax losses; and (c) the carry-forward of unused 
tax credits.
deferred tax liabilities  The amounts of income taxes pay-
able in future periods in respect of taxable temporary 
differences.
defined benefit plans  Retirement benefit plans under 
which amounts to be paid as retirement benefits are 
determined by reference to a formula usually based 
on employees’ earnings and/or years of service.
defined contribution plans  Retirement benefit plans un-
der which amounts to be paid as retirement benefits 
are determined by contributions to a fund together 
with investment earnings thereon.
depreciable amount  The cost of an asset, or other 
amount substituted for cost (in the financial state-
ments), less its residual value.
depreciation (amortization)  The systematic allocation of 
the depreciable amount of an asset over its useful life.
derecognition (of a financial instrument)  The removal of 
a previously recognized financial asset or financial lia-
bility from an entity’s statement of financial position.
payable wholly within 12 months after the end of the 
period, profit-sharing, bonuses and deferred compen-
sation; (d) termination benefits; and (e) share-based 
payment.
component of an entity  Operations and cash flows that 
can be clearly distinguished, operationally and for fi-
nancial reporting purposes, from the rest of the entity.
consolidated financial statements  The financial state-
ments of a group in which assets, liabilities, equity, 
income, expenses and cash flow of the parent and 
its subsidiaries are presented as those of a single eco-
nomic entity.
construction contract  A contract specifically negotiated 
for the construction of an asset or a combination of 
assets that are closely interrelated or interdependent 
in terms of their design, technology and function or 
their ultimate purpose or use.
constructive obligation  An obligation that derives 
from an entity’s actions where: (a) by an established 
pattern of past practice, published policies or a suf-
ficiently specific current statement, the entity has 
indicated to other parties that it will accept certain 
responsibilities; and (b) as a result, the entity has cre-
ated a valid expectation on the part of those other 
parties that it will discharge those responsibilities.
contingent asset  A possible asset that arises from past 
events and whose existence will be confirmed only 
by the occurrence or non-occurrence of one or more 
uncertain future events not wholly within the con-
trol of the entity.
contingent liability  (a) A possible obligation that arises 
from past events and whose existence will be con-
firmed only by the occurrence or non-occurrence of 
one or more uncertain future events not wholly within 
the control of the entity; or (b) a present obligation 
that arises from past events but is not recognized be-
cause: (i) it is not probable that an outflow of resources 
embodying economic benefits will be required to settle 
the obligation; or (ii) the amount of the obligation 
cannot be measured with sufficient reliability.
control of an investee  An investor controls an investee 
when the investor is exposed, or has rights, to vari-
able returns from its involvement with the investee 
and has the ability to affect those returns through its 
power over the investee.
cost  The amount of cash or cash equivalents paid or the 
fair value of the other consideration given to acquire 
an asset at the time of its acquisition or construction, 
or, when applicable, the amount attributed to that as-
set when initially recognized in accordance with the 
specific requirements of other IFRSs, e.g. IFRS 2.
costs of disposal  Incremental costs directly attributable 
to the disposal of an asset, excluding finance costs 
and income tax expense.
costs to sell  The incremental costs directly attributable 
to the disposal of an asset (or disposal group),  
excluding finance costs and income tax expense.

GLOSSARY
497
equity interests  In IFRS 3, is used broadly to mean own-
ership interests of investor-owned entities and owner, 
member or participant interests of mutual entities.
equity method  A method of accounting whereby the 
investment is initially recognized at cost and adjusted 
thereafter for the post-acquisition change in the 
investor’s share of the investee’s net assets. The inves-
tor’s profit or loss includes its share of the investee’s 
profit or loss and the investor’s other comprehensive 
income includes its share of the investee’s other 
­comprehensive income.
events after the reporting period  Those events, favour-
able and unfavourable, that occur between the end 
of the reporting period and the date when the finan-
cial statements are authorized for issue. Two types 
of events can be identified: (a) those that provide 
evidence of conditions that existed at the end of the 
reporting period (adjusting events after the reporting 
period); and (b) those that are indicative of conditions 
that arose after the reporting period (non-adjusting 
events after the reporting period).
exchange difference  The difference resulting from trans-
lating a given number of units of one currency into 
another currency at different exchange rates.
exchange rate  The ratio of exchange for two currencies.
exit price  The price that would be received to sell an as-
set or paid to transfer a liability.
expected cash flows  The probability-weighted average 
(i.e. mean of the distribution) of possible future cash 
flows.
expenses  Decreases in economic benefits during the 
accounting period in the form of outflows or deple-
tions of assets or incurrences of liabilities that result 
in decreases in equity, other than those relating to 
distributions to equity participants.
fair value  The price that would be received to sell an asset 
or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction 
between market participants at the measurement date.
fair value less costs to sell  The amount obtainable from 
the sale of an asset or cash-generating unit in an 
arm’s length transaction between knowledgeable, 
willing parties, less the costs of disposal.
finance lease  A lease that transfers substantially all the 
risks and rewards incidental to ownership of an asset. 
Title may or may not eventually be transferred.
financial asset  Any asset that is: (a) cash; (b) an equity in-
strument of another entity; (c) a contractual right:  
(i) to receive cash or another financial asset from 
another entity; or (ii) to exchange financial assets or 
financial liabilities with another entity under condi-
tions that are potentially favourable to the entity; 
or (d) a contract that will or may be settled in the 
entity’s own equity instruments and is: (i) a non-
derivative for which the entity is or may be obliged 
to receive a variable number of the entity’s own 
equity instruments; or (ii) a derivative that will or 
may be settled other than by the exchange of a fixed 
derivative  A financial instrument or other contract 
within the scope of IFRS 9 (see paragraphs 2.1) with 
all three of the following characteristics: (a) its value 
changes in response to the change in a specified 
interest rate, financial instrument price, commod-
ity price, foreign exchange rate, index of prices or 
rates, credit rating or credit index or other variable, 
provided in the case of a non-financial variable that 
the variable is not specific to a party to the contract 
(sometimes called the ‘underlying’); (b) it requires no 
initial net investment or an initial net investment 
that is smaller than would be required for other types 
of contracts that would be expected to have a similar 
response to changes in market factors; and (c) it is 
settled at a future date.
development  The application of research findings or 
other knowledge to a plan or design for the produc-
tion of new or substantially improved materials, de-
vices, products, processes, systems or services before 
the start of commercial production or use.
direct method of reporting cash flows from
	
operating activities  A method whereby major classes 
of gross cash receipts and gross cash payments are 
disclosed.
discontinued operation  A component of an entity that ei-
ther has been disposed of or is classified as held for sale 
and: (a) represents a separate major line of business or 
geographical area of operations, (b) is part of a single 
co-ordinated plan to dispose of a separate major line of 
business or geographical area of operations or (c) is a 
subsidiary acquired exclusively with a view to resale.
disposal group  A group of assets to be disposed of, by 
sale or otherwise, together as a group in a single trans-
action, and liabilities directly associated with those 
assets that will be transferred in the transaction. The 
group includes goodwill acquired in a business combi-
nation if the group is a cash-generating unit to which 
goodwill has been allocated in accordance with the 
requirements of paragraphs 80–87 of IAS 36 or if it is 
an operation within such a cash-generating unit.
economic life  Either: (a) the period over which an asset 
is expected to be economically usable by one or more 
users; or (b) the number of production or similar 
units expected to be obtained from the asset by one 
or more users.
employee benefits  All forms of consideration given by 
an entity in exchange for service rendered by em-
ployees or for the termination of employment.
entity-specific value  The present value of the cash flows 
an entity expects to arise from the continuing use of 
an asset and from its disposal at the end of its useful 
life or expects to incur when settling a liability.
entry price  The price paid to acquire an asset or received 
to assume a liability in an exchange transaction.
equity instrument  A contract that evidences a residual 
interest in the assets of an entity after deducting all 
of its liabilities.

GLOSSARY
498
amount of cash or another financial asset for a fixed 
number of the entity’s own equity instruments. For 
this purpose the entity’s own equity instruments do 
not include puttable financial instruments classified 
as equity instruments in accordance with paragraphs 
16A and 16B of IAS32, instruments that impose on 
the entity an obligation to deliver to another party a 
pro rata share of the net assets of the entity only on 
liquidation and are classified as equity instruments in 
accordance with paragraphs 16C and 16D of IAS32, or 
instruments that are contracts for the future receipt or 
delivery of the entity’s own equity instruments.
financial asset or liability held for trading  A financial as-
set or financial liability that: (a) is acquired or incurred 
principally for the purpose of selling or repurchasing 
it in the near term; (b) on initial recognition is part of 
a portfolio of identified financial instruments that are 
managed together and for which there is evidence of a 
recent actual pattern of short-term profit-taking; or  
(c) is a derivative (except for a derivative that is a 
financial guarantee contract or a designated and effec-
tive hedging instrument).
financial guarantee contract  A contract that requires the 
issuer to make specified payments to reimburse the 
holder for a loss it incurs because a specified debtor 
fails to make payment when due in accordance with 
the original or modified terms of a debt instrument.
financial instrument  Any contract that gives rise to a fi-
nancial asset of one entity and a financial liability or 
equity instrument of another entity.
financial liability  Any liability that is: (a) a contractual 
obligation: (i) to deliver cash or another financial 
asset to another entity; or (ii) to exchange financial 
assets or financial liabilities with another entity under 
conditions that are potentially unfavourable to the 
entity; or (b) a contract that will or may be settled in 
the entity’s own equity instruments and is: (i) a non-
derivative for which the entity is or may be obliged to 
deliver a variable number of the entity’s own equity 
instruments; or (ii) a derivative that will or may be 
settled other than by the exchange of a fixed amount 
of cash or another financial asset for a fixed number 
of the entity’s own equity instruments. For this pur-
pose rights, options or warrants to acquire a fixed 
number of the entity’s own equity instruments for a 
fixed amount of any currency are equity instruments 
if the entity offers the rights, options or warrants pro 
rata to all of its existing owners of the same class of 
its own non-derivative equity instruments. Also, for 
these purpost the entity’s own equity instruments 
do not include puttable financial instruments that 
are classified as equity instruments in accordance 
with paragraphs 16A and 16B of IAS 32, instruments 
that impose on the entity an obligation to deliver to 
another party a pro rata share of the net assets of the 
entity only on liquidation and are classified as equity 
instruments in accordance with paragraphs 16C and 
16D of IAS 32, or instruments that are contracts for 
the future receipt or delivery of the entity’s own eq-
uity instruments.
financial liability at fair value through profit or loss  A 
financial liability that meets either of the following 
conditions. (a) It meets the definition of held for trad-
ing. (b) Upon initial recognition it is designated by 
the entity as at fair value through profit or loss. An 
entity may use this designation only when permitted 
by IFRS 9 paragraph 4.3.5 (embedded derivatives) or 
when doing so results in more relevant information, 
because either (i) it eliminates or significantly reduces a 
measurement or recognition inconsistency (sometimes 
referred to as ‘an accounting mismatch’) that would 
otherwise arise from measuring assets or liabilities or 
recognizing the gains and losses on them on different 
bases; or (ii) a group of financial liabilities or financial 
assets and financial liabilities is managed and its perfor-
mance is evaluated on a fair value basis, in accordance 
with a documented risk management or investment 
strategy, and information about the group is provided 
internally on that basis to the entity’s key management 
personnel (as defined in IAS 24).
financial risk  The risk of a possible future change in one 
or more of a specified interest rate, financial instru-
ment price, commodity price, foreign exchange rate, 
index of prices or rates, credit rating or credit index or 
other variable, provided in the case of a non-financial 
variable that the variable is not specific to a party to 
the contract.
financing activities  Activities that result in changes in 
the size and composition of the contributed equity 
and borrowings of the entity.
firm commitment  A binding agreement for the ex-
change of a specified quantity of resources at a speci-
fied price on a specified future date or dates.
firm purchase commitment  An agreement with an unre-
lated party, binding on both parties and usually legally 
enforceable, that (a) specifies all significant terms, 
including the price and timing of the transactions, 
and (b) includes a disincentive for non-performance 
that is sufficiently large to make performance highly 
probable.
foreign currency  A currency other than the functional 
currency of the entity.
foreign currency transaction  A transaction that is denom-
inated in or requires settlement in a foreign currency.
foreign operation  An entity that is a subsidiary, associate, 
joint venture or branch of the reporting entity, the ac-
tivities of which are based or conducted in a country 
or currency other than those of the reporting entity.
functional currency  The currency of the primary eco-
nomic environment in which the entity operates.
funding (of retirement benefits)  The transfer of assets 
to an entity (the fund) separate from the employer’s 
entity to meet future obligations for the payment of 
retirement benefits.

GLOSSARY
499
hyperinflation  Loss of purchasing power of money at 
such a rate that comparison of amounts from transac-
tions and other events that have occurred at different 
times, even within the same accounting period, is 
misleading.
Hyperinflation is indicated by characteristics of 
the economic environment of a country which in-
clude, but are not limited to, the following:  
(a) the general population prefers to keep its wealth 
in non-monetary assets or in a relatively stable for-
eign currency. Amounts of local currency held are 
immediately invested to maintain purchasing power. 
(b) the general population regards monetary amounts 
not in terms of the local currency but in terms of 
a relatively stable foreign currency. Prices may be 
quoted in that currency. (c) sales and purchases on 
credit take place at prices that compensate for the 
expected loss of purchasing power during the credit 
period, even if the period is short. (d) interest rates, 
wages and prices are linked to a price index.  
(e) the cumulative inflation rate over three years is 
approaching, or exceeds, 100 per cent.
identifiable  An asset is identifiable if it either: (a) is sepa-
rable, i.e. capable of being separated or divided from 
the entity and sold, transferred, licensed, rented or 
exchanged, either individually or together with a re-
lated contract, identifiable asset or liability, regardless 
of whether the entity intends to do so; or (b) arises 
from contractual or other legal rights, regardless of 
whether those rights are transferable or separable 
from the entity or from other rights and obligations.
impairment loss  The amount by which the carrying 
amount of an asset exceeds its recoverable amount.
initial direct costs  Incremental costs that are directly 
attributable to negotiating and arranging a lease, 
except for such costs incurred by manufacturer or 
dealer lessors.
inputs  The assumptions that market participants would 
use when pricing the asset or liability, including as-
sumptions about risk, such as the following: (a) the 
risk inherent in a particular valuation technique used 
to measure fair value (such as pricing model); and (b) 
the risk inherent in the inputs to the valuation tech-
nique. Inputs may be observable or unobservable.
intangible asset  An identifiable non-monetary asset 
without physical substance.
interest in another entity  For the purpose of IFRS 12, 
an interest in another entity refers to contractual 
and non-contractual involvement that exposes an 
entity to variability of returns from the performance 
of the other entity. An interest in another entity can 
be evidenced by, but is not limited to, the holding of 
equity or debt instruments as well as other forms of 
involvement such as the provision of funding, liquid-
ity support, credit enhancement and guarantees. It 
includes the means by which an entity has control or 
joint control of, or significant influence over, another 
general purpose financial statements  Financial statements 
that are intended to meet the needs of users who are 
not in a position to require an entity to prepare reports 
tailored to their particular information needs.
goodwill  An asset representing the future economic ben-
efits arising from other assets acquired in a business 
combination that are not individually identified and 
separately recognized.
government  Government, government agencies and sim-
ilar bodies whether local, national or international.
government assistance  Action by government designed 
to provide an economic benefit specific to an entity 
or range of entities qualifying under certain criteria.
government grants  Assistance by government in the form 
of transfers of resources to an entity in return for past 
or future compliance with certain conditions relating 
to the operating activities of the entity. They exclude 
those forms of government assistance which cannot 
reasonably have a value placed upon them and transac-
tions with government which cannot be distinguished 
from the normal trading transactions of the entity.
grant date  The date at which the entity and another 
party (including an employee) agree to a share-based 
payment arrangement, being when the entity and 
the counterparty have a shared understanding of the 
terms and conditions of the arrangement. At grant 
date the entity confers on the counterparty the right 
to cash, other assets, or equity instruments of the en-
tity, provided the specified vesting conditions, if any, 
are met. If that agreement is subject to an approval 
process (for example, by shareholders), grant date is 
the date when that approval is obtained.
group  A parent and its subsidiaries.
harvest  The detachment of produce from a biologi-
cal asset or the cessation of a biological asset’s life 
processes.
hedged item  An asset, liability, firm commitment, 
highly probable forecast transaction or net invest-
ment in a foreign operation that (a) exposes the 
entity to risk of changes in fair value or future cash 
flows and (b) is designated as being hedged (IAS 39 
paragraphs 78–84 and AG98–AG101 elaborate on the 
definition of hedged items).
hedging instrument  A designated derivative or (for a 
hedge of the risk of changes in foreign currency ex-
change rates only) a designated non-derivative finan-
cial asset or non-derivative financial liability whose 
fair value or cash flows are expected to offset changes 
in the fair value or cash flows of a designated hedged 
item (IAS 39 paragraphs 72–77 and AG94–AG97 elab-
orate on the definition of a hedging instrument).
held for trading  See ‘financial asset or financial liability 
held for trading’.
highest and best use  The use of a non-financial asset by 
market participants that would maximize the value 
of the asset or the group of assets and liabilities (e.g. a 
business) within which the asset would be used.

GLOSSARY
500
joint operation  A joint arrangement whereby the par-
ties that have joint control of the arrangement have 
rights to the assets, and obligations for the liabilities, 
relating to the arrangement.
joint operator  A party to a joint operation that has joint 
control of that joint operation.
joint venture  A joint arrangement whereby the par-
ties that have joint control of the arrangement have 
rights to the net assets off the arrangement.
joint venturer  A party to a joint venture that has joint 
control of the joint venture.
key management personnel  Those persons having au-
thority and responsibility for planning, directing and 
controlling the activities of the entity, directly or in-
directly, including any director (whether executive or 
otherwise) of that entity.
lease  An agreement whereby the lessor conveys to the 
lessee in return for a payment or series of payments 
the right to use an asset for an agreed period of time.
lease term  The non-cancellable period for which the les-
see has contracted to lease the asset together with any 
further terms for which the lessee has the option to 
continue to lease the asset, with or without further 
payment, when at the inception of the lease it is rea-
sonably certain that the lessee will exercise the option.
legal obligation  An obligation that derives from: (a) a 
contract (through its explicit or implicit terms); (b) 
legislation; or (c) other operation of law.
lessee’s incremental borrowing rate of interest  The rate 
of interest the lessee would have to pay on a similar 
lease or, if that is not determinable, the rate that, at 
the inception of the lease, the lessee would incur to 
borrow over a similar term, and with a similar secu-
rity, the funds necessary to purchase the asset.
level 1 inputs  Quoted prices (unadjusted) in active mar-
kets for identical assets or liabilities that the entity 
can access at the measurement date.
level 2 inputs  Inputs other than quoted prices included 
within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or li-
ability, either directly or indirectly.
level 3 inputs  Unobservable inputs for the asset or 
liability.
liability  A present obligation of the entity arising from 
past events, the settlement of which is expected to 
result in an outflow from the entity of resources em-
bodying economic benefits.
liquidity risk  The risk that an entity will encounter diffi-
culty in meeting obligations associated with financial 
liabilities that are settled by delivering cash or an-
other financial asset.
losses  Decreases in economic benefits and as such no 
different in nature from other expenses.
market-corroborated inputs  Inputs that are derived prin-
cipally from or corroborated by observable market 
data by correlation or other means.
material  Omissions or misstatements of items are 
material if they could, individually or collectively, 
entity. An entity does not necessarily have an interest 
in another entity solely because of a typical customer 
supplier relationship. Paragraphs B7–B9 of IFRS 12 
provide further information about interests in other 
entities. Paragraphs B55–B57 of IFRS 10 explain vari-
ability of returns.
interest rate implicit in the lease  The discount rate that, 
at the inception of the lease, causes the aggregate pres-
ent value of (a) the minimum lease payments and (b) 
the unguaranteed residual value to be equal to the 
sum of (i) the fair value of the leased asset and (ii) any 
initial direct costs of the lessor.
interest rate risk  The risk that the fair value or future 
cash flows of a financial instrument will fluctuate be-
cause of changes in market interest rates.
interim financial report  A financial report containing 
either a complete set of financial statements (as de-
scribed in IAS 1) or a set of condensed financial state-
ments (as described in IAS 34) for an interim period.
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRSs)   
Standards and Interpretations issued by the Interna-
tional Accounting Standards Board (IASB). They com-
prise: (a) International Financial Reporting Standards; 
(b) International Accounting Standards; (c) IFRIC 
Interpretations; and (d) SIC Interpretations.
inventories  Assets: (a) held for sale in the ordinary 
course of business; (b) in the process of production 
for such sale; or (c) in the form of materials or sup-
plies to be consumed in the production process or in 
the rendering of services.
Inventories encompass goods purchased and 
held for resale including, for example, merchandise 
purchased by a retailer and held for resale, or land 
and other property held for resale. Inventories also 
encompass finished goods produced, or work in 
progress being produced, by the entity and include 
materials and supplies awaiting use in the production 
process. In the case of a service provider, inventories 
include the costs of the service, as described in IAS 2 
paragraph 19, for which the entity has not yet recog-
nized the related revenue (see IAS 18).
investing activities  The acquisition and disposal of long-
term assets and other investments not included in 
cash equivalents.
investment property  Property (land or a building or part 
of a building or both) held (by the owner or by the 
lessee under a finance lease) to earn rentals or for cap-
ital appreciation or both, rather than for: (a) use in 
the production or supply of goods or services or for 
administrative purposes; or (b) sale in the ordinary 
course of business.
joint arrangement  An arrangement of which two or 
more parties have joint control.
joint control  The contractually agreed sharing of control 
over an arrangement which exists only when deci-
sions about the relevant activities require the unani-
mous consent of the parties sharing control.

GLOSSARY
501
offsetting  See ‘set-off, legal right of’.
onerous contract  A contract in which the unavoidable 
costs of meeting the obligations under the contract 
exceed the economic benefits expected to be received 
under it.
operating activities  The principal revenue-producing 
activities of an entity and other activities that are not 
investing or financing activities.
operating lease  A lease other than a finance lease.
operating segment  An operating segment is a compo-
nent of an entity: (a) that engages in business ac-
tivities from which it may earn revenues and incur 
expenses (including revenues and expenses relating 
to transactions with other components of the same 
entity), (b) whose operating results are regularly re-
viewed by the entity’s chief operating decision maker 
to make decisions about resources to be allocated to 
the segment and assess its performance, and (c) for 
which discrete financial information is available.
options, warrants and their equivalents  Financial in-
struments that give the holder the right to purchase 
ordinary shares.
ordinary equity holders  Holders of ordinary shares.
ordinary share  An equity instrument that is subordinate 
to all other classes of equity instruments.
other comprehensive income  Items of income and ex-
pense (including reclassification adjustments) that are 
not recognized in profit or loss as required or permit-
ted by other IFRSs.
owners  Holders of instruments classified as equity.
parent  An entity that controls one or more entities.
party to a joint arrangement  An entity that participates 
in a joint arrangement, regardless of whether that en-
tity has joint control of the arrangement.
past service cost  The change in the present value of 
the defined benefit obligation for employee service 
in prior periods, resulting from a plan amendment 
(the introduction or withdrawal of, or change to, a 
defined benefit plan) or a curtailment (a significant 
reduction by the entity in the number of employees 
covered by a plan).
plan assets (of an employee benefit plan)  (a) Assets held 
by a long-term employee benefit fund; and (b) quali-
fying insurance policies.
post-employment benefits  Employee benefits (other 
than termination benefits and short-term employee 
benefits) that are payable after the completion of 
employment.
potential ordinary share  A financial instrument or 
other contract that may entitle its holder to ordinary 
shares.
power  Existing rights that give the current ability to di-
rect the relevant activities.
presentation currency  The currency in which the finan-
cial statements are presented.
present value of a defined benefit obligation  The present 
value, without deducting any plan assets, of expected 
influence­ the economic decisions that users make on 
the basis of the financial statements. Materiality de-
pends on the size and nature of the omission or mis-
statement judged in the surrounding circumstances. 
The size or nature of the item, or a combination of 
both, could be the determining factor.
measurement  The process of determining the monetary 
amounts at which the elements of the financial state-
ments are to be recognized and carried in the balance 
sheet [statement of financial position] and income 
statement [statement of comprehensive income].
minority interest  See ‘non-controlling interest’.
monetary assets  Money held and assets to be received in 
fixed or determinable amounts of money.
monetary items  Units of currency held and assets and li-
abilities to be received or paid in a fixed or determin-
able number of units of currency.
net investment in a foreign operation  The amount of 
the reporting entity’s interest in the net assets of that 
operation.
net realizable value  The estimated selling price in the 
ordinary course of business less the estimated costs 
of completion and the estimated costs necessary to 
make the sale.
Net realizable value refers to the net amount that 
an entity expects to realize from the sale of inventory 
in the ordinary course of business. Fair value reflects 
the amount for which the same inventory could be 
exchanged between knowledgeable and willing buyers 
and sellers in the marketplace. The former is an entity-
specific value; the latter is not. Net realizable value for 
inventories may not equal fair value less costs to sell.
non-adjusting events after the reporting period  See 
‘events after the reporting period’.
non-cancellable lease  A lease that is cancellable only:  
(a) upon the occurrence of some remote contingency; 
(b) with the permission of the lessor; (c) if the lessee 
enters into a new lease for the same or an equiva-
lent asset with the same lessor; or (d) upon payment 
by the lessee of such an additional amount that, at 
inception of the lease, continuation of the lease is 
reasonably certain.
non-controlling interest  The equity in a subsidiary not 
attributable, directly or indirectly, to a parent.
non-current asset  An asset that does not meet the defini-
tion of a current asset.
notes  Notes contain information in addition to that 
presented in the statement of financial position, state-
ment of comprehensive income, separate income 
statement (if presented), statement of changes in eq-
uity and statement of cash flows. Notes provide narra-
tive descriptions or disaggregations of items presented 
in those statements and information about items that 
do not qualify for recognition in those statements.
obligating event  An event that creates a legal or con-
structive obligation that results in an entity having 
no realistic alternative to settling that obligation.

GLOSSARY
502
reportable segment  An operating segment for which 
IFRS 8 requires information to be disclosed.
research  Original and planned investigation undertaken 
with the prospect of gaining new scientific or techni-
cal knowledge and understanding.
residual value (of an asset)  The estimated amount that 
an entity would currently obtain from disposal of an 
asset, after deducting the estimated costs of disposal, 
if the asset were already of the age and in the condi-
tion expected at the end of its useful life.
restructuring  A programme that is planned and con-
trolled by management, and materially changes either: 
(a) the scope of a business undertaken by an entity; or 
(b) the manner in which that business is conducted.
retirement benefit plans  Arrangements whereby an en-
tity provides benefits for its employees on or after ter-
mination of service (either in the form of an annual 
income or as a lump sum) when such benefits, or the 
employer’s contributions towards them, can be de-
termined or estimated in advance of retirement from 
the provisions of a document or from the entity’s 
practices. (See also ‘post-employment benefit plans’.)
return on plan assets (of an employee benefit plan)  In-
terest, dividends and other revenue derived from the 
plan assets, together with realized and unrealized 
gains or losses on the plan assets, less (a) any cost of 
managing plan assets; and (b) any tax payable by the 
plan itself, other than tax included in the actuarial 
assumptions used to measure the present value of the 
defined benefit obligation.
revenue  The gross inflow of economic benefits dur-
ing the period arising in the course of the ordinary 
activities of an entity when those inflows result in 
increases in equity, other than increases relating to 
contributions from equity participants.
separate financial statements  Those presented by a par-
ent (i.e. an investor with control of a subsidiary) or 
an investor with joint control of, or significant influ-
ence over, an investee,, in which the investments are 
accounted for at cost or in accordance with IFRS 9.
separate vehicle  A separately identifiable financial struc-
ture, including separate legal entities or entities rec-
ognized by statue, regardless of whether those entities 
have a legal personality.
share-based payment arrangement  An agreement be-
tween the entity or another group entity or any 
shareholder of the group entity and another party 
(including an employee) that entitles the other party 
to receive (a) cash or other assets of the entity for 
amounts that are based on the price (or value) of eq-
uity instruments (including shares or share options) 
of the entity or another group entity, or (b) equity 
instruments (including shares or share options) of the 
entity or another group entity, provided the specified 
vesting conditions, if any, are met.
share-based payment transaction  A transaction in which 
the entity (a) receives goods or services from the 
future payments required to settle the obligation 
resulting from employee service in the current and 
prior periods.
probable  More likely than not.
profit or loss  The total of income less expenses, exclud-
ing the components of other comprehensive income.
property, plant and equipment  Tangible items that:  
(a) are held for use in the production or supply of 
goods or services, for rental to others, or for adminis-
trative purposes; and (b) are expected to be used dur-
ing more than one period.
protective rights  Rights designed to protect the interest of 
the party holding those rights without giving that party 
power over the entity to which those rights relate.
provision  A liability of uncertain timing or amount.
realizable value  The amount of cash or cash equivalents 
that could currently be obtained by selling an asset in 
an orderly disposal.
reclassification adjustments  Amounts reclassified to 
profit or loss in the current period that were recog-
nized in other comprehensive income in the current 
or previous periods.
recoverable amount  The higher of an asset’s (or cash-
generating unit’s) fair value less costs to sell and its 
value in use.
related party  A person or entity that is related to the en-
tity that is preparing its financial statements (in IAS 
24 referred to as the ‘reporting entity’). (a) A person or 
a close member of that person’s family is related to a 
reporting entity if that person (i) has control or joint 
control over the reporting entity; (ii) has significant 
influence over the reporting entity; or (iii) is a member 
of the key management personnel of the reporting en-
tity or of a parent of the reporting entity. (b) An entity 
is related to a reporting entity if any of the following 
condition applies: (i) The entity and the reporting 
entity are members of the same group (which means 
that each parent, subsidiary and fellow subsidiary is 
related to the others). (ii) One entity is an associate 
or joint venture of the other entity (or an associate 
or joint venture of a member of a group of which the 
other entity is a member). (iii) Both entities are joint 
ventures of the same third party. (iv) One entity is a 
joint venture of a third entity and the other entity is 
an associate of the third entity. (v) The entity is a post-
employment benefit plan for the benefit of employees 
of either the reporting entity or an entity related to the 
reporting entity. If the reporting entity is itself such a 
plan, the sponsoring employers are also related to the 
reporting entity. (vi) The entity is controlled or jointly 
controlled by a person identified in (a). (vii) A person 
identified in (a)(i) has significant influence over the 
entity or is a member of the key management person-
nel of the entity (or of a parent of the entity).
relevant activities  For the purpose of IFRS 10, relevant 
activities are activities of the investee that signifi-
cantly affect the investee’s returns.

GLOSSARY
503
taxable profit (tax loss)  The profit (loss) for a period, 
determined in accordance with the rules established 
by the taxation authorities, upon which income taxes 
are payable (recoverable).
taxable temporary differences  Temporary differences 
that will result in taxable amounts in determining 
taxable profit (tax loss) of future periods when the 
carrying amount of the asset or liability is recovered 
or settled.
temporary differences  Differences between the carrying 
amount of an asset or liability in the statement of 
financial position and its tax base. Temporary dif-
ferences may be either: (a) taxable temporary differ-
ences; or (b) deductible temporary differences.
total comprehensive income  The change in equity dur-
ing a period resulting from transactions and other 
events, other than those changes resulting from 
transactions with owners in their capacity as owners.
useful life  Either: (a) the period over which an asset is 
expected to be available for use by an entity; or  
(b) the number of production or similar units ex-
pected to be obtained from the asset by the entity.
value in use  The present value of estimated future cash 
flows expected to arise from the continuing use of an 
asset and from its disposal at the end of its useful life.
warrant  A financial instrument that gives the holder the 
right to purchase ordinary shares.
Source: Glossary of Terms, IASB 
Copyright © 2012 International Accounting 
Standards Committee Foundation. All rights reserved. 
No permission granted to reproduce or distribute.
supplier of those goods or services (including an em-
ployee) in a share-based payment arrangement, or (b) 
incurs an obligation to settle the transaction with the 
supplier in a share-based payment arrangement when 
another group entity receives those goods or services.
share option  A contract that gives the holder the right, 
but not the obligation, to subscribe to the entity’s 
shares at a fixed or determinable price for a specific 
period of time.
significant influence  The power to participate in the fi-
nancial and operating policy decisions of an investee 
but is not control or joint control of those policies.
spot exchange rate  The exchange rate for immediate 
delivery.
structured entity  An entity that has been designed so 
that voting or similar rights are not the dominant 
factor in deciding who controls the entity, such as 
when any voting rights relate to administrative tasks 
only and the relevant activities are directed by means 
of contractual arrangements. Paragraphs B22–B24 of 
IFRS 12 provide further information about structured 
entities.
subsidiary  An entity that is controlled by another entity.
tax base of an asset or liability  The amount attributed to 
that asset or liability for tax purposes.
tax expense (tax income)  The aggregate amount in-
cluded in the determination of profit or loss for the 
period in respect of current tax and deferred tax. Tax 
expense (tax income) comprises current tax expense 
(current tax income) and deferred tax expense (de-
ferred tax income).

504
accountants 54
accounting
choices 10–14
database 34
policies 5
profession 52–4
profit 114
summary 55
accounting function
internal accounting manual 31
main transaction categories 32–4
national rules 31
objectives 30–1
accounting measurement 70–1
accrual basis 74–5
consistency 73–4
GAAP 71–3
going concern 76
prudence 75–6
accounting regulation 14–15
government 16
international 17–18
private sector 16–17
public sector 19–20
types of regulation 15–16
Accounting Regulatory Committee 
(ARC) 25
accounts payable ledger 103
accounts receivable ledger 104
accruals basis of accounting 74–5, 
99–101
accrued audit expense 202
electricity accrual 201–2
telephone accrual 201
working capital cycle 118–19
accrued expenses 166–8
accrued revenues 170–2
acid test ratio 249
acquiree 310
acquirer 310
acquisition cost 136
acquisition method 316–21
consolidation difference at acquisi-
tion date 316–18
recognition/fair value adjustments 
of acquired assets/liabilities 
319–21
acquisitions 308–9
statement of changes in equity 295–6
statement of comprehensive in-
come 295
statement of financial position 295
summary 305
summary of significant accounting 
policies 296
ARC see Accounting Regulatory 
Committee
asset-liability approach 89
asset/s 89, 91–2, 132–3
definition/recognition 133
disposal of long-term 279–80
impairment 178–84
individual vs cash-generating units 
180, 182–3
recognition/fair value adjustment 
of acquired 319–20
summary 160
associated company 159, 329–34
audit
accrued audit expense 202
external 46, 48–9
IIA standards 47
internal 44–6
international issues 438–9
report 5
statutory 437–8
audit committee 445, 447
Nokia example 445–6
auditor 53–4
independence 439–41
report 296
Austrian Airlines, impairment of air-
craft 186
bad debts 185–7
balance sheet 4, 262
company worth 60
deferred taxes 421–3
equation 80–2
horizontal 67–8
structure of statement 68–70
values 382–3
vertical 68–9
Bayer
impairment indicators 179
notes to the accounts 393–5
active market 179
actuarial assumptions 396
adjusting events 402
adjustments 198–208
accrued audit expense 202
depreciation 202–3
electricity accrual 201–2
fair value of acquired assets/liabili-
ties 319–20
insurance prepayment 201
inventory goods 198
provision for litigation costs 202
rent prepayment 201
telephone accrual 201
AGFA, intangible assets 156
AGFA-Gevaert 371
agricultural produce 109
amortization 137, 321–2
analysis
cross-sectional 235–6, 250–1
financial statements 250–4
objectives 464–6
professional analysts 457–60
purpose of 232–4
summary 254
time series 235
tools of 236–40
traditional 234–6
analytical techniques
common accounting base 463–4
common size 464
EBITDA 464
Anglo-Saxon accounting 6–8
Anglogold Ashanti 361, 372
annual financial statements 4–6
audit report 5
balance sheet 4
notes to the accounts 4–5
profit or loss 4
statement of cash flows 5
statement of changes in equity 5
annual report 294–7
analyzing 304
auditor’s report 296
corporate publicity material 294
management report 294–5
notes to accounts 296
statement of cash flow 296
I N D E X

index
505
cost of goods sold 109–11
cost of inventories 115
cost method 330–1
costs 4
costs of conversion 115
costs of purchase 115
costs to self 179
credit given 249
credit transactions 86–8, 101–5
purchases 102–3
sales 103–5
creditor 103
definition 104
other 104
trade 104
creditors’ ledger 103
critical accounting judgements/esti-
mates 461–2
Cromme Report (Germany) 430
cross-sectional analysis 235–6
currency hedge 367–8
currency rates 221
currency risk 367
current asset 75
current liabilities 82
current rate method 374
current rate ratio 249
database, accounting 34
debt 81
bad and doubtful 185–7
finance 229
pay off (or retire) 267
debt/equity ratio 247–8
debtors’ ledger 104
decommissioning liabilities 406–8
deductible temporary differences 422
default risk 234
deferred expenses 168–9
deferred revenues 169–70
deferred tax
balance sheet perspective 421–3
presentation in financial 
statements 424
statement of profit or loss 416–20
defined benefit liability 395–6
defined benefit obligation 396
defined contribution 395
Deloitte 48
depreciable amount 137
depreciation 137–8, 2023
accounting for 144–9
components approach 144
diminishing balance method 
139–40
excess as hidden reserve 144
straight-line 139
tax 140–3
units of production method 143
nature of activity 63
ownership 61
size 63–4
value 60
company accountant 54
company size
large company 63, 64
micro-entity 63, 64
small company 63, 64
compensation 217
components approach (depreciation) 144
comprehensive income, statement of 
295, 298–303
Confederation of Asian and Pacific Ac-
countants (CAPA) 54
conglomerate 307
consistency in measurement 73–4
consolidated financial statements 4
acquisition method 316–21
basics 314–16
control as basis for 313–14
rationale 311–13
summary 336
consolidated statement of profit or loss 
325–9
construction contracts 109
constructive obligation 92
Continental Europe 8
contingent assets 401
contingent liability 175
continuous inventory 115–16
contract 45
executory 384–5
onerous 384
control 92
internal system 38–44
control activities
corrective 42
detective 41–2
policy component 41
preventive 41, 42, 43
procedure component 41
convertibles 191–2
corporate governance 51–2, 430–7
chairman of the board 436
chief executive officer 436
definition 431
independent directors 434–6
institutional shareholders 436–7
national rules 430
regimes 431–2
reporting on internal control 
432, 434
summary 447
corporate report 294–7
corridor 396, 398
COSO (Committee of Sponsoring Orga-
nizations of the Treadway Com-
mission) 39, 40–1, 432, 441–2
BC36 Global financial reporting stan-
dards 62
Bekaert, finance leases 160
biological assets 109
bonds 221
brand names 152–4
business 3
Cadbury Report (UK, 1992) 430
CAPA see Confederation of Asian and 
Pacific Accountants
capital 5
capital employed 243
capital intensity ratio 245
capital structure 190–1
Cardon Report (Belgium) 430
carrying amounts 77
carrying value 140
cash 5
cash equivalents 256
cash flows 5, 252
constructing statement of 277–9, 
281–4
cycles 263–4
direct method for reporting operat-
ing cash flows 274–5
disposal of long-term assets 279–80
forecast 475
format/structure of statement 
264–6
interpretation 284–6
investing/financing activities 256–9
operating activities 270–4
presentation differences 286–7
statement 296
summary 287
usefulness 252–3
cash-equivalent 77
cash-generating units (CGUs) 180, 
182–3
goodwill and 322–3
identification in retail store 
chain 183
identification in single product 
company 184
CGUs see cash-generating units
chairman of the board 436
chart of accounts 36
chief executive officer (CEO) 436
China Shoto, allowance for doubtful 
trade receivables 188
closing rate 360, 374
common accounting base 463–4
common size 464
common-size financial statements 
236–8
company
legal form 63
managerial objectives 61–2

index
506
functional currency 356–7, 358–9, 
370–2
summary 374
future earnings 60
future economic benefits 91
GAAP see US Generally Accepted Ac-
counting Principles
gains 84
vs revenue 107–8
general ledger 36
organization of data within 36–7
going concern 76
goodwill 151, 321–3
amortization approach 321–2
core 321
impairment approach 322–3
non-controlling interest approach 
324–5
purchased 154–5
governance see corporate governance
government 4
regulation 16
grant date 488
gross profit 123–6
group 5
group accounts (or group financial 
statements) 307
harvest 109
hedging 222–3, 256
foreign currency transactions 361
instrument 391
net investment in foreign operation 
373–4
held for trading 159
hidden reserves 187–92
capital structure 190–1
components of equity 191
convertibles 191–2
excess depreciation as 144
preference chares 191
Higgs Report (UK, 2003) 430
historical cost 76, 77, 381
horizontal group 307
IAS 1 Presentation of Financial State-
ments 72, 74, 76, 295, 300–3, 
461–2
IAS 2 Inventories 109, 115
IAS 7 Statement of Cash Flows 265–6, 
268, 275, 276, 286, 464
IAS 10 Events after the Reporting 
Event 402
IAS 12 Income Taxes 421–3
IAS 16 Property 133, 136, 137–8, 144, 
155–6, 157, 188
IAS 17 Leases 158
IAS 18 Revenue 106
fair value 78, 319–20, 388
measurement 385
Fédération des Experts Comptables Eu-
ropéens (European Accountants 
Federation) 54
FIFO (First In First Out) 116, 122–3
finance lease 92
finance, sources of see sources of 
finance
financial assets 78
financial instruments 15, 389–92
asset or liability at fair value 
through profit or loss 391
available-for-sale assets 391
held-to-maturity investments 391
loans and receivables 391
financial leverage ratio 469–70
financial liability 316
financial position 67
constructing 82–6
statement 295
financial ratios 238–40
net profit margin ratio 238–9
financial risk 217
financial statements 3
analyzing 250–4
asset-liability approach 89
basic 59
company characteristics 60–4
company reports 295–6
construction 197–205
content 64–70
elements 89–93
interpretation 217–18, 252–4
presentation of deferred taxes 424
summary 94, 209
uses 6–9, 208–9
financial strength ratios 247–50
acid test (or quick ratio) 249
current ratio 249
debt/equity 247–8
interest cover 248
solvency 247
financial structure 218–20
financing activities 255
firm commitment 177
forecast cash flows 475
foreign currency 25
hedging 361
primary translation 358–61
secondary translation 362–70
transactions 356–9
foreign exchange rates 373
foreign operations 356–9
functional currency and 370–2
hedging a net investment  
373–4
types 362–4
full goodwill 324–5
deprival value 381–2
derecognized 330
derivatives 15
development 149
diluted earnings per share 244
diminishing balance 139–40
direct method 274–6
directors, independent 434–6
disclosure 66, 90, 409
environmental 404–6
requirements 335–6
discontinued operations 403–4
discount rate 475
disposal group 404
disposal of long-term assets 279–80
dividend 5, 206, 230
policy 223–4
dividend yield ratio 245
doubtful debts 185–7
earnings fluctuation 453–7
income smoothing 457
manipulation of profits 454–7
earnings per share (EPS) 245–6, 246
EBITDA 464
economic life 152
EFRAG see European Financial Report-
ing Advisory Group
electricity accrual 201–2
enterprise risk management 441–2
entry value 380
environmental disclosures 404–8
equity 5, 70, 81, 89, 93
components 191
instruments 244
method 331
statement of changes 295–6
Ernst & Young 48
ESMA see European Securities and mar-
kets Authority
European Commission (EC) 25,  
486–7
European Directives 330, 393
European Financial Reporting Advisory 
Group (EFRAG) 25
European Securities and markets Au-
thority (ESMA) 16
events after the reporting period 402
exchange differences 360
exchange rate 114, 359, 373
executory contracts 384–5, 400
exit value 380
expenses 9, 89, 93
accrued 166–7
by function 65
by nature 65
deferred 168–9
extended trial balance 198–200
external audit 46, 48–9

index
507
calculation of value 111–13
continuous 115–16
finished goods 226
impacted on gross profit 123–6
LIFO/FIFO 120–3
raw materials 226
summary 120
weighted average 123
inventory of goods 200
inventory turnover ratio 246
investing activities 255
investment property 392–3
investments 159
investor relations 451–2
investors in a joint venture 333
IPSASB see International Public 
­Sector Accounting Standards 
Board
ISAR see Intergovernmental Working 
Group of Experts on Interna-
tional Standards of Accounting 
and Reporting
Jaguar Land Rover 308–9
joint operators 334–5
joint ventures 30, 335
key management personnel 44
KPMG 48
land and buildings 156–7
leased assets 158–9
leasing 221
legal obligation 7
liabilities 89, 92–3
clear liability 401
decommissioning 406–8
possible but unlikely 401
possible liability 401
recognition/fair value adjustment 
of acquired 319–20
LIFO (Las In First Out) 116, 120–2
limited liability companies 63
linkage 314
liquidity 227, 247
litigation costs 202
loans 221
long-term asset turnover 245
long-term assets 132
disposal or retirement 149, 279–80
impairment 179
losses 78
Lufthansa 141, 443–4
management manipulation of profit 
454–7
management performance ratios 241–7
asset utilization ratios 241
capital intensity ratio 245
intangible assets 68, 149–55
brand names 152–4
definition 151
patents 154
purchased goodwill 154–5
R&D 151–2
intellectual capital 155, 408, 409
interest cover 234
interest cover ratio 248
interest rate risk 256
interest rates 221
Intergovernmental Working Group of 
Experts on International Stan-
dards of Accounting and Report-
ing (ISAR) 18–19
interim reports 19
internal audit 44–6
definition 46
internal control 38–44, 441–2
activities 40
definition 39
environment 40
information and communication 40
monitoring 41
risk assessment 40
system components 39–44
International Accounting Standards 
Board (IASB) 6, 17, 18–19, 66
2007 financial crisis 489–90
conceptual framework 11–12, 20–2, 
89–91, 100
first decade 487–9
mixed-attribute model 388–9
next five years 490–1
standard-setting due process 24–5
strategic evolution 485–7
structure 22–4
summary 491
International Accounting Standards 
(IAS) 18, 26–7
International Federation of Accoun-
tants (IFAC) 19, 54
International Financial Reporting 
­Interpretations Committee 
­(IFRIC) 18
International Financial Reporting Stan-
dards (IFRS) 15, 20–7
in Europe 25–7
for SMEs 62
worldwide 27
International Organization of Securities 
Commissions (IOSCO) 485, 486
International Public Sector Accounting 
Standards Board (IPSASB) 19–20
international regulation 17–19
international taxation see taxation
inventories 4, 109–15
accounting assumptions 116–17
accounting techniques 115–17
IAS 19 Employee Benefits 295–6
IAS 21 Effects of Changes in Foreign 
­Exchange Rates 356, 360, 
370, 373
IAS 36 Impairment of Assets 179, 180, 
183, 388
IAS 37 Provisions, Contingent Liabilities 
and Contingent Assets 174–6, 
188, 384, 389, 399–401
IAS 38 Intangible Assets 150, 152
IAS 39 Financial Instruments: Recogni-
tion and Measurement 330, 384, 
390–1
IAS 40 Investment Property 392–3
IAS 41 Agriculture 385, 393
IAS see International Accounting 
Standards
IASB see International Accounting 
Standards Board
IFAC see International Federation of 
Accountants
IFRIC see International Financial 
Reporting Interpretations 
Committee
IFRS 1 First-time Adoption of IFRS 488
IFRS 3 Business Combinations 183, 316, 
317, 318, 388
IFRS 5 Non-Current Assets Held for Sale 
and Discontinued Operations 
403–4
IFRS 7 Financial Instruments: Disclosures 
390, 393
IFRS 8 Operating Segments 348, 351, 
353–5
IFRS 10 Consolidated Financial State-
ments 313, 316, 362
IFRS 11 Joint Arrangements 334–5
IFRS 12 Disclosure of Interests in Other 
Entities 335–6
IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement 78, 
385–6
IFRS see International Financial Report-
ing Standards
impairment
annual test requirements 183
goodwill approach 322–3
losses 178, 184, 198
rules 182
income 14, 89, 93
income smoothing 452–3, 457
independent accountants 54
independent auditor 53–4
indirect method 270, 276
individual assets vs cash-generating 
units 180, 182–3
initial measurement 381
innovation 387–8
Institute of Internal Auditors 47
insurance prepayment 201

index
508
portfolio 307
possible obligation 176
post reporting period events 401–2
potential ordinary shares 244
power 313–14
precollected (or unearned) revenue 169
preference shares 191
present obligation 92, 176
present value 77, 474
present value of its defined benefit 
obligations defined contribu-
tion 395
presentation currency 345
price/earnings (P/E ratio) 244–5,  
452–3
PriceWaterhouseCoopers (PwC) 48
primary translation 357
translating foreign currency trans-
actions in functional currency 
359–61
principal market 386–7
private sector, regulation 16–17
probable 75
production cycle 227
professional analysts 457–60
profit 4
as estimate 11
manipulation 454–7
measurement 109–15
profit or loss 4, 262
consolidated statement of 325–9
deferred taxes 416–20
preparation 197–205
structure of statement 65–7
values 382
property, plant, equipment 91
proprietary approach 69
provisions 68, 172–8, 399–401
decision tree 175
prudence 75–6
PSA Peugeot Citroën 347–8
publicity document 294, 297–8
purchases 33
purchases on credit 102–3
qualitative characteristics 12
fundamental vs enhancing charac-
teristics 12–14
quality of earnings 244, 460–2
critical accounting judgements/esti-
mates 461–2
quick ratio 249
ratios see financial ratios; financial 
strength ratios; management 
performance ratios; strategic 
ratio analysis
receivable turnover ratio 246–7
receivables 227
Nokia
audit committee 445–6
income taxes disclosures 420–1
inventories 119
revenue recognition 107–8
non-adjusting events after the report-
ing period 402
non-cancellable operating lease 400
non-cash profit or loss items 271–2
non-controlling interest 324–5
full goodwill method 324–5
partial goodwill method 324
non-current assets 68
expensing 136–44
general valuation principles 133–6
specific valuation principles 149
non-operating items 274
notes to accounts 4–5
Novartis 176
obligating event 92
obligation 74, 92–3
possible 176
present 176
OFR see Operating and Financial 
Review
onerous contract 384
operating activities 265, 270–4
operating cycle 118
Operating and Financial Review 
(OFR) 294
operating leases 158
operating segments 345, 348–51
operational gearing 471–3
ordinary shares 191
Organization for Economic Co-opera-
tion and Development (OECD) 
430–1
Other Comprehensive Income 296
owners 11
partial goodwill 324
past transactions or events 91
patents 154
pay off (or retire) debt 267
payables 103, 227
payments, frequency of 228
payroll 33
pension obligations 395–9
percentage of completion method 107
performance 4
measurement 228–9, 230
period costs 108–9
Peters Report (Netherlands) 430
Philips
contingent liabilities 177
income taxes disclosure 417–18
plan assets 395
plant and equipment 157–8
earnings per share (EPS) 243–4
gross operating margin 242
inventory turnover 246
long-term asset turnover 245
net profit margin 241
price/earnings (P/E ratio) 244–5
profitability ratios 241
receivable turnover 246–7
return on assets (ROA) 242
return on capital employed 
(ROCE) 242
return on equity (ROE) 242
return on investment (ROI) 242
return on sales 241
total asset turnover 245
yield ratio 245
management report 294–5
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 
(MD&A) 294
manufacturing accounts 124–6
matching 75
material 41
maturity mix 221
MD&A see Management’s Discussion 
and Analysis
measurement 8–9, 90
conventional bases 76–80
measurement attributes 383–8
continuing debate on innovation 
387–8
executory contracts 384–5
expanding boundaries of account-
ing model 383–4
fair value 385
measurement hierarchy 385–7
Microsoft 171
minority interest 324–5
mixed-attribute model 388–9
monetary assets 249
monetary items 360
monetary measurement unit 78–80
multinational corporations (MNCs)
annual reports 292–4
organization and development 
307–11
Nestlé Group 10
company report 50–1
creating shared value Kepy Perfor-
mance Indicators 405
events after balance sheet date 403
operating segments 350
reconciliation details of property, 
plant, equipment 146–7
net book value 140
net investment method 368–70, 374
net profit margin 241
net realizable value 114, 117–18
net working capital 225

index
509
tax depreciation 140–3
tax expense 205
tax havens 427
taxable profits 9
taxable temporary differences 422
taxation 8–9
background 413–14
corporate income tax and dividends 
414–15
deferred 416–24
depreciation method 142
international 424–5
local/regional 413–14
profit or loss statement 67
social security charges 413
summary 427–8
transfer pricing 425–6
Value Added Tax (VAT) 414
telephone accrual 201
temporal method 365–8
time series analysis 235
total asset turnover 245
total comprehensive income 299
transactions 80–8
balance sheet equation 80–2
credit 86–8
recording 34–6
statement of financial position 
82–6
transfer pricing 425–6
treasury function 33
treasury shares 296
trial balance, extended 198–200
Turnbull Report (UK) 443
UN Conference on Trade and Develop-
ment (UNCTAD) 18
UNCTAD see UN Conference on Trade 
and Development
undelivered elements 171
understandability 13
unearned revenue 171
United Nations Intergovernmental 
Working Group of Experts on 
International standards of Ac-
counting and Reporting (ISAR) 
404–5
units of production (depreciation) 143
US Generally Accepted Accounting 
Principles (GAAP) 17, 18, 27, 
71–6, 486
US Sarbane-Oxley Act (SOX) (2002) 43, 
53–4, 432–3
US Securities and Exchange Commis-
sion (SEC) 485
Value Added Tax (VAT) 413, 414
value in use 178, 181, 380
value-added approach 65
separation of functions 42
settlement value 374
share issue 220
share options 244
share-based payment 488
shareholder value 473–5
discount rate 475
forecast cash flows 475
shareholders, institutional 436–7
shares 191
Sibir Energy 407
SIC see Standards Interpretations 
Committee
significant influence 329
small and medium-sized enterprises 
(SMEs)
annual reports 292–3
global financial standards 62
solvency 247
Sony Ericsson Mobile Communication 
AB 308
sources of finance
bonds 221
hedging 222–3
leasing 221
loans 221
maturity mix 221
share issue 220
spot exchange rate 359
Standards Interpretations Committee 
(SIC) 18
statement of cash flows 296
statement of changes in equity  
295–6
statement of comprehensive income 
295, 298–303
statement of financial position  
4, 295
stock exchange requirements  
345–6
Stora Enso 397–8
straight-line depreciation 139
strategic ratio analysis 466–73
financial leverage 469–70
operational gearing 471–3
ROI decomposition 468
segment data analysis 470–1
sustainable growth 466–7
Z scores 473
subsidiary 45, 309–10
substance over form 90
sustainable growth 466–7
tangible assets 141, 155–9
land and buildings 156–7
leased assets 158–9
plant and equipment 157–8
Tata Motors 308–9
tax base 188
recognition 27, 90
of acquired assets/liabilities 319
of revenue 105–6
recoverable amount 135, 179–80
regulation see accounting regulation
relevant costs 113–15
rent prepayment 201
reportable segments 352
reporting entity 11
research 15
research and development 151–2
residual value 11
restructure 172
retire (or dispose) long-term assets 149, 
279–80
retire (or pay off) debt 267
retirement benefits 396
return on assets (ROA) 242
return on capital employed 
(ROCE) 242
return on equity (ROE) 242
return on investment (ROI) 242
return on plan assets 396
return on sales 241
returns 314
revaluation 93
revenue 4
accrued 170–2
deferred 169–70
vs gains 107
revenue recognition 105–6
timing 106–7
risk management 441–2
Lufthansa example 443–4
risk/return relationship 217–18
ROA see return on assets
ROCE see return on capital employed
Roche Group 311
ROE see return on equity
ROI see return on investment
ROI decomposition 468
Ryanair 462–3
sacrifice of economic benefits 93
sales 32
on credit 103–5
frequency of transactions 228
scale of credit sales 227
secondary translation 357
alternative accounting methods 
364–70
translating foreign currency 
­financial statements in group’s 
presentation currency 362–4
segment data analysis 470–1
segment reporting 346–55
information content 352–5
operating segments 348, 351
reportable segments 352

index
510
scale of credit sales 227
variability of demand/flexibility of 
production 227
XBRL (eXtensible Business Reporting 
Language) 36
z scores 473
working capital 230
cycle 118–19, 120, 225
frequency of payments 228
frequency of sale transaction 228
length of production  
cycle 227
management 224–8
movements 272–4
values 380–3
vertical group 307
Viénot I and II report (France) 430
Vodafone 171
volume licensing programs 171
warrants 244
weighted average 116, 123



