

GMO Food

Recent Titles in the
CONTEMPORARY WORLD ISSUES
Series
World Sports: A Reference Handbook
Maylon Hanold
Entertainment Industry: A Reference Handbook
Michael J. Haupert
World Energy Crisis: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Military Robots and Drones: A Reference Handbook
Paul J. Springer
Marijuana: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Religious Nationalism: A Reference Handbook
Atalia Omer and Jason A. Springs
The Rising Costs of Higher Education: A Reference Handbook
John R. Thelin
Vaccination Controversies: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
The Animal Experimentation Debate: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Steroids and Doping in Sports: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Internet Censorship: A Reference Handbook
Bernadette H. Schell
School Violence: A Reference Handbook, second edition
Laura L. Finley

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary
source material, a forum of authoritative perspective essays,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series
will ﬁnd the information they need to have a better
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and
economic issues facing the world today.


CONTEMPORARY WORLD ISSUES
GMO Food
A REFERENCE HANDBOOK
David E. Newton

Copyright © 2014 by ABC-CLIO, LLC
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or
otherwise, except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review,
without prior permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Newton, David E.
GMO food : a reference handbook / David E. Newton.
pages cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978–1–61069–685–2 (hard copy : alk. paper) — ISBN
978–1–61069–686–9 (ebook) 1. Genetically modiﬁed foods.
2. Genetically modiﬁed foods—Social aspects. 3. Genetically
modiﬁed foods—Risk assessment. 4. Transgenic plants. I. Title. II.
Title: Genetically modiﬁed organisms food. III. Title: Genetically
modiﬁed food.
TP248.65.F66N49
2014
664—dc23
2014021910
ISBN: 978–1–61069–685–2
EISBN: 978–1–61069–686–9
18 17 16 15 14
1 2 3 4 5
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook.
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, LLC
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper
Manufactured in the United States of America

Contents
Preface, xv
1
BACKGROUND AND HISTORY, 3
Hybridization, 4
The Birth of Genetics, 6
The Gene, 7
The Process of Genetic Engineering, 14
Concerns about rDNA Research, 20
History of rDNA Regulation, 24
Breakthroughs in rDNA Research, 28
Types of Genetically Modiﬁed Plants, 32
Genetically Modiﬁed Animals, 37
Conclusion, 38
References, 39
2
PROBLEMS, CONTROVERSIES, AND SOLUTIONS, 49
Opposition to Genetically Modiﬁed Foods, 49
Public Opinion on Genetically Modiﬁed Foods in the
United States, 52
vii

Public Opinion about Genetically Modiﬁed Foods in
Europe, 58
Regulation of Genetically Modiﬁed Crops and Foods in
the European Union, 60
The Cartagena Protocol, 65
A Shift in Emphasis, 66
Current Status of Regulation of Genetically Modiﬁed
Organisms in Europe, 68
A Shift in Emphasis: European Regulations
on Labeling, 70
Regulation of Genetically Modiﬁed Products throughout
the World, 74
Genetically Modiﬁed Crops and Foods: Pro and Con, 78
Potential Beneﬁts to the Agricultural System, 78
Potential Beneﬁts to Human Health, 85
Potential Beneﬁts to the Natural Environment, 86
Potential Harm to Human Health, 88
Potential Harm to the Natural Environment, 94
Potential Social and Economic Harm, 97
Labeling of Genetically Modiﬁed Foods in the United
States, 98
Pros and Cons of Labeling, 100
Conclusion, 101
References, 102
3
PERSPECTIVES, 117
Introduction, 117
A Sledgehammer or a Dart?: Sandy Becker, 117
viii
Contents

Genetic Engineering in Agriculture: Uncertainties and
Risks: Debal Deb, 120
Uncertainties in Genetic Engineering, 121
The Precautionary Principle, 124
Conclusions, 125
References, 125
The U.S. Government Should Not Require Genetically
Modiﬁed Food Labels: Phill Jones, 129
Mandatory Genetically Modiﬁed Food Labels
Would Incorrectly Indicate a Risk, 130
Mandatory Genetically Modiﬁed Food Labels
Would Increase the Cost of Food, 131
References, 133
Health Problems Linked to Genetically Modiﬁed Crops:
Rashmi Nemade, 133
Herbicides, Pesticides (human-cides?), 134
References, 136
Genetically Modiﬁed Organisms: Tony Owen, 137
Genetically Modiﬁed Foods in Developing Countries:
Santosh Pandey, 140
References, 143
Genetically Modiﬁed Crops in Africa: Fear of the
Unknown?: Elizabeth Shoo, 145
References, 148
Accepting Genetically Modiﬁed Crops in India:
Sweta, 149
Genetically Modiﬁed Crops: Possible Risks, 151
A Growing World Demands New Food Technology:
Susan Young, 152
References, 155
Contents
ix

4
PROFILES, 161
Introduction, 161
American Academy of Environmental Medicine, 161
Biological Regulatory Services, 164
Biotechnology Industry Organization, 166
José Bové (1953–), 168
Herbert Boyer (1936–), 171
Canadian Biotechnology Action Network, 173
Center for Food Safety, 175
Mary-Dell Chilton (1939–), 177
Stanley N. Cohen (1935–), 179
Council for Biotechnology Information, 181
CropGen, 184
Food & Water Watch, 186
Robert T. Fraley (1953–), 188
John E. Franz (1929–), 190
Dennis Gonsalves (1943–), 192
Greenpeace International, 194
Greenpeace United States, 194
Institute for Responsible Technology, 197
International Service for the Acquisition of Agri-Biotech
Applications, 199
John D. Kemp (1940–), 203
Steve Lindow (1951–), 204
x
Contents

Mark Lynas (1973–), 206
Monsanto, 209
Non-GMO Project, 211
Organic Consumers Association, 213
Ingo Potrykus (1933–), 216
Maxine Singer (1931–), 218
Marc van Montagu (1933–), 221
World Health Organization, 223
5
DATA AND DOCUMENTS, 229
Introduction, 229
Data, 229
Table 5.1 Genetically Engineered Crops in the
United States, 2000–2013, 229
Table 5.2 Laws and Regulations on Genetically
Modiﬁed Crops and Foods, 230
Table 5.3 Characteristics of Permits on Genetically
Modiﬁed Crops Issued by Animal and Plant Health
Inspection Service, 232
Table 5.4 Trends in Approved Phenotype Releases
in the United States, 1987–2012, 235
Table 5.5 Global Farm Income Beneﬁts from
Growing Genetically Modiﬁed Crops,
1996–2011, 237
Table 5.6 Genetically Modiﬁed Crop Farm Income
Beneﬁts of 1996–2011: Selected Countries, 238
Table 5.7 Genetically Modiﬁed Crop Farm Income
Beneﬁts of 2011: Developing versus Developed
Countries, 239
Contents
xi

Documents, 240
Plant Patent Act of 1930, 240
Diamond v. Chakrabarty, 447 U.S. 303
(1980), 241
Coordinated Framework for the Regulation of
Biotechnology (1986), 243
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety (2000), 246
Guidance for Industry: Voluntary Labeling
Indicating Whether Foods Have or Have Not Been
Developed Using Bioengineering (2001), 248
Regulation of Genetically Modiﬁed Foods by the
European Union (2003), 250
Mendocino County (California) Ban on Genetically
Modiﬁed Crops (2004), 252
The Safety of Genetically Modiﬁed Foods,
GAO Report (2002), 254
Invoking of Preemption (North Dakota, SB2277;
2005), 256
Monsanto Co. v. Geertson Seed Farms,
561 U.S. ___ (2010), 257
Proposition 37. Genetically Engineered Foods.
Labeling. Initiative Statute (2012), 260
Bowman v. Monsanto, et al. 569 U.S. 11-796
(2013), 262
H. R. 1699 (2013), 263
Raised Bill No. 6519, State of Connecticut
(2013), 265
6
RESOURCES FOR FURTHER RESEARCH, 269
Books, 269
Articles, 279
xii
Contents

Reports, 292
Internet Sources, 295
7
CHRONOLOGY, 311
Glossary, 323
Index, 329
About the Author, 335
Contents
xiii


Preface
Humans have been altering the genomes (genetic composition)
of plants and animals for millennia. At ﬁrst, these modiﬁcations
were largely trial-and-error events in which organisms with
desirable traits were crossbred with each other to produce new
plants or animals better suited for food, for transportation, for
working in the ﬁeld, to be resistant to pests, or for other pur-
poses. The ﬁrst major breakthrough in the process of genetic
modiﬁcation occurred in the late nineteenth century with the
discovery of the genetic units (genes) through which characteris-
tics are transmitted from generation to generation. Breeders
and biological researchers had no way of using this new knowl-
edge, however, to improve the traditional methods of produc-
ing new organisms by crossbreeding.
The next major breakthrough, however, did cross that
hurdle. In 1953, American biologist James Watson and English
chemist Francis Crick showed that genes were not more nor less
than chemical molecules of a substance called deoxyribonucleic
acid (DNA). That discovery opened new vistas for the modiﬁca-
tion of plants and animals because DNA, like any other chemical,
can be modiﬁed, at least in principle, in the same way any other
chemical can be modiﬁed. For the ﬁrst time in history, researchers
were able to change the chemical structure of DNA from a cat,
alligator, or tobacco plant, thereby producing a new type of cat,
alligator, or tobacco plant. And thus was born the science of
genetically modiﬁed organisms (GMOs).
Among the most obvious targets of the new technology were
food organisms, plants and animals that are bred primarily as
xv

foodstuffs for humans, domestic animals, and other organisms.
The technology made it possible, for example, to create new
types of plants that are resistant to pesticides, making it possible
to use those pesticides on crops without affecting the crops
themselves. It also made possible to development of animals
used for meat that are fatter or leaner, that mature more
quickly, that are less susceptible to disease, or that have any
one of a number of other desirable traits.
The success of this new technology is reﬂected in the fact
that, as of 2013, 90 percent of all the cotton and corn and
93 percent of all the soybeans grown in the United States is
genetically modiﬁed. Worldwide, the amount of land under
cultivation for genetically modiﬁed (GM) crops has risen from
essentially zero in 1996 to more than 70 million hectares
(170 million acres) in developed nations and just slightly less
than that amount in developing nations. Today, crops are
modiﬁed for a host of purposes, including pest resistance, dis-
ease resistance, cold tolerance, drought tolerance, resistance to
salinity, improved nutritional value, and the synthetic produc-
tion of drugs and other useful chemical products.
Despite the undeniable success of GM crops at this point in
history, critics have raised a number of concerns about the
development, production, and use of such foods. Those critics
often argue that, even after years of research, scientists and the
general public simply do not know enough about potential
health risks of GM foods. They are concerned that such foods
may cause cancer in humans and other animals to whom they
are fed or that they may produce allergic reactions in people
who have a predisposition to such conditions. Critics also worry
about the potential harm that GM foods could cause to the
natural environment. They suggest that genetically engineered
traits might be transferred in nature to unintended target
organisms, producing frightening “super-organisms,” which
might be resistant to human control because of their modiﬁed
genomes. Critics also point out that once GM plants and ani-
mals are released to the natural environment, there may be no
xvi
Preface

way to control or recover those organisms, should they turn out
to be more dangerous than ﬁrst thought. Finally, individuals
and organizations who object to the use of GM technology fear
that this technology will only make developing nations even
more dependent on developed nations and multinational
corporations than they already are.
This book is designed to provide young adults with the fac-
tual background they need to better understand the controversy
over GM foods and with the tools to continue their own
research on the topic. Chapter 1 provides background and his-
tory about the development of genetic engineering technology
over the centuries, with special emphasis on the period since
the 1950s. Chapter 2 reviews some of the most important
problems and issues associated with GM foods, including the
advantages and disadvantages of the development and use of
such products. Chapter 3 provides an opportunity for stake-
holders in the debate to express their personal views on some
speciﬁc aspect of the overall issue of GM foods. Chapter 4
includes proﬁles of a number of individuals and organizations
that have been or are involved in the controversy over the devel-
opment and use of GM foods. Chapter 5 includes a number of
important documents—court cases, laws, position statements,
and the like—associated with the topic of GM foods, as well
as some statistical data about the production and use of such
foods. Chapter 6 is an annotated bibliography of print and elec-
tronic sources that contain additional information about GM
foods. Chapter 7 is a chronology of important events from pre-
history to the modern day on the topic of GM food. Glossary
lists important terms used in the discussion of the topic.
Preface
xvii


GMO Food


1
Background and History
Be fruitful and multiply; ﬁll the earth and subdue it; have
dominion over the ﬁsh of the sea, over the birds of the air,
and over every living thing that moves on the earth.
(Genesis 1: 28, New King James Version)
One of the ﬁrst commands issued by God, according to the
holy book of the Christian religion, is for humans to “subdue
the Earth,” taking command over all the plants and animals
that God had placed on Earth. At the dawn of human civiliza-
tion, no matter what religious beliefs one holds, such was
largely the situation in which early humans found themselves;
they stood alone against the rest of the natural world. They
had no cows to supply them with milk, no mules to carry their
burdens, no horses to ride to distant places, and no corn or
wheat with which to make their meals. Everything they needed
they had to ﬁnd in the natural world and kill or collect it for
their own needs.
Slowly that situation began to change. Humans realized, ﬁrst
of all, that they could domesticate some of the wild animals
around them as sources of milk and meat, as beasts of burden,
and to supply hides and other body parts for tools and
3
Marshall Nirenberg shared the 1968 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine
with Har Gobind Khorana and Robert W. Holley for solving the genetic
code and showing how it functions in the synthesis of proteins. (National
Library of Medicine)

ornaments. No one knows precisely when the ﬁrst animals were
domesticated, although some authorities suggest a date of
about 8000 BCE as the period during which ﬁrst goats, and
then sheep, were domesticated for human use. Residents of
Mesopotamia were learning about the domestication of not
only animals but also plants at about the same time. They
found ways of taking plants that grew naturally in the environ-
ment around them and growing them under controlled condi-
tions not only as sources of food but also as raw materials for
clothing, housing, and other basic needs.
Hybridization
Many millennia after humans began the domestication of wild
plants and animals, they took a signiﬁcantly more advanced step:
They began to create entirely new plants or animals, not found
in nature, by cross-breeding two different species of natural plants
or animals, a process known as hybridization. Probably the ﬁrst
animal hybrid was produced by crossing a horse and a donkey.
When the cross involves a male donkey (jackass) and a female
horse (mare), the product is called a mule. A cross between
a female donkey (jenny) and a male horse (stallion) results in
the birth of a hinny. Hinnies are depicted in Egyptian tomb
paintings as early as 1400 BCE, and mules can be identiﬁed in
Mesopotamian art dating to the ﬁrst millennium BCE (Sherman
2002, 42).
The origins of plant hybridization are also somewhat difﬁcult
to trace, although there is some evidence that the ﬁrst rice hybrids
may have been produced by about 2000 BCE when rice native to
Japan (Oryza sativa japonica) was hybridized on the Indian sub-
continent to form a new strain, O. sativa indica (“Indian
Archaeobotany Watch: Lahuradewa 2008”). O. sativa japonica
also made its way to the African continent by about 1500 BCE,
where it was domesticated and hybridized with a native form of
rice, O. barthii, to form a new species, O. glaberrima (Hirst,
“History of Rice, Part One”; Linares 2002, 16360).
4
GMO Food

For more than 3,000 years, agricultural workers have contin-
ued to use hybridization techniques to improve the quality of
domestic plants and animals. To a large extent, these tech-
niques have relied on trial-and-error methods of crossing differ-
ent organisms with each other to produce certain desirable
traits. The fact that experimentalists did not know the scientiﬁc
basis for the production of hybrids did not mean that such
methods were often not elegant, sophisticated, and productive.
Over time, in fact, they produced hybrid animals such as ligers
(a cross between lions and tigers), beefalo (cow and buffalo),
cama (camel and llama), savannah (domestic cat and serval),
donkra (donkey and zebra), and dzo (domestic cow and yak),
as well as hybrid plants such as the Amarcrinum (a cross
between the Amaryllis and Crinum genera), peppermint
(spearmint and watermint), Chitalpa (desert willow [Chilopsis
linearis] and southern catalpa [Catalpa bignonioides]), Leyland
cypress (Monterey cypress [Cupressus macrocarpa] and Alaska
cedar [Chamaecyparis nootkatensis]), and limequat (Key lime
and kumquat).
Hybrid technologies can be subdivided into two major
categories: intraspeciﬁc and interspeciﬁc. In the former case,
individuals from two different species are interbred to produce
a new species (e.g., the liger or buffalo), sometimes to produce
a plant or animal with some new and useful physical charac-
teristics, and sometimes just to prove that the breed can be
produced. In the latter case, two individuals from the same spe-
cies are interbred to improve the overall quality of the species.
The inbreeding of the maize plant over the centuries, as an
example, has resulted in a modern plant that looks and tastes
entirely different from the parent plant from which it origi-
nated, a small plant with cobs only a few inches in length and
eight rows of kernels (“Corn in the United States”). The very
signiﬁcant accomplishments of hybridization can be appreci-
ated today simply by looking at the 161 different breeds of dogs
recognized by the American Kennel Club, the 40 different
breeds of cats recognized by the Cat Fanciers Association, or
Background and History
5

the more than 2,000 varieties of roses recognized by the
American Rose Society (“AKC Breeds—Complete Breed
List”; “CFA Breeds”; Quest-Ritson and Quest-Ritson 2011).
The Birth of Genetics
The ﬁrst real attempt to obtain a scientiﬁc explanation for the
process by which hybridization occurs dates to the work of
the Austrian monk Gregor Mendel between 1856 and 1863.
In one of the most famous set of experiments in the history of
science, Mendel patiently crossbred differing strains of peas
(Pisum sativum), carefully recording the properties of the prog-
eny of each cross for two or more generations of the plants. As a
one-time teacher of mathematics and physics, Mendel under-
stood the importance of collecting precise quantitative data
about the changes that occurred as a result of his crossbreeding
efforts. The laws of hybridization that now carry his name illus-
trate this commitment to quantitative thinking. One such law,
for example, predicts that the ratio between two forms of a trait
(e.g., color) in a crossbreeding will always be 3:1, whereas the
ratio between two forms of two traits (e.g., color and size) will
always be 9:3:3:1 (O’Neil 1997).
Perhaps the most important conclusion Mendel was able to
draw from his research was actually a very simple one: The physi-
cal traits of pea plants that are transmitted from parent to off-
spring are apparently encoded in some type of unitary particle,
to which Mendel gave the name Elemente. He was fully able to
describe how physical traits (which he called Merkmal), such as
color and size, were passed down from generation to generation
by imagining various ways in which these Elemente combined
with each other during the mating of female and male plants.
In one of the great oddities of the history of science, Mendel’s
momentous discoveries were essentially lost for more than three
decades after he reported them to a small local group of scientists,
the Natural History Society of Brno (Naturforschenden Vereins
Brünn), on February 8 and March 8, 1865. Then, in 1900, those
6
GMO Food

results were almost simultaneously rediscovered by three research-
ers independently, the Dutch botanist Hugo de Vries, the
Austrian agronomist Erich von Tschermak, and the German
botanist Carl Correns, all of whom immediately recognized that
Mendel’s discoveries made possible for the ﬁrst time a new ﬁeld
of science that could be used to understand and direct the
hybridization of plants and animals. The dispute that arose as to
which of these three men should receive credit for this rediscovery
inspired many more biologists to seek out Mendel’s original
papers, and his work at last began to receive the recognition that
it had long deserved (Moore 2001). And thus was born the new
science of genetics.
The renaissance of Mendel’s work raised the question as to
what the unitary particle, Mendel’s Elemente, should be called.
De Vries had already adopted the notion of a unitary hereditary
factor, which he called the pangen, which he thought of as
being invisibly small but still larger than a chemical molecule
(Wayne 2010, 270). Finally in 1909, the Danish botanist
Wilhelm Johannsen suggested a name for the unitary particle
by which it is still known today, the gen (in Danish and
German), or gene (in English).
The Gene
By the ﬁrst decade of the twentieth century, genetics had begun
to expand and grow. Some early discoveries about the transmis-
sion of hereditary traits were being reported. However, one of
the most basic questions in the new science remained unan-
swered: What is a “gene”? Most practitioners understood the
notion that hereditary traits were carried from one generation
to the next on or within some type of unitary particles, but
what precisely and exactly was that particle? True, many geneti-
cists did not worry too much as to what a “gene” was as long as
they could design experiments that played out successfully—
even if they didn’t know exactly what a gene looked like.
Whereas other researchers recognized that discovering the
Background and History
7

physical and chemical nature of the gene was ultimately essen-
tial to developing a true and productive science of genetics,
and they embarked on a campaign to discover what that unit
really consisted of.
For most researchers, the primary candidate for the gene was
some kind of protein molecule. Proteins are complex chemical
substances that consist of various combinations of about two
dozen simpler molecules known as amino acids, joined to each
other in a variety of ways. Proteins are very large molecules,
consisting of hundreds or thousands of amino acids in virtually
every imaginable combination. And that fact explains why pro-
teins were thought to be good candidates for genes: The many
different sizes, shapes, and compositions proteins could have
meant that they could code for an endless variety of physical
and biological traits, which is just what we see in the natural
world.
A relatively small number of researchers, however, focused on
a different candidate molecule known as deoxyribonucleic acid
(DNA). Nucleic acids had been discovered in 1868 by German
chemist Friedrich Miescher, who originally called the material
nuclein, because he found it in the nuclei of cells. (Miescher’s stu-
dent, Richard Altmann, later suggested the term nucleic acid for
the material, the name by which it is known today.) Miescher
knew nothing about the chemical composition of nuclein or its
biological function. He considered the possibility that it might
be involved in the hereditary transmission of genetic traits but
later rejected that notion (Dahm 2008; Wolf 2003). In fact,
research on the chemical structure and function of nucleic acids
moved forward very slowly and with few practical results for
many years. For example, it was not even until 1935 that the
Russian chemist Andrei Nikolaevitch Belozersky was able to iso-
late a pure sample of the material, making it possible for research-
ers to proceed with an analysis of its structure and function.
Much of the early research on DNA produced ﬁndings
that appeared to be trivial and of questionable value at the
time. For example, in 1950, Austro-Hungarian–born American
8
GMO Food

biochemist Erwin Chargaff discovered that two of the nitrogen
bases found in DNA, adenine (A) and thymine (T), always
occur in the same ratio to each other, and the other two nitro-
gen bases present in DNA, guanine (G) and cytosine (C), also
occur in the same ratio, although the two ratios are different
from each other. So according to this so-called Chargaff’s rule,
if there were 5.2 g of A in a sample of DNA, there would also
be 5.2 g of T, and the presence of 3.5 g of C necessarily implied
the presence of 3.9 g of G. So what possible signiﬁcance could
that information have in thinking about genes? The answer to
that question would come in only three years, and when it
did, it turned out to be an essential part of the description of
what a gene is.
In fact, by the early 1950s, enough information about DNA
had accumulated that a few research teams were close to
answering that fundamental question: What is a gene? The
winners of the contest (and a contest is very much what it
was) was a somewhat unusual research team working at
Oxford University in Great Britain. The team consisted of a
somewhat brash young biologist from the United States,
James Watson; a more reserved physicist-turned-chemist from
Great Britain, Francis Crick; a New Zealand-born physicist-
turned-molecular biologist, Maurice Wilkins; and a brilliant,
but
somewhat
ignored,
English
x-ray
crystallographer,
Rosalind Franklin. In a series of events too long and complex
to be told here, the team—often not working together happily
as a team—ﬁnally discovered the chemical structure of DNA.
Crick and Watson announced the result of their work in a
now-classic
paper
published
in
the
journal
Nature
on
April 25, 1953. (Crick and Watson received the Nobel Prize
in physiology or medicine, along with Wilkins, but without
Franklin, in 1962.)
The Watson–Crick model of DNA consists of two very long
strands of atoms (the backbone of the molecule), where long
means tens or hundreds of thousands of atoms. The atoms are
grouped into two characteristic groups, a sugar called deoxyribose
Background and History
9

and a phosphate group, which is a collection of one phosphorus
atom and four oxygen atoms. So each of the two strands of the
DNA molecules looks like this:
where S represents a sugar grouping and P a phosphate
grouping.
Attached to every sugar group is one of the four (and there
are only four) nitrogen bases found in DNA. Each of the four
nitrogen bases—adenine, thymine, guanine, and cytosine—
consists of about two dozen atoms, some of which are nitrogen
atoms (and hence their name). So a complete DNA strand
looks like this:
where A, T, G, and C stand for the four nitrogen bases, and
with the possibility of placing any nitrogen base anywhere on
the strand. To get an idea of the size of a DNA molecule, imag-
ine that the formula shown in here runs across the width of this
page, the next page, and all the pages of this book, without
showing even a small part of the molecule.
As soon as they drew this model, Watson and Crick knew
that DNA would be an ideal candidate for a gene. Moving
all those A, T, C, and G nitrogen bases around on the DNA
backbone made possible an almost inﬁnite variety of structures,
10
GMO Food
Figure 1.1
Backbone of DNA Molecule
Figure 1.2
Nitrogen Bases in DNA

certainly enough to account for every known genetic character-
istic. At ﬁrst, they did not know how that all took place, but
they certainly had their suspicions. Indeed, in the last sentence
of their 1953 paper they noted that “[i]t has not escaped our
notice that the speciﬁc pairing we have postulated immediately
suggests a possible copying mechanism for the genetic material”
(Watson and Crick 1953, 738).
Only one step remains to provide a complete description of
the DNA molecule. The two strands of the type shown in ear-
lier are lined up opposite each other so that the nitrogen bases
on one strand are lined up opposite the only nitrogen bases
on the other strand to which they are attracted: every A with a
T, and vice versa, and every C with a G, and vice versa (i.e.,
Chargaff’s rule), and the two strands are twisted around each
other to form a double helix, almost like a spiral staircase.
At this point, all that remained was to solve the ﬁnal part of
the puzzle: Given the chemical structure of a DNA molecule,
how do the four nitrogen bases code for a physical trait, such
as blue eyes, red hair, or left handedness? (Note that it has to
be the bases that hold the key because the background strand of
sugar and phosphate groups is always the same in every DNA
molecule.) A number of researchers contributed to answering
this question, but credit for cracking the code usually goes to
American biochemist Marshall Nirenberg, working with col-
league Johann H. Matthaei at the National Institutes of Health
(NIH). In some ways, the answer was easy. Researchers knew that
the basic process had to be something like this:
nitrogen bases — direct production of —> amino acids —
which make —> proteins.
Each different protein made by this process is responsible by itself
or in combination with other proteins for a speciﬁc genetic trait:
blue eyes, red hair, left handedness, and so on. The question really
was how many nitrogen bases and in what arrangement were
needed to account for the production of the approximately two
dozen amino acids used in the synthesis of proteins?
Background and History
11

It is obvious that a single nitrogen base cannot code for two
dozen amino acids because the four nitrogen bases in DNA
could then code for only four different amino acids. How about
a genetic code consisting of two nitrogen bases? In that case,
one DNA molecule could make 16 amino acids. Go ahead
and try it. See how many different ways you can put together
two nitrogen bases, such as:
AA
AT
AC
AG
GC
GT
. . .
12
GMO Food
Figure 1.3
Structure of a DNA Molecule (Madeleine Price Ball)

You should be able to come up with 16 different combinations,
not enough to make two dozen amino acids.
However, what about sets of three nitrogen bases? Again, try
it yourself and see:
AAA
AAT
ATA
ATT
CGT
CGG
CGA
. . .
This system will work. With a set of three nitrogen bases—
called a triad or codon—a single DNA molecule can code for
64 different amino acids. That is well beyond the number of
amino acids used in proteins, but, as it turns out, it provides
redundancy for the DNA molecule. A single amino acid, such
as arginine, can be made by any one of six different triads:
CGU, CGC, CGA, CGG, AGA, or AGG.
The ﬁnal step is to determine which arrangement of nitrogen
bases codes for which amino acid. Nirenberg got the process
working to answer this question with an elegantly simple experi-
ment. He prepared a DNA molecule that contained only one
nitrogen base, adenine (AAA), and found that this molecule codes
for the amino acid lysine. Another DNA molecule consisting only
of cytosine (CCC) coded for the amino acid proline. By using
somewhat more complicated DNA molecules consisting of other
combinations of nitrogen bases, Nirenberg and other researches
were eventually able to produce a complete genetic code that tells
which amino acid is coded for by every possible combination of
nitrogen bases. Table 1.1 shows what that code looks like. In
the table, the ﬁrst nitrogen base in the code is shown on the left
side of the box, the second nitrogen base on the top of the box,
and the third nitrogen base on the right side of the box.
All very interesting, perhaps, what does this discussion have
to do with the genetic modiﬁcation of foods? The important
point of this story is that the Watson–Crick discovery turned
the question of the biological properties of an organism—the
colors of its ﬂowers, the amount of meat on its carcass, its abil-
ity to resist attack by insects, and the like—into a chemical
problem. A plant that is able to live in a very salt environment,
Background and History
13

for example, can do so—taking the simplest possible view—
because its DNA consists of a sequence of nitrogen bases that
codes for the amino acids from which proteins are made
that are responsible for salt tolerance. If the plant did not
have this speciﬁc set of nitrogen bases, it could not make those
amino acids or the protein that makes it salt tolerant.
So if you have a plant that is not salt tolerant to begin with,
all you really need to do is to carry out a chemical experiment
in which the incorrect nitrogen bases are removed from the
DNA molecule and/or the correct nitrogen bases are inserted
into the molecule in such a way that the “salt-tolerant” conﬁgu-
ration is achieved. As you might guess, this process is a lot easier
to describe than it is to carry out in the laboratory. Let us see
how it is actually done in practice.
The Process of Genetic Engineering
The modiﬁcation of a plant or animal’s genetic composition
(its genome) can be accomplished in the following steps.
14
GMO Food
Table 1.1
The Genetic Code
2nd base
3rd base
T
C
A
G
T
TTT = Phe
TTC = Phe
TTA = Leu
TTG = Leu
TCT = Ser
TCC = Ser
TCA = Ser
TCG = Ser
TAT = Tyr
TAC = Tyr
TAA = STOP
TAG = STOP
TGT = Cys
TGC = Cys
TGA = STOP
TGG = Trp
T
C
A
G
C
CTT = Leu
CTC = Leu
CTA = Leu
CTG = Leu
CCT = Pro
CCC = Pro
CCA = Pro
CCG = Pro
CAT = His
CAC = His
CAA = Gln
CAG = Gln
CGT = Arg
CGC = Arg
CGA = Arg
CGG = Arg
T
C
A
G
1st
base
A
ATT = Ile
ATC = Ile
ATA = Ile
ATG = Met/
START
ACT = Thr
ACC = Thr
ACA = Thr
ACG = Thr
AAT = Asn
AAC = Asn
AAA = Lys
AAG = Lys
AGT = Ser
AGC = Ser
AGA = Arg
AGG = Arg
T
C
A
G
G
GTT = Val
GTC = Val
GTA = Val
GTG = Val
GCT = Ala
GCC = Ala
GCA = Ala
GCG = Ala
GAT = Asp
GAC = Asp
GAA = Glu
GAG = Glu
GGT = Gly
GGC = Gly
GGA = Gly
GGG = Gly
T
C
A
G

First, researchers have to decide what physical or biological
property of an organism they want to change. Do they want
to make a plant that is resistant to rust disease or one that pro-
duces fruit that does not ripen as quickly as the natural plant?
Or do they want an animal with reduced body fat or one that
lays more eggs in a shorter time?
Second, they have to ﬁnd out what region of the organism’s
genome codes for that particular physical or biological property.
In practice, that means that all or some portion of the organism’s
genome has to be sequenced. Sequencing means ﬁnding out what
genes are present in the genome, what their chemical (DNA)
structures are, and where they are located in the genome.
Scientists have been working on the sequencing of plant, ani-
mal, and other genomes for more than 40 years. The ﬁrst genome
of any kind sequenced was that of a virus, bacteriophage MS2, a
project completed by Belgian molecular biologist Walter Fiers
in 1976. It took nearly two decades to produce the genomes
of more complex organisms, such as the ﬁrst bacterium,
Haemophilus
inﬂuenzae,
completed
by
researchers
at
the
Institute for Genomic Research (IGR) in 1995; the ﬁrst archaeon,
Methanococcus jannaschii, also produced by IGR researchers in
1996; and the ﬁrst eukaryote, a yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
determined by researchers at 74 European laboratories and
announced after a decade-long project in 1997.
The complete sequencing of the ﬁrst plant genome, that of a
weed in the mustard family, Arabidopsis thaliana, was com-
pleted in 2000 by an international consortium, and a new
project has been initiated to determine the function of the
more than 25,000 genes present in that genome. The ﬁrst
complete animal genome announced was that of the nematode
Caenorhabditis elegans, produced by a team at the Sanger
Institute and Washington University in 1998, followed two
years later by the announcement of the complete genome of
the fruit ﬂy Drosophila melanogaster by a team from the Celera
company, the Baylor College of Medicine, the University of
California at Berkeley, and the European Drosophila Genome
Background and History
15

Project (DGP). The ﬁrst draft of the complete genome of
humans (Homo sapiens) was announced in 2001 by the
Human Genome Project and researchers at Celera Genomics,
and the ﬁnal and complete genome was reported in 2006.
Efforts to determine the function of each of the 20,251 known
human genes constitute a major activity in the world of genetics
research today (Hutchison 2007; “Memorandum by the UK
Intellectual Property Ofﬁce (UK-IPO),” Table 2.1).
Third, researchers have to ﬁnd a way to alter the organism’s
genome so that it stops producing the wrong (to the researchers)
kind of protein(s) and/or to start producing the right (again, to
the researchers) kind of proteins(s). Either of these options changes
the properties of the organism in the direction that researchers
want. How can they make such changes in the genome?
It turns out that changing the structure of a DNA molecule
requires only two kinds of tools: a “pair of scissors” to cut open
a DNA molecule and a “paste pot” to glue the molecule back
together. In a stroke of good luck, researchers learned that
DNA molecules already have these devices available to them;
in fact, they use them regularly to deal with everyday occur-
rences with which a DNA molecule has to deal.
The “scissors” ﬁrst: In the late 1960s, Swiss microbiologist
Werner Arber hypothesized that bacterial cells possess a natural
ability to protect themselves against infection by virus-type
materials (bacteriophages, or simply phages) by using specialized
enzymes that cut viral DNA, incapacitating the bacteriophage.
He called these enzymes restriction endonucleases or restriction
enzymes. By 1968, he had been able to identify one such restric-
tion enzyme in the common bacterium Escherichia coli, an
enzyme that he called EcoB. Within a matter of months,
Harvard researchers Matthew Meselson and Robert Yuan had
discovered a second restriction enzyme in the E. coli bacterium,
which they named EcoK.
Two years later, Hamilton O. Smith and Kent W. Wilcox at
the University of California at Berkeley discovered another
restriction enzyme from the bacterium Haemophilus inﬂuenzae,
16
GMO Food

which they called HindII. HindII turned out, however, to be a
signiﬁcantly different kind of restriction enzyme from either
EcoB or EcoK. The latter two enzymes cut DNA molecules at
random points in the molecular chain. Adding either enzyme
to a DNA molecule produced different sets of products each
time the experiment was done. Whereas HindII targeted very
speciﬁc parts of a DNA molecule, which became known as
restriction sites. When added to DNA, the enzyme “searched
for” the sequence and cut the molecule precisely at that part.
(Today, the two types of restriction enzymes are known as
Type I and Type II enzymes.) For the HindII restriction
enzyme, for example, the restriction site is in the region:
GTPy"PuAC
where G is a guanine group, T a thymine group, A an adenine
group, C a cytosine group, Py any pyrmidine nitrogen base (usu-
ally cytosine or thymine), and Pu any purine base (usually
adenine or guanine). The arrow indicates the point at which the
enzyme cleaves the DNA strand. Other restriction enzymes cut
a DNA molecule at other characteristic points. The PstI enzyme,
for example, cuts the molecule at the point CTGCA"G. (For a
history of the development of restriction enzymes, see Pray
2008 and Roberts 2005).
Using a pair of restriction enzyme scissors on a DNA
molecule produces the following effect, in which a complete
molecule is cut at some distinctive region:
- C - G - G - G - T - A - A - G - T - C - C - C - A - G - C - G -
- G - C - C - C - A - T - T - C - A - G - G - G - T - C - G - C -
#
- C - G - G - G - T - A - A - G - T - C - C - C - A - G - C - G -
- G - C - C - C - A - T - T - C - A - G - G - G - T - C - G - C -
Second, the “paste pot” also occurs naturally in cells
and is used to repair strands of DNA that become broken as a
result of exposure to heat, light, other forms of radiation, some
Background and History
17

chemicals, and other factors. As this process occurs thousands
of time every day in the average human body, some mechanism
is needed to repair damage to DNA. That mechanism involves
the use of yet another type of enzyme, known as a DNA ligase.
Ligases have the ability to join together the two ends of a
broken DNA molecule, making it once more “as good as
new.” In the example just above, a ligase is able to restore the
chemical bond between adenine and guanine groups in the
upper chain and between thymine and cytosine in the lower
chain (“DNA Ligase, T4”; “DNA Repair” 2002).
The availability of naturally occurring “scissors” and “paste
pot” makes it possible to carry out the process of genetic engi-
neering of any cell. The ﬁrst instance in which this process
was actually carried out in the laboratory was an experiment
designed by American biochemist Paul Berg in 1972. He
worked with two very simple organisms, a virus that infects
monkeys, SV40 (for simian virus 40), and another virus that
most commonly infects the bacterium E. coli, called the 
(lambda) bacteriophage. Both organisms exist in the form of
plasmids, circular loops consisting of DNA only.
In the ﬁrst step of his experiment, Berg cut open the SV40
plasmid using the restriction enzyme EcoRI. He then used the
same restriction enzyme to cut out a small segment of DNA
from the  bacteriophage. Each time the restriction enzyme
made a cut in one of the viruses, it produced a modiﬁed par-
ticle (the SV40 modiﬁed plasmid) or a DNA fragment (from
the  bacteriophage) with so-called sticky ends. The term
sticky ends refers to the fact that the open segment of the
SV40 virus and the ends of the  particle contain a short
segment of DNA consisting of a distinctive set of nitrogen
bases
GCTA
CGAT
that was capable of joining to a comparable set of nitrogen bases
from some other source, such as
18
GMO Food

GCTA
CGAT
Next, Berg inserted the DNA segment taken from the  bacte-
riophage into the gap he had created in the SV40 plasmid.
Finally, he sealed up this new plasmid using a DNA ligase. The
product thus formed is known in general as a chimera, a term
taken from Greek mythology that refers to mythical animals con-
sisting of body parts of a variety of animals, such as a human body
with the head of a lion or some other animal and a tail. The ﬁnal
product is also known as recombinant DNA (rDNA), a term that
is also used to describe the procedure by which the chimera is
produced. Berg was awarded the Nobel Prize in chemistry in
1980 for this research. (He offered a technical description of his
work in his Nobel lecture on December 8, 1980.)
At about the same time that Berg was carrying out his pio-
neering experiments, two other American researchers, Herbert
W. Boyer and Stanley N. Cohen, were embarking on a some-
what more ambitious but similar project in their separate labo-
ratories at Stanford University and the University of California
at San Francisco. Boyer and Cohen were exploring methods for
inserting a variety of DNA segments that coded for specialized
properties into plasmids like the one used by Berg. In one
experiment, for example, Boyer and Cohen worked with E. coli
bacteria, one strain of which was resistant to the antibiotic
tetracycline (call them the t+ bacteria), and one of which was
resistant to the antibiotic kanamycin (call them k+).
For their experiments, Boyer and Cohen used a synthetic
plasmid called pSC101 (“p” for “plasmid,” “SC” for “Stanley
Cohen,” and “101” because it was the 101st plasmid Cohen
had invented). pSC101 was about as simple as plasmids can
get, consisting of only two genes, one of which coded for
replication of the plasmid and one for resistance to kanamycin.
Using the cut-and-paste method described earlier, Boyer and
Cohen inserted a third gene into the pSC101 plasmid, a gene
coding for resistance to tetracycline. They then inserted the
Background and History
19

modiﬁed pSC101 plasmid into a E. coli culture and allowed the
bacteria to reproduce. After a period of time, they found some
bacteria that were resistant to tetracycline (as some E. coli natu-
rally are), some that were resistant to kanamycin (as other E. coli
naturally are), and some that were resistant to both antibiotics
(as none of their bacteria naturally were). They had produced a
recombinant form of the bacterium with new properties different
from those found in naturally occurring E. coli.
Boyer and Cohen went on to conduct a number of similar
experiments transferring one or another physical or biological
property from one organism to another. In what was probably
their most impressive work of all, they eventually found a way
to transfer genes taken from an amphibian, the African clawed
toad Xenopus laevis, into bacteria, where they were expressed over
a number of generations (“The First Recombinant DNA”).
Concerns about rDNA Research
The work of Boyer and Cohen is sometimes thought to consti-
tute the beginning of the age of modern biotechnology.
Certainly, the techniques they developed were soon being
put into use by researchers around the world to produce a host
of new transformed organisms. For example, German-born
American researcher Rudolf Jaenisch and his colleague,
Beatrice Mintz, reported in 1974 that they had produced trans-
genetic mice by transferring a portion of the SV40 genome into
pregnant mice, which then exhibited traits carried by the SV40
DNA when they reached adulthood (Hopkin 2011).
Virtually everyone with the least knowledge about molecular
biology began to realize the staggering implications of this line
of research. For the ﬁrst time in human history, scientists had
discovered a way of potentially remaking life in essentially any
form they desired. It is difﬁcult to imagine a more exciting,
promising, and also terrifying line of research.
Even as the ﬁrst new discoveries in biotechnology were
being announced, a number of researchers—including many
20
GMO Food

who were themselves active in the ﬁeld—began to express con-
cerns about the possible risks to humans and the natural envi-
ronment of such research. Of course, there was almost no
precedent for the research being conducted, and no one really
knew what might happen if an engineered organism managed
to escape from a laboratory. What effects might it have on
human health or on the environment. These concerns were
partially based on the fact that one of the most common organ-
isms used in the research was E. coli, a bacterium found com-
monly in the environment and, more importantly, in the
digestive tract of humans and other animals.
As early as 1973, the potential risks posed by rDNA research
were discussed at a meeting, the Conference on Biohazards
in Biological Research, also known as Asilomar I, held in
January 1973 at the Asilomar Conference Center, Asilomar
State Beach, California. That meeting was sponsored by the
National Science Foundation and the National Cancer
Institute and attended by about 100 researchers. The risks asso-
ciated with the use of viruses in research were the major theme,
and only modest attention paid to rDNA research in particular
(Peterson and White 2010).
At another series of meetings held in June of the same year, a
major annual session known as the Gordon Conferences, Boyer
reported in an off-the-record session about his research, and
attendees at his meeting immediately recognized potential
problems that this research was likely to involve. They agreed
to write a letter to the National Academy of Sciences (NAS)
and National Academy of Medicine (NAM), recommending
that these federal agencies initiate a more formal analysis of
the risks that might be associated with rDNA research projects
(Peterson and White 2010).
The NAS responded to that letter by recommending the for-
mation of an informal study group of rDNA researchers to con-
sider this question. In July 1974, that group of researchers
wrote a letter to the journal Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States (now PNAS) reporting
Background and History
21

on their deliberations. The group included Berg (who was chair
of the group), Boyer, Cohen, Daniel Nathans, Watson, and
David Baltimore, who was a year later to win the Nobel Prize
in physiology or medicine for his work in molecular biology.
The signatories of the PNAS letter made four speciﬁc recom-
mendations for dealing with the potential dangers posed by
rDNA research:
1. A voluntary moratorium on certain types of rDNA research
that might possibly increase the risk to human health of
such research.
2. Careful consideration to experiments in which animal
DNA is introduced into bacterial DNA.
3. The creation of an advisory committee within the NIH
with the responsibilities of overseeing an experimental pro-
gram to obtain better information about the safety of
rDNA research, developing new procedures for minimizing
the risks posed by such research, and devising guidelines
under which future rDNA research should be conducted.
4. Convening an international meeting of scientists to discuss
the safety issues created by this new ﬁeld of research (Berg
et al. 1974).
In October 1974, the NIH followed recommendation 3 in
this letter by appointing a Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee (RAC), which remains in service to the present
day. In addition, less than a year after the PNAS letter was pub-
lished, the proposed meeting was held, once more at the
Asilomar Conference Center. It is sometimes known as
Asilomar II, to distinguish it from the earlier meeting by the
same name. The conference included a total of 153 partici-
pants, of whom 83 were molecular biologists from the United
States, 50 molecular biologists from other countries, 16 jour-
nalists, and four lawyers (Peterson and White 2010). The meet-
ing continued over a period of four days, from February 24 to
22
GMO Food

February 27, at the conclusion of which participants adopted a
general statement summarizing their work. That statement was
later published as an article in PNAS in June 1975 that con-
sisted of three major elements, based on two general principles.
Those principles were the following:
(i) that [physical] containment be made an essential con-
sideration in the experimental design and, (ii) that the
effectiveness of the containment should match, as closely
as possible, the estimated risk. (Berg et al. 1975, 1981)
The major elements enunciated for reducing risk, according
to one historian, could be classiﬁed as “physical containment,
biological containment, and human behaviour” (Krimsky
2005). In the ﬁrst category, participants at the conference
deﬁned four levels of risk, minimal, low, moderate, and high,
and outlined the types of physical containment necessary for
each level. The second category involved a review of the types
of organisms that should and should not be produced, empha-
sizing the avoidance of organisms that had a moderate to high
probability of being able to survive outside the laboratory.
The third category dealt with the types of behaviors that should
not be allowed, including some that are now part of even a
beginning chemistry student’s list of prohibitions, including
eating and drinking in the laboratory and carrying materials
produced in the laboratory out of the work space (Berg et al.
1975).
The recommendations made by the Asilomar participants
were sent to the NAS, which, in turn, forwarded them to the
NIH, which responded by reconvening the RAC, with instruc-
tions to convert the Asilomar recommendations into guidelines
for researchers who wanted to work with rDNA experiments.
This decision initiated what was to become a long and conten-
tious debate over the elements that should be included within
the guidelines, including debates over the role the general pub-
lic should have in developing those guidelines, the proper
Background and History
23

agencies from whom those guidelines should come, how
restrictive the ﬁnal guidelines should be, how important it was
to conduct rDNA research at all, and the extent to which the
safety of such research could be guaranteed. The ﬁrst draft of
the rDNA guidelines was issued in June 1976, representing a
noble effort on the part of the RAC and NIH to satisfy all inter-
ested parties. That hope was too optimistic, however, and the
committee and the agency continued to work for a number of
years on revisions to the guidelines that would become increas-
ingly more acceptable to all stakeholders in the debate. The
most recent version of the NIH guidelines is a 142-page
document that covers virtually every imaginable issue involved
in the conduct of rDNA research as of March 2013 (“NIH
Guidelines for Research Involving Recombinant or Synthetic
Nucleic Acid Molecules [NIH Guidelines], March 2013”; for
an excellent review of the post-Asilomar activities on the guide-
lines, see Fredrickson 2001).
History of rDNA Regulation
The NIH guidelines on rDNA research issued in 1976 had,
according to many critics, one major ﬂaw: they applied only
to research funded by the federal government. This ﬂaw
prompted a number of members of Congress to consider legis-
lation that would extend and perhaps strengthen those guide-
lines to include all research of any kind by any entity within
the United States. In 1977 alone, for example, 16 discrete
bills were introduced into the U.S. Congress on the regulation
of rDNA research (see, for example, “Planned Releases of
Genetically-Altered Organisms” 1986). That effort did not suc-
ceed, however, for a variety of reasons. For one thing, the RAC
decided to expand its membership, including more individuals
from outside the scientiﬁc community and giving critics a
greater opportunity to express their views on regulatory issues.
Perhaps more important, however, was the growing realization
among researchers that rDNA experiments might actually not
24
GMO Food

be as dangerous as they had feared only a few years earlier.
Indeed, the late 1970s and early 1980s saw a number of impor-
tant breakthroughs by researchers who followed the NIH
guidelines and voluntarily used the greatest precautions in con-
ducting their work. As researchers lobbied legislators not to
proceed with formal legislation, that avenue of regulation
gradually disappeared as an option (McClean 1997).
This is not to say that regulatory agencies in the government
abandoned their responsibilities to oversee rDNA research
under the NIH guidelines. Instead of looking to new legislation
for the oversight responsibilities they had, however, they turned
to existing laws and regulations and found ways to apply them
to the new technology. For example, the U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA) was among the ﬁrst agencies faced with
ruling on the use of genetically engineered organisms in agricul-
tural projects. To determine whether such projects should be
approved or not, they turned to one very old law, the Plant
Quarantine Act of 1912, which gave the USDA the authority
to regulate plants that might carry pests or diseases that could
harm agricultural crops, and the Plant Pest Act of 1957,
which had similar provisions for plants imported to the United
States (McHughen 2006). The Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) followed a similar line, referring applications for the
testing of genetically engineered organisms to its Center for
Drug Evaluation and Research (Junod 2009).
As progress in rDNA research rapidly moved forward in the
1980s, the federal government ﬁnally recognized that a more
comprehensive and orderly system was needed to regulate
research on and release and commercial production of genetically
modiﬁed organisms (GMOs). Thus, in April 1984, President
Ronald Reagan appointed a Cabinet Council Working Group
(the Working Group) to consist of representatives from all
executive
departments
and
the
Environmental
Protection
Agency, Council on Environmental Quality, Council of
Economic Advisers, Ofﬁce of Management and Budget, Ofﬁce of
Science and Technology Policy, White House Ofﬁce of Policy
Background and History
25

Development, and National Science Foundation. By December,
the Working Group had produced a draft document for publica-
tion in the Federal Register, to which public comments
were invited. As a result of these comments, the Working
Group created yet another committee, the Biotechnology
Science Coordinating Committee (BSCC), consisting of a smaller
group of members more directly concerned with the regulation of
GMOs, the commissioner of the FDA, the director of NIH, the
assistant secretary of agriculture for marketing and inspection
services, the assistant secretary of agriculture for science and edu-
cation, the assistant administrator of EPA for pesticides and toxic
substances, the assistant administrator of EPA for research and
development, and the assistant director of the National Science
Foundation for biological, behavioral, and social sciences. This
committee reassessed the work of its predecessors and produced
yet another version of the Coordinated Framework, which
was published in the Federal Register on June 26, 1986
(“Coordinated Framework for Regulation of Biotechnology
Products” 1986; Kingsbury 1990).
That document dealt with two large issues: research on
GMOs and commercial products made from such organisms.
The committee divided up the responsibilities for all the con-
ceivably possible regulatory needs in these areas among the
USDA, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS),
FDA, NIH, EPA, Food and Safety Inspection Service (FSIS),
and Science and Education Administration of USDA (S&E).
(The appropriate portion of the document is reprinted in
Chapter 5.) For example, research on GMOs that could be
contained with a laboratory were regulated by the agency pro-
viding funding for the research if it were a federal agency and
by NIH, S&E, and APHIS (or voluntarily by researchers) in
the case of funding from nonfederal sources. Just who was
responsible for what research in the latter case was the point
of an extended discussion in the Coordinated Framework.
Similarly, the regulation of commercial GMO foods and food
26
GMO Food

additives was the responsibility of the FDA in some cases and
the FSIS in other cases, whereas the production of pesticides
was usually the responsibility of the EPA and, sometimes,
APHIS.
(For
the
ﬁnal
document,
see
“Coordinated
Framework” 1986 or, in a more accessible and essentially simi-
lar form, Ofﬁce of Science and Technology Policy 1986.)
Interestingly, some local and state governments were moving
forward on the regulation of rDNA research, whereas the
federal government was working its tortuous way through
the issue. As early as 1977, for example, the city of Cambridge,
Massachusetts, became the ﬁrst municipality in the world to regu-
late rDNA research by adopting a version of the NIH Guidelines
for Research Involving DNA Molecules. The provisions of the
Cambridge Recombinant DNA Technology Ordinance remain
in force today and are administered by the city’s Biosafety
Committee (“Recombinant DNA”). The Cambridge ordinance
was especially signiﬁcant because the city is home to one of the
largest and most prestigious research institutions in the world,
Harvard University, whose activities in the ﬁeld of rDNA research
therefore became subject to city regulation.
Shortly after the Cambridge action, a number of cities and
states across the nation adopted similar ordinance, also often
modeled on the NIH Guidelines. These municipalities
included the cities of Emeryville and Berkeley, California
(both in 1977); Princeton, New Jersey (1978); Amherst and
Waltham, Massachusetts (1978); Boston and Somerville,
Massachusetts (1981); and Newton, Massachusetts (1982),
and the states of Maryland (1977) and New York (1978).
(For details of these ordinances, see Krimsky, Baeck, and
Bolduc 1982.) A number of these cities are, like Cambridge,
home to major research institutions, including Princeton
University,
the
University
of
Massachusetts
(Amherst),
Brandeis University (Waltham), and Boston (the home of
many important institutions of higher learning and research
companies).
Background and History
27

Breakthroughs in rDNA Research
Even as governmental entities at all levels were debating the
regulation of rDNA research, scientists interested in the topic
were moving forward at a signiﬁcant rate, making a number of
critical breakthroughs in the development of GMOs. In 1977,
for example, the genetic engineering ﬁrm of Genentech, Inc.,
announced the creation of the ﬁrst transgenic organism capable
of expressing a human gene. The term transgenic refers to an
organism whose genome has been altered by the insertion of
DNA from a different species. In this case, a human gene for
the production of the compound somatostatin had been inserted
into the genome of the bacterium of E. coli, producing a new
strain of bacterium that was capable of producing the human hor-
mone somatostatin. Somatostatin is a hormone that regulates the
endocrine system and affects neurotransmission and cell repro-
duction in the human body. The next year, Genetech announced
the production of a second transgenic organism, a bacterium car-
rying a human gene for the production of the hormone insulin,
and in 1978, it reported a third such product, a bacterium engi-
neered to synthesize the human growth hormone (HGH).
These breakthroughs were signiﬁcant because they made available
for the ﬁrst time a relatively inexpensive, efﬁcient method for
manufacturing a group of extremely important natural products
used for the treatment of a variety of human diseases and
disorders.
Work was progressing apace among researchers who were
attempting to produce transgenic plants and animals with other
purposes. For example, the ﬁrst transgenic animal was pro-
duced by researchers at Ohio University in 1981 when they
injected a gene for the β-globin protein from a rabbit into a
mouse. The host mouse and its descendants then produced
blood that carried that protein for a number of generations
(Wagner et al. 1981). Almost simultaneously, transgenic mice
with other characteristics were reported by four other research
teams (“Transgenic Mice Formed by Nuclear Injection”).
28
GMO Food

Over the next three decades, researchers produced a number
of transgenic animals for a variety of purposes. Among the most
popular lines of research has been the production of genetically
engineered mice and rats with introduced genetic traits that can
be studied for medical purposes. Other transgenic animals have
been developed for other types of research or for purely enter-
tainment value. For example, a common line of research has
involved the introduction of the gene for the production a pro-
tein known as green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP) into a variety of
animals. GFP has the specialized property of producing a bright
green ﬂuorescence when exposed to light in the blue to ultra-
violet range. Researchers sometimes add the gene for GFP to
other genes they want to study that are introduced into a host
animal. A more mundane application of the technology has
been the creation of so-called GloFish that carry the GFP gene
and glow in different colors when exposed to light of different
wavelengths (Zimmer, “Fluoro Fish”).
Other than their use in research and for the production of
medical products such as insulin and HGH, transgenic animals
have not yet experienced wide use in agricultural or other types
of commercial businesses. Such has not been the case at all with
transgenic plants. The ﬁrst such plants were invented almost
simultaneously in 1983 by four different research groups.
Three of those groups presented papers about their discoveries
at a conference in Miami, Florida, in January 1983, whereas
the fourth group announced its own discovery at a conference
in Los Angeles in April of the same year. The three groups that
reported in January had all used similar approaches for the
insertion of a gene providing resistance to the antibiotic kana-
mycin in tobacco plants, in two cases, and petunia plants, in
the third case (Fraley, Rogers, and Horsch 1983, 211–221;
Framond et al. 1983, 159–170; Schell et al. 1983, 191–209).
The fourth group took a somewhat difference approach and
introduced a gene removed from the common bean plant and
inserted it into a sunﬂower plant (Murai et al. 1983, 476–
482; also see “History of Plant Breeding”). (The matter of
Background and History
29

priority in discoveries is often a matter of dispute. For example,
some historians credit invention of the ﬁrst transgenic plant to a
European research team because they published their results in
a peer-reviewed journal ﬁrst in May 1983; see Herrera-Estrella
et al. 1983.)
Again, much of the earliest work on transgenic plants was
designed to test a variety of technologies for producing such
plants and demonstrating the efﬁcacy of such technologies.
The 1983 experiments, for example, were not designed pri-
marily for the purpose of producing new strains of tobacco
plants or sunﬂower plants with commercial value to farmers.
That step was soon to come, however, when in 1985 a research
team at the Belgian company Plant Genetic Systems (now
Bayer CropScience) reported that they had developed a geneti-
cally engineered tobacco plant that was resistant to attack by
insects that normally caused disease in the plant. The key to
this discovery was the use of a bacterium commonly found in
the soil called Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt). Bt also occurs naturally
in the gut of caterpillars of various types of moths and butter-
ﬂies, on leaf surfaces, in aquatic environments and animal feces,
and in human-made environments, such as ﬂour mills and
grain storage facilities. Some strains of Bt produce proteins
during the process of spore production called δ-endotoxins that
are toxic to a large range of insect species. By introducing
the gene for the production of Bt into a tobacco plant,
the Belgian researchers had created a new form of the plant that
was resistant to predators that normally cause disease in the
plant (Vaeck et al. 1987).
The signiﬁcance of this technology, of course, is profound.
By adding the Bt gene to any type of plant, that plant then
becomes resistant to many of the diseases to which it would
otherwise be subject. Farmers do not have to spray a ﬁeld with
insecticide to protect a corn, cotton, soybean, or other type of
crop carrying the Bt gene, because those crops are now natu-
rally resistant to many types of insect-caused diseases. Almost
simultaneously and also within a short period of time, other
30
GMO Food

research teams announced the development of Bt tomatoes
(Fischhoff et al. 1987) and Bt cotton plants (Perlak et al.
1990). Bt technology very quickly became widely popular
among farmers throughout the world, and plants modiﬁed with
the gene were soon available for a number of crops (Betz,
Hammond, and Fuchs 2000).
There are at least two major arguments for the use of agricul-
tural plants that have been engineered to contain the Bt gene
(beyond the obvious ﬁnancial beneﬁt to the companies that
manufacture and sell the plant seeds). First, the natural envi-
ronment will beneﬁt because farmers will have to spray less
plant-killing herbicide on their ﬁelds. Second, farmers will ben-
eﬁt because they will have to buy less herbicide and, therefore,
save money. As it turns out, the latter prediction has not turned
out to be very accurate. Studies have showed that farmers who
plant Bt-engineered crops often use more herbicide than they
did using traditional, nonengineered plants. (More about this
topic is in Chapter 2. For data on this issue, see Benbrook
2012; Superweeds: How Biotech Crops Bolster the Pesticide
Industry 2013.)
Bt crops are still being planted around the world today,
although they tend to be less popular than other forms of GM
crops. In the United States, for example, 5 percent of all the
corn planted in 2013 was a Bt varietal, down from a high of
26 percent in 2005, and 8 percent of all cotton was a Bt vari-
etal, down from a high of 18 percent in 2005 and 2006
(“Adoption of Genetically Engineered Crops in the U.S.”).
Comparable numbers in other parts of the world were much
smaller in most cases, largely because of bans on many aspects
of GM crops and foods in the European Union and nations
economically depended on trade with the Union. In its latest
report on the production of GM crops worldwide, the
International Service for the Acquisition of Agri-Biotech
Applications (ISAAA) reported that two countries, Sudan and
Cuba, began using Bt crops for the ﬁrst time in 2012, whereas
the use of such crops increased moderately in some parts of the
Background and History
31

European Union. The Czech Republic, Portugal, Romania,
Slovakia, and Spain together planted 129,071 hectares of Bt
maize in 2012, a 13 percent increase over the previous year
and a signiﬁcant increase, given the continent’s general
opposition to the use of GM crops and foods (“Global Status
of Commercialized Biotech/GM Crops: 2012”).
Two exceptions to these trends appear in India and China.
In the former case, farmers cultivated a total of 10.8 million
hectares of Bt cotton, with an adoption rate of 93 percent,
whereas the data for China showed 4.0 million hectares of Bt
cotton, with an adoption rate of 80 percent. Adoption rate is
deﬁned as the percentage of land planted to a crop that is used
for the Bt varietal (“Global Status of Commercialized Biotech/
GM Crops: 2012”). A good general overview of the ongoing
status of Bt crops can be found at Mannion and Morse (2013).
Types of Genetically Modified Plants
The introduction of pest resistance by the insertion of a Bt gene
is by no means the only mechanism by which plants have
been genetically modiﬁed for use in agriculture. A historically
famous example involves efforts to produce plants that survive
low atmospheric temperatures at which they would normally
be killed by frost. The economic beneﬁts of such a product
are obvious because many crops that are routinely destroyed
by low temperatures would survive to the marketplace.
The scientiﬁc basis for such a product was discovered acci-
dentally in the early 1960s when researchers at the USDA
observed that some of the plants being used in an experimental
test at the department froze to death during an unexpected
frost, whereas others survived the frost. It took more than a de-
cade to unravel this mystery, but researchers eventually discov-
ered that bacteria living on the surface of plants routinely
produce a protein on the plant surface that serves as a center
on which ice crystals can form, resulting in the eventual
32
GMO Food

freezing of the plant. Some mutant bacteria lack the gene for
this protein, however, and are unable to produce the so-called
ice nucleation protein.
A number of biotech companies began to explore the pos-
sibility of producing a genetically modiﬁed form of bacteria that
lack the ice nucleation gene. In 1983, one of those companies,
Advanced Genetics Sciences (AGS), applied for a permit from
the USDA to ﬁeld test a spray, called Frostban, containing so-
called ice-minus bacteria, which lacked the gene to produce
the ice nucleation protein. USDA issued the permit, the ﬁrst
permit for the testing of a GM crop in history. However, the
ﬁeld testing did not occur immediately because outraged activ-
ists interrupted the ﬁeld test by burning the test ﬁelds. In fact, it
was not until four years later that the test was actually carried
out. For a variety of reasons, the strong objection of activists
among them, AGS never pursued the commercial development
of the Frostban spray (Maugh 1987; Skirvin et al. 2000).
Another early—and failed—GM crop was the Flavr Savr
tomato, developed by the biotech company, Calgene, in the
late 1980s and early 1990s. The objective behind this research
was to develop a tomato that does not ripen as quickly as occurs
in nature. A tomato that ripens more slowly might retain the
correct color, odor, and taste but would not soften during har-
vesting, storage, transport to the market, and display time on
market shelves. It would save untold amounts of money lost
by having to throw away tomatoes that go bad between harvest-
ing and sale.
Researchers learned that the process of ripening in a tomato
is controlled by the enzyme polygalacturonase, which attacks
and breaks down the pectin in the cell walls of tomato skin,
producing the softening of the fruit. They hypothesized that
introducing a compound that inactivates that enzyme, a so-
called antisense enzyme, would interrupt that natural process
and slow down the ripening process. Experiments eventually
supported this line of genetic engineering, and in 1992,
Calgene submitted a petition to the FDA asking for permission
Background and History
33

to sell the product to the general public. After a two-year analy-
sis of the petition, the FDA concluded that the Flavr
Savr tomato was “as safe as tomatoes bred by conventional
means” and that there was, therefore, no reason to withhold
approval of its sale to human consumers (“Agency Summary
Memorandum”).
At ﬁrst blush, Flavr Savr tomatoes and the paste made from
them appeared to be very popular, often outselling their tradi-
tional rivals at supermarkets. The GM fruit was also popular
with food manufacturers, who realized about a 20 percent
proﬁt in the distribution and production of tomato products
from it. For a variety of reasons, however, initial sales numbers
soon began to drop off, and by early 1999, the product had
been withdrawn from the market, never to reappear again
(Bruening and Lyons 2000; Martineau 2002).
Another approach to the genetic modiﬁcation of crops is
based on a chemical known as glyphosate. The name is a short-
ened version that describes the substance’s chemical composi-
tion; it is a phosphate derivative of the amino acid glycine.
Glyphosate was ﬁrst synthesized in Switzerland in 1950 by
the organic chemist Henri Martin, who was working at the
time for the small pharmaceutical company Cilag. Martin appa-
rently never published his research and did not explore possible
biological properties of the substance. It essentially sat on the
virtual shelves of the drug industry until 1970, when a chemist
working for the Monsanto company, John E. Franz, repeated
Martin’s synthesis and tested it for herbicidal action. Franz
found that glyphosate was extraordinarily effective in killing
large-leaved plants of the type that most commonly compete
with agricultural crops. Monsanto went on to patent glyphosate
under the trade name of Roundup (Duke and Powles 2008;
Magin 2003).
Roundup soon became a very popular herbicide among
farmers. The product had one serious drawback. As it was most
effective against large-leaf plants, it also had a tendency to
attack and kill crop plants. Monsanto’s solution to this problem
34
GMO Food

was to develop a new generation of GM plants that were resist-
ant to their new herbicide. The challenge of developing such
plants was simple in concept, although not so easy in practice.
Glyphosate kills plants because it inhibits an enzyme known as
5-enolpyruvylshikimate-3-phosphate (EPSP) synthase, which is
essential for the synthesis of three aromatic amino acids: tyrosine,
tryptophan, and phenylalanine. Without these amino acids, a
plant stops growing and dies. Monsanto’s method for developing
Roundup Ready–resistant plants was to insert a gene into those
plants that inhibits the action of glyphosate. Engineered plants
with this gene are, therefore, resistant to the harmful effects of
glyphosate on the plant’s normal growth patterns. (For a technical
description of this process, see Funke et al. 2006.) As with Bt-
engineered plants, the expectation is that the use of Roundup her-
bicide on ﬁelds where Roundup Ready plants are being grown
results in less harm to the environment and ﬁnancial beneﬁt to
farmers (and the Monsanto company). The extent to which this
has actually occurred will be discussed in Chapter 2.
Glyphosate herbicides experienced by far the greatest
increase in popularity among American farmers in the period
between 1990, when they ﬁrst became commercially available,
and the ﬁrst decade of the twenty-ﬁrst century. In one series
of ongoing studies, for example, the USDA found that the use
of glyphosate herbicides in nine Midwestern states rose from
essentially zero in 1990, to about 10 million pounds in 1996,
to 30 million pounds in 1999, to 50 million pounds in 2002.
During this period, no other herbicide in use experienced such
an increase in popularity (Battaglin et al. 2005, Table 1). In
another series of studies conducted by the EPA, the use of
glyphosate nationwide continued to grow from more than
85 million pounds in 2001 to more than 180 million pounds
in 2007, the last year for which the EPA has data (“Pesticide
News Story” 2011). Still, in 2013, herbicide-resistant plants
accounted for only 14 percent of all corn and 15 percent of all
cotton planted in the United States (but 93 percent of all soy-
bean crops) (“Adoption of Genetically Engineered Crops in the
Background and History
35

U.S.”). How does one account for the remaining parts of corn
and cotton acreage planted in the United States in 2013
(71 percent for corn and 67 percent for cotton)?
The answer is that researchers have developed yet another
technique for the modiﬁcation of plants, which involves a pro-
cess known as stacking. An obvious improvement in the devel-
opment of GM plants might involve the invention of a plant
that contains genes for two or more characteristics, such as re-
sistance to an herbicide and delayed development of fruit. The
problem is that inserting one gene at a time into a plant is difﬁ-
cult enough, and adding two or more genes to a plant is an
extraordinarily difﬁcult technical procedure. However, there is
a way around that problem, one that involves mating two
GM members of the same species. In such a case, at least some
of the progeny of that mating will carry both inserted genes,
one from each parent. By continuing this process through addi-
tional generations, more and more modiﬁed genes can be added
to the plant. A group of genes that have been added by this pro-
cedure is said to constitute a set of stacked genes. The process is
also known as gene pyramiding and multigene transfer (“Stacked
Traits in Biotech Crops”). Currently (early 2014), the most
complex of these products is a seed called SmartStax, produced
in a collaborative effort between Monsanto and the Dow
Chemical Company. SmartStax seeds contain eight GM genes
for a resistance to a variety of above-ground and below-
ground insects and to two kinds of herbicides (“Monsanto’s
SmartStax Maize”).
Plants with stacked genes obviously hold a number of advan-
tages for farmers, and they have become very popular since ﬁrst
introduced in 1995. The most recent data available suggest that
stacked plants accounted for about 43.7 million hectares of
crops worldwide in 2012, making up more than 26 percent of
all GM crops planted. The rate of adoption of stacked varietals
by farmers in that year was 31 percent greater than it had been
for the previous year. In the United States, the rates of stacked
36
GMO Food

gene varietals were even greater than the worldwide total, reach-
ing (as noted earlier) 71 percent for corn and 67 percent for
cotton (but essentially zero for soybeans). Stacked gene plants
appear to be growing in popularity fastest in developing
nations, with Argentina, Brazil, China, India, and South
Africa collectively accounting for about 78.2 million hectares
of such crops, nearly half of all biotech crops grown in those
countries. These numbers are important because it is in just
those countries that population is growing fastest, food short-
ages tend to be the most severe, and new technologies, such as
stacking, more hold the greatest promise for dealing with those
issues (“Global Status of Commercialized Biotech/GM Crops:
2012”).
Genetically Modified Animals
Research on GM animals dates back at least three decades, a
period during which GM animals have been produced for a
variety of purposes, such as
• Producing pharmaceuticals for use by humans and other
animals
• Decreasing the environmental effects of impact of large-
scale, “industrial” agriculture by decreasing the amount of
harmful chemicals such as phosphate in manure, thereby
reducing water pollution
• Serving as a source of cells, tissue, and organs for use in
human transplantation procedures
• Producing certain types of materials with specialized uses,
such as surgical sutures and personal protection devices,
including body armor for military and law enforcement use
• Producing very speciﬁc antibiotics for use against disease-
causing bacteria such E. coli 0157:H7 and salmonella
(“Fact Sheet: Genetically Engineered Animals”)
Background and History
37

Notice that one use not mentioned in this list is the develop-
ment of GM animals for human consumption. Until late 2013,
research had not yet yielded a single animal developed through
rDNA research that was approved for human consumption in
the United States. That situation changed in 2014 when the
FDA granted approval for the sale of a genetically modiﬁed form
of salmon in the United States. The salmon, sold under the trade
name of AquAdvantage salmon, was developed by AquaBounty
Technologies and includes a growth-regulating hormone that
forces the ﬁsh to grow year around, rather than only in spring
and summer, as is the case with the natural form of the ﬁsh.
The hormone makes it possible for the salmon to reach market
size in about half the time of its natural cousins, 16 to 18 months,
rather than three years. The advantage the ﬁsh offers to producers
(although not necessarily consumers) is obvious (“Genetically
Engineered Salmon”).
Conclusion
The Biblical admonition quoted at the beginning of this chap-
ter to take dominion over every living organism on Earth
appears to be coming true. Over the last half century, humans
have made impressive progress in learning how to change and
shape plants, animals, bacteria, viruses, and other organisms
for dozens of different purposes, from the production of drugs
to the creation of new food varietals. It is hardly a wonder,
then, that many scientists see the new age of biotechnology as
a period in human history ﬁlled with promise and hope, an
opportunity perhaps for the ﬁrst time to feed the billions of
hungry men, women, and children around the world.
However, that view would be ignoring some very strong
objections and concerns posed by individuals worldwide about
the potential risks that GM foods pose to human health and to
the natural environment. Ever since the earliest breakthroughs
in rDNA research were announced, critics have been asking
38
GMO Food

scientists to slow down and take a closer look at the potential
risks posed by their research, or perhaps to abandon that
research entirely.
These concerns have thus far not been expressed universally
in all parts of the world. As this chapter indicates, for example,
there are virtually no laws that limit or prohibit research on
GM foods, or even to require labeling of foods that contain
GM components, although there are many very complex regu-
lations that companies must follow before their products are
approved for public consumption. Such is not the case in the
European Union, for example, where concerns about GM
foods have resulted in the adoption of very tight controls on
research, development, distribution, sale, and consumption of
foods that contain GM elements.
Thus, the debate over the use of GM foods continues in most
parts of the world, even in the United States, where battles are still
being fought about the sale and labeling of such products.
Chapter 2 offers a historical review of the anti-GMO movement
around the world and a discussion of the arguments currently
being offered both for and against the development and market-
ing of such products, for and against the labeling of GM foods,
and other issues that remain before the public today.
References
“Adoption of Genetically Engineered Crops in the U.S.”
USDA Economic Research Service. http://www.ers.usda
.gov/data-products/adoption-of-genetically-engineered
-crops-in-the-us.aspx. Accessed on September 8, 2013.
“Agency Summary Memorandum Re: Consultation with
Calgene, Inc., Concerning FLAVR SAVR™Tomatoes.”
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. http://www.fda.gov/
Food/FoodScienceResearch/Biotechnology/Submissions/
ucm225043.htm. Accessed on September 8, 2013.
Background and History
39

“AKC Breeds—Complete Breed List.” American Kennel Club.
http://www.akc.org/breeds/complete_breed_list.cfm.
Accessed on September 3, 2013.
Battaglin, William A., et al. 2005. “Glyphosate, Other
Herbicides, and Transformation Products in Midwestern
Streams, 2002.” Journal of the American Water Resources
Association 41(2): 323–332.
Benbrook, Charles M. 2012. “Impacts of Genetically
Engineered Crops on Pesticide Use in the U.S.—the First
Sixteen Years.” Environmental Sciences Europe 24: 24.
http://www.enveurope.com/content/pdf/2190-4715-24-24
.pdf. Accessed on September 9, 2013.
Berg, Paul. 1980. “Dissections and Reconstructions of Genes
and Chromosomes.” Nobel lecture, December 8. http://
www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/chemistry/laureates/
1980/berg-lecture.pdf. Accessed on September 5, 2013.
Berg, Paul, et al. 1974. “Potential Biohazards of Recombinant
DNA Molecules.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 71(7): 2593–2594.
Berg, Paul, et al. 1975. “Summary Statement of the Asilomar
Conference on Recombinant DNA Molecules.” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Science of the United States of
America 72(6): 1981–1984.
Betz, Fred S., Bruce G. Hammond, and Roy L. Fuchs. 2000.
“Safety and Advantages of Bacillus thuringiensis-Protected
Plants to Control Insect Pests.” Regulatory Toxicology and
Pharmacology 32(2): 156–173.
Bruening, G., and J. M. Lyons. 2000. “The Case of the
FLAVR SAVR Tomato.” California Agriculture 54(4):
6–7.
“CFA Breeds.” Cat Fanciers’ Association. http://www.cfa.org/
breeds.aspx. Accessed on September 3, 2013.
“Coordinated Framework for Regulation of Biotechnology
Products.” 1986. Federal Register 51: 23303–23350.
40
GMO Food

“Corn in the United States.” http://www2.econ.iastate.edu/
classes/econ496/lence/spring2004/corn.pdf. Accessed on
September 3, 2013.
Dahm, Ralf. 2008. “Discovering DNA: Friedrich Miescher and
the Early Years of Nucleic Acid Research.” Human Genetics
122(6): 565–581.
“DNA Ligase, T4.” Worthington Enzyme Manual. http://
www.worthington-biochem.com/dnat4l/. Accessed on
September 4, 2013.
“DNA Repair.” 2002. In Molecular Biology of the Cell, 4th
edition. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK26879/.
Accessed on September 4, 2013.
Duke, Stephen O., and Stephen B. Powles. 2008. “Glyphosate:
A Once-in-a-Century Herbicide.” Pest Management Science
64(4): 319–325.
“Fact Sheet: Genetically Engineered Animals.” U.S. Food and
Drug Administration. http://www.fda.gov/AnimalVeterinary/
DevelopmentApprovalProcess/GeneticEngineering/
GeneticallyEngineeredAnimals/ucm113597.htm.
Accessed on September 9, 2013.
“The First Recombinant DNA.” DNA Learning Center.
http://www.dnalc.org/view/15915-The-ﬁrst-recombinant
-DNA.html. Accessed on September 5, 2013.
Fischhoff, David A., et al. 1987. “Insect Tolerant
Transgenic Tomato Plants.” Nature Biotechnology 5(8):
807–813.
Fraley, R. T., S. B. Rogers, and R. B. Horsch. 1983. “Use of a
Chimeric Gene to Confer Antibiotic Resistance to Plant
Cells.” In Advances in Gene Technology: Molecular
Genetics of Plants and Animals. Miami Winter Symposia
20: 211–221.
Framond, A. J., et al. 1983. “Mini-ti Plasmid and a Chimeric
Gene Construct: New Approaches to Plant Gene Vector
Construction.” In Advances in Gene Technology: Molecular
Background and History
41

Genetics of Plants and Animals. Miami Winter Symposia 20:
159–170.
Fredrickson, Donald S. 2001. “The First Twenty-Five Years
after Asilomar.” Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 44(2):
170–182.
Funke, Todd, et al. 2006. “Molecular Basis for the Herbicide
Resistance of Roundup Ready Crops.” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
103(35): 13010–13015.
“Genetically Engineered Salmon.” U.S. Food and Drug
Administration. http://www.fda.gov/AnimalVeterinary/
DevelopmentApprovalProcess/GeneticEngineering/
GeneticallyEngineeredAnimals/ucm280853.htm. Accessed
on September 9, 2013.
“Global Status of Commercialized Biotech/GM Crops: 2012.”
International Service for the Acquisition of Agri-Biotech
Applications. http://www.isaaa.org/resources/publications/
briefs/44/executivesummary/default.asp. Accessed on
September 8, 2013.
Herrera-Estrella, Luis, et al. 1983. “Expression of Chimaeric
Genes Transferred into Plant Cells Using a Ti-Plasmid-
Derived Vector.” Nature 303(5914): 209–213.
Hirst, K. Kris. “History of Rice, Part One.” About.com
Archaeology. http://archaeology.about.com/od/
domestications/a/rice.htm. Accessed on August 29, 2013.
“History of Plant Breeding.” Colorado State University. http://
cls.casa.colostate.edu/transgeniccrops/history.html. Accessed
on September 8, 2013.
Hopkin, Karen. 2011. “Ready, Rest, Go.” The Scientist. http://
www.the-scientist.com/?articles.view/articleNo/30726/title/
Ready–Reset–Go/. Accessed on September 5, 2013.
Hutchison, Clyde A., III. 2007. “DNA Sequencing: Bench to
Bedside and Beyond.” Nucleic Acids Research 35(18):
6227–6237.
42
GMO Food

“Indian Archaeobotany Watch: Lahuradewa 2008.” The
Archaeobotanist. http://archaeobotanist.blogspot.com/
2009/06/indian-archaeobotany-watch-lahuradewa.html.
Accessed on August 29, 2013.
Junod, Suzanne White. 2009. “Celebrating a Milestone: FDA’s
Approval of the First Genetically-Engineered Product.”
About FDA. http://www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/WhatWeDo/
History/ProductRegulation/SelectionsFromFDLIUpdate
SeriesonFDAHistory/ucm081964.htm. Accessed on
September 7, 2013.
Kingsbury, David T. 1990. “Regulation of Biotechnology:
A. Perspective on the US ‘Coordinated Framework’.” http://
www.scopenvironment.org/downloadpubs/scope44/
chapter14.html. Accessed on September 7, 2013.
Krimsky, Sheldon. 2005. “From Asilomar to Industrial
Biotechnology: Risks, Reductionism, and Regulation.”
Science as Culture 14(4): 309–323. http://www.tufts.edu/
~skrimsky/PDF/From%20Asilomar.PDF. Accessed on
September 5, 2013.
Krimsky, Sheldon, Anne Baeck, and John Bolduc. 1982.
Municipal and State Recombinant DNA Laws: History and
Assessment. Medford, MA: Department of Urban and
Environmental Policy, Tufts University.
Linares, Olga F. 2002. “African Rice (Oryza glaberrima): History
and Future Potential.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 99(25): 16360–16365.
Magin, Ralph W. 2003. “Glyphosphate: Twenty-Eight Years
and Still Growing—the Discovery, Development, and
Impact of the Herbicide on the Agrichemical Industry.”
In G. C. Volgas, Roger A. Downer, and H. B. Lopez, eds.
Pesticide Formulations and Application Systems, vol. 23,
149–158. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM.
Mannion, A. M., and Stephen Morse. 2013. Gm Crops
1996–2012: A Review of Agronomic, Environmental and
Background and History
43

Socio-economic Impacts. University of Surrey Centre for
Environmental Strategy Working Paper 04/13. http://
biotechbeneﬁts.croplife.org/paper/gm-crops-1996-2012-a
-review-of-agronomic-environmental-and-socio-economic
-impacts-2/. Accessed on September 8, 2013.
Martineau, Belinda. 2002. First Fruit: The Creation of the Flavr
Savr Tomato and the Birth of Biotech Food. New York;
London: McGraw-Hill.
Maugh, Thomas H., II. 1987. “Altered Bacterium Does Its
Job: Frost Failed to Damage Sprayed Test Crop, Company
Says.” Los Angeles Times. http://articles.latimes.com/
1987-06-09/news/mn-6024_1_frost-damage. Accessed on
September 8, 2013.
McClean, Phillip. 1997. “Historical Events in the rDNA
Debate.” http://www.ndsu.edu/pubweb/~mcclean/plsc431/
debate/debate3.htm. Accessed on September 7, 2013.
McHughen, Alan. 2006. “Plant Genetic Engineering and
Regulation in the United States.” Agricultural Biotechnology
in California Series. http://anrcatalog.ucdavis.edu/pdf/8179
.pdf. Accessed on September 7, 2013.
“Memorandum by the UK Intellectual Property Ofﬁce
(UK-IPO).” http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/
ld200809/ldselect/ldsctech/107/107we39.htm. Accessed
on September 4, 2013.
“Monsanto’s SmartStax Maize ‘to be Approved for Growth in
October’ in EU.” RT. http://rt.com/news/smartstax-maize
-germany-approval-428/. Accessed on September 9, 2013.
Moore, Randy. 2001. “The ‘Rediscovery’ of Mendel’s Work.”
Bioscene 27(2): 13–24. http://www.cs.uml.edu/~grinstei/91
.510/Rediscovery%20of%20Mendel.pdf. Accessed on
May 2, 2014.
Murai, Norimoto, et al. 1983. “Phaseolin Gene from Bean Is
Expressed after Transfer to Sunﬂower via Tumor-Inducing
Plasmid Vectors.” Science 222(4623): 476–482.
44
GMO Food

“NIH Guidelines for Research Involving Recombinant or
Synthetic Nucleic Acid Molecules (NIH Guidelines),
March 2013.” Department of Health and Human Services,
National Institutes of Health. http://osp.od.nih.gov/ofﬁce
-biotechnology-activities/rdna/nih_guidelines_oba.html.
Accessed on May 16, 2014.
O’Neil, Dennis. 1997. “Mendel’s Genetics.” http://anthro
.palomar.edu/mendel/mendel_1.htm. Accessed on
September 3, 2013.
Ofﬁce of Science and Technology Policy. 1986. Coordinated
Framework for Regulation of Biotechnology. http://www.aphis
.usda.gov/brs/fedregister/coordinated_framework.pdf.
Accessed on August 19, 2013.
Perlak, Frederick J., et al. 1990. “Insect Resistant Cotton
Plants.” Bio/Technology 8(10): 939–943.
“Pesticide News Story: EPA Releases Report Containing
Latest Estimates of Pesticide Use in the United States.”
2011. Environmental Protection Agency. http://www
.epa.gov/oppfead1/cb/csb_page/updates/2011/
sales-usage06-07.html. Accessed on September 9,
2013.
Peterson, M. J., and Paul White. 2010. “Asilomar Conference
on Laboratory Precautions When Conducting DNA
Research—Case Summary.” http://scholarworks.umass
.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1023&context=ed
ethicsinscience&seiredir=1&referer=http%3A%2F
%2Fwww.google.com%2Furl%3Fsa%3Dt%26rct%3Dj
%26q%3Dasilomar%2520conference%2520was
%2520convened%2520by%2520%26source%3Dweb
%26cd%3D2%26ved%3D0CC8QFjAB%26url%3Dhttp
%253A%252F%252Fscholarworks.umass.edu%252Fcgi
%252Fviewcontent.cgi%253Farticle%253D1023%
2526context%253Dedethicsinscience%26ei%3DQfwo
UtiUAcPiiwKXroHQDA%26usg%3DAFQjCNFIR
1KKv4q0jLHttdmMVryF5vZqA%26bvm%3Dbv.5177
Background and History
45

3540%2Cd.cGE#search=%22asilomar%20conference%
20convened%20by%22. Accessed on September 5, 2013.
“Planned Releases of Genetically-Altered Organisms: The
Status of Government Research and Regulation.” 1986.
Hearing before the Subcommittee on Investigations and
Oversight of the Committee of Science and Technology,
House of Representatives, Ninety Ninth Congress, First
Session, December 4, 1985. Washington, DC: Government
Printing Ofﬁce.
Pray, Leslie A. 2008. “Restriction Enzymes.” Nature
Education. http://www.nature.com/scitable/topicpage/
restriction-enzymes-545. Accessed on September 4, 2013.
Quest-Ritson, Charles, and Brigid Quest-Ritson. 2011.
Encyclopedia of Roses. New York: DK.
“Recombinant DNA.” Cambridge Public Health Department.
http://cambridgepublichealth.org/services/regulatory
-activities/biosafety/overview.php. Accessed on September 8,
2013.
Roberts, Richard J. 2005. “How Restriction Enzymes Became
the Workhorses of Molecular Biology.” PNAS 102(17):
5905–5908.
Schell, J. M., et al. 1983. “Ti Plasmids as Experimental Gene
Vectors for Plants.” In Advances in Gene Technology:
Molecular Genetics of Plants and Animals. Miami Winter
Symposia. 20: 191–209.
Sherman, David M. 2002. Tending Animals in the Global
Village: A Guide to International Veterinary Medicine. New
York: Wiley-Blackwell.
Skirvin, R. M., et al. 2000. “The Use of Genetically Engineered
Bacteria to Control Frost on Strawberries and Potatoes.
Whatever Happened to All of That Research?” Scientia
Horticulturae 84(1): 179–189.
“Stacked Traits in Biotech Crops.” International Service for the
Acquisition of Agri-Biotech Applications. http://www.isaaa
46
GMO Food

.org/resources/publications/pocketk/42/. Accessed on
September 9, 2013.
Superweeds: How Biotech Crops Bolster the Pesticide Industry.
2013. Food & Water Watch. http://documents.foodand
waterwatch.org/doc/Superweeds.pdf. Accessed on
September 9, 2013.
“Transgenic Mice Formed by Nuclear Injection.” http://www
.informatics.jax.org/silver/chapters/6-3.shtml. Accessed on
September 8, 2013.
Vaeck, Mark, et al. 1987. “Transgenic Plants Protected from
Insect Attack.” Nature 328(6125): 33–37.
Wagner, Thomas E., et al. 1981. “Microinjection of a Rabbit
β-Globin Gene into Zygotes and Its Subsequent Expression
in Adult Mice and Their Offspring.” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
78(10): 6376–6380.
Watson, J. D., and F. H. C. Crick. 1953. “A Structure for
Deoxyribose Nucleic Acid.” Nature 171(4356): 737–738.
Wayne, Randy. 2010. Plant Cell Biology: From Astronomy to
Zoology. Amsterdam; Boston: Academic Press.
Wolf, George. 2003. “Friedrich Miescher: The Man Who
Discovered DNA.” http://www.bizgraphic.ch/miescheriana/
html/the_man_who_dicovered_dna.html. Accessed on
September 3, 2013.
Zimmer, Mark. “Fluoro Fish.” http://www.conncoll.edu/
ccacad/zimmer/GFP-ww/cooluses16.html. Accessed on
September 8, 2013.
Background and History
47


2
Problems, Controversies,
and Solutions
Opposition to Genetically Modified Foods
In 1985, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
granted approval to Advanced Genetic Sciences, Inc. (AGS) to
conduct a ﬁeld test on a genetically engineered product called
Frostban, consisting of ice-minus bacteria. Ice-minus bacteria
are genetically modiﬁed organisms (GMOs) capable of prevent-
ing plants from freezing at temperatures below which they nor-
mally freeze and die (see page 33, Chapter 1). The test was
originally scheduled to take place in Monterey County,
California, on a small patch of strawberries on December 12,
1985. News of the planned test aroused an immediate and vocif-
erous outcry from the general public. Monterey County ofﬁcials
received so many complaints and expressions of concern from
local residents and other critics from as far away as Europe that
the tests were cancelled, and the county adopted an ordinance
prohibiting the release of GMOs in the county, a ban that contin-
ues today (Naimon 1991; “Report on Genetically Modiﬁed
Organisms in Monterey County, California”).
49
Barry Aleshnick, of Guilford, Vermont, holds a sign at the Statehouse in
Montpelier on February 26, 2004, during a protest to call for a time out
on genetically engineered crops. Demonstrators went inside to listen to
Monsanto lobbyists as they testiﬁed before the House Agriculture
Committee. (AP Photo/Toby Talbot)

Understandably concerned by public reaction to its planned
test, AGS decided to reschedule its experiment in another loca-
tion, this time working to better inform the public about the
nature of the ice-minus bacterium and its potential risk (or lack
of risk). The new test site was a 0.2-acre plot of strawberries in
Brentwood, Contra Costa, California, on April 24, 1987. Any
hopes the company had that the test would go forward
smoothly were dashed, however, when protestors mounted
another campaign against those plans. They made a number
of accusations against the planned test, some supposedly scien-
tiﬁc, others political, and still others moral and ethical. Noted
iconoclast Jeremy Rifkin, for example, predicted that the release
of ice-minus bacteria might “reduce rainfall,” and other protest-
ers opined that scientists, bureaucrats, and industrialists were
“playing God” in their experiments (Jukes 1987).
During the early morning hours of April 24, protestors
gained access to the Brentwood test plot and pulled up 2,200
of the 2,400 strawberry plants scheduled to be sprayed. AGS
ofﬁcials replanted those plants, however, and the spraying went
forward without further incident. The experiment was eventu-
ally completed, and the test plants were destroyed two months
later (Baskin 1987; Crawford 1987).
This type of early reaction against the development and test-
ing of GM crops did not bode well for the industry. Supporters
of GM technology had every reason to believe that they might
face an uphill battle in convincing farmers and consumers of
the value of their new products. This concern was conﬁrmed
when a second test of Frostban was disrupted less than a month
after the Brentwood incident. About three-quarters of 4,000
potatoes sprayed with the product at a test site in Tule Lake,
California, were pulled up by protestors in the early morning
hours of May 26, 1987. Again, the potatoes were replanted,
and the experiment was carried to its conclusion (“Vandals
Uproot Plants Used in Bacteria Test” 1987).
In 2000, a reporter for The Oregonian, Portland’s daily news-
paper, reported on a survey of the types of protests carried out
50
GMO Food

by anti-GM activists, primarily in the West. Some of the inci-
dents he described were the following:
• In 1996, members of the Greenpeace organization spray-
painted a giant letter “X” on a ﬁeld of soybeans in Iowa con-
sisting of GM plants (“Greenpeace Protestors Paint Field”).
• In protest against a contract between the biotechnology ﬁrm
of Novartis and the University of California at Berkeley in
1998, two teams of protesting students played a football
game on a test ﬁeld of GM corn, destroying 14 rows of the
corn (“Round-Up Ready Corn under Attack in California”).
• Members of the Earth Liberation Front (ELF) set ﬁre in
December 1999 to a research facility at Michigan State
University where genetic engineering experiments with
plants were being conducted, claiming that such research
was “one of the many threats to the natural world as we
know it” (“Four Arrested in 1999 New Year’s Eve
Agricultural Hall Arson”).
• A group calling itself Seeds of Resistance took credit in
August 1999 for cutting down a half-acre crop of experi-
mental GM corn at the University of Maine, hoping to con-
vince workers there to “look into other lines of work”
(Tuttle 1999).
• In November 1999, members of an activist group calling
themselves the Washington Tree Improvement Association
broke into a research facility at the Washington State
University Puyallup Research and Extension Center, intend-
ing to destroy genetically engineered poplar and cottonwood
trees. By mistake, they uprooted 180 nonengineered rasp-
berry plants (Mccomber 1999).
At the time of the Oregonian article quoted here, the reporter
noted that his own state was fortunate in not having been the
target of any serious eco-action in opposition to GM crops
and foods, although he quoted a representative of ELF that it
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
51

“is just a matter of time before Oregon is hit.” That prediction
was surely correct, because members of ELF attacked the
Jefferson Poplar Farm in Catskanie, Oregon, on May 21,
2001, to protest the growing of GM trees at the location
(Bartley 2006). This action was hardly the last such event in
the history of protests against GM crops and foods in the
United States. As recently as June 2013, unknown individuals
plowed under a total of about 6,500 genetically engineered
sugar beet plants in southern Oregon (Wilson 2013).
Thus, although the GM food and crop industry has moved
forward in the United States with considerable success in the
past half century, protests by those opposed to such research
continue. Those protests reached a zenith in 2013 when two
worldwide March against Monsanto events were held on
May 26 and October 12. Organizers claimed that more than
2 million people from 436 cities in 52 countries attended the
ﬁrst of these marches and 3 million people from 400 cities in
57 countries attended the second. Organizer Tami Canal
explained her group’s objective. “If we don’t act,” she said,
“who’s going to?” After all, she continued, “They [presumably,
Monsanto] are poisoning our children, poisoning our planet”
(“Protestors around the World March against Monsanto”).
Public Opinion on Genetically Modified Foods
in the United States
To what extent, if at all, does the action of protesters, such as
these, reﬂect general public opinion about GM crops and
foods? Public opinion polling companies have been taking the
pulse of the American public, as well as citizens of other nations
around the world, for more than 30 years. No brief summary is
adequate to describe the results of those polls, although the gen-
eral trend over those years appears to be that the general public
is (1) generally uninformed about the nature of GM foods and
the scientiﬁc evidence about their safety, (2) generally opposed
to the sale of GM foods and less likely to by such foods if
52
GMO Food

provided the opportunity, and (3) generally in favor of labeling
GM foods so that consumers can know when they are purchas-
ing such foods.
One of the earliest surveys of public opinion about GMOs
was conducted in 1987 by the U.S. Ofﬁce of Technology
Assessment (OTA). The agency asked a sample of Americans
about a number of aspects of biotechnology, including geneti-
cally engineered crops and foods. The results of this study must
be read in view of the fact that the ﬁeld of biotechnology was
still relatively young. In any case, some of the OTA ﬁndings
included the following:
• About two-thirds of the people surveyed for the study
thought that they had a general understanding of the process
of genetic engineering.
• Only about one in ﬁve respondents (19 percent) had heard
of any possible negative consequences of research in genetic
engineering.
• Respondents’ concerns about the development of GM crops
and foods depended on the perceived risk posed by such
items. More than half (55 percent) said that they would
approve the use of GM crops if the risk of losing one or
more natural plants or animals were 1 in 1,000 or less.
That number decreased as the risk of losing organisms
increased.
• Members of the general public appeared to be aware of the
potential risks posed by the development of GM crops and
foods. Sixty-one percent acknowledged the possibility that
antibiotic-resistant diseases might develop, that such prod-
ucts might produce birth defects in humans (57 percent),
or
that
they
might
create
herbicide-resistant
weeds
(56 percent) or endanger the food supply (52 percent).
Nonetheless, fewer than one in ﬁve respondents expressed
any real concerns about such outcomes, regarding them all
as highly unlikely.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
53

The OTA concluded that its overall impression was that the
general public had some concerns about genetic engineering
in the abstract but approved of every speciﬁc example of such
research when offered the choice. The general summary of the
report concluded with the observation that
obstruction of technological development is not a popular
cause in the United States in the mid-1980s. This survey
indicates that a majority of the public believes the
expected beneﬁts of science, biotechnology, and genetic
engineering are sufﬁcient to outweigh the risks. (U.S.
Congress, Ofﬁce of Technology Assessment 1987, 3–5)
A fairly signiﬁcant number of public opinion polls about the
attitudes of Americans toward GM foods have been conducted
over the past three decades. Some of these polls have a relatively
short-term focus, conducting surveys that last over a year or so.
Other polling agencies have conducted a series of polls on the
topic that extend over many years, in at least one case more
than a decade. The International Food Information Council
(IFIC) has been conducting such polls on a regular basis since
2001, with its most recent survey dating to 2012. Surveys
were conducted in 1997, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2006, 2007,
2008, 2010, and 2012 (“Consumer Insights Regarding Food
Biotechnology”).
An example of the type of short-term polling that has been
conducted was an especially interesting survey by researchers
at the University of Florida, reported in 2004. In this survey,
the researchers asked some fairly standards, such as how much
respondents actually knew about GM foods in general and in
the food industry and what their attitudes about various aspects
of GM foods were. They repeated their survey on four occasions,
ranging from February 1999 to September 2001. Although
responses varied somewhat over this period, they tended to range
within a central limit. For example, researchers found that some-
where between 10 and 15 percent of respondents said that they
54
GMO Food

knew “a lot” about GM foods, about 30 percent said that they
knew “some,” another 30 percent said that they knew “little,”
and about 20 to 25 percent said that they knew “nothing”
(Medina et al. 2004).
When asked whether they knew if GM foods were available
in local markets, about 40 percent said yes, and an equal num-
ber said no. The remaining number of respondents just did not
know. Respondents were then asked how willing they might be
to purchase foods that had been genetically modiﬁed (1) for the
purpose of resisting the action of pesticides (e.g., Roundup
Ready plants) and (2) to improve the shelf life or taste of a
product. Nearly three quarters of respondents had no problem
with the ﬁrst option (30 percent being “very willing” to buy
such products and 40 percent, “somewhat willing”), whereas
just over half were agreeable to the second option (20 percent
being “very willing” to buy such products and 40 percent,
“somewhat willing”). About 40 percent said that they were
not likely to buy such products (20 percent) or deﬁnitely would
not do so (20 percent).
Of somewhat greater interest is long-term trends detected by
surveys that have extended over many years. For example, the
Pew Initiative on Food and Biotechnology conducted a series of
annual surveys beginning in 2001 and ending in 2006, measuring
some basic information about public attitudes with regard to GM
foods (Pew Initiative on Food and Biotechnology; “The Pew
Initiative on Food and Biotechnology” 2006) Some of the ﬁnd-
ings reported from that series of studies include the following:
• Self-reported knowledge about GM foods ranged from
54 percent at the beginning of the period to a high of 65 per-
cent in 2003 and 2004, back down to 58 percent in 2005
and 2006.
• Support for the introduction of GM foods into the U.S.
marketplace remained stable throughout the period at about
27 percent, although opposition declined over that period
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
55

from a high of 58 percent in 2001 to a low of 46 percent in
2006.
• The willingness of an individual to knowingly eat GM foods
was very much a function of gender, with men about equally
equal to knowingly eat or not eat such foods, whereas
women were about twice as likely not to eat GM foods as
they were to eat them.
• A somewhat common ﬁnding supported by the Pew data
has to do with how consumers respond after being told that
more than half of all processed foods in the marketplace con-
tain GM elements. When consumers receive that informa-
tion, they tend to feel much more safe about GM foods
than without that information. In the Pew surveys, nearly half
of all respondents said that they felt GM foods were safe to eat
after being provided with this information, whereas less than a
third felt GM foods were unsafe. The former number fell only
slightly over the ﬁve-year period of the surveys, whereas the
latter number increased by almost 10 percent.
• One of the quite remarkable ﬁndings of the Pew surveys was
to whom an individual would turn for trusted information
about GM foods. The least reliable source mentioned was
the news media, with only 9 percent of respondents selecting
this source, followed by biotechnology companies them-
selves, regarded as trustworthy by only 11 percent, and food
manufacturers and government regulators, by 14 percent
each. The most reliable source of information mentioned
by respondents was friends and family, followed by farmers,
with support from 37 percent and 33 percent of respond-
ents, respectively.
Perhaps the best overall view of public opinion in the United
States about GM foods is the series of IFIC polls mentioned
earlier. Some of the ﬁndings produced over the decade and a
half of this polling are as follows (all data from individual poll
56
GMO Food

results summarized at Consumer Insights Regarding Food
Biotechnology, 2013):
• The number of people surveyed for the IFIC polls who said
they knew “a lot” about GM foods remained fairly constant
at around 10 percent from 1997 to 2012, with the number
claiming to know “some” stayed just under 30 percent until
it rose to 32 percent in 2012. Throughout the period, the
number who said they knew “little” or “nothing” remained
consistently in the low-60-percent range.
• Generally speaking, the number of respondents who knew
whether or not GM foods were available in stores was just
under 30 percent during the period, with about twice that
number (ranging from 59 to 68 percent) saying they just
did not know. Around 10 percent believed that no GM
foods were available in stores.
• IFIC pollsters began asking respondents in 2006 about their
general attitudes toward GM foods and found that about
10 percent were very favorable, about 22 percent somewhat
favorable, about 30 percent neutral, about 12 percent some-
what unfavorable, and about 5 percent strongly unfavorable.
These numbers have remained relatively constant in the
2008, 2010, and 2012 polls.
• A question that IFIC researchers have consistently asked
over the years has to do with the willingness of consumers
to purchase and eat foods that have been genetically modi-
ﬁed, similar to the query by Florida researchers noted earlier.
Their results were generally similar to those of the Florida
study, with about two-thirds of responding saying that they
would be very or somewhat likely to buy foods that were
genetically modiﬁed to improve taste or shelf life and about
one-third saying that they would not do so. In the case of
pest-resistant plants, the IFIC results were somewhat
different from the Florida results, with about two-thirds of
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
57

respondents again saying that they had no problem buying
and eating such products and about one-third saying that
they were unlikely to do so.
Overall, the IFIC surveys seem to show a somewhat modest
increase in public acceptability of GM foods, although it is
probably too early to know if this is really a long-term trend
or a single-year movement in the data. (For a good overall
review of trends in public opinion about GM foods in the
United States up to 2008, see Bonny 2008.)
Public Opinion about Genetically Modified Foods
in Europe
Observers have long commented on the disparity in views
about GM foods in the United States versus the European
Union and other developing nations. As one reporter has
noted,
the United States and Europe could hardly be farther
apart. U.S. grocery stores are well stocked with genetically
modiﬁed cereals and other products, while Europeans
have found ways to keep them off the shelves. (Galbraith
2013)
In polls from the 1990s and early 2000s, European respond-
ents tended to show a disapproval of GM crops and foods by as
much as a dozen percentage points or more.
Over
the
last
decade,
however,
differences
between
European and American attitudes have begun to disappear.
For example, a German website devoted to providing informa-
tion about GM products, GMO Compass, reported in 2009
that support for GM crops and foods among the general popu-
lace in Europe appeared to be inching upward and that fewer
and fewer poll respondents were expressing concern about the
potential health and environmental effects of such products
58
GMO Food

(“Opposition Decreasing or Acceptance Increasing?”). A similar
trend was observed in the United Kingdom, where a 2012 poll
commissioned by the British Science Association (BSA) showed
that the percentage of respondents who expressed concerns
about GM foods had dropped from 46 percent in 2003 to
41 percent in 2012 and the percentage who were not concerned
rose from 17 percent to 25 percent over the same period
(Vaughan 2012). Perhaps more to the point, pollsters have
found that consumers in Europe and the United Kingdom
appear to have little hesitation in actual practice to the purchase
of GM foods, even when they express concerns or doubts about
such products. In one EU survey, for example, more than
80 percent of consumers interviewed in a recent EU poll said
that they make no conscious effort to avoid the purchase of
GM foods in their daily marketing (“Opposition Decreasing
or Acceptance Increasing?”).
Probably the best statistical information currently available
about European attitudes toward GM crops and foods comes
from a 2010 Eurobarometer poll on the topic. Eurobarometer
is the Public Opinion Analysis division of the European
Commission (EC) that has been conducting surveys about a vari-
ety of topics in the European Union since 1973. The major
results of the 2010 survey on GM foods are shown in Table 2.1.
As one might expect, general data for the European Union
do not necessarily reﬂect attitudes in individual member states,
which tend to vary over a relatively wide range. For example, on
the question as to whether or not GM foods make a person
uneasy, the response rate ranged from a “yes” response of
88 percent in Greece, 85 percent in Cyprus, and 80 percent
in Lithuania to 40 percent in Malta, 47 percent in Hungary,
and 48 percent in Ireland. A similar spread was found in the
fundamental question as to whether or not GM foods are good
for a person and her or his family. Eighty percent of Latvians
said “no” to that question, along with 78 percent of Greeks
and 73 percent of Cypriots, compared with 37 percent of the
Maltese, 39 percent of the Irish, and 40 percent of residents
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
59

of the United Kingdom. As to the risk posed by GM crops and
foods to the environment, the residents of no nation provided
majority support for the view that GM crops and foods are safe
for the environment, although the Czechs (41 percent), Slovaks
(35 percent), and Hungarians (32 percent) were most support-
ive of the view, the Swedes (10 percent), Cypriots (12 percent),
Greeks (14 percent), and Lithuanians (14 percent) were most
critical of that view (“Biotechnology,” questions QB4a.7,
QB4a.2, and QBa4.9).
Regulation of Genetically Modified Crops and Foods
in the European Union
Although the development of GM crops and foods has been a
matter of some concern to many countries around the world,
the responses to that concern have differed sharply from region
to region. That fact is perhaps most clearly in evidence in the
comparison of attempts to regulate GM food and crops in the
United States and the European Union.
60
GMO Food
Table 2.1
European Attitudes on Genetically Modiﬁed Foods (percentages)
Issue
Agree
Disagree
No Opinion
Genetically modiﬁed food
Is fundamentally unnatural
70
20
10
Makes you uneasy
61
29
10
Beneﬁts some people but puts others
at risk
57
25
18
Is not good for you and your family
54
30
16
Helps people in developing countries
43
37
20
Is good for the economy of your nation
31
50
19
Should be more fully developed
23
61
16
Does no harm to the environment
23
53
24
Is safe for your health and that of your
family
22
59
19
Is safe for future generations
21
58
21
Source: “Biotechnology.” Eurobarometer 73.1. Brussels: TNS Opinion & Social.
http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/archives/ebs/ebs_341_en.pdf.
Accessed
on
September 15, 2013.

The American approach to the regulation of GM foods and
crops was formulated to a large extent in the 1980s and early
1990s, under the administrations of President Ronald Reagan
and George H. W. Bush. This approach was based on three pri-
mary principles. First, the regulations would focus on the spe-
ciﬁc products of genetic engineering, such as rDNA cotton
and corn, and not on the general process by which these prod-
ucts were made. Second, the general assumption underlying
regulation would be that GM substances would be regarded as
safe unless there was competent scientiﬁc information to indi-
cate otherwise. Third, existing regulatory agencies were
adequate and sufﬁcient for carrying out whatever regulatory
activities were necessary. Recall that regulation of GM substan-
ces was distributed by the Coordinated Framework for
Regulation of Biotechnology Products of 1986 among just such
agencies, primarily the Food and Drug Administration, the
Environmental Protection Agency, and the U.S. Department
of Agriculture Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service.
(For a complete history of this issue, see Marden 2003.)
The approach to the regulation of GM products in the
European Union as a whole, as well as in individual nations,
was different from that in the United States in two fundamental
ways. In the ﬁrst place, the European Union decided to focus
its regulatory efforts on the process by which GM crops and
foods were produced, tested, and marketed rather than on the
individual products. Second, it was considerably more skeptical
about the safety of these products, acting on the assumption
that there might be good reason to err on the side of caution
in regulating the products. This point of view is reﬂected in a
philosophy that has long underlain much of the EU regulatory
effort, the precautionary principle. The precautionary principle
states that some new product or process should not be approved
for use if the safety associated with the product or process is
unknown or in serious dispute. Thus, a company that wanted
to test or market a GM product in the European Union had
ﬁrst to prove beyond reasonable doubt that it was safe to use.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
61

(For more on the comparison between the American and
European approach to regulation, see Lynch and Vogel 2001.)
The European Union’s earliest forays into the ﬁeld of GMO
regulation came in 1978, when the EC proposed a directive
requiring that all researchers in member states submit proposals
for any work on GMOs to it for ﬁnal approval. The proposed
directive reﬂected the signiﬁcant level of concern about genetic
engineering present in the United States at the same time, fol-
lowing the Asilomar conference by three years. The EC pro-
posal was withdrawn only two years later without ever taking
effect as European government ofﬁcials (like those in the
United States) began to feel somewhat more comfortable with
rDNA research and began to worry instead about possible
consequences on the competitiveness of European research if
regulations were too severe (Shaffer and Pollack 2004).
At that point, EU regulators shifted their attention primarily
from research to the release of GM organisms into the environ-
ment and the labeling of GM products. Among the ﬁrst regula-
tions adopted by the European Union was Directive 90/219/
EEC of April 23, 1990. This directive required member states
to adopt legislation that would ensure that GMOs introduced
into the environment could not escape and travel into an
adjoining state. It made provisions for notiﬁcations of member
states about the release of GM organisms and distinguished
between two general classes of GMOs, those that were known
to be relatively safe, and those that were known to be unsafe
or whose safety was in doubt (“Contained Use of Genetically
Modiﬁed Micro-organisms”).
For a few years, Council Directive 90/219/EEC and its
amendments (especially 90/220/EEC) seemed to provide a sat-
isfactory, if somewhat uneasy, solution for dealing with research
and development on GM crops and foods. Then, in 1996, a
series of events occurred in close proximity to each other to
disrupt that compromise. In March of that year, the British
government announced that more than 150,000 cows in
Great Britain had been infected with bovine spongiform
62
GMO Food

encephalopathy (BSE), popularly known as mad cow disease, a
condition thought to be associated with Creutzfeldt–Jakob dis-
ease in humans. The importation of British beef to the
Continent was almost immediately banned, and the general
public became wary of the effectiveness of food regulations in
protecting human health and that of domestic animals
(Shaffer and Pollack 2004, 21).
This event was followed closely by a number of other adverse
events that raised further doubts about the effectiveness of
existing EU regulation of crops and foods. In December 1996,
Scottish researchers announced the birth of the ﬁrst cloned mam-
mal, the sheep Dolly, and at almost the same time, the United
States and Canada ﬁled a complaint with the World Trade
Organization (WTO) that the EU ban on the importation of
hormone-treated beef was an illegal restrain on trade. EU food
regulation policies were, thus, under attack from a variety of
fronts: scientiﬁc, economic, political, and ethical.
Ironically, just at the time that doubts were being raised
about the effectiveness of EU regulatory procedures, the EC
had begun to grant approval to the importation and sale of
GM foods. The ﬁrst such action was taken in April 1996 (only
a month after announcement of the BSE epidemic) when the
EC approved the sale of GM soy beans. The action was taken
in response to a request by the United Kingdom for such
approval and in spite of the fact that every other EU state had
voted to oppose the approval. The action reﬂected a somewhat
unusual aspect of the EU regulatory procedure, in which a
request by a single member state had to be approved by the
EC, even though every other state opposed the action. The
EC took a similar action only a few months later when it
approved the sale of GM corn in January 1997. That action
was also opposed by all member states except the requesting
nation, in this case, France (Shaffer and Pollack 2004, 24).
The fragmented view on GM crops and foods in the
European Union is reﬂected in these actions and in the further
steps taken by individual member states. Those steps were
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
63

permissible under the so-called safeguard clause in EU GM reg-
ulations. That clause allows individual member states to “provi-
sionally restrict or prohibit the use and/or sale” of a GM
product if it regards that product as harmful to human health or
the environment (“GMOs in a Nutshell”). Over the years, vari-
ous nations have invoked the safeguard clause for various prod-
ucts and reasons. As of early 2014, those nations include
Austria, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, and Luxembourg
(“Rules on GMOs in the EU—Ban on GMOs Cultivation”).
In January 1997, two events occurred that further clariﬁed
the EU position on GM foods and crops. The ﬁrst event was
the release of a new regulation by the EC, Regulation 258/97,
more commonly known as the Novel Foods Regulation. This
regulation was designed to deﬁne what a “novel food” was,
and how it was to be regulated in the European Union. The
concept of a novel food was hardly new, as it could and had
been applied to a host of foods not native to the European con-
tinent whose safety may or may not have been known, but it
clearly focused more speciﬁcally on crops and foods that had
been genetically modiﬁed and whose safety was often in doubt.
The regulation deﬁned novel foods as any product “not
hitherto . . . used for human consumption to a signiﬁcant
degree within the Community” (“Regulation [EC] No 258/
97”). Signiﬁcantly, it included both foods that had been genet-
ically modiﬁed and foods produced from but not containing
GMOs. As an example, some popular oils were being produced
from GM crops, but they no longer contained any traces of
GMOs (Shaffer and Pollack 2004, 20).
Two features of the regulation were of particular interest.
In the ﬁrst place, the principle of substantial equivalence was
introduced as a guiding feature for determining the safety of
novel foods. In a somewhat circular deﬁnition, the principle
of substantial equivalence states that any new food or product
that is substantially equivalent to an existing food or product
can be treated in the same way as the known and/or conven-
tional food in terms of its safety for human consumption.
64
GMO Food

So the task facing a company wanting to introduce a novel food
in the European Union (or the United States, for that matter)
was to show that one could not detect any real difference
between the new food and other foods like it already in use.
The second feature of the Novel Foods Regulation was the
restatement of the safeguard clause, which allowed any nation
member of the European Union to prohibit the importation
and/or sale of any substance that it had reason to believe might
be harmful to its citizens. As pointed out earlier, this feature has
become a powerful tool for EU nations that had misgivings
about the safety of any type of GM product that has otherwise
been approved for use elsewhere in the Union. Indeed, an
example of that became available almost immediately when
the second major event of January 1997 took place, the appro-
val by the EC of the sale of GM maize in the Union.
The controversy arose when the French government
requested approval for the use of a GM form of maize, Bt176,
produced by the Syngenta company. After review by the EC,
the French request was approved and distributed to the other
14 members of the Union. All 14 nations either opposed the
EC recommendation or abstained from voting. According to
the rules by which the EU works, however, these actions were
insufﬁcient to prevent the French from proceeding with the
use of Bt176 maize. Eventually, three nations, Austria,
Germany, and Luxembourg, invoked the safeguard clause
against the importation and sale of Bt176 maize within their
borders (“Austria Bans Monsanto’s GM Oilseed Rape”).
The Cartagena Protocol
The issue of GMOs was one of concern not only in the United
States and the European Union but in many other parts of the
world as well. That concern was expressed in a number of ways
in a variety of settings. For example, discussions among nations
about protection of Earth’s biodiversity dating to the late 1980s
came to fruition at the May 1992 Nairobi Conference for the
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
65

Adoption of the Agreed Text of the Convention on Biological
Diversity (CBD). The document presented at that time laid
out some general principles about the importance of biodiver-
sity on the planet and a number of steps needed to ensure that
biodiversity would be maintained in the face of an expanding
human presence in the natural world. By June 4, 1993, 186
nations had signed that treaty, and it ofﬁcially came into effect
on December 29, 1993, after the 30th ratiﬁcation. As of 2013,
192 nations and the European Union—every member of
the United Nations except Andorra, South Sudan, and the
United States—have ratiﬁed the treaty (“The Convention on
Biological Diversity”).
One of the most contentious issues in the negotiations over
the CBD was how best to deal with GMOs (referred to in the
treaty as living modiﬁed organisms [LMOs]). In fact, as is often
the case, it required a number of international meetings to get
a statement about GMOs into a form in which it could become
part of the CBD. That point was ﬁnally reached at a meeting in
Cartagena, Colombia, in January 2000. That document, now
known as the Cartagena Protocol, is ofﬁcially a part of the
CBD. Its purpose is to protect biodiversity by establishing
rigorous rules by which GMOs can be transferred from one
nation to another. As of the end of 2013, 166 nations had rati-
ﬁed the protocol. A group of six nations that have withheld
their support for the treaty, the so-called Miami Group consists
of nations that are either responsible for the production of the
great majority of GM foods and crops or major exporters of
those crops and foods (Argentina, Australia, Canada, Chile,
the United States, and Uruguay) (Rajamani 2013). (For a com-
plete description of the Cartagena Protocol, see Mackenzie
et al. 2003.)
A Shift in Emphasis
The debate over the Cartagena Protocol came at a time when
the European Union was beginning to feel a squeeze on its
66
GMO Food

policies about the regulation of GM crops and foods. On the
one hand, nations that were moving forward aggressively with
the production of GM foods and crops, such as (primarily)
the United States, were trying to convince the Europeans to
relax their restrictions on the importation of GM products.
As a simple economic reality, they wanted to increase the
marketplace for some of their major GM producers, such as
Monsanto and Syngenta. On the other hand, individual
nations were becoming more resistant to any liberalization in
the rules controlling the production, testing, release, transport,
and sale of GM products. More and more nations were choos-
ing the safeguard clause as a way of ignoring EC efforts to mol-
lify the United States and other members of the Miami Group.
As a way of dealing with these conﬂicting pressures, the EC
began a reanalysis of its viewpoint on GM products, eventually
producing a new statement of its position in a White Paper on
Food Safety and a White Paper on the Precautionary Principle,
both released in 2000. These papers recommended a restruc-
turing of the EU approach to GM regulation with an eye to sat-
isfying its critics on both sides of the debate. That compromise
turned out to be unsatisfactory to both the Miami nations,
which did not abandon their demand for greater access to
European markets for their GM products, nor to individual
European nations, some of whom became even more insistent
that they would not allow GM crops, seeds, or foods within
their boundaries.
A key development
in this controversy occurred in
May 2003, when the United States ﬁled a complaint with the
WTO, arguing that the EC regulatory policies constituted an
illegal act of protectionism against trade from itself and other
Miami countries. (A year later, Argentina and Canada joined
the United States in this complaint.) In February 2006, the
WTO ruled against the European Union in this dispute, saying
that the region’s ban on the importation of GM foods was ille-
gal under international trade rules. The dispute between
Argentina, Canada, and the United States on the one hand
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
67

and the European Union on the other dragged on, however,
for nearly a decade. After extended discussion, Canada and
the European Union reached an agreement in July 2009
and Argentina and the European Union, in March 2010.
Discussions between the United States and the European
Union lingered on into November 2012, however, when the
WTO ﬁnally ruled that the EC bans on the importation of
GM products was indeed illegal and ordered the European
Union to remove those bans. In the end, the force of
international trade had made its mark on European efforts to
restrict the introduction and use of GM products to the conti-
nent (“EU and Argentina Settle WTO Case on Genetically
Modiﬁed Organisms”; “EU GMO Ban Was Illegal, WTO
Rules”).
Current Status of Regulation of Genetically Modified
Organisms in Europe
After three decades of legal maneuvering, the European Union
has evolved a system for regulating GM seeds, crops, and foods
available on the Continent. This process is quite precise and
very detailed. Each GM crop or food is considered de facto to
be a “new food” that must be tested to be sure that it is safe
for human consumption and will not cause harm to the natural
environment. Testing of a new GM product is carried out
by the Panel on Genetically Modiﬁed Organisms of the
European Food Safety Authority (EFSA). The EFSA then
transmits
its
ﬁndings
to
the
Standing
Committee
on
Genetically Modiﬁed Food and Feed and Environmental Risk
of the European Commission, which then accepts or rejects
the EFSA recommendation. The EC also has the option of
passing the recommendation on to its Council of Agricultural
Ministers, which may make its own determination on the prod-
ucts or return the recommendation to the EC for promulga-
tion. When a product passes all these hurdles, it may be
ofﬁcially approved for use in the European Union, although
68
GMO Food

further roadblocks are also possible (Davison 2010; “GMOs in
a Nutshell”).
The most common of those additional hurdles is invoking of
the safeguard clause by one or more member states. When that
happens, the EC is required to investigate the complaint made
by the nation or nations invoking the safeguard clause. It may
then change its mind and revoke the original authorization or
conclude that the authorization was legitimate and ask the
invoking state to withdraw its objections. As noted earlier, as
of early 2014, six states had invoked the safeguard clause
against GM products that had been approved by the EC:
Austria, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, and Luxembourg.
As of early 2014, 47 products had been approved as a result
of this process, virtually all of them intended for human or ani-
mal food or for the production of other foods. Of these, 27
were varieties of maize, eight of corn, seven of soybeans, three
of oilseed rape, and one each of potato and sugar beet. A num-
ber of other products were moving through the regulatory pipe-
line and were subject to approval (or rejection) in the near
future.
Authorization for the use of GM crops in the European
Union is governed by 2001/18/EC, on the deliberate release
of GMOs into the environment. According to that directive,
GM seeds must be thoroughly tested to make sure that they
pose no harm to the environment. That restriction applies also
to plants imported from outside the European Union, which
could conceivably be planted and grown on the Continent. As
of early 2014, only two crops had been approved for use in
the European Union under this direction. The ﬁrst was a
modiﬁed form of maize known as MON810, developed
by the Monsanto company and approved for use against the
European corn-borer caterpillar in 1998. That crop is now
widely grown in Spain, where it is planted on more than
80,000 hectares (200,000 acres) of land. Smaller areas have also
been planted in the Czech Republic, Germany, and Portugal
(“Maize”).
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
69

The second approved crop is a type of GM potato called
Amﬂora, developed by the German company BASF. The vari-
etal was developed not for human consumption but for use in
the production of industrial starch used in the textile, paper,
adhesive, and other industries. It was licensed in 2010 in a
move that one of the world’s most famous scientiﬁc journals
called “a new dawn for transgenic crops in Europe” (Butler
2010). The company had been trying for 13 years to earn
approval for its products. Only two years later, however, the
company withdrew the product from the market and decided
against its further promotion largely because of lack of public
acceptance of the plant. At the time it discontinued sale of the
potato, it had been planted to 150 hectares (370 acres) in
the Czech Republic, 80 hectares (200 acres) in Sweden, and
15 hectares (37 acres) in Germany in 2010 and 2 hectares
(4 acres) in Germany in 2011 (“Amﬂora—a Potato for
Industrial Applications”).
A Shift in Emphasis: European Regulations on Labeling
By the end of the 1990s, it had become apparent that the
European Union was losing its battle to limit, prohibit, or effec-
tively control the importation and use of GM crops and foods
on the continent. At that point, the EC apparently began to
shift its emphasis with regard to GMO crops and foods within
the union. It decided, instead, to focus on the labeling of GMO
crops and foods or food products containing GMOs. The phi-
losophy appeared to be that if the organization could not
restrict the use of GM crops and foods, it could at the very least
let consumers know which products contained GMOs.
The ﬁrst step in this new initiative was a provision of
Regulation (EC) 258/97 (article 8) on novel foods and their
ingredients. The purpose of that article was to ensure that con-
sumers were aware of any food whose “composition, nutritional
value or nutritional effects, or intended use of the food” made
the food “no longer equivalent to an existing food or food
70
GMO Food

ingredient.” Among the properties that would produce such a
change in a food product was, according to part 1(d) of the
article, “the presence of an organism genetically modiﬁed by
techniques of genetic modiﬁcation, the non-exhaustive list of
which is laid down in Annex I A, Part 1 of Directive 90/220/
EEC” (“Regulation [EC] No 258/97,” Article 8). The regula-
tion then went on in Article 9 to provide additional detail as
to the steps that had to be followed to place into the market-
place a product containing a GMO. For example, the release
of a GMO-containing product was required to be accompanied
by, at least:
a copy of the written consent, if any, from the competent
authority, to the deliberate release of the genetically modi-
ﬁed organisms for research and development purposes
provided for in Article 6 (4) of Directive 90/220/EEC,
together with the results of the release(s) with respect to
any risk to human health and the environment;
and
the complete technical dossier supplying the relevant
information requested in Article 11 of Directive 90/220/
EEC and the environmental risk assessment based on this
information, the results of any studies carried out for the
purposes of research and development or, where appropri-
ate, the decision authorizing the placing on the market
provided for in part C of Directive 90/220/EEC.
(“Regulation [EC] No 258/97,” Article 9)
These labeling regulations were gradually reﬁned over the
following decade. Only a year later, for example, the EC
adopted an amendment to 258/97, adding a number of GM
products that were not covered by that document, primarily
GM maize and soybeans. Regulation 1139/98 was very speciﬁc
as to which products were to be covered by labeling regulations,
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
71

and what kinds of working were required in the labeling
system. In Article 2 of the regulation, for example, it provided
that
where the food consists of more than one ingredient, the
words “produced from genetically modiﬁed soya” or “pro-
duced from genetically modiﬁed maize”, as appropriate,
shall appear in the list of ingredients provided for by
Article 6 of Directive 79/112/EEC in parentheses
immediately after the name of the ingredient concerned.
Alternatively, these words may appear in a prominently
displayed footnote to the list of ingredients, related by
means of an asterisk (*) to the ingredient concerned.
Where an ingredient is already listed as being produced
from soya or maize the words “produced from genetically
modiﬁed” may be abbreviated to “genetically modiﬁed”;
if the abbreviated form of words is used as a footnote,
the asterisk shall be directly attached to the word “soya”
or “maize”. Where either form of words is used as a foot-
note, it shall have a typeface of at least the same size as
the list of ingredients itself. (“Council Regulation [EC]
No 1139/98,” Article 2, 3[a])
The EC went one step further in its labeling efforts with the
adoption in 2000 of Regulation 50/2000. That regulation
focused on a category of food products that had been expressly
excluded from previous regulations, namely food additives and
ﬂavoring. Regulation 50/2000 corrected that omission by
requiring that
The words “genetically modiﬁed” shall appear in the list of
ingredients immediately after the indication of the addi-
tive or ﬂavouring in question. Alternatively, this wording
may appear in a prominently displayed footnote to the list
of ingredients, linked to the additive or the ﬂavouring
concerned by an asterisk (*). It shall be printed in a font
72
GMO Food

that is at least of the same size as that used for the list of
ingredients itself. (“Commission Regulation [EC] No
50/2000 of 10 January 2000,” Article 4, 2)
One of the interesting issues with which the EC has had to
deal involves products offered for sale to the public that were
produced from GM crops but which no longer contain any
detectable amount of GM product. For example, the vast
majority of corn now produced comes from GM seed. Some
of that corn is used to produce corn oil that is used to make
other food products or used directly for human and animal
consumption. The production of the corn oil from GM corn,
however, destroys essentially all the corn protein that would
contain GM DNA. So is the corn oil available for sale at the
corner grocery a GM product or not?
The EC position on this matter has long been that any food
product derived from a GM substance must be labeled if there
is any detectable amount of DNA or protein remaining from
the original substance present in the ﬁnal product (“GM Food
& Feed—Labelling”).
Yet one more step in the regulatory process was adopted by
the EC in 2003. Regulation 1830/2003 deals with rules for
the traceability, as well as the labeling, of GM substances. The
purpose of this regulation is threefold: First, it provides regula-
tors with a way of locating and tracing the movement of all
GMO products through the supply chain, from production of
seeds, to planting and growth, to processing, to marketing of
the products to consumers. This chain of evidence applies not
only to products that contain GM elements at the point of sale
but also to processed foods in which the original modiﬁed
DNA may have been destroyed or lost and also to the seeds
from which such crops are grown. Second, it allows regulators
to check information provided on the labels of GM foods to
make sure that it accurately matches the information associated
with the marked products. Third, it makes it possible to moni-
tor the effects of GM crops and foods on the environment and
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
73

human health and to order recalls of harmful products from the
marketplace (“Traceability and Labelling of GMOs”).
Since the 2003 action by the EC, the European Union, at
many levels of its structure, has continued to struggle with the
issue of the labeling and regulation of GM products. As of early
2014, it still faces a number of unresolved questions as to how
most effectively to allow the use of GM products while main-
taining the safety of human health and the natural environ-
ment, given the availability of those products. For an excellent
overview of this issue, see the University of Massachusetts at
Amherst International Dimensions of Ethics Education in
Science and Engineering Case Study on this topic (Peterson
and White 2010, with special attention to the appendices that
accompany this document).
Regulation of Genetically Modified Products
throughout the World
Questions about research on, development of, testing and pro-
duction of, and marketing and regulation of GM seeds, crops,
and foods often focus strongly on the situation in the United
States and the European Union. That situation should not be
surprising since the United States is by far the largest producer
of research and production of GM products and, with the
European Union, the largest consumer of such products in
the world. However, that does not mean that other nations
are not involved and interested in many of the same issues with
which the United States and the European Union have had to
deal over the past three decades or more.
Outside of the United States, the largest producers of GM
crops are Brazil, Argentina, India, and Canada. Table 2.2 sum-
marizes data for nations that grow GM crops, the type of crops
most commonly grown, and the amount of land devoted to
GM crops. As the table shows, the United States produces
about 40 percent of all GM crops grown in the world, Brazil
about 21 percent, and Argentina about 14 percent, with the
74
GMO Food

Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
75
Table 2.2
Global Area of Biotech Crops in 2012: By Country (million hectares)
Rank
Country
Total Area**
Crop(s)
1
United States*
69.5
Maize, soybean, cotton,
canola, sugarbeet, alfalfa,
papaya, squash
2
Brazil*
36.6
Soybean, maize, cotton
3
Argentina*
23.9
Soybean, maize, cotton
4
Canada*
11.6
Canola, maize, soybean,
sugarbeet
5
India*
10.8
Cotton
6
China*
4.0
Cotton, papaya, poplar,
tomato, sweet pepper
7
Paraguay*
3.4
Soybean, maize, cotton
8
South Africa*
2.9
Maize, soybean, cotton
9
Pakistan*
2.8
Cotton
10
Uruguay*
1.4
Soybean, maize
11
Bolivia*
1.0
Soybean
12
Philippines*
0.8
Maize
13
Australia*
0.7
Cotton, canola
14
Burkina Faso*
0.3
Cotton
15
Myanmar*
0.3
Cotton
16
Mexico*
0.2
Cotton, soybean
17
Spain*
0.1
Maize
18
Chile*
<0.1
Maize, soybean, canola
19
Colombia
<0.1
Cotton
20
Honduras
<0.1
Maize
21
Sudan
<0.1
Cotton
22
Portugal
<0.1
Maize
23
Czech
Republic
<0.1
Maize
24
Cuba
<0.1
Maize
25
Egypt
<0.1
Maize
26
Costa Rica
<0.1
Cotton, soybean
27
Romania
<0.1
Maize
28
Slovakia
<0.1
Maize
Total
170.3
*Eighteen biotech mega-countries growing 50,000 hectares, or more, of biotech
crops.
**Rounded off to the nearest hundred thousand.
Source: James, Clive. 2012. Global Status of Commercialized GM/Biotech Crops
for 2012: ISAAA Brief 44. Ithaca, NY: ISAAA. Used by permission.

rest of the world accounting for the remaining 25 percent of
GM crops.
Thus, concerns about gaining access to world markets for GM
crops and foods are largely those of a small handful of nations, the
vast majority of nations have to deal with a quite different issue:
What should be their policies about GM products? Should they
even be permitted to be grown? Should they be allowed to be
marketed? What regulations are needed to ensure the safety of
human health and the natural environment in their countries?
As has been the case with the European Union, many
nations have gone through a period of attempting to ﬁnd the
right answers to these questions for their own unique situa-
tions. Sometimes the nature of the questions and the possible
answers to those questions are very different in some nations
than they are in the United States and the European Union.
In developing nations, for example, many experts believe that
the availability of engineered crops may make it possible for
nations to vastly increase their agricultural output, offering
one important way of dealing with the overwhelming problem
of hunger common in many developing nations (more about
this topic in a later section of this chapter).
The issue of dealing with GM products for most nations,
then, has come down to the same topic as it has in the
European Union: How can GM seeds, crops, and foods best
be regulated to provide for the safety of citizens and protection
of the environment? The following section outlines some of the
positions taken by various countries of the world.
In perhaps the most comprehensive and complete (although
now somewhat dated) study of this issue, Guillaume P. Gruère
of the Organisation de Coopération et de Développement
Économiques and S. R. Rao of the Indian Ministry of Science
and Technology found that nations could be categorized as to
the kind of labeling policies they had and the degree of enforce-
ment they used with those policies. Among the nations with the
strictest policies were Australia, China, the European Union,
Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South
76
GMO Food

Korea, Switzerland, and Taiwan. Nations that had GM labeling
policies but failed either to enforce them stringently or to enforce
them at all included Brazil, Chile, Croatia, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Indonesia, Mauritius, Serbia, Sri Lanka, Thailand (partially),
Ukraine, and Vietnam. A number of nations that had indicated
their intentions to introduce labeling regulations, but had
not done so as of 2007, included Bolivia, Cameroon, Colombia,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Georgia, India, Israel, Ivory Coast, Jamaica,
Malaysia,
Namibia,
Nigeria,
Paraguay,
Peru,
Philippines,
Singapore, Uganda, UAE, Uruguay, and Zambia. Philippines
had indicated that its labeling policy would be voluntary.
Nations that already had voluntary labeling policies were
Canada, Hong Kong, South Africa, and the United States
(Gruère and Rao 2007, Table 1, 52).
Nations that had decided to label GM products also used a
variety of policies and practices in this regard. For example,
some nations followed the practice in the European Union of
focusing regulating and labeling of processes by which GM
crops and foods are produced and sold. The two other entities
beside the European Union would follow this practice are
Brazil and China. All other nations follow the model of the
United States by regulating and labeling individual products.
These nations tend to prepare a list of GM foods that have been
tested or otherwise evaluated and then approved for distribu-
tion and use. Nations in this category include Australia,
Indonesia, Japan, New Zealand, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South
Korea, and Taiwan. Nations also differ with regard to the so-
called threshold level at which regulations become effective.
These threshold levels are the percentage of GM material that
can be detected by laboratory analysis. The threshold levels that
various countries have selected for their boundaries of regula-
tion range from a high of 5 percent in East Asian nations such
as Indonesia, Japan, and Taiwan to a low of 0 percent in
China, 0.9 percent in Russia (as it is in the European Union),
and 1 percent in Australia, Brazil, New Zealand, and Saudi
Arabia (Gruère and Rao 2007, Table 2, 53).
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
77

Genetically Modified Crops and Foods: Pro and Con
More than four decades after the technology for producing
GMOs was ﬁrst developed, a dispute still rages worldwide
about that technology. Proponents of rDNA research claim
that GM seeds, crops, and foods are safe to use for human
health and the natural environment and that they can bring
unimagined beneﬁts in dealing with some of the world’s most
serious ongoing problems, such as hunger and disease. Critics
argue that such claims are overblown, that the safety of GM
products is still an unresolved issue, and that, at the very least,
GM substances should be adequately labeled so that consumers
at all levels of the food chain will know when they are using
GMO products and the extent to which they are present in
crops and foods. The next section provides a detailed review
of these issues.
The pros and cons of the use of GM products can generally
be classiﬁed into three major categories: potential beneﬁts and
harm to the agricultural system, potential beneﬁts and harm
to human health, and potential beneﬁts and harm to the natu-
ral environment.
Potential Beneﬁts to the Agricultural System
Proponents of genetic modiﬁcation of crops often point out
that this process is really not so very different from the
centuries-old process of hybridization, in which a farmer
attempts to produce better crops by manipulating the genetic
information available in existing plants. For example, he or
she might try to produce a new type of apple by crossbreeding
one type of apple with better taste with a second type that is
especially resistant to frost. By crossbreeding the two types of
apples over many generations, the farmer might be able to pro-
duce precisely the new type of apple he or she desires.
The advantage provided by rDNA procedures is that the
farmer (or researcher) can take advantage of a much wider range
of genetic properties in her or his research than is readily
78
GMO Food

available in the natural world. To get that better tasting, frost-
resistant apple, for example, the farmer or researcher may have
difﬁculty ﬁnding the precise species or varietal with the proper-
ties needed to crossbreed into the new varietal. He or she may
have to wait many generations until just the right result is
obtained, or in some cases, the desired product may not even be
possible if the appropriate parent plants do not exist in nature.
With genetic engineering, the farmer or researcher can use genes
from any or all possible apple species and varietals, as well as genes
from totally unrelated species (e.g., a tobacco plant) or even genes
that have been invented and produced synthetically in the labora-
tory. With this vastly wider range of possibilities, a much greater
variety of agricultural products can be made than is possible with
traditional crossbreeding procedures.
It is just this general principle, of course, that underlies the
development of some of the most popular genetically engi-
neered crops available today. Plants that have been engineered
to contain the Bt gene that produces an insecticidal protein,
for example, are normal cotton, corn, soybean, or some other
type of plants to which has been added one or more genes from
totally different organisms. The engineered plants then have an
entirely new trait that reduces the need for using pesticides
during the plant’s growing season. The same is true for plants
that have been engineered to be resistant to herbicides, such
as
Monsanto’s
Roundup
Ready
herbicides
and
Bayer
CropScience’s Liberty herbicides. Engineered plants of this
kind provide, at least in theory, a huge advantage for farmers
who have to use much smaller amounts of herbicides, an
important money-saving advantage.
Bt-enhanced and herbicide-resistant plants are only one cat-
egory of engineered plants possible by this process. Researchers
are also exploring other changes in plants that can improve their
survivability or improve their value as crops. As an example, the
single most serious environmental problem facing farmers world-
wide is an inadequate supply of fresh water for growing plants.
In a number of regions, water resources are becoming more saline
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
79

(salty), often as a result of increased annual temperatures and/or
increased drought conditions. In such instances, plants that do
not grow well in saline conditions tend to die out, and farmers
may lose large portions of their crops.
One approach to dealing with this problem is to engineer
plants that are more resistant to saline conditions. One way to
do that is to remove one or more genes from plants that are nor-
mally more resistant to saline conditions (e.g., those that grow
in and around salt water) and insert them into otherwise
saline-sensitive plants. A number of attempts have been made
in this direction, with greater or lesser success. Part of the chal-
lenge appears to be that saline resistance is not a function of a
single gene in most cases, and identifying the groups of genes
responsible for saline resistance and then successfully inserting
them into a plant genome is a distinct challenge (see, for exam-
ple, Agarwal et al. 2013; Peleg, Apse, and Blumwald 2011;
Turan, Cornish, and Kumar 2012).
Another target of researchers is the development of heat-
resistant plants. Climate scientists continue to predict that
Earth’s annual average temperature will continue to climb for
the foreseeable future, suggesting that the planet’s warmest
regions will experience even more severe weather, adding yet
another stress to plants growing there. One approach to dealing
with this problem is to engineer plants so that they are better
able to withstand the heat shock caused by rising temperatures.
As an example of this line of research, plant molecular biologist
L. Curtis Hannah, at the University of Florida, has been explor-
ing ways of producing two genes known as Sh2 and Bt2 that
code for the production of enzymes known as ASPases in
plants. These enzymes are inactivated at elevated temperatures,
causing death in plants. Hannah suggests that plants that carry
the modiﬁed genes for these proteins will be able to withstand
higher temperatures and, therefore, survive and thrive at the
higher annual temperatures that climatologists predict will
occur in Earth’s future (“Heat-Tolerant Crops Could Prevent
Future Starvation and Help Preserve Biofuels”).
80
GMO Food

Yet another trait for which crops are being genetically modi-
ﬁed is frost resistance. Recall from Chapter 1 that one of the
ﬁrst commercial GM crops was Frostban strawberry, a plant
engineered to survive at temperatures that normally caused a
plant to freeze. Efforts continue to develop frost-resistant plants
in the mid-2010s, at least partly because one possible effect of
global climate change may involve changes in frost seasons to
which plants are not adapted. In 2006, for example, researchers
at the Victorian AgriBiosciences Centre at La Trobe University
in Australia transplanted a gene from a form of hair grass that
occurs in Antarctica (Deschampsia antarctica) into wheat plants
that were later found to be signiﬁcantly more resistant to frost
than were nonengineered plants. Government and industry
representatives have been sufﬁciently interested in this develop-
ment to provide signiﬁcant funds for further research on the
procedure. In October 2013, for example, the Australian
Grains and Development Council (AGDC) announced that it
would more than double its investment in the development
of frost-resistant wheat over the next ﬁve years, from AUS
$1.2 million to AUS$3 million (“GRDC Ups the Ante in
Search for Frost Tolerant Crops”; see also Frederiks et al.
2012).
Proponents of the use of GM crops often point to the special
beneﬁts such crops can bring to developing nations, where
the rate of population growth is generally high and hunger
and nutrition are common problems. Most, if not all, of the
approaches outlined earlier can be used for crops such as maize,
soybeans, and cotton in developing nations. A 2003 publica-
tion by the United Kingdom’s Nufﬁeld Council on Bioethics
has pointed out some of the beneﬁts of extending the use of
GM crops in developing nations. Some of the case studies pre-
sented in that publication include the following (“Possible
Beneﬁts of GM Crops in Developing Countries”):
• The expanded use of Bt cotton in China. The Nufﬁeld
report pointed to studies that indicated that pesticide use
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
81

in areas where the GM cotton was planted fell by as much as
50 kilograms per hectare, a reduction of between 60 and
80 percent in comparison with pre-GM use. The report said
that the savings thereby achieved were realized in particular
by an estimated 3.5 million farmers who tended relatively
small farms of less than 2 hectares (5 acres). (Also see Pray
et al. 2002.)
• The development of dwarf varieties of rice for India. The
rice historically grown on the Indian subcontinent tends to
have long stems that are somewhat easily broken and
damaged in wind storms and other inclement weather.
Researchers have developed a dwarf form of the rice plant
by inserting a gene from the common weed Arabidopsis
thaliana, which codes for dwarﬁsm in some plants. (For
more on this technology, see Peng et al. 1999.)
• Virus-resistant sweet potatoes in Kenya. Sweet potatoes are
the second most important food crop in Kenya, after maize.
Yet crop yields tend to be very low, about half of the world
average for the crop. One problem is that the plant is subject
to a number of agents that reduce growth or kill plants,
including a number of fungi and viruses. Since the early
1990s, the government of Kenya, in conjunction with
Monsanto, has been working to develop virus-resistant
strains of sweet potato that will signiﬁcantly increase yields
of the crop. (For more, see Odame, Kameri-Mbote, and
Wafula 2002.)
A number of studies have been conducted attempting to
quantify the gains to agricultural made by the use of GM crops.
One of the most important of those is a 2012 report, GM
Crops:
Global
Socio-economic
and
Environmental
Impacts
1996–2011, the eighth in a series of annual reviews of the social
and economic impact of the use of GM crops worldwide. The
2012 report mentioned a number of beneﬁts resulting from
82
GMO Food

the adoption of GM crops by farmers, including (all data from
Brookes and Barfoot 2013):
• Direct global farm income beneﬁt resulting from the use of
GM crops in 2011 was $19.8 billion. This amount is the
equivalent of having added 6.3 percent to the value of global
production of the four main crops of soybeans, maize, can-
ola, and cotton (9).
• In the period from 1996 to 2011, farm incomes have
increased by $98.2 billion as a result of using GM crops.
About half of that amount ($48 billion) has resulted from
more effective treatment of weeds and pests and the remain-
ing amount from decreased costs of production (9).
• Genetic modiﬁcation of plant traits resulted in an increase of
110 million tonnes (120 million tons) of soybeans over the
period of the study, 195 million more tonnes (215 million
tons) of corn, 15.8 million tonnes (17.4 million tons) of cot-
ton, and 6.6 million tonnes (7.3 million tons) of canola
(Table 5, 13).
• Economic gains resulting from the use of GM crops has
been greatest in the United States, Argentina, Brazil, India,
and China. It has also been signiﬁcant in developing coun-
tries, where, in the period between 1996 and 2011, farmers
have achieved 51.2 percent of total global gains resulting
from GM crop use (Table 3, 12).
• At the same time, the net cost to farmers in developing
countries was much less (14 percent of the total economic
gain) than it was in developed countries (21 percent of total
economic gain) (Table 4, 12).
Some observers point out that the data presented here do not
tell the whole story about the use of GM crops. In at least some
cases, the hazards involved in using such crops can have signiﬁ-
cant negative impact on agricultural economics. One issue
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
83

often mentioned is the fact that the introduction of herbicide-
resistant crops has not necessarily or even commonly resulted
in a reduction in the amount of herbicides used by farmers. A
study by the organization Food & Water Watch in 2013, for
example, found that in the United States, the amount of at least
two popular herbicides, glyphosate and 2,4-D, increased sig-
niﬁcantly between the late 1990s, when herbicide-resistant
crops were ﬁrst made available, and 2012, the latest year for
which data were available. Speciﬁcally, total herbicide use on
corn, cotton, and soybean crops dropped by 42 million pounds
(15 percent) between 1998 and 2001, but then it began to rise.
Between 2001 and 2010, that number rose to 81.2 million
pounds (an increase of 26 percent) (Superweeds: How Biotech
Crops Bolster the Pesticide Industry 2013, 2).
The reason for this increase, according to Food & Water
Watch, was the rapid increase in the amount of herbicide-
resistant weeds resulting from the use of glyphosate and 2,4-D
on herbicide-resistant crops. The growth of these “superweeds”
resulted in a 10-fold increase in the amount of glyphosate used
on corn, cotton, and soybeans between 1996 and 2012, from
15 million pounds to 159 million pounds, and the use of 2,4-D
increased over the same time period by 90 percent (Superweeds:
How Biotech Crops Bolster the Pesticide Industry 2013, 2).
The development of superweeds, and the concomitant cost
to farmers of using additional herbicides, has outweighed the
supposed economic beneﬁts of using herbicide-resistant crops,
in Food & Water Watch’s view. The cost of GM corn seeds is
about $40 higher per acre than non-GM corn seeds, and these
costs nearly tripled between 1998 and 2013. However, the
added costs of using additional herbicides to treat superweeds
have added even more to farmers’ expenses. Summarizing a
number of studies conducted on this issue, Food & Water
Watch concluded that the costs to farmers posed from treating
superweeds ranged from $12 per acre (2 percent of the value
of the crop) for Tennessee soybean farmers to $50 per acre
(7 percent of the value of the crop) for a range of cotton farmers
84
GMO Food

(Superweeds: How Biotech Crops Bolster the Pesticide Industry
2013, Table 1, 10). (The Food & Water Watch study closely
matches a similar long-range study of the use of herbicides con-
ducted by Charles Benbrook (2012) at Washington State
University.) The issue of the economic beneﬁt of GM crops
for farmers is obviously not entirely resolved.
Potential Beneﬁts to Human Health
Plants and animals can both be engineered to provide a range of
health beneﬁts for humans. The example that is perhaps most
often mentioned in this regard is the case of Golden Rice, dis-
cussed in Chapter 1. Other types of biofortiﬁcation are also
possible. Biofortiﬁcation refers to the process by which the
nutritional value of a plant or animal is increasing by genetic
engineering or some other synthetic process. An example
of current research in this area is the BioCassave Plus
Programme (BC+), originally funded by the Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundation in 2005. Cassava is the primary staple food
for more than 250 million people in Africa and millions of
others worldwide. The plant is, however, deﬁcient in essential
nutrients, providing, for example, less than 30 percent of the
recommended daily amount of protein. The goal of the BC+
program is to develop mechanisms for genetically modifying
the cassava plant to enrich the concentration of protein, iron,
zinc, vitamin A, and other nutrients. Field tests in Puerto
Rico and Nigeria in the second half of the ﬁrst decade of the
twenty-ﬁrst century have focused on cassava genetically
enhanced for improved β-carotene, iron, zinc, and protein
and cassava lines with low cyanogens, increased shelf life, and
virus resistance. Researchers have estimated that successful
development of crops such as vitamin A–enhanced cassava
could save up to $1.4 billion in health costs in Nigeria and
$81 million in Kenya (Sayre et al. 2011).
Rice and cassava are by no means the only food crops being
studied for possible biofortiﬁcation by genetic means. One
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
85

review of the ﬁeld has noted that research is ongoing on other
crops, such as the genetic engineering of carrots to increase cal-
cium content, of lettuce with zinc to prevent organ disorders, of
tomatoes to improve folate content, and of lettuce to increase
tocopherol and resveratrol composition, as a way of reducing
risk for coronary disease and arteriosclerosis (Silva Dias and
Ortiz 2012).
Biofortiﬁcation by genetic means might appear to have a
number of advantages. Still, some critics have raised a number
of objections to the practice. In the ﬁrst place, such crops and
food products sometimes look and even taste somewhat differ-
ent from their natural cousins. These differences may give
farmers pause in raising such crops and cause hesitation in get-
ting consumers to eat them. Another complaint that is some-
times raised is that the increased emphasis on improving the
nutritional quality of basic foods such as maize, rice, and cas-
sava may tend to reduce the dietary variety for millions of peo-
ple, with possible long-term nutritional issues that are still not
entirely understood (Johns and Eyzaguirrea 2007).
Potential Beneﬁts to the Natural Environment
Many of the arguments for the beneﬁts of GM crops and foods
to agriculture and human health also translate into potential
beneﬁts to the natural environment. For example, increasing
the productivity of crops not only provides a beneﬁt to human
health and nutrition but also means that farmers may need to
press less marginal land into cultivation. Marginal land is
deﬁned as low-quality land on which crops can be grown only
at relatively high costs that may be only slightly less than the
value of products obtained on the land. As population grows
in a given region, food demand also increases. The only way
of meeting increased food demands at the present time is to
ﬁnd land currently not used for—or well adapted to—
agriculture. In many cases, that situation may mean draining
swamps, cutting down forests, irrigating desert regions, and
86
GMO Food

otherwise disrupting the natural environment, often with a host
of ecological consequences. The use of GM crops, then, may
not only increase the per-acre output of food but also protect
some of the most sensitive and most essential components of
an ecological system.
As noted earlier, the use of GM crops may also reduce farm-
ers’ dependence on chemical fertilizers and pesticides that can
have devastating and unwanted effects on the natural environ-
ment. As the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations has noted,
Genetically engineered resistance to pests and diseases . . .
is already happening. Farmers are growing maize, cotton
and potatoes that no longer have to be sprayed with the
bacterial insecticide Bacillus thuringiensis—because they
produce its insecticidal agent themselves. Scientists are
developing trees that have a lower content of lignin, a
structuring constituent of woody plant cells. This could
reduce the need for noxious chemicals in pulp and paper
production. (“Weighing the GMO Arguments: For”)
GM plants might also be used on land that is normally not
otherwise productive. As noted earlier, they can be engineered
to grow on land that is too dry, too wet, too salty, too hot, or
too cold.
A quite different contribution that genetic engineering
might make to the environment is the development of new or
more abundant biofuels, organic materials that can be burned
directly or converted to another form for use as a fuel.
Biofuels are an increasingly important factor in most future
assessments of a nation’s energy equation. Currently, biofuels
make up only 7.1 percent of all fuels burned in the United
States and less than 1 percent worldwide (“U.S. Bioenergy
Statistics”). Currently, they cannot compete economically with
fossil fuels or most other renewable fuels. However, it may be
possible to change the genetic structure of some types of plants
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
87

to alter that fact, vastly increasing the types, efﬁciencies, and
quantities of plants that can be used as energy sources (Stecker
2013).
Potential Harm to Human Health
Opponents of the genetic modiﬁcation of seeds, crops, and
foods tend to focus primarily on two concerns: How might
such products affect human health and how might they damage
the natural environment? With regard to the ﬁrst question, crit-
ics of GM products are faced with a very large body of scientiﬁc
evidence suggesting that GM foods have no demonstrable or
measurable effects on human health. A number of highly
regarded studies appear to conﬁrm this contention. Among
the strongest statements in this regard are the following:
• American Association for the Advancement of Science
(AAAS): “the World Health Organization, the American
Medical Association, the U.S. National Academy of
Sciences, the British Royal Society, and ‘every other
respected organization that has examined the evidence has
come to the same conclusion: consuming foods containing
ingredients derived from GM crops is no riskier than con-
suming the same foods containing ingredients from crop
plants modiﬁed by conventional plant improvement tech-
niques’ ” (“AAAS Board of Directors: Legally Mandating
GM Food Labels Could ‘Mislead and Falsely Alarm
Consumers’ ”).
• The main conclusion to be drawn from the efforts of more
than 130 research projects, covering a period of more than
25 years of research and involving more than 500 indepen-
dent research groups, is that biotechnology, and in particular
GMOs, is not per se more risky than, for example, conven-
tional plant breeding technologies (Decade of EU-Funded
GMO Research (2001–2010)).
88
GMO Food

• There is broad scientiﬁc consensus that genetically engi-
neered crops currently on the market are safe to eat. After
14 years of cultivation and a cumulative total of 2 billion
acres planted, no adverse health or environmental effects
have resulted from commercialization of genetically engi-
neered crops (Ronald 2011).
• Bioengineered foods have been consumed for close to
20 years, and during that time, no overt consequences on
human health have been reported and/or substantiated in
the peer-reviewed literature (“Report 2 of the Council on
Science and Public Health [A-12]”).
• In contrast to adverse health effects that have been associated
with some traditional food production methods, similar seri-
ous health effects have not been identiﬁed as a result of
genetic engineering techniques used in food production
(Committee on Identifying and Assessing Unintended
Effects of Genetically Engineered Foods on Human Health
et al. 2004, R9–R10).
In the face of statements such as these, a number of observers
have argued essentially that the debate over the safety of GM
foods is over. In fact, British author, journalist, and environ-
mental activist Mark Lynas made just that statement in
January 2013. He apologized to his readers for having attacked
GM foods for so many years, saying that “We no longer need to
discuss whether or not it [GM food] is safe—over a decade and
a half with three trillion GM meals eaten there has never been a
single substantiated case of harm. You are more likely to get hit
by an asteroid than to get hurt by GM food” (Kloor 2013).
Still, a substantial number of critics remain very much
unconvinced that the debate is over. They continue to present
evidence that additional research is needed and that there are
sound reasons for believing that GM foods may be responsible
for a host of risks to human health. For example, researchers
at the University of Minnesota Food Policy Research Center
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
89

issued a report in October 2012 arguing that signiﬁcant ques-
tions remain about the safety of GM foods. That report said
that “[s]cientiﬁc studies testing whole GE food show some
mixed results so statements about all GE foods being safe or
unsafe are unwarranted.” A fundamental reason for this uncer-
tainty, the report went on, was that “[w]hole-food feeding stud-
ies for GE safety assessment are tricky, as plant varieties are
diverse in chemical composition and the effect of the intro-
duced genes or changes caused by them are hard to tease out”
(Kuzma and Haase 2012).
Even a cursory examination of the print and electronic liter-
ature shows that concerns about the safety of GM foods are
ongoing. Those concerns are generally based on three funda-
mental questions: Are some GM food products actually toxic
to humans and other animals; do they pose a risk to the nutri-
tional needs of humans and other animals; and are GM foods
allergenic to a signiﬁcant portion of the human population?
A number of individuals and organizations with varying degrees
of professional expertise argue that GM foods do or may pose a
signiﬁcant threat to human health. For example, a committee
of
the
American
Academy
of
Environmental
Medicine
(AAEM) reviewed the published evidence about the biological
effects of GM foods on humans and other animals came to
the conclusion that
There is more than a casual association between GM
foods and adverse health effects. There is causation as
deﬁned by Hill’s Criteria in the areas of strength of associ-
ation, consistency, speciﬁcity, biological gradient, and
biological plausibility. The strength of association and
consistency between GM foods and disease is conﬁrmed
in several animal studies. (Dean and Armstrong 2009)
(Note: The so-called Hill’s Criteria is a set of measures
that can be used to determine whether two factors are
associated simply by association or by a cause-and-effect
relationship.)
90
GMO Food

Some of the speciﬁc conditions mentioned in the AAEM
report were infertility; failure of the immune system; acceler-
ated aging; dysregulation of genes associated with cholesterol
synthesis, insulin regulation, cell signaling, and protein forma-
tion; and changes in the liver, kidney, spleen, and gastrointesti-
nal systems. At the conclusion of their report, the AAEM
authors recommended that additional tests be conducted on
the safety of GM foods and, until further information becomes
available, that physicians advise their patients to avoid GM
foods to the extent possible.
A number of articles have been written and reports issued
reviewing and summarizing the purported health effects of
GM foods on human health. As an example, a team of Indian
researchers published an article in 2011 in which they reviewed
a large body of scientiﬁc research and came to the conclusion
that “GMOS are inherently unsafe.” Among the “unique dan-
gers” they identiﬁed were:
• Toxic reactions in the digestive tract
• Liver damage
• Higher death rates and organ damage in experimental animals
• Reproductive failure and higher infant mortality rates
• Immune reactions and allergenicity (Verma et al. 2011, 7–8)
An example of the type of problem that might arise from the
consumption of GM foods was reported online by a team of
Chinese researchers in late 2011. Those researchers discovered
the presence of so-called microRNA (miRNA) in the blood
and organs of humans, where it is not normally found. They
pointed out that the miRNA had apparently been transferred
from rice to humans and then survived the digestive process
to attack human cells. Since they were discovered early in the
twenty-ﬁrst century, miRNAs have been found to disrupt a
variety of cell functions, resulting in a variety of health condi-
tions that include some types of cancer, diabetes, and
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
91

Alzheimer’s disease. Opponents of the consumption of GM
foods point out that scientists clearly do not yet know what
the health effects might be of foreign genes introduced into
plants that work their way into the human (or other animal)
body, where they may constitute a signiﬁcant hazard to health.
(The original report is Zhang et al. 2012, with commentary on
the article at Levaux 2012.)
The debate over the safety of GM foods goes somewhat
beyond a disagreement as to what the research shows.
Opponents of genetic engineering of plants sometimes argue
that the research cited by supporters of GMO crops and foods
use unfair and dishonest mechanisms for advancing their case.
The fundamental problem, according to one critic of GM
foods, is that “the industry is unregulated, and when companies
say their foods are safe, their views are unquestioned.”
Agribusinesses like Monsanto, he says, will stop at nothing to
develop and promote the use of their GM products. As a conse-
quence, he goes on, they are guilty of all kinds of errors, such
that
their studies are substandard, adverse ﬁndings are hidden,
and they typically “fail to investigate the impacts of GM
food on [a variety of bodily functions]. . . . In addition,
industry-funded studies creatively avoid ﬁnding problems
or conceal any uncovered. They cook the books by using
older instead of younger more sensitive animals, keep
sample sizes too low for statistical signiﬁcance, dilute the
GM component of feeds used, limit the duration of feed-
ing trials, ignore animal deaths and sickness, and engage in
other unscientiﬁc practices. (Lendman 2008; also see
Smith 2007; for an extended review of studies on health
and nutritional effects of GM foods, see Magaña-Gómez
and Calderón de la Barca 2009)
Questions have also been raised about the potential allergic
effects of GM foods. One of the most famous episodes in the
92
GMO Food

history of GM food testing—and one that is still cited by oppo-
nents of GM foods today—involved the introduction of a
Brazil nut protein into soybeans in an effort to improve the
nutritional value of that crop. During the testing of the GM
crop, researchers found that some consumers of the modiﬁed
soybean experienced an allergic reaction to the GM product.
Upon making this discovery, further research on the GM soy-
bean was discontinued, and it was never made commercially
available
(“The
Safety
of
Genetically
Modiﬁed
Foods
Produced through Biotechnology” 2003).
Critics point out that GM foods may produce allergic reac-
tions in humans in one of three ways:
1. They may cause allergic reactions in individuals who are
already allergic to the introduced protein or to other pro-
teins similar to it.
2. An introduced gene may alter the expression of existing
genes in the host plant, making it allergic in circumstances
where it had previously not had that effect.
3. An introduced gene and the protein for which it codes may
create a new allergy in humans who consume that product.
Proponents of GM foods and crops and many neutral
observers tend to repeat the mantra that “no allergic reactions
to GM food by consumers have been conﬁrmed” (see, for
example, Cencič and Krygier 2007, 232). Critics of GM foods
simply do not buy that statement, however, and offer a number
of studies that seem to suggest the reverse of that situation. As
an example, a study conducted by Indian researchers found that
individuals who had been exposed to GM cotton carrying the
gene for the Bt protein exhibited obvious allergic reactions.
The researchers concluded that
All the evidence gathered during the investigation shows
that [Bt engineered cotton] has been causing skin, Upper
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
93

[sic] respiratory tract and eye allergy among persons
exposed to cotton. The symptoms vary from mild, moder-
ate to very severe to the extent that one woman had to be
admitted for 9 days as a result of allergy. (Gupta et al.
2005)
Potential Harm to the Natural Environment
Opponents of GM seeds and crops offer a number of examples
of ways in which these products can harm the natural environ-
ment. First, they point out that genes present in any plant,
natural or genetically modiﬁed, can escape from that particular
plant and travel into other members of the same or different
species. The transfer of genes from one organism to another
by such a process, or any other process other than traditional
reproduction, is called horizontal gene ﬂow (or horizontal gene
transfer). Plants that are pollinated by the wind or by insects
are especially at risk for this effect, because the pollination pro-
cess can carry genes over relatively great distances, allowing GM
pollen to interact with non-GM plants. One review of these
effects mentioned a number of speciﬁc examples of the process
that have already been observed, including:
• Contamination of an organic canola farm in West Australia
by pollen blown in from a nearby GM-planted farm
• Contamination of up to 5 percent of non-GM rapeseed in
Canada by cross-pollination from GM crops
• Spontaneous growth of GM cotton and soybeans in Costa
Rica from GM seeds blown in from areas planted with those
seeds
• Widespread contamination of virtually all agricultural land in
Canada by at least some minimal amount of GM canola seed
• Contamination of as much as 30 percent of all U.S. long-
grain rice plantings with GM rice varietals
94
GMO Food

The transfer of herbicide-resistant genes from engineered
plants to weeds, discussed earlier in this chapter, is another
example of this type of gene transfer that may be possible in
nature.
Proponents of GM seeds and crops suggest that this problem
can be avoided by constructing a buffer zone around areas
where GM crops are planted. One problem with this sugges-
tion is that it is not clear how wide a buffer zone has to be in
order to protect native plants from pollen drift. One study con-
ducted on this question found that the width required was
quite large. The Japanese province of Hokkaido, for example,
requires a buffer zone of 300 meters, 10 times the size required
by the Japanese Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries.
Studies found, however, that native plants were contaminated
with GM pollen at distances of up to 600 meters for rice plants
and 1,200 meters for sugar beets. Buffer zones of this size
would, in many cases, effectively prevent the growing of GM
crops in most areas (“Buffer Zones Can Not Prevent GMO
Cross Pollination”; “Cross-Fertilization by Airborne Pollen
Found at Surprisingly Large Distances”).
Opponents of GM crops and seeds also point out that the
insertion of a foreign gene into a plant can have extensive effects
on the genetic composition of that plant, beyond that which is
planned and expected by researchers. They point out that infor-
mation on possible plant mutations is simply not available, and
it is a risky enterprise to attempt in-the-ﬁeld experiments on the
insertion of genes without knowing the possible effects that
change will produce (Smith 2005).
The response to this argument is that, yes, inserting genes
into a plant does have extensive effects on that plant’s genome.
However, that type of change has been going on for centuries,
ever since humans began crossbreeding plants. Furthermore,
as one reviewer has pointed out, as of late 2013, “not a single
ill effect has ever been demonstrated to be the result of DNA
alteration in a food or feed plant” (“Any DNA Insertion Can
Cause a Mutation”).
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
95

Critics raise questions also about the possibility that genes
injected into a crop plant might accidentally activate so-called
sleeper genes. A sleeper gene is a gene that is usually inactive in
a plant but that can be turned out by the introduction of an
abnormal substance or event (e.g., unusually high temperatures
or drought conditions) into the plant’s environment. Scientists
simply do not know at this point whether engineered genes can
act as activators of this kind, setting off changes in a plant’s bio-
chemistry about which researchers may know little or nothing.
Questions have also been raised about the potential conse-
quences resulting from horizontal gene ﬂow from cultivated
transgenic plants into the wild, followed by their incorporation
into wild plants of the same or other species. Such a scenario is
fraught with a number of questions, such as whether such
transfers can actually occur and, if so, how easily and how
often; how the incorporation of genes would affect the physical
characteristics of the wild plants; what environmental advan-
tages and disadvantages the GM wild plants would have in
comparison with their non-GM cousins; and how such events
are likely to affect the diversity of a biological community.
One of the potential problems posed by some researchers is that
the growth of new GM plants in the wild produced by gene
transfer could result in the loss of native, non-GM plant species
that have grown up within a biome with the ability to with-
stand particular environmental stresses. The loss of those spe-
cies, then, could result in a less diverse and less vigorous
biological community than existed before the gene transfer.
(For an excellent discussion of this issue, see Lu 2008.)
Generally speaking, many of these arguments can be sub-
sumed under a common theme: It is fairly clear that genes that
have been introduced into domestic crops by genetic engineer-
ing are capable of escaping into the wild, and no one knows
precisely how this process is likely to affect the genotypes and
phenotypes of natural plants thus infected or how, if at all, they
will affect the general ecological structure of an area. And the
general response to that query is that humans have been
96
GMO Food

altering organisms for many centuries (as with hybridization),
and those changes have not produced problems at the level of
either individual species or ecological systems. (For an extended
discussion of this topic, see Andersson and de Vicente 2010;
Boškovic et al. 2010.)
Potential Social and Economic Harm
The introduction of GM crops and foods has had impacts on
human society that go far beyond those of agriculture, human
health, the environment, and other primarily scientiﬁc issues.
Particularly over the past decade, a number of observers have
been asking how GM crops and foods have changed the eco-
nomics of food production, the social characteristics of the agri-
cultural endeavor, the politics of food production, and related
issues. Some information about those issues is now available.
As noted earlier, one of the strongest arguments for the use
of GM seeds and crops is the beneﬁts such products will have
for farmers. It is also possible that those products may cause
farmers problems that they would not otherwise have in grow-
ing traditional, non-GM crops. For example, the cost of pur-
chasing GM seed is often higher than the cost of non-GM
traditional seed. For example, the Organic Center maintains a
Seed Premium-Farm Income Database that tracks the cost of
crop seeds from 1975 to the current year. Figures from that
database showed that the price of conventional corn seed in
2010 was $152.90 per bag, compared to $170.10 per bag for
organic seed, $270.25 per bag for GM seed, and $320.00 per
bag for a specialty GM seed called SmartStax. Comparable
prices for soybean seeds were $36.50 per bag for conventional
seed, $48.56 per bag for organic seed, $59.52 per bag for GM
seed, and $70.43 per bag for Roundup Ready seed. The com-
parison was even more dramatic for cotton seed, which sold
for $118.65 per hundred-weight for conventional seed and
$700.35 per hundred-weight for GM seed. (For more details
on this issue, see Benbrook 2009.)
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
97

Such a pattern makes sense because the cost of developing
GM seeds and plants is high, and corporations only naturally
want to make back their expenses of development along with
a reasonable proﬁt. Although this is true, the reality is that
GM seed may be too expensive for smaller farmers, especially
those living in developed countries who may simply not be able
to afford such seeds.
Biotechnology companies have also developed mechanisms
for ensuring that, to the extent possible, farmers use only engi-
neered seeds that they purchase from one of the major producers
(Monsanto, Syngenta, DuPont, Bayer, and BASF). Even if farm-
ers growing conventional, non-GM crops accidentally use seed
blown in from adjacent farms that use GM seeds, they can be
sued by biotechnology companies for infringement of patent
rights on those seeds. And to close the circle on their control of
GM seeds and crops, biotechnology companies have developed
a technology known as genetic use restriction technology (GURT).
GURT can be used for the production of so-called suicide seeds
that can be grown for a crop in one year but whose own seeds
are sterile and unable to be used for growing crops in later years
(Dimech 2002). Monsanto claims that it has not sold such seeds,
nor does it plan to do so, even though the technology is available
(“Monsanto Sells Terminator Seeds”).
Labeling of Genetically Modified Foods
in the United States
Many critics of GMO have taken a second approach in their
opposition to GM foods: They have suggested or demanded
that any such foods made available for sale to consumers be so
labeled. At the beginning of 2014, more than 60 nations world-
wide had some type of laws or regulations along these lines.
Those nations included Australia, Brazil, China, Russia, South
Africa, Turkey, and the member states of the European Union
(Kingston 2013). As discussed earlier, the European Union
has struggled for many years to resolve the issue as to whether
98
GMO Food

or not to require the labeling of GM foods, at what stage of
their use to do so, what the nature of a label should be, and a
host of other issues relating to the labeling process. (For a good
overview of the EU labeling regulations, see “Labeling of GMO
Products.”) Although the United States has a complex system
for approving research on, development of, and sale of GM
foods, there are no federal labeling laws or regulations.
This difference between the way the European Union and
the United States approach the labeling of GM foods reﬂects
signiﬁcant differences in public attitudes about GM foods in
the two regions, as noted earlier. As recently as 2012, public
opinion polls showed that about 20 percent of Americans
viewed GM foods “not favorably,” compared to 61 percent of
Europeans who held a similar view in a poll held two years ear-
lier (Kreibohm 2013, 3). For this reason, efforts to produce
federal legislation on the labeling of GM foods in the United
States has gone essentially nowhere.
Activists have been forced, therefore, to pursue their case for
the labeling of GM foods at the state and local level. Each year
over the past decade, labeling laws have been introduced into
dozens of state legislatures, always without success. During
2013, for example, 26 state legislatures considered at least one
bill (and some more than a half dozen bills) requiring the label-
ing of GM products, the great difference being that two of
those bills were, for the ﬁrst time, passed (“State Labeling
Initiatives”). The ﬁrst of those bills was passed by the
Connecticut legislature and signed by Governor Dannel P.
Malloy in June 2013. The bill was written in such a way, how-
ever, that it would not take effect until four other states, one of
which shares a boundary with Connecticut, took similar action.
Within a matter of days, the Maine legislature passed a similar
bill, with similar provisions. Thus, two states technically have
GM food labeling laws, although those laws may not go into
effect for a while (Artz 2013).
Activists have also placed initiatives on state ballots requi-
ring the labeling of GM foods. The ﬁrst such initiative was
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
99

California’s Proposition 37, requiring the labeling of all food
products that contained any type of GMO. After intense and
expensive
campaigning,
that
initiative
failed
in
the
November 2012 election by a margin of 53 percent to 47 per-
cent. A second attempt was made in the state of Washington
a year later, when voters were presented with Initiative 522.
Once again, the proposal was defeated at the polls by a vote
of 55 percent to 45 percent. Like the California campaign, the
Washington contest was dominated by national and international
out-of-state interests, such as the Grocery Manufacturers Asso-
ciation, Monsanto, DuPont Pioneer, Dow AgroSciences, and
Bayer CropScience in support of the “no” side of the vote
and Dr. Bronner’s Magic Soaps, Center for Food Safety
Action Fund, Mercola.com Health Resources LLC, Organic
Consumers Association, and Presence Marketing, Inc., on the
“yes” side. The total investment by the two sides was about
$22 million for the “no” side and $7 million for the “yes” side
(Behrson 2013).
Pros and Cons of Labeling
Proponents of mandatory GM food labeling often put forward
a relatively straightforward argument. They suggest that many
people remain unconvinced by claims of pro-genetic engineer-
ing that GM foods are safe to eat and safe for the environment.
They argue that such individuals should, at the very least, be
allowed the right to decline to purchase GM foods. The only
way they can do that, they continue, is for foods to be labeled
to indicate whether or not they contain GM foods.
Other arguments in favor of labeling can be made also. For
example, more than 60 nations require the labeling of GM
foods, and opinion polls suggest that a large fraction of the
American populace (if not a majority) approves of food label-
ing. What harm is there, then, in providing that same option
to the American population? Also, it is possible that individuals
who do not eat meat for one reason or another might be
100
GMO Food

exposed to genes from meat products by eating GM foods.
Such individuals should have the right to avoid such products.
(For one of the many statements in favor of GM food labeling,
see Bronner 2013.)
Critics of mandatory food labeling counter such arguments
with a number of opposing views. In the ﬁrst place, requiring
the labeling of GM foods for all practical purposes acknowl-
edges that such foods do pose a risk to human health or the
natural environment. However, opponents say, that concern
has been disproved over and over again by countless numbers
of research studies over the years. Also, the desire to offer con-
sumers a greater degree of choice by labeling GM foods may
be admirable in the abstract, but it has turned out not to be true
in real life. Some studies have showed that the additional costs
of handling labeled GM foods have prompted many retailers
to stop stocking such items and prevented consumers from
purchasing them (see, for example, Carter and Gruère 2003).
Opponents of labeling also point to the huge cost that would
be involved with the handling of labeled foods, from the design
and printing of labels, to the production of separate batches of
products, to the transportation and storage of additional food
items, to the stocking and merchandising separate versions of
what is essentially the same product. Finally, they take note that
worries about the presence of animal genes in GM foods are
unfounded, because no animal genes are now used in the pro-
duction of such foods. (For summary statements in opposition
to mandatory GM food labeling, see, for example, Editors of
Scientiﬁc American 2013; Sunstein 2013, with many responses
to the blog.)
Conclusion
One of the points raised by critics of the production and con-
sumption of GM seeds, crops, and foods is that this technology
is still very new. Many of the potential problems they see with
the technology may not be manifested for years or decades.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
101

At this early point, they say, humans should exercise caution as to
their use of GM products. Such concerns are unreasonable, pro-
ponents of GM products say. Humans cannot hold off forever
to take advantage of new technologies on the basis of possible
harmful results many years or decades into the future. With this
diversity of basic assumptions, one can only assume that the
debate over GM products will continue long into the future.
References
“AAAS Board of Directors: Legally Mandating GM Food
Labels Could ‘Mislead and Falsely Alarm Consumers’.”
http://www.aaas.org/news/releases/2012/1025gm
_statement.shtml. Accessed on November 25, 2013.
Agarwal, Pradeep K., et al. 2013. “Bioengineering for Salinity
Tolerance in Plants: State of the Art.” Molecular
Biotechnology 54(1): 102–123.
“Amﬂora—a Potato for Industrial Applications.” GMO Safety.
http://www.gmo-safety.eu/science/potato/263.amﬂora
-potato-industrial-applications-starch-potatoes-renewable
-raw-material.html. Accessed on October 21, 2013.
Andersson, Meike S., and M. Carmen de Vicente. 2010. Gene
Flow between Crops and Their Wild Relatives. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
“Any DNA Insertion Can Cause a Mutation.” Academics
Review. http://academicsreview.org/reviewed-content/
genetic-roulette/section-2/2-1-dna-insertion/. Accessed on
November 30, 2013.
Artz, Kenneth. 2013. “Connecticut, Maine Pass GMO
Labeling Laws.” http://news.heartland.org/newspaper
-article/2013/07/12/connecticut-maine-pass-gmo-labeling
-laws. Accessed on December 1, 2013.
“Austria Bans Monsanto’s GM Oilseed Rape.” GM Watch.
http://gmwatch.org/latest-listing/1-news-items/137-austria
102
GMO Food

-bans-monsantos-gm-oilseed-rape. Accessed on October 13,
2013.
Bartley, Nancy. 2006. “2 Charged in Arson at Oregon Tree
Farm.” Seattle Times. http://community.seattletimes
.nwsource.com/archive/?date=20060224&slug=eco24m.
Accessed on September 11, 2013.
Baskin, Yvonne. 1987. “Testing the Future.” The Alicia
Patterson Foundation. http://aliciapatterson.org/stories/
testing-future. Accessed on September 11, 2013.
Behrson, Pamela. 2013. “Data Release: WA GMO Labeling
Initiative—$22M from 57 NO Contributors; $7.7M from
10,500+ YES Contributors.” MapLight. http://maplight
.org/data-release/data-release-wa-gmo-labeling-initiative
-22m-from-57-no-contributors-77m-from-10500-yes-.
Accessed on December 1, 2013.
Benbrook, Charles. 2009. The Magnitude and Impacts of the
Biotech and Organic Seed Price Premium. The Organic
Center. http://www.organic-center.org/reportﬁles/
SeedPricesReport.pdf. Accessed on November 30,
2013.
Benbrook, Charles M. 2012. “Impacts of Genetically
Engineered Crops on Pesticide Use in the U.S.—the First
Sixteen Years.” Environmental Sciences Europe 24: 24. http://
www.enveurope.com/content/pdf/2190-4715-24-24.pdf.
Accessed on September 9, 2013.
“Biotechnology.” Eurobarometer 73.1. Brussels: TNS Opinion
& Social. http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/archives/ebs/
ebs_341_en.pdf. Accessed on September 15, 2013.
Bonny, Sylvie. 2008. “How Have Opinions about GMOs
Changed Over Time? The Situation in the European Union
and the USA.” CAB Reviews: Perspectives in Agriculture,
Veterinary Science, Nutrition and Natural Resources 3(093).
http://icon.slu.se/ICON/Documents/Publications/BONNY
_How%20have%20opinions%20about%20GMOs%20
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
103

changed%20over%20time_CAB%20rev%202008%20
%20PAV3093.pdf. Accessed on September 15, 2013.
Boškovic, Jelena V., et al. 2010. “Assessing Ecological Risks
and Beneﬁts of Genetically Modiﬁed Crops.” Journal of
Agricultural Sciences 55(1): 89–101.
Bronner, David. 2013. “5 Reasons to Get on the Soapbox for
GMO Labeling.” Hufﬁngton Post. http://www.hufﬁngton
post.com/david-bronner/ﬁve-reasons-to-get-on-the-soap
box_b_4183815.html. Accessed on December 1, 2013.
Brookes, Graham, and Peter Barfoot. 2013. GM Crops: Global
Socio-economic and Environmental Impacts 1996–2011.
Dorchester, UK: PG Economics, Ltd. https://www.landes
bioscience.com/journals/gmcrops/2013GMC0001R.pdf.
Accessed on November 30, 2013.
“Buffer Zones Can Not Prevent GMO Cross Pollination.” GM
Watch. http://www.gmwatch.org/index.php/news/archive/
2008/9542-buffer-zones-can-not-prevent-gmo-cross
-contamination. Accessed on November 30, 2013.
Butler, Declan. 2010. “A New Dawn for Transgenic Crops in
Europe?” Nature. http://www.nature.com/news/2010/100309/
full/news.2010.112.html. Accessed on October 21, 2013.
Carter, Colin A., and Guillaume P. Gruère. 2003. “Mandatory
Labeling of Genetically Modiﬁed Foods: Does It Really
Provide Consumer Choice?” AgBioForum. http://www
.agbioforum.org/v6n12/v6n12a13-carter.htm. Accessed
on December 1, 2013.
Cencič, Avrelija, and Krzysztof Krygier. 2007. “Miscellaneous
Hazards.” In Frank Devlieghere, Pieternel Luning, and
Roland Vehe, eds. Safety in the Agri-food Chain, 223–248.
Wageningen, the Netherlands: Wageningen Academic
Publishers.
“Commission Regulation (EC) No 50/2000 of 10
January 2000.” Ofﬁcial Journal of the European Communities.
104
GMO Food

http://faolex.fao.org/docs/pdf/eur19091.pdf. Accessed on
October 30, 2013.
Committee on Identifying and Assessing Unintended Effects of
Genetically Engineered Foods on Human Health, Board on
Life Sciences, Food and Nutrition Board, Board on
Agriculture and Natural Resources, Institute of Medicine,
and National Research Council of the National Academies.
2004. Safety of Genetically Engineered Foods: Approaches to
Assessing Unintended Health Effects. Washington, DC: The
National Academies Press.
“Consumer Insights Regarding Food Biotechnology.”
International Food Information Council Foundation. http://
www.food.insight.org/Resources/Detail.aspx?topic
=Consumer_Insights_Regarding_Food_Biotechnology.
Accessed on September 15, 2013.
“Contained Use of Genetically Modiﬁed Micro-organisms.”
Europa. http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/other/
l21157_en.htm. Accessed on September 23, 2013.
“The Convention on Biological Diversity.” Convention on
Biological Diversity. https://www.cbd.int/convention/.
Accessed on October 13, 2013.
“Council Regulation (EC) No 1139/98 of 26 May 1998
Concerning the Compulsory Indication of the Labelling of
Certain Foodstuffs Produced from Genetically Modiﬁed
Organisms of Particulars Other than Those Provided for in
Directive 79/112/EEC.” ec.europa.eu/food/fs/gmo/legal_oj/
reg1139-98_en.pdf. Accessed on May 7, 2014.
Crawford, Mark. 1987. “California Field Test Goes Forward.”
Science 236(4801): 511.
“Cross-Fertilization by Airborne Pollen Found at Surprisingly
Large Distances.” BioJournal. http://www5d.biglobe.ne.jp/
~cbic/english/2008/journal0805.html. Accessed on
November 30, 2013.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
105

Davison, John. 2010. “GM Plants: Science, Politics and EC
Regulations.” Plant Science 178(2): 94–98.
Dean, Amy, and Jennifer Armstrong. 2009. “Genetically
Modiﬁed Foods.” American Academy of Environmental
Medicine. http://www.aaemonline.org/gmopost.html.
Accessed on November 26, 2013.
A Decade of EU-Funded GMO Research (2001–2010).
Directorate-General for Research and Innovation. European
Union. http://ec.europa.eu/research/biosociety/pdf/a
_decade_of_eu-funded_gmo_research.pdf. Accessed on
November 25, 2013.
Dimech, Adam. 2002. “Terminator.” http://www.adonline.id
.au/terminatorseeds/. Accessed on November 30, 2013.
Editors of Scientiﬁc American. 2013. “Labels for GMO Foods
Are a Bad Idea.” Scientiﬁc American. http://www.scientiﬁc
american.com/article.cfm?id=labels-for-gmo-foods-are-a
-bad-idea. Accessed on December 1, 2013.
“EU and Argentina Settle WTO Case on Genetically Modiﬁed
Organisms.” Press Releases Database. http://europa.eu/
rapid/press-release_IP-10-325_en.htm. Accessed on
October 13, 2013.
“EU GMO Ban Was Illegal, WTO Rules.” EurActiv.com.
http://www.euractiv.com/trade/eu-gmo-ban-illegal-wto
-rules-news-216529. Accessed on October 13, 2013.
“Four Arrested in 1999 New Year’s Eve Agricultural Hall
Arson.” [Michigan State University] Agriculture. http://
special.news.msu.edu/ag_hall/index.php. Accessed on
September 11, 2013.
Frederiks, T. M., et al. 2012. “Current and Emerging
Screening Methods to Identify Post-Head-Emergence Frost
Adaptation in Wheat and Barley.” Journal of Experimental
Botany 63(15): 5405–5416.
Galbraith, Kate. 2013. “Attitudes on Crops Are Modifying.”
New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/11/
106
GMO Food

business/energy-environment/11iht-green11.html?ref
=geneticallymodiﬁedfood&_r=0. Accessed on
September 15, 2013.
“GM Food & Feed—Labelling.” European Commission.
http://ec.europa.eu/food/food/biotechnology/gmfood/
labelling_en.htm. Accessed on October 30, 2013.
“GMOs in a Nutshell.” Health and Consumers, European
Commission. http://ec.europa.eu/food/food/biotechnology/
qanda/d1_en.htm. Accessed on September 23, 2013.
“GRDC Ups the Ante in Search for Frost Tolerant Crops.”
Grains Research and Development Council. http://www
.noodls.com/view/FD98A689C5269EC870AEA385A1
B316A7263D6D7D. Accessed on October 31, 2013.
“Greenpeace Protestors Paint Field of Genetically Altered
Soybeans.” AP News Archive. http://www.apnewsarchive
.com/1996/Greenpeace-Protesters-Paint-Field-of-Genetically
-Altered-Soybeans/id-7f3397419d2a1a90ca894cbb2f6f796a.
Accessed on September 11, 2013.
Gruère, Guillaume P., and S. R. Rao. 2007. “A Review of
International Labeling Policies of Genetically Modiﬁed
Food to Evaluate India’s Proposed Rule.” AgBioForum 10
(1): 51–64.
Gupta, Ashish, et al. 2005. “Impact of Bt Cotton on Farmers’
Health (in Barwani and Dhar District of Madhya Pradesh).”
Investigation Report, Oct–Dec 2005. http://www.docstoc
.com/docs/123222095/BT-Health-Report-NBA-JSA.
Accessed on November 26, 2013.
“Heat-Tolerant Crops Could Prevent Future Starvation
and Help Preserve Biofuels.” National Science Foundation.
http://www.nsf.gov/discoveries/disc_summ.jsp?cntn
_id=114642&org=NSF. Accessed on October 31,
2013.
Johns, Timothy, and Pablo B. Eyzaguirrea. 2007.
“Biofortiﬁcation, Biodiversity and Diet: A Search for
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
107

Complementary Applications against Poverty and
Malnutrition.” Food Policy 32(1): 1–24.
Jukes, Thomas. 1987. “The Nonsense about Frostban.” The
Scientist. http://www.the-scientist.com/?articles.view/
articleNo/8658/title/The-Nonsense-About-Frostban/.
Accessed on September 11, 2013.
Kingston, Hudson B. 2013. “64 Countries around the World
Label GE Food.” http://www.pccnaturalmarkets.com/sc/
1305/countries_label_ge.html. Accessed on December 1,
2013.
Kloor, Keith. 2013. “Greens on the Run in Debate over
Genetically Modiﬁed Food.” The Grid. http://www
.bloomberg.com/news/2013-01-07/green-activist-reverses
-stance-on-genetically-modiﬁed-food.html. Accessed on
November 25, 2013.
Kreibohm, Linnea. 2013. “Who’s Afraid of GMOs?
Understanding the Differences in the Regulation of GMOs
in the United States and European Union.” Issue Brief 44.
American Institute for Contemporary German Studies. The
Johns Hopkins University. http://www.aicgs.org/site/
wp-content/uploads/2013/08/Issue-Brief-44_GMOs1.pdf.
Accessed on December 1, 2013.
Kuzma, Jennifer, and Rachel Haase. 2012. Safety Assessment of
Genetically Engineered Foods: US Policy & Current Science.
University of Minnesota Food Policy Research Center.
http://www.foodpolicy.umn.edu/prod/groups/cvm/@pub/
@cvm/@fprc/documents/content/cvm_content_411776
.pdf. Accessed on November 26, 2013.
“Labeling of GMO Products: Freedom of Choice for
Consumers.” GMO Compass. http://www.gmo-compass
.org/eng/regulation/labelling/. Accessed on December 1,
2013.
Lendman, Stephen. 2008. “Potential Health Hazards of
Genetically Engineered Foods.” GlobalResearch.
108
GMO Food

http://www.globalresearch.ca/potential-health-hazards-of
-genetically-engineered-foods/8148. Accessed on
November 26, 2013.
Levaux, Ari. 2012. “The Very Real Danger of Genetically
Modiﬁed Foods.” The Atlantic. http://www.theatlantic.com/
health/archive/2012/01/the-very-real-danger-of-genetically
-modiﬁed-foods/251051/. Accessed on November 26, 2013.
Lu, Bao-Rong. 2008. “Transgene Escape from GM Crops and
Potential Biosafety Consequences: An Environmental
Perspective.” http://www.icgeb.org/~bsafesrv/pdfﬁles/
Bao-Rong.pdf. Accessed on November 30, 2013.
Lynch, Diahanna, and David Vogel. 2001. The Regulation of
GMOs in Europe and the United States: A Case-Study of
Contemporary European Regulatory Politics. New York:
Council on Foreign Relations Press.
Mackenzie, Ruth, et al. 2003. An Explanatory Guide to the
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety. Gland, Switzerland, and
Cambridge, UK: IUCN. http://www.cbd.int/doc/books/
2003/B-01669.pdf. Accessed on May 20, 2014.
Magaña-Gómez, Javier A., and Ana M. Calderón de la Barca.
2009. “Risk Assessment of Genetically Modiﬁed Crops for
Nutrition and Health.” Nutrition Reviews 67(1): 1–16.
“Maize.” GM Compass. http://www.gmo-compass.org/eng/
grocery_shopping/crops/18.genetically_modiﬁed_maize_eu
.html. Accessed on October 21, 2013.
Marden, Emily. 2003. “Risk and Regulation: U.S. Regulatory
Policy on Genetically Modiﬁed Food and Agriculture.”
Boston College Law Review 44(3): 733–787.
Mccomber, J. Martin. 1999. “Ecoactivists Go after Wrong
Target.” The Seattle Times. http://community.seattletimes
.nwsource.com/archive/?date=19991129&slug=2998261.
Accessed on September 11, 2013.
Medina, Carolina, et al. 2004. “U.S. Consumer Attitudes
toward Food Biotechnology.” Paper prepared for
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
109

presentation at the Southern Agricultural Economics
Association Annual Meeting, Tulsa, Oklahoma,
February 18. http://ageconsearch.umn.edu/bitstream/
34626/1/sp04me01.pdf. Accessed on September 15, 2013.
“Monsanto Sells Terminator Seeds.” Monsanto. http://www
.monsanto.com/newsviews/Pages/terminator-seeds.aspx.
Accessed on November 30, 2013.
Naimon, Jonathan S. 1991. “Using Expert Panels to Assess
Risks of Environmental Biotechnology Applications: A Case
Study of the 1986 Frostban Risk Assessments.” In Morris A.
Levin and Harlee S. Strauss, eds. Risk Assessment in Genetic
Engineering, 319–353. New York: McGraw-Hill. Inc.
Odame, Hannington, Patricia Kameri-Mbote, and David
Wafula. 2002. “Innovation and Policy Process: Case of
Transgenic Sweet Potato in Kenya.” Economic and Political
Weekly 37(27): 2770–2777.
“Opposition Decreasing or Acceptance Increasing?” GMO
Compass. http://www.gmo-compass.org/eng/news/stories/
415.an_overview_european_consumer_polls_attitudes
_gmos.html. Accessed on September 15, 2013.
Peleg, Zvi, Maris P. Apse, and Eduardo Blumwald. 2011.
“Engineering Salinity and Water-Stress Tolerance in Crop
Plants: Getting Closer to the Field.” Advances in Botanical
Research 57: 405–443.
Peng, J., et al. 1999. “ ‘Green Revolution’ Genes Encode
Mutant Gibberellin Response Modulators.” Nature 400
(6741): 256–261.
Peterson, M. J., and Paul A. White. 2010. “The EU–US
Dispute over Regulation of Genetically Modiﬁed
Organisms, Plants, Feeds, and Foods—Case Summary.”
International Dimensions of Ethics Education in Science
and Engineering Case Study Series. http://scholarworks
.umass.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1007&context
=edethicsinscience. Accessed on October 30, 2013.
110
GMO Food

Pew Initiative on Food and Biotechnology. http://www.pew
health.org/projects/pew-initiative-on-food-and-biotechnology
-85899367237. Accessed on September 15, 2013.
“The Pew Initiative on Food and Biotechnology.” 2006. The
Mellman Group. http://www.pewtrusts.org/uploadedFiles/
wwwpewtrustsorg/Public_Opinion/Food_and_Biotechnology/
2006summary.pdf. Accessed on September 15, 2013.
“Possible Beneﬁts of GM Crops in Developing Countries.”
Nufﬁeld Council on Bioethics. http://www.nufﬁeld
bioethics.org/gm-crops-developing-countries/gm-crops
-developing-countries-possible-beneﬁts-gm-crops
-developing-co. Accessed on October 31, 2013.
Pray, Carl E., et al. 2002. “Five Years of Bt Cotton in
China—the Beneﬁts Continue.” Plant Journal 31(4):
423–430.
“Protestors around the World March against Monsanto.” USA
Today. http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/world/2013/
05/25/global-protests-monsanto/2361007/. Accessed on
September 11, 2013.
Rajamani, Lavanya. 2013. “The Cartagena Protocol—a Battle
over Trade or Biosafety?” Third World Network. http://
www.twnside.org.sg/title/lavanya-cn.htm. Accessed on
October 13, 2013.
“Regulation (EC) No 258/97 of the European Parliament and
of the Council of 27 January 1997 Concerning Novel Foods
and Novel Food Ingredients.” http://eur-lex.europa.eu/
LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CONSLEG:1997R0258:
20090120:EN:PDF. Accessed on October 13, 2013.
“Report 2 of the Council on Science and Public Health
(A-12).” American Medical Association. http://www
.ama-assn.org/resources/doc/csaph/a12-csaph2-bio
engineeredfoods.pdf. Accessed on November 25, 2013.
“Report on Genetically Modiﬁed Organisms in Monterey
County, California.” http://ag.co.monterey.ca.us/assets/
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
111

resources/assets/132/Report%20on%20GMOs%20in%
20Monterey%20Co%20CA.1.3.11.pdf?1296753661.
Accessed on September 11, 2013.
Ronald, Pamela. 2011. “Plant Genetics, Sustainable
Agriculture and Global Food Security.” Genetics
188(1): 11–20.
“Round-Up Ready Corn under Attack in California.” III
Publishing. http://www.iiipublishing.com/politics/gmnews
.htm. Accessed on September 11, 2013.
“Rules on GMOs in the EU—Ban on GMOs Cultivation.”
Health and Consumers, European Commission. http://ec
.europa.eu/food/food/biotechnology/gmo_ban_cultivation
_en.htm. Accessed on September 23, 2013.
“The Safety of Genetically Modiﬁed Foods Produced through
Biotechnology.” 2003. Toxicological Sciences 71(1): 2–8.
Sayre, Richard, et al. 2011. “The BioCassava Plus Program:
Biofortiﬁcation of Cassava for Sub-Saharan Africa.” Annual
Review of Plant Biology 62: 251–272.
The Seed Premium-Farm Income Database. The Organic
Center. http://organic-center.org/reportﬁles/
SeedPricesDatabase.pdf. Accessed on November 30, 2013.
Shaffer, Gregory C., and Pollack, Mark A. 2004. Regulating
between National Fears and Global Disciplines: Agricultural
Biotechnology in the EU. New York: New York University
School of Law. http://centers.law.nyu.edu/jeanmonnet/archive/
papers/04/041001.pdf. Accessed on September 23, 2013.
Silva Dias, João, and Rodomiro Ortiz. 2012. “Transgenic
Vegetable Breeding for Nutritional Quality and Health
Beneﬁts.” Food and Nutrition Sciences 3: 1209–1219.
Smith, Jeffrey M. 2005. “Scrambling and Gambling with the
Genome.” Institute for Responsible Technology. http://
www.responsibletechnology.org/gmo-dangers/Scrambling
-and-Gambling-with-the-Genome-July-2005. Accessed on
November 30, 2013.
112
GMO Food

Smith, Jeffrey M. 2007. Genetic Roulette: The Documented
Health Risks of Genetically Engineered Foods. Fairﬁeld, IA:
Yes! Books.
“State Labeling Initiatives.” Center for Food Safety. http://
www.centerforfoodsafety.org/issues/976/ge-food-labeling/
state-labeling-initiatives. Accessed on December 1, 2013.
Stecker, Tiffany. 2013. “New Enzyme May Lead to Cheaper
Biofuels.” Scientiﬁc American. http://www.scientiﬁcamerican
.com/article.cfm?id=new-enzyme-may-lead-to-cheaper
-biofuels. Accessed on November 25, 2013.
Sunstein, Cass R. 2013. “Don’t Mandate Labeling of Gene-
Altered Food.” Bloomberg View. http://www.bloomberg
.com/news/2013-05-12/don-t-mandate-labeling-for-gene
-altered-foods.html. Accessed on December 1, 2013.
Superweeds: How Biotech Crops Bolster the Pesticide Industry.
2013. Washington, DC: Food & Water Watch, July
2013. Available online at http://documents.foodand
waterwatch.org/doc/Superweeds.pdf. Accessed
on November 1, 2013.
“Traceability and Labelling of GMOs.” Europa: Summaries of
EU Legislation. http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/
environment/nature_and_biodiversity/l21170_en.htm.
Accessed on October 30, 2013.
Turan, Satpal, Katrina Cornish, and Shashi Kumar. 2012. “Salinity
Tolerance in Plants: Breeding and Genetic Engineering.”
Australian Journal of Crop Science 6(9): 1337–1348.
Tuttle, Jeff. 1999. “Group Claims Responsibility for Corn
Crop Damage.” Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy.
http://www.iatp.org/news/group-claims-responsibility-for
-corn-crop-damage. Accessed on September 11, 2013.
“U.S. Bioenergy Statistics.” United States Department of
Agriculture. Economic Research Service. http://www.ers
.usda.gov/data-products/us-bioenergy-statistics.aspx#
.UpPOesQqh8F. Accessed on November 25, 2013.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
113

U.S. Congress, Ofﬁce of Technology Assessment. 1987. New
Developments in Biotechnology—Background Paper: Public
Perceptions of Biotechnology. OTA-BP-BA-45. Washington,
DC: U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce. http://digital.library
.unt.edu/ark:/67531/metadc39888/m1/10/?q=food.
Accessed on May 7, 2014. Also available at http://www
.princeton.edu/~ota/disk2/1987/8721/. Accessed on
May 7, 2014.
“Vandals Uproot Plants Used in Bacteria Test.” 1987. New
York Times. May 27. http://www.nytimes.com/1987/05/27/
us/vandals-uproot-plants-used-in-bacteria-test.html?n=Top
%2fReference%2fTimes%20Topics%2fSubjects%2fT
%2fTests%20and%20Testing. Accessed on September 11,
2013.
Vaughan, Adam. 2012. “Public Concern over GM Food Has
Lessened, Survey Shows.” Guardian. http://www.the
guardian.com/environment/2012/mar/09/gm-food-public
-concern. Accessed on September 15, 2013.
Verma, Charu, et al. 2011. “A Review on Impacts of
Genetically Modiﬁed Food on Human Health.” Open
Nutraceuticals Journal 4: 3–11.
“Weighing the GMO Arguments: For.” Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations. http://www.fao.org/
english/newsroom/focus/2003/gmo8.htm. Accessed on
November 25, 2013.
Wilson, Kimberly A. C. 2013. “Genetically Engineered Sugar
Beets Destroyed in Southern Oregon.” Oregon Live. http://
www.oregonlive.com/paciﬁc-northwest-news/index.ssf/
2013/06/genetically_engineered_sugar_b.html. Accessed on
September 11, 2013.
Zhang, Lin, et al. 2012. “Exogenous Plant MIR168a
Speciﬁcally Targets Mammalian LDLRAP1: Evidence of
Cross-Kingdom Regulation by microRNA.” Cell Research
22: 107–126.
114
GMO Food



3
Perspectives
Introduction
This chapter provides individuals with an opportunity to write
brief essays on some speciﬁc aspects of genetically modiﬁed
(GM) foods. Those essays cover a wide variety of topics, from
recent developments in the technology of genetic engineering
to reasons to support or oppose the expanded use of GM foods
in the United States and other parts of the world.
A Sledgehammer or a Dart?: Sandy Becker
I do not mind eating genetically modiﬁed (GM) foods. I have
probably done it for years without noticing it, since until
recently there has not been any law here in Connecticut
demanding that they be labeled. As a biologist, I am not aware
of any studies showing that eating GM foods can harm me.
However, I am worried about what may happen during the
process of growing them.
There are basically three major categories of GM crops. There
are those modiﬁed to be immune to weed killers, so the farmer
can douse his or her crop with an herbicide to kill weeds, without
harming the crop. There are those modiﬁed to be poisonous to
117
A harvester works through a ﬁeld of genetically modiﬁed corn near Santa
Rosa, California. GM corn now makes up well over 90 percent of all corn
crops grown in the United States. (AP Photo/Rich Pedroncelli)

common insect pests, so the farmer does not have to douse
the crop with insecticides. And there are those modiﬁed to be
immune to various microbe-caused diseases. The advantages of
each of these traits are pretty obvious.
Bt corn, for example, contains an inserted gene from a
naturally occurring soil bacterium (Bacillus thuringiensis, hence
the Bt) that is highly toxic to caterpillars: for example the
European corn borer, whose larvae feed on both the stalks and
the ears of corn. The evidence so far, of which there is a lot,
indicates that it is not at all toxic to us. However, it is a sledge-
hammer approach, toxic to the caterpillars of other moths and
butterﬂies as well. I have some concerns about killing every
caterpillar that takes a bite of Bt corn. One person’s hated pest
is another person’s beloved endangered species. Monarch but-
terﬂy caterpillars eat milkweed, which farmers consider a weed.
Should I be concerned that the Bt gene in GM corn could
spread to milkweed and poison the caterpillars of monarch
butterﬂies?
Probably not. The process of genetically modifying plants is
so difﬁcult and complex that I am not too worried about the
inserted genes jumping to another nearby plant on their own.
So I will worry a little less about the monarch caterpillars.
However, it is entirely plausible to imagine that the inserted
genes could end up being transferred to a closely related wild
species that can cross-pollinate with the GM crop. This process
has been suspected in Mexico. Wild maize growing in the
vicinity of Bt corn has been found to contain the Bt gene,
although data from various studies disagree—some claim it
has happened; some say it has not. But if this has happened,
what butterﬂy larvae may feed on wild maize and be poisoned?
I would prefer to use a dart, not a sledgehammer, to kill agri-
cultural insect pests. If we really want to be sure we are poison-
ing only the insect pest we are aiming for, there may be a better
weapon available soon: RNA interference (RNAi). Like a well-
thrown dart, this technique could target a speciﬁc pest for
destruction. How does RNAi work? (No, it is not a newfangled
118
GMO Food

football play.) Remember that any protein an organism needs
must be ﬁrst transcribed from the gene into messenger RNA,
which functions as a template to make the protein. If the
RNA is destroyed, the protein cannot be made, and if it is a
crucial protein, the cell will die without it. RNAi can precisely
target a speciﬁc protein, in a speciﬁc insect pest.
RNAi was discovered in the 1990s and is most likely a
defense against some viral infections. When replicating, some
viruses consist of double-stranded RNA—the two matching
nucleic acid strands stuck together like a closed zipper, as
DNA (the “double helix”) normally is. Messenger RNA tran-
scribed from a gene is single stranded. Thus, the cells of most
organisms recognize that there is something ﬁshy about
double-stranded RNA—it should not be there. A defense
against these invaders has been evolved: RNAi. When a cell
notices double-stranded RNA, the cell chops it into short
chunks, which then work with other cellular machinery to
destroy all matching RNAs. If the invading double-stranded
RNA belongs to a virus, the cell can destroy it in this way.
Researchers often use RNAi to “turn off” a given gene so
they can see what happens to the cell without it. However, if
a curious researcher introduces double-stranded RNA belong-
ing to a gene critical to the cell itself, the cell will destroy the
messenger RNA for its own important gene and will not sur-
vive. It is very difﬁcult to introduce double-stranded RNA into
the cells of mammals, but it is very easy to get it into insects—
you just feed it to them. So, if a plant can be genetically modi-
ﬁed to produce a double-stranded RNA crucial to the survival
of an insect pest, for example, the corn rootworm, the worms
that feed on the corn will die. The worms eat the corn contain-
ing the RNA, and the worms’ own cellular machinery destroys
the “invader.” However, in this case, the “invader” is RNA
responsible for a protein crucial to the worm’s cells, and the
worm dies when it is destroyed.
These double-stranded RNAs can be engineered to be exqui-
sitely speciﬁc to just one species of insect pest, so no other
Perspectives
119

(possibly beneﬁcial) insects are at risk. RNAi-containing GM
crops are not in the ﬁelds yet, but several companies are hard
at work getting them ready for commercial use.
In science, it is not possible to prove things harmless. Failure
to ﬁnd evidence of harm may only mean we did not look hard
enough yet. I am still concerned about possible harm to the
environment from growing GM crops, but I suspect the rising
human population that needs to be fed will keep them around
for some time.
Sandy Becker is a molecular biologist at Wesleyan University in
Connecticut. She has not created any GM plants but has made
some GM mouse stem cells.
Genetic Engineering in Agriculture: Uncertainties
and Risks: Debal Deb
Genetic engineering (GE) transfers genes across the natural
reproductive barrier across species—even across taxonomic
kingdoms—so that genes from viruses, bacteria, fungi, or ani-
mals are inserted into a plant cell and vice versa. This is a bril-
liant tool of gene mixing, enabling biologists to “create” novel
organisms never found in nature.
Genetic engineers have transferred genes from the ﬁreﬂy to
tobacco, to create a novel tobacco plant that glows in the dark.
This novel genetically modiﬁed (GM) tobacco was created for
purely scientiﬁc curiosity, but different crops have also been
developed to yield agronomic beneﬁts. With a view to protect-
ing crop plants from insect pests, genes coding for a class of
insecticidal toxins from the soil bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis
(shortened as “Bt”) have been transferred to common plants to
create Bt crops.
Another group of GM crops is created explicitly for promot-
ing agrochemical business. A prominent example is Monsanto
company’s Roundup Ready™crops, which are designed to
withstand the assault from the company’s proprietary herbicide
Roundup™, so the farmers can freely apply this herbicide to
120
GMO Food

their farms, without harming the GM herbicide tolerant
(GMHT) crop from the same company.
Uncertainties in Genetic Engineering
The process of gene transfer across natural taxic barriers is
fraught with uncertainties on molecular, organismal, and eco-
logical levels. The different sources of uncertainty, which ren-
der the claims of GE to precision untenable, are as follows.
Molecular Level
“Gene silencing” or gene expression failure is common when
more than one transgene is inserted into the GM plant (Qin,
Dong, and von Arnim 2003; de Sadeleer 2012). If the Bt trans-
gene in the Bt corn is silenced, the insecticidal Bt toxin is not pro-
duced in the crop tissues, so no pest insects will be controlled.
Conversely, a transgene may be “overexpressed,” so that
the cell manufactures an unregulated excess of gene products,
which may interfere with other unrelated signaling pathways.
This may disrupt many cellular biochemical pathways (Nakai
et al. 2013; Scheel 2002).
In transformants that are homozygous for a transgene, “co-
suppression” of the genes may occur. The native genes in the
GMO may become inactivated when a homologous transgene is
inserted into an ectopic position of the genome (Meyer 1988).
Finally, the transgene may be expressed differently in differ-
ent tissues and organs. “Variable expression” of the transgene
would result in another unintended effect: If the Bt gene is
expressed in the roots and leaves of Bt cotton plant, but not
in its bolls, then the pest bollworms will remain unaffected by
the Bt toxin, causing cotton production failure. This is what
happened in several states of India, causing Bt cotton yield loss
(Sahal and Rahman 2003).
A speciﬁc transgene may behave differently in different host
crops, for unknown reasons. Thus, Bt toxin is known to exude
Perspectives
121

from the roots of Bt corn and Bt rice, but not of Bt cotton, Bt
canola, and Bt tobacco (Saxena et al. 2004).
Organismal Level
The introduction of a transgene usually alters the gene expres-
sion patterns of the whole cell. The native genes, small RNA
molecules (e.g., siRNA [small interfering RNA]), and different
proteins in the GM plant cells may coordinate in unpredictable
manners, resulting in either co-suppression, silencing, or over-
expression of the transgene and certain native genes, leading
to unpredictable effects on the organism’s growth and repro-
duction. For instance, overexpression of a gene involved in pec-
tin synthesis has no effect in tobacco but caused premature leaf
shedding in apple trees (Atkinson et al. 2002). Golden Rice
plants showed unexplained alterations in morphology, such as
shorter stature, later ﬂowering, and lesser panicle density than
the non-GM cultivars (Datta et al. 2003).
“The problem is that currently there is no way to predict the
resultant changes in protein synthesis” (Schubert 2002). For in-
stance, retinoic acid (RA), retinol (vitamin A), and its derivatives
are involved in some signaling events that control mammalian cell
development (Gronemeyer and Miturski 2001). GM plants (e.g.,
Golden Rice) making vitamin A may also produce RA derivatives
in the biochemical pathways of the human consumer. These
derivatives would then act as agonists or antagonists in the
organism’s developmental pathways, causing direct toxicity or
abnormal embryonic development.
Ecosystem Level
If the transgene products of a GM crop are toxic, it would nec-
essarily kill off at least some organisms. Of course, Bt crops are
intended to kill phytophagous insects. There is a growing body
of experimental evidence that GM crops have unintended, del-
eterious effects on nontarget organisms (O’Callaghan et al.
122
GMO Food

2004). Bt toxin may have adverse effects on several insect taxa
(Marvier et al. 2007). Bt toxin runoff from the farm into water
bodies may have deleterious effects on various aquatic organ-
isms (Rosi-Marshall et al. 2007).
Even when a GM crop is not designed to kill anything,
increased herbicide application associated with GMHT crop cul-
tivation leads to the elimination of broadleaved plants, butterﬂies,
and birds (Bohan et al. 2005). The use of Roundup herbicide also
kills off tadpoles of both aquatic and terrestrial frogs (Costa
et al. 2008; Relyea 2005).
Suppression or elimination of a target or nontarget insect
population—whether by chemical or biotechnological means—
may trigger secondary extinction of several species in the agroeco-
system, thereby disrupting the ecosystem functioning (Deb
2009), much of which is not yet fully understood. Furthermore,
short-term elimination of pests may result in undesirable effects
of pest outbreaks in the long term (Reilly and Elderd 2014).
Bt toxin resistance has been recorded in many insect popula-
tions (e.g., diamondback moth [Tabashnik and Carrière 2004;
Zhao et al. 2000] and cotton bollworm [Morin et al. 2003]).
Neither organic Bt spray nor Bt crops can control the resistant
pests, which would compel farmers to apply more pesticides,
driving cascades of ecological destruction.
Health Risks
A series of GM crops are being developed as panacea for nutri-
tional security. GM “Golden Rice” fortiﬁed with β-carotene
and iron is also promoted as the solution to undernutrition in
the global South. However, GE cannot reduce vitamin A deﬁ-
ciency, unless (1) intestinal disease like diarrhea is absent and
(2) the diet also contains triglycerols and zinc (Castenmiller
and West 1998; Nutting et al. 2002). Clearly, micronutrient
deﬁciency is a public health problem, requiring multiple
approach, such as safe drinking water supply and access to food
diversity. A wide range of food plant diversity in the South is
Perspectives
123

known to be 10 to 200 times richer in β-carotene than is the
Golden Rice. The leaves of Amaranthus spinosus, Ipomoea aqua-
tica, Indian mustard, and taro yam tuber are examples (West
and Poortvliet 2014), which prove investing in Golden Rice is
unnecessary. There are traditional rice landraces (a local plant
or animal species that has been improved by traditional agricul-
tural methods) that are richer in iron than the iron-fortiﬁed
GM rice so far developed (Anandan et al. 2011).
Besides,
regular
consumption
of
β-carotene
and
its
derivatives may have adverse health effects. RA, derived from
β-carotene, is biologically active at concentrations several orders
of magnitude lower than retinol. Thus, excess RA or its deriva-
tives are dangerous, particularly to infants and during pregnancy
(Schubert 2008).
Transgenic endotoxins are manufactured in the GM plant,
wherever the genes are expressed, round the clock. The long-
term health effects of transgenic endotoxins are yet unknown,
because there has been no long-term rigorous experiment with
GM foods. The biotech corporations do not allow any publica-
tion of adverse effects of their proprietary crops (“Do Seed
Companies Control GM Crop Research?” 2009).
A published study that demonstrated serious health effects on
rats was conducted by Séralini et al. (2012), whose paper was
nevertheless retracted a year later by a newly appointed associate
editor of the journal, who is an ex-Monsanto employee (“Open
Letter on Retraction and Pledge to Boycott Elsevier” 2013).
In the absence of conclusive evidence, the rational option is to
adopt the precautionary principle (PP) until some future experi-
ments prove the GM foods, case by case, to be safe beyond doubt.
The Precautionary Principle
When introducing a new drug, vaccine, or food product, it is a
universal norm to follow the PP, which aims to reduce the
Type II error in experiments. Type I error consists of rejecting
the null hypothesis (“no effect”) when it is actually true. Type
124
GMO Food

II error is the error of accepting the null hypothesis when it is
actually false. Either error may result from sampling error, faulty
observation, or spurious analyses. Now suppose we erroneously
accept the null hypothesis of “no harm from a GM food” when
it is actually harmful. The consequence would be dangerous—
consumers who will eat the food may fall sick, even die. By the
time more rigorous experiments may prove the null hypothesis
to be false, it will be too late. This is exactly what happened in
the late 1980s with L-tryptophan food supplements (Mayeno
and Gleicha 1994) and in the early 1990s with GM soya contain-
ing a gene from Brazil nut (Nordlee et al. 1996).
Conversely, if we commit Type I error, and stop eating the
GM food until future experiments prove the null hypothesis
to be correct, we will have, at worst, postponed the beneﬁts of
eating the food. It is therefore safer to reduce Type II error than
Type I error and delay accepting the null hypothesis until it is
conclusively proven to be true.
Conclusions
There is a growing body of evidence of unforeseen behavior of
transgenes in GMOs and their unpredictable impacts on the
environment and human health. Therefore, application of the
PP to GE research is imperative before the commercial release
of GM crops. Putative nutritional beneﬁts from GM foods are
unrealistic and unlikely to outweigh the risks. Besides, micro-
nutrient contents in GM food crops, developed to ﬁght
nutrient deﬁcits, are far less than in many food plants, which
render the costly technology unnecessary.
References
Anandan, A., et al. 2011. “Genotypic Variation and
Relationships between Quality Traits and Trace Elements in
Traditional and Improved Rice (Oryza sativa L.)
Genotypes.” Journal of Food Science 76(4): H122–H130.
Perspectives
125

Atkinson, Ross G., et al. 2002. “Overexpression of
Polygalacturonase in Transgenic Apple Trees Leads to a
Range of Novel Phenotypes Involving Changes in Cell
Adhesion.” Plant Physiology 129(1): 122–133.
Bohan, David A., et al. 2005. “Effects on Weed and
Invertebrate Abundance and Diversity of Herbicide
Management in Genetically Modiﬁed Herbicide-Tolerant
Winter-Sown Oilseed Rape.” Proceedings of the Royal Society:
Biological Sciences 272(1562): 463–474.
Castenmiller, J. J., and C. E. West. 1998. “Bioavailability and
Bioconversion of Carotenoids.” Annual Review of Nutrition
18: 19–38.
Costa, M. J., et al. 2008. “Oxidative Stress Biomarkers and
Heart Function in Bullfrog Tadpoles Exposed to Roundup
Original.” Ecotoxicology 17(3): 153–163.
Datta, Karabi, et al. 2003. “Bioengineered ‘Golden’ Indica Rice
Cultivars with ß-carotene Metabolism in the Endosperm
with Hygromycin and Mannose Selection Systems.” Plant
Biotechnology Journal 1(2): 81–90.
de Sadeleer, Nicolas, ed. Implementing the Precautionary
Principle: Approach from the Nordic Countries, EU and USA.
London: Routledge, 2012.
Deb, Debal. 2009. “Biodiversity and Complexity of Rice Food
Webs: An Empirical Assessment.” The Open Ecology Journal
2: 112–129.
“Do Seed Companies Control GM Crop Research?” 2009.
Scientiﬁc American. http://www.scientiﬁcamerican.com/
article/do-seed-companies-control-gm-crop-research/.
Accessed on May 8, 2014.
Gronemeyer, H., and R. Miturski. 2001. “Molecular
Mechanisms of Retinoid Action.” Cell & Molecular Biology
Letters 6(1): 3–52.
126
GMO Food

Marvier, Michelle, et al. 2007. “A Meta-Analysis of Effects of
Bt Cotton and Maize on Nontarget Invertebrates.” Science
316(5830): 1475–1477.
Mayeno, A. N., and Gerald J. Gleicha. 1994. “Eosinophilia-
Myalgia Syndrome and Tryptophan Production: A
Cautionary Tale.” Trends in Biotechnology 12(9): 346–352.
Meyer, Peter. 1988. “Stabilities and Instabilities of Transgene
Expression” In Keith Lindsey, ed. Transgenic Plant Research,
263–277. London: Harwood.
Morin, Shai, et al. 2003. “Three Cadherin Alleles Associated
with Resistance to Bacillus Thuringiensis in Pink
Bollworm.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 100(9): 5004–5009.
Nakai, Yusuke, et al. 2013. “Overexpression of VOZ2 Confers
Biotic Stress Tolerance but Decreases Abiotic Stress
Resistance in Arabidopsis.” Plant Signaling and Behavior 8
(3): e23358.
Nordlee, J. A., et al. 1996. “Identiﬁcation of a Brazil-Nut
Allergen in Transgenic Soybeans.” New England Journal of
Medicine 334(11): 688–692.
Nutting, D. F., et al. 2002. “Nutrient Absorption.” Current
Opinion in Gastroenterology 18(2): 168–175.
O’Callaghan, M., et al. 2004. “Effects of Plants Genetically
Modiﬁed for Insect Resistance on Nontarget Organisms.”
Annual Review of Entomology 50: 271–292.
“Open Letter on Retraction and Pledge to Boycott Elsevier.”
2013. http://www.i-sis.org.uk/Open_letter_to_FCT_and
_Elsevier.php. Accessed on March 20, 2014.
Qin, H., Y. Dong, and A. G. von Arnim. 2003. “Epigenetic
Interactions between Arabidopsis Transgenes:
Characterization in Light of Transgene Integration Sites.”
Plant Molecular Biology 52: 217–231.
Perspectives
127

Reilly, James R., and Bret D. Elderd. 2014. “Effects of
Biological Control on Long-Term Population Dynamics:
Identifying Unexpected Outcomes.” Journal of Applied
Ecology 51(1): 90–101.
Relyea, Rick A. 2005. “The Lethal Impact of Roundup on
Aquatic and Terrestrial Amphibians.” Ecological Applications
15(4): 1118–1124.
Rosi-Marshall, E. J., et al. 2007. “Toxins in Transgenic Crop
Byproducts May Affect Headwater Stream Ecosystems.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 104(41): 16204–16208.
Sahal, Suman, and Shakeelur Rahman. 2003. “Mahyco–
Monsanto’s Bt Cotton Fails to Perform.” Current Science 85
(4): 426.
Saxena, Deepak, et al. 2004. “Larvicidal Cry Proteins
from Bacillus thuringiensis Are Released in Root Exudates
of Transgenic B. thuringiensis Corn, Potato, and Rice
but Not of B. thuringiensis Canola, Cotton, and
Tobacco.” Plant Physiology and Biochemistry 42(5):
383–387.
Scheel, Dierk. 2002. “Signal Transduction Elements.” In Kirsi-
Marja Oksman-Caldentey and W. H. Barz, eds. Plant
Biotechnology and Transgenic Plants, 363–376. New York:
M. Dekker.
Schubert, D. 2002. “A Different Perspective on GM Food.”
Nature Biotechnology 20(10): 969.
Schubert, D. R. 2008. “The Problem with Nutritionally
Enhanced Plants.” Journal of Medicinal Food 11(4):
601–605.
Séralini, G. E., et al. 2012. “Long Term Toxicity of a
Roundup Herbicide and a Roundup-Tolerant Genetically
Modiﬁed Maize.” Food and Chemical Toxicology 50(11):
4221–4231.
128
GMO Food

Tabashnik, Bruce E., and Yves Carrière. 2004. “Bt Transgenic
Crops Do Not Have Favorable Effects on Resistant Insects.”
Journal of Insect Science 4(4): 1–3.
West, C. E., and E. J. Poortvliet. “The Carotenoid Content of
Foods with Special Reference to Developing Countries.”
International Science and Technology Institute, Inc. http://
pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PNABR428.pdf. Accessed on
March 20, 2014.
Zhao, J. Z., et al. 2000. Development and Characterization of
Diamondback Moth Resistance to Transgenic Broccoli
Expressing High Levels of Cry1c. Applied Environmental
Microbiology 66(9): 3784–3789.
Debal Deb is chair of the Centre for Interdisciplinary Studies,
Barrackpore, India.
The U.S. Government Should Not Require Genetically
Modified Food Labels: Phill Jones
In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) has the authority to ensure the safety and wholesome-
ness of most foods. Over 20 years ago, the FDA was asked to
consider if foods produced from genetically modiﬁed (GM)
crops should be required to display special labeling to reveal
that fact to consumers. The FDA’s authority comes from the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, and according to the
act, the FDA can only require information on a label that is
accurate and material. In a 1992 policy statement, the FDA
said that “the agency does not believe that the method of devel-
opment of a new plant variety (including the use of new tech-
niques including recombinant DNA techniques) is normally
material information . . . and would not usually be required to
be disclosed in labeling for the food.”
The FDA’s announcement that the agency would not
require GM food labels sparked protests. Yet activists seem to
Perspectives
129

overlook that mandatory GM food labeling is incompatible
with the FDA’s regulation system. The FDA uses a science-
based approach to evaluate the safety of foods produced from
new plants. FDA scientists focus on the characteristics of food
and its components rather than the fact that a new method
(e.g., genetic engineering) was used at some point to produce
the food. Mandatory GM labeling would force a shift in the
FDA’s approach from science-based regulation to a regulatory
system based in political and social criteria, such as consumer
curiosity.
Nevertheless, GM food label campaigners continue to
promote a labeling requirement, using ﬂawed justiﬁcations.
Mandatory Genetically Modiﬁed Food Labels Would
Incorrectly Indicate a Risk
Advocates for GM food labeling claim that labels would enable
consumers to avoid health risks probably associated with GM
foods. Mandatory labeling would validate this idea of a health risk,
an idea discredited by many scientiﬁc and medical organizations.
During 2012, for example, the Board of Directors of the
American Association for the Advancement of Science com-
mented on efforts to require labels for foods produced from GM
crops. “These efforts are not driven by evidence that GM foods
are actually dangerous,” the board said. “Indeed, the science is
quite clear: crop improvement by the modern molecular tech-
niques of biotechnology is safe” (American Association for
the Advancement of Science 2013). Ofﬁcials of the FDA, the
American Medical Association, the U.S. National Research
Council, the World Health Organization, and the European
Union also have stated that GM foods do not present unique risks.
According to the FDA, foods developed by genetic engineer-
ing do not create greater safety concerns than foods developed
by traditional plant breeding. This is a point often overlooked
130
GMO Food

by advocates of GM food labeling: Humans have genetically
modiﬁed agricultural plants for thousands of years using con-
ventional plant breeding techniques.
Mandatory Genetically Modiﬁed Food Labels Would
Increase the Cost of Food
Promoters of mandatory labeling argue that the cost of GM
food labels would be small—just a matter of adding informa-
tion to existing food labels. This is incorrect.
During 2012, Northbridge Environmental Management
Consultants, a private research company, investigated possible
consequences of California’s Genetically Engineered Foods
Mandatory Labeling Initiative. After analyzing experiences with
GM labeling in other parts of the world and consulting with busi-
ness experts, Northbridge concluded that food companies would
comply with a GM labeling law by substituting other ingredients
for GM ingredients in their products. “This means that compa-
nies would change the way in which they source ingredients or
manufacture their products,” Northbridge stated, “in order to
avoid labeling their products with a vague and potentially fright-
ening warning that conveys little meaningful information.”
In this scenario, food companies would face the costs of manu-
facturing products that do not contain GM ingredients. These
costs arise from the need to verify the absence of GM ingredients
by tracking food components starting with companies that sell
seeds and continuing to farmers, grain storage companies, trans-
port ﬁrms, food processors, and food product distributors. In
addition, conventional (non-GM) crops can require more pesti-
cides,
herbicides,
and
water,
which
also
increase
cost.
Northbridge estimated that a GM food labeling law would cost
a Californian household at least an additional $350 to $400 per
year (Northbridge Environmental Management Consultants
2012). Others have estimated the cost of mandatory GM food
labeling at 10 percent of a person’s food bill.
Perspectives
131

Consumer Choice Does Not Justify Mandatory
Genetically Modiﬁed Food Labeling
Mandatory labeling advocates often urge that consumers have
the right to know. The most important point about the “right
to know” is that it does not exist. Theoretically, the FDA could
require GM labels to satisfy consumer curiosity. However, the
FDA has stated that the agency does not have the authority to
mandate labeling based solely on a consumer’s right to know
the method of food production if the agency considers the ﬁnal
food product to be safe.
Consumers have the right to choose food products that do
not have ingredients from GM plants. Today, anyone who
wants to avoid GM ingredients can purchase food products
certiﬁed as “organic.” In addition, the FDA wrote guidelines
for companies that want to voluntarily label their food products
to inform consumers that they do not use ingredients produced
using biotechnology.
Mandatory GM food labeling would actually reduce con-
sumer choice. During the late 1990s, the European Union
required GM food labels based on perceived consumer
demand. Soon, retailers refused to sell products with the labels,
fearing that they would lose customers. GM food products
almost disappeared from European markets. If the FDA
required GM labels, this would lead to a similar decreased
choice for U.S. consumers.
According to law professors Gary E. Marchant and Guy A.
Cardineau (2013), this outcome represents the true goal of
mandatory GM food labeling campaigns. “[T]he organizers
and funders of the GM labeling campaigns have developed a
strategy to leverage GM labeling to eliminate GM crops from
the United States,” they wrote. “It is a campaign funded almost
entirely by the organic food industry, which realizes its future
growth is limited by the strong preference for GM crops by
farmers.”
132
GMO Food

References
American Association for the Advancement of Science. 2013.
“Statement by the AAAS Board of Directors on Labeling of
Genetically Modiﬁed Foods.” http://www.aaas.org/news/
releases/2012/media/AAAS_GM_statement.pdf. Accessed
on October 15, 2013.
Food and Drug Administration. 1992. “Foods Derived from
New Plant Varieties.” Federal Register 57: 22984–23005.
Marchant, G. E., and G. A. Cardineau. 2013. “The Labeling
Debate in the United States.” GM Crops and Food 4(3):
126–134. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
23982076. Accessed on October 15, 2013.
Northbridge Environmental Management Consultants. 2012.
“The Genetically Engineered Foods Mandatory Labeling
Initiative: Overview of Anticipated Impacts and Estimated
Costs to Consumers.” http://www.noprop37.com/ﬁles/
Prop.-37-Will-Raise-Grocery-Bills-400-Annually.pdf.
Accessed on October 15, 2013.
Phill Jones earned a PhD in physiology/pharmacology and a JD.
He worked 10 years as a patent attorney, specializing in biological,
chemical, and medical inventions. As a freelance writer, he writes
articles and books in the areas of general science, agbiotech, forensic
science, medicine, and history.
Health Problems Linked to Genetically Modified Crops:
Rashmi Nemade
Humans have been genetically altering foods and crops for
millennia from simple crossbreeding and crude irradiation or
chemical mutagenesis to modern laboratory genetic modiﬁca-
tion techniques. At the present time, the impact of simply alter-
ing the genetic makeup of a plant does not seem harmful in and
Perspectives
133

of itself, but very little research has been done on the long-term
effects on humans.
What we do know is that there are some very serious
problems that genetically modiﬁed foods (GMFs) are already
causing on a large scale. Humans have never been able to genet-
ically modify plants as rapidly and as widely as is currently
being done. In fact, an approved GMF can be grown on mil-
lions of acres within just a few years. Whole ﬁelds (hectares)
of the major foods we eat or wear are now genetically modiﬁed
(wheat, corn, rice, soybean, and cotton). According to the
United States Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) Economic
Research Service (ERS), biotechnology plantings as a percent-
age of total crop plantings in the United States in 2013 were
about 90 percent for corn, 90 percent for cotton, and 93 per-
cent for soybeans (“Genetically Engineered Varieties of Corn,
Upland Cotton, and Soybeans, by State and for the Unites
States, 2000–13” 2013).
Widespread GMFs allow us more freedom in how we grow
our food. This means that we can now use more herbicides
(poisons to kill weed) and pesticides (poisons to kill insect) that
are harmful to not only the environment but human health as
well.
Herbicides, Pesticides (human-cides?)
Weeds and insects are a nuisance in any garden or farm; they
must be watched and pulled, or they will take over the garden
or farm. Today, in industrial operations, most of our crops
carry an herbicide-resistance gene, which allow farmers to spray
their ﬁelds widely with heavy amounts of herbicides to control
the weeds. As these herbicides kill all plants (good and bad),
the plants with the resistance gene stay alive while all other
plant matter dies. Now that the soil is contaminated and
depleted of its natural plant matter—microorganisms and
smaller plants that help crops grow—we need more fertilizer,
yet another chemical to boost our food production. After some
134
GMO Food

time, weeds begin to modify their genome too—a natural pro-
cess of evolution whereby these weeds adapt to their environ-
ment; over time, the weeds become resistant to the herbicides.
Currently, agriculture is battling an unexpected outcome of this
way of farming—superweeds—so stronger and stronger herbi-
cides are needed to grow our food.
The same is true of insects and pesticides. Insects are becom-
ing resistant to insecticide genes in genetically modiﬁed plants,
as well as the sprayed pesticides. The methods GMF companies
use to pest-proof their crops are also killing beneﬁcial bugs,
such as bees and butterﬂies. Spraying herbicides, pesticides,
and fertilizers have another outcome—they drift. They can
drift for thousands of miles and impact crops and people in far-
away places.
Initially, GMFs sound like a revolution with the promise of
preventing a world food crisis because of its ability to grow
more crops in less space with much more speed, but once the
pests and weeds develop immunity, farmers have little choice
except to spray ever-increasing amounts of herbicides and pesti-
cides, effectively raising chemical pollution levels. Slowly these
chemical pollution levels will start to destroy our environment
and make us sick.
In fact, as there is no national registry for herbicides and pes-
ticides in the United States, farmers are not required to report
chemical releases. Thus, we have no idea how many tons of
chemicals are used on, for example, the 59 million acres of
U.S. wheat. What we do know is that in counties where wheat
is grown, there are signiﬁcantly lower rates of conception,
higher rates of birth defects, cognitive delays, and autism
(Steingraber 2011, 92–93).
Our foods now contain, for the ﬁrst time in humanity’s his-
tory, unprecedented quantities of chemicals. And the health
impacts are not theoretical, yet to be seen, or suspected; they
are proven in doctor’s ofﬁces, clinics, hospitals, health records,
and laboratory reports all over the country. The rising rates
of diabetes, obesity, digestive disorders, inﬂammatory bowel
Perspectives
135

disease, colitis, autism spectrum disorders (ASD), attention
deﬁcit disorders (ADD), autoimmune diseases, sexual dysfunc-
tion, sterility, asthma, cancers, and so on are all modern phe-
nomena, which have soared with the use of GMFs (Mercola
2012).
Around the world, countries are watching this issue unfold
and explode in the United States. Despite the promises of
higher food yields, countries in Asian and Africa where millions
of people go hungry and have widespread malnutrition are
refusing to import GMFs (Freedman 2013, 82). Numerous
countries—including China and the European Union—
require labeling of genetically engineered foods, but the
United States (the largest producer of GM crops) still has no
such laws (several states are considering such bills). This makes
it incredibly difﬁcult for people to choose whether or not they
want to consume GMFs, as many folks are not even aware
when they are eating a GM product. As so much of our corn
and soy is genetically modiﬁed, GMFs are in just about every
prepackaged food. Thus, there is a good chance Americans are
eating a lot more GMOs than they realized.
As consumers our best defense is education that comes
through labeling, so that we can make our own choices. The
reality is that we do not need to wait for research, but we
already know the health impacts from using chemicals on our
foods, so GMFs are already causing enough trouble to prove
they are not worth our while.
References
Freedman, David H. 2013. “Are Engineered Foods Evil?”
Scientiﬁc American 309(3): 80–85.
“Genetically Engineered Varieties of Corn, Upland Cotton,
and Soybeans, by State and for the Unites States, 2000–13.”
2013. USDA Economic Research Service. http://www.ers
.usda.gov/data-products/adoption-of-genetically-engineered
136
GMO Food

-crops-in-the-us.aspx#.Ug0OJZLCZ8F. Accessed on
August 15, 2013.
Mercola, Joseph. 2012. “Decade-Long Feeding Study Reveals
Signiﬁcant Health Hazards of Genetically Engineered
Foods.” http://articles.mercola.com/sites/articles/archive/
2012/08/07/genetically-engineered-foods-hazards.aspx#
_edn1. Accessed on May 8, 2014.
Steingraber, Sandra. 2011. Raising Elijah: Protecting Our
Children in an Age of Environmental Crisis. Philadelphia: Da
Capo Press.
Rashmi Nemade is passionate about the environment and its
impact on food safety and health. She is an advocate for education
on these topics for a healthier and improved future. She holds a
PhD in molecular genetics and is a freelance scientist-writer and
consultant.
Genetically Modified Organisms: Tony Owen
Growing up, I was taught “you are what you eat,” and I took it
to heart, always preferring whole grains and plenty of fruits and
vegetables. In the late sixties1960s to late 1970s, I had an
organic market garden, and my three daughters got their treats
in the rows of peas to the extent that we never had enough for
our customers. The markets we sold to were unaware of
“organic” and were simply pleased to get a source of local pro-
duce, which sold well. One time the store manager pointed to
a tiny slug on a bunch of handsome Swiss chard. I popped it
in my mouth and said, “There’s no poison on the leaf!”
He was astonished and my girls said, “Eeeww!” when I told
the story at the dinner table, and I could never get them to
ignore the occasional aphid on their broccoli. I do believe their
good health (they are now in their 40s) originates in what food
they grew up on. Today, every mouthful of food I eat is
organic, not because I reject GMOs but because I support the
Perspectives
137

soil conservation and diversity of pollinators associated with
organic cultivation.
I had the privilege, at a meeting of organic farmers in San
Francisco, of making the motion to create a California Certiﬁed
Organic Farmers Association, and the motion was carried. Later,
when the U.S. Department of Agriculture solicited input as to
what could be labeled organic, I voted to exclude GMOs, as
I believed that was what my customers would expect, not because
I had any reservations about the technology.
I believe that opposition to GMOs is a political point of view
rather like climate-change skepticism and is not based on sci-
ence. GM crops, like apples and oranges, bear no resemblance
to one another and have in common only the technology by
which they were developed. All modern crops have been
genetically modiﬁed from primitive precursors, and the non-
GMO sort simply used crossbreeding as molecular biology
was unknown. Monsanto has made much opposition by its
heavy-handed efforts to protect its intellectual property. I hope
this does not lead to throwing out the technological baby with
the anticorporate bath water. All present crops were developed
to appeal to farmers. Perhaps things would have been different
had consumers been the target as with high vitamin and min-
eral content coupled with legacy ﬂavor. If the clamor for GM
labeling succeeds, it might take off. You could have a choice
between a tomato bred for shipping and handling and one with
the high vitamin C content of a guava and the ﬂavor of the old
timers.
Most research is carried out around the world to develop dis-
ease resistance in subsistence crops like cassava. Recently, a
Golden Rice crop in the Philippines was vandalized by those
who share the same self-righteous motivation as those who
bomb abortion clinics. Sea levels are rising, and only genetic
engineering can deliver crops that can withstand the occasional
drenching with salt water. Growers in many parts of the world
(think Florida or Bangladesh) will face hazards like these, and
a few genes from salt marsh hay may save their crops. The ﬁrst
138
GMO Food

major intersection of genetic engineering and foodstuffs
occurred in 1987 with the ﬁrst tests of a modiﬁed version of
the bacterium Pseudomonas syringae on strawberry ﬁelds in
California. The bacterium, which commonly lives on the sur-
face of crops, normally produces a protein that allows ice to
more easily begin crystallizing, causing damage to the host
plant. However, the strain of P. syringae used in the experiment
had been engineered without the gene needed to produce the
protein in hopes of reducing frost-induced crop loss. Though
the data looked positive following the trial, they could not be
fully trusted due to environmental activists destroying some of
the test crops in protest of the experiment.
In many parts of the world, fears abound over potential
health problems and the prospect of environmental catastro-
phe, all stemming from the production and consumption of
GM foods. Although the paranoia is gradually decreasing, a
lot of misinformation is still thrown about regarding genetic
engineering and GM foods.
GM foods have been consumed by millions with no docu-
mented health effects. A suggestion that a protein in StarLink
corn caused an allergic reaction in 28 people eating taco shells
made partly from the corn was discredited by the U.S.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) when it
was pointed out that the protein would have been completely
denatured in the high temperature used in cooking the shells
and their blood contained no trace of the protein in question.
Studies of pest resistance and weeds acquiring herbicide re-
sistance as has occurred in conventional crops is also present
in GMOs. It is a natural effect of evolution, and a quick devel-
opment of new strains of pest resistance in crops can easily be
met with genetic engineering while herbicide resistance in
weeds is amenable with crop rotation and other cultivation
techniques.
The real promise in my view is the creation of new varieties
of crops such as perennial grains that require little or no tillage
and ﬁx their own nitrogen like legumes. The contamination
Perspectives
139

of ground water, streams, lakes, and even the ocean itself with
the nitrate runoff from farms is a huge problem that affects
everything from human health to the biodiversity of our coastal
areas where dead zones occur. The rising sea level, as men-
tioned, will also put novel demands on food production where
novel solutions are the only practical response.
In a world where millions of people believe that the world is
only 6,000 years old or that humans are not the generator of
global warming, skepticism of the scientiﬁc consensus is so
common as to adversely affect our education and indeed our
very future. It is a shame that children can graduate from high
school and not be aware of, or even disbelieve, facts that have
a direct and very important bearing on their futures.
Closely examined, objections to GMOs do not withstand
rigorous scientiﬁc scrutiny, and the use of this very valuable
technology is imperative in the future we all share.
Tony Owen is 77 years old and was born in Kahuku, Oahu,
Hawaii, in October 1936. He has three daughters and four grand-
daughters. He is currently involved in 3D modeling and animation.
Genetically Modified Foods in Developing Countries:
Santosh Pandey
Sustainable agriculture and food security are critical founda-
tions that underpin human society. Sustainable agriculture
refers to the ability of a farm to produce crops indeﬁnitely and
proﬁtably, without damaging the ecosystem. As agriculture by
its very nature is one of the most expensive and environmentally
harmful practices carried out by humans, the need to balance
proﬁtability and environmental stewardship is a signiﬁcant eco-
nomic and scientiﬁc challenge. The use of transgenic plants offers
great promise for the integration of improved varieties into tradi-
tional cropping systems because improved plant lines can be gen-
erated quickly and with relative precision once suitable genes for
transfer have been identiﬁed (Ferry and Gatehouse 2009).
140
GMO Food

Today, the majority of GMO crops are grown in developed
countries and address the needs of commercial farmers.
However, farmers in developing countries are increasingly
beginning to adopt GMO crops. Crop losses from insects and
other pests can be staggering, resulting in devastating ﬁnancial
loss for farmers and starvation in developing countries. The
use of pesticides in food causes various harmful health effects.
GMO foods promise to meet the needs of the developing coun-
tries in a number of ways. GMO crops could address these
problems, where other breeding techniques have failed. Pest re-
sistance, disease resistance, as well as cold, drought, herbicide,
and salinity tolerance of the GMO crops could be a magic
wand that can achieve sustainable agriculture and free the
developing world from poverty, hunger, and malnutrition.
Similarly, plants could be genetically modiﬁed to produce vac-
cines or other medicines. Potatoes have been modiﬁed to pro-
duce edible vaccines against Escherichia coli bacteria that
cause diarrhea. This would allow cheap and easy distribution
of the vaccine (“The Use of Genetically Modiﬁed Crops in
Developing Countries”).
Not all GMO plants are grown as crops. Plants such as
poplar trees have been genetically engineered to clean up heavy
metal pollution from contaminated soil (Whitman 2000).
Scientists now can not only mix genes from two different plants
but also mix a gene of a plant with the gene of an animal. It will
not be surprising if scientists develop elephant-sized chickens or
pumpkin-sized tomatoes. Cow milk has a lot of nutrients, but
it lacks the antibiotic elements found in human milk. The sci-
entists are now developing a new breed of cows whose milk
contains the antibiotic components found in human milk.
Malnutrition is common in Third World countries, where
impoverished peoples rely on a single crop such as rice for the
main staple of their diet. However, rice does not contain
adequate amounts of all necessary nutrients to prevent malnu-
trition. If rice could be genetically engineered to contain
Perspectives
141

additional vitamins and minerals, micronutrient deﬁciencies
could be alleviated (Bimba 2013).
GMO technology is not free from controversies. The tech-
nology demands a rigorous control and meticulous use of the
scientiﬁc methods for obtaining new breeds. Even a slight mis-
take in the experiment might result in the nightmarish inci-
dents. The criticism of agribusiness in developing countries is
for pursuing proﬁt without concern for potential hazards, and
the criticism of governments is for failing to exercise adequate
regulatory oversight. Those who had the most to gain, multina-
tional biotech companies, propounded a very convincing mes-
sage through well-funded mass media that biotechnology was
the miracle that would solve world famine, reduce reliance on
pesticides, or cure the diseases of humankind (Smith 2003).
Concerns about GMO foods in developing countries include
environmental hazards, human health risks, and economic con-
cerns. The major environmental concern about GMOs is the
reduced effectiveness of pesticides and different unintended
harm to other organisms. Also genetically engineered crops
can cross-pollinate with certain forms of weeds, resulting in
“super weeds” that are herbicide resistant or that, over time,
certain species of insects will also become resistant to pesticides
(Pandey 2014). The potential cross-pollination of GM seeds
onto non-GM crops is also a concern to farmers, particularly
those farmers who certify their crops as non-GM or organic
crops. The farmers of many developing countries have the prac-
tice of saving seed between harvests rather than buying new
seed each year. It is suggested that the introduction of GM
crops will force farmers to buy seed. Some people feel that the
effects of GM crops on human health (bioethics) are not yet
adequately understood. Different allergenic symptoms have
been observed as a result of the consumption of some GM
foods. As genes make proteins, and proteins are potential aller-
gens, one cannot exclude the possibility that genetic engineer-
ing of foods may introduce proteins into foods that will cause
142
GMO Food

sensitivities and allergic reactions in some portion of the popu-
lation (Abraham 2009).
In developing countries, there is also an ethical obligation to
explore the potential of GMO crops responsibly. The impact of
human action on nonhuman animals is controversial because
some people deny that animals can be harmed at all. In his article
“Ethical Perspectives on Food Biotechnology,” Michigan State
University ethicist Paul B. Thompson suggested that agricultural
biotechnology has become caught up in several long-standing
moral and political debates, as well as having introduced a few
new wrinkles on its own (Brunk and Coward 2009).
Yields of almost all crops are signiﬁcantly lower in developing
countries than developed countries. Most people believe that
GMO foods will eliminate the need for political, social, or eco-
nomic change or that they will simply “feed the developing
world.” Others argue that genetic modiﬁcation is “unnatural,”
and the use of organic farming methods, integrated pest manage-
ment, and mixed cropping would be a more appropriate solution
than the use of GM technology. GMO foods have the potential
to solve hunger and malnutrition problems and to help protect
and preserve the environment by increasing yield and reducing
reliance upon chemical pesticides and herbicides. Conversely,
acceptance of this technology without paying attention to the legal
conditions may distress the economy of poor farmers in develop-
ing countries. To solve this, scientists are drafting guidelines on
the experiment and their risks so far as humans are concerned.
International and regional treaties, conventions, and protocols are
being drafted to regulate the production of GM foods and seeds.
References
Abraham, Samuel. 2009. “Genetics and Genetically Modiﬁed
Organisms.” In Conrad Brunk and Harold Coward, eds.
Acceptable Genes? Religious Traditions and Genetically
Modiﬁed Foods, 19–37. Albany: SUNY Press.
Perspectives
143

Bimba, D. H. 2013. Main Agenda. Face to Face. 13. Nepal
Forum of Environmental Journalists.
Brunk, Conrad, and Harold Coward, eds. 2009. Acceptable
Genes? Religious Traditions and Genetically Modiﬁed Foods.
Albany: SUNY Press.
Ferry, Natalie, and Angharad M. R. Gatehouse, eds. 2009.
Environmental Impacts of Genetically Modiﬁed Crops.
Oxfordshire, England: CAB International.
Pandey, Santosh. 2014. “The Lesser Evil.” República.
http://www.myrepublica.com/portal/index.php?
action=news_details&news_id=69341. Accessed on
March 13, 2014.
Smith, Jeffrey M. 2003. Seeds of Deception: Exposing
Industry and Government Lies about the Safety of the
Genetically Engineered Foods You’re Eating. Fairﬁeld, IA:
Yes Books.
Thompson, Paul B. 2009. “Ethical Perspectives on Food
Biotechnology.” In Conrad Brunk and Harold Coward, eds.
Acceptable Genes? Religious Traditions and Genetically
Modiﬁed Foods, 39–61. Albany: SUNY Press.
“The Use of Genetically Modiﬁed Crops in Developing
Countries.” Nufﬁeld Council on Bioethics. http://www
.nufﬁeldbioethics.org/sites/default/ﬁles/GM%20Crops
%20Discussion%20Paper%202004.pdf. Accessed on
March 13, 2014.
Whitman, Deborah B. 2000. “Genetically Modiﬁed Foods:
Harmful or Helpful?” ProQuest. http://www.csa.com/
discoveryguides/gmfood/overview.php. Accessed on
March 13, 2014.
Santosh Pandey is a food journalist and student of food tech-
nology at the Central Campus of Technology, Tribhuvan
University, Dharan, Nepal.
144
GMO Food

Genetically Modified Crops in Africa: Fear of the
Unknown?: Elizabeth Shoo
According to estimates from the United Nations, 223 million
people in sub-Saharan Africa suffer from malnutrition. One of
the causes is long periods of drought, which lead to poor harvests
of staple foods such as maize and millet. For years, African politi-
cians have called for the introduction of genetically modiﬁed
(GM) plants as a means to combat the decline in yields. Their
hope is that drought- and pest-resistant crops will beneﬁt African
small-scale farmers who make up the majority of the population.
At an African Agriculture Conference in 2012, 24 African coun-
tries said they were in favor of allowing the use of GM crops.
However, just like everywhere else in the world, there is a
heated debate on whether GM crops should be grown in
Africa, a decision that each country has to make on its own.
So far, the commercial use of genetically engineered seeds is
permitted only in South Africa, Egypt, Sudan, and Burkina
Faso. South Africa was the ﬁrst country to introduce commer-
cially grown GM crops in 1997 and is now one of the top pro-
ducers of GM maize, soybeans, and cottonseed oil.
Not only politicians but also researches have shown their
support for GMOs. In its annual Africa Agriculture Status
Report of 2013, the Kenyan-based Alliance for a Green
Revolution in Africa (AGRA) urged African countries to be
more open toward GM crops. “There is growing public
opposition to GM crops in Africa that is best described as a fear
of the unknown,” the report states (“Africa Agriculture Status
Report” 2013). In an effort to take away this fear from farmers
and policy makers in Africa, AGRA researchers insist that
GMOs are safe. “It is important to point out that GM crops
have been subject to more testing worldwide than any other
new crops, and have been declared as safe as conventionally
bred crops by scientiﬁc and food safety authorities worldwide.”
Perspectives
145

The opinion that African countries should not completely
resist the introduction of GM food is shared by Calestous
Juma, professor of the Practice of International Development
at Harvard University.
“Too often the biotechnology decisions made in Africa are
politically motivated and do not reﬂect the balance of scientiﬁc
evidence,” he points out. Therefore, he suggests that African
countries should have presidential ofﬁces for science and
technology, which would “allow African leaders to act strategi-
cally and analytically, adopting agricultural biotechnologies
when and where it makes sense to do so” (Juma and Gordon
2014).
Arid regions above all would proﬁt from GM seeds, Juma
said. U.S. agriculture giant Monsanto has already developed
drought-tolerant maize seeds, named Water Efﬁcient Maize
for Africa (WEMA). On its website, Monsanto advertises that
WEMA could feed an additional 21 million people in Africa.
The corn is being grown conventionally at the moment, but
ﬁeld tests for the GM version are underway in Mozambique,
Tanzania, and Uganda. Monsanto already grows trial crops of
GM cotton, sugar cane, tomatoes, and bananas in eight
African countries, including Kenya, Tanzania, Mozambique,
and Uganda. In South Africa, farmers can buy Monsanto’s
GM corn and cotton seeds and sow them on their ﬁelds.
More than half of the corn planted there is the GM variety.
Even though South Africa started growing GM crops more
than 15 years ago, there is still a large opposition toward these
crops. Demonstrations against GM companies like Monsanto
take place regularly, with farmers and activists wanting the com-
panies’ GM products to be banned from their country. The hesi-
tation and resentment is present all over Africa. In 2012, various
civil society organizations called out African governments to com-
pletely ban the growing, importing, and exporting of GMOs on
the African continent. In their joint petition to ban GMOs, the
civil society organizations clearly stated why they are against
146
GMO Food

GMOs. Their main concern is the safety of GM foods. They urge
African governments to conduct independent tests. They are wor-
ried about the “patenting of life forms and privatization of agricul-
ture, which has led to the dependence by farmers, rural
communities and indigenous people on external private and
monopolistic seeds suppliers.” And they air their concern about
the impact of industrial and GM based agriculture on biodiversity
and climate change.
One of the prominent opponents of GMO is Million Belay,
coordinator of the pan-African platform Alliance for Food
Sovereignty in Africa (AFSA). AFSA promotes biodiversity
and ecological land management in Africa and ﬁghts against
the use of GM seeds. “By pushing just a few varieties of seed
that need fertilizers and pesticides, agribusiness has eroded our
indigenous crop diversity,” he writes in an article for the
Guardian, adding that seed variety is the solution to hunger
and malnutrition. There is a danger of having just one or a
few types of seeds, he adds. “If northern governments genuinely
wish to help African agriculture, they should support the revival
of seed-saving practices, to ensure that there is diversity in farm-
ers’ hands” (“GM Crops Won’t Help African Farmers”).
Even African governments are moving from policies that
support seed variety to those that favor single seeds. The
Council of Ministers of the Common Market for Eastern and
Southern Africa (COMESA) in September 2013 approved con-
troversial new seed trade regulations. According to the rules,
only standardized, certiﬁed seeds may be sold among the
19 member states. The seeds are patented and must guarantee
consistent results over a long period of time, ruling out further
use of traditional seeds. Small farmers could no longer jointly
collect seeds and sell the unpatented variety. The agreement
would also pave the way for major agricultural companies
that have GM seeds on offer. The COMESA members are
free to decide, however, whether they want to introduce GM
seeds.
Perspectives
147

The ruling has not yet gone into force, but when it does,
many small farmers are bound to be affected. “Ownership
would be transferred to companies, and that would actually
mean the life of the people would be controlled by few interest
groups and big companies like Monsanto,” Belay warned.
Just three companies are responsible for more than 50 per-
cent of the worldwide sale of seeds: Monsanto, Syngenta from
Switzerland, and DuPont, another U.S. giant.
The debate on whether or not Africa should embrace GM
technology will continue, and in the end, each country will
decide for itself. Inﬂuences from Western powers will play a
role. Even then, there are two equally probable outcomes:
If African leaders look toward the United States, where GM
foods are allowed, they might be in favor of them. On the other
hand, if they take the European Union as an example, they
could rule against GM crops because the European Union
prohibits GM foods for human consumption.
References
“Africa Agriculture Status Report: Focus on Staple Crops.”
2013. http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/ﬁles/resources/
agraﬁnalaugust20akim.pdf. Accessed on February 9, 2014.
“GM Crops Won’t Help African Farmers.” http://www
.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/
2013/jun/24/gm-crops-african-farmers/print. Accessed on
March 9, 2014.
Juma, Calestous, and Katherine Gordon. 2014. “Leap-
Frogging in African Agriculture: The Case of Genetically
Modiﬁed Crops.” http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/
Research/Files/Reports/2014/foresight%20africa%202014/
06%20foresight%20african%20agriculture%20juma
%20gordon.pdf. Accessed on March 9, 2014.
Elizabeth Shoo is a Tanzanian journalist working for DW,
Germany’s international broadcaster. She is based in Bonn,
148
GMO Food

Germany, and mainly reports about political, social, and
economic issues in Europe and Africa.
Accepting Genetically Modified Crops in India: Sweta
The Green Revolution of the 1960s has no doubt made India
self-sufﬁcient in the production of food grains. Introduction
of high-yielding varieties of seeds and excessive use of chemical
fertilizers were the major factors for this change. However, in
the last few decades, the extensive use of chemical pesticides
and fertilizers has led to increasing health hazards and depletion
of overall soil quality. Now, there is a need for second green
revolution in India. Different experts have different opinions
on this topic. Some support organic farming, whereas others
strongly feel that use of genetically modiﬁed (GM) crops can
boost India’s food production to a level of second green revolu-
tion. Here we are going to discuss about GM food.
GM or transgenic crops express foreign genes that confer re-
sistance to viruses, insects, herbicides, or postharvest deteriora-
tion and accumulation of useful modiﬁed storage products.
These advances form the basis of a chemical free and economi-
cally viable approach for pest and disease control.
One of the most hotly debated topics in India remains GM
foods. No doubt these foods possess a lot of potential to
enhance our food security. However, various concerns with
direct relevance to our agricultural system have been raised.
The conservative assumptions underlying regulations in India
is that all GM crops are potentially hazardous, and the obstacles
range from legal and regulatory hurdles, economic factors, and
social concerns.
Let us start with 2012 when the Parliamentary Committee
on Agriculture clearly asked the government of India to estab-
lish a bar on the production of Bt brinjal (a type of eggplant)
and immediately stop all ongoing ﬁeld trials. The reason for
this request was that the committee was convinced that there
Perspectives
149

are several better options to enhance food security and increase
food production in India than the use of GM crops. A ban on
transgenic crops was also recommended by the committee as
many farmers, especially those in the Vidarbha region of
Maharashtra, were not able to shift the cultivation of cotton
from transgenic varieties to farmer-friendly and traditional vari-
eties due to nonavailability of seeds. The expert panel had
merely talked about the apprehensions and concerns that soci-
ety at large has toward GM crops.
In 2013, the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Agriculture and Technical Expert Committee (TEC) of the
Supreme Court submitted their reports related to deliberate
concerns over GM crops. The recommendations of the TEC
called for the following:
• A ban on all the ﬁeld trials and commercial releases of GM
crops until the “major gaps in the regulatory system” are
addressed and there is more accurate information regarding
the safety of using Bt genes in food crops.
• A ban on all herbicide-tolerant crops because manual weed-
ing generates employment in small farms and is feasible in
India.
• A ban on GM crops whose point of origin is India.
There was no difference in the TEC’s recent report from the
earlier one that had recommended a 10-year ban on Bt gene–
based technology in all food crops.
In fact the truth is that with the widespread adoption of Bt
cotton, a genetically engineered crop that contains a bacterial
protein harmful to certain insects, India has boosted its cotton
production to a level of 500 kilograms/hectare in just six years,
which was not possible before. People should understand that
the cotton plant is producing natural insecticides in its tissues
reducing the use of pesticides in cotton ﬁelds. This proves that
150
GMO Food

GM crops are eco-friendly. Bt cotton is the only crop permitted
in India so far that is commercially cultivated.
In a recent development, Jayanthi Natarajan, minister of
state for environment and forests, said that the ﬁeld trials of
20 GM crops have been approved by the Indian government.
In fact the ﬁeld trials of three GM crops—mustard, corn, and
cotton—have been initiated after getting a no-objection certiﬁ-
cate (NOC) from the state governments. Other crops are wait-
ing for NOC from the respective state governments.
Recently, the union agriculture minister, Sharad Pawar,
backing the use of transgenic crops said that GM crops are pre-
ferred by farmers as they produce higher yields than do tradi-
tional varieties, as well as are being more disease resistant.
Further, he added that he is against any ban on GM crops as
they reduce the use of harmful chemicals in the ﬁeld, maintain-
ing the quality of soil as well as saving the hard-earned money
of farmers. However, there are a lot of people in India who
remain convinced that GM crops are not only unsafe for con-
sumption but also inappropriate for an agricultural economy
as Bt seeds are more expensive than normal seeds.
Genetically Modiﬁed Crops: Possible Risks
Two most important factors that attract farmers greatly toward
GM crops are the following:
1. High yield: Yield cannot be increased magically by
inserting a gene. There are several factors that control yield,
such as soil, water, and crop management practices. So,
GM crops may prove to be a costly distraction over many
sustainable agroecological and non-GM methods.
2. Insect resistance: Use of GM crops reduces pesticide use,
but this gain is short-lived. Over time, the target pest devel-
ops resistance, and secondary pests often increase. We can
Perspectives
151

see this in Bt cotton, where pink ballworm developed resis-
tance in less than a decade and sucking pests increased.
In a developing country like India, there is a need to create
awareness and spread genuine information regarding GM
crops. Different people have different views, and confusion
arises here. GM food is an important topic for farmers as well
as for the public to understand. We need to be more transpar-
ent about its beneﬁts and potential risks. GM foods should be
tested extensively and exhaustively before their commercializa-
tion. The queries of people on safety of GM crops should be
cleared by not only talking but also presenting the scientiﬁc
data available about their safety.
The Indian government has been struggling with different
views on GM food for the past decade, but now it seems to be
showing more commitment over the commercialization and ﬁeld
trials of GM crops. It may have realized the importance of being
up-to-date in terms of modern technological innovation for a
country to compete at the global level. The biggest challenge for
the Indian government now is to come up with a good regulatory
system and better communication on GM food.
Sweta is a freelance writer based in Gurgaon, India. She has
done postgraduate work in genetics and plant breeding at
Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, and has a research paper
published in World Journal of Agricultural Sciences.
A Growing World Demands New Food Technology:
Susan Young
Not so long from now, the planet will be home to 9 billion
people. To get nutritious food on all our plates in an environ-
mentally sustainable way, we may need to lean on genetically
modiﬁed foods (GMFs).
The United Nations estimates that the number of people on
Earth is going to grow by nearly one-third in the next 35 years
152
GMO Food

(“Revised UN Estimates Put World Population at over 9
Billion by 2050” 2009). Most of that baby boom will take place
in developing countries where rising incomes are likely to lead
to even greater demand for food. The growing population will
need the world to produce 70 percent more food than it does
now (“How to Feed the World 2050: The Technology
Challenge” 2009). This task will be made all the more difﬁcult
with the expected impacts of climate change. Scientists predict
that in the coming decades, droughts will become more
common (Dai 2013) and crop-destroying pests will spread to
new areas of the planet (Bebber 2013).
The United Nations has called on technology to address the
increased pressures on food production and points to genetic
engineering as a tool to “transfer desired traits between plants
more quickly and accurately than it is possible with conven-
tional plant breeding” (“How to Feed the World 2050: The
Technology Challenge” 2009).
GMO crops are already grown in the United States and
abroad, and most Americans have been eating GMOs for decades
as they are common in processed foods (Byrne 2010; “Recent
Trends in GE Adoption” 2013; Phillips and Corkindale 2002).
One of the GM crops already grown in the United States is a vari-
ety of corn that makes its own pesticide. The strain was created by
splicing into the corn genome a copy of a gene from bacteria that
kill certain insects. Scientists report that this “in-plant” resistance
has helped farmers protect their crops and apply less insecticide
than in years before the transgenic strain was available (Brookes
and Barfoot 2010; Pilcher et al. 2002).
Genetic engineering may be able to help other crops resist
damage and disease. Plant breeder and geneticist Walter De
Jong thinks that genetic engineering could help potato farmers
grow their crops with fewer pesticides than are needed to care
for typical potato plants. As reported by science journalist
Amy Maxmen (2013), De Jong hopes to help develop a GM
potato that resists potato blight, the plant disease that caused
Perspectives
153

the Irish famine of the mid-1800s so that less pesticide is
needed.
Genetic engineering might even save our favorite breakfast
drink, orange juice, while avoiding big increases in pesticide use.
Citrus greening, a disease caused by a bacterium that can kill
orange trees, has recently spread from Asia to the United States
and Brazil, the world’s largest producers of orange juice.
Fighting that disease, which is carried by an insect called a psyllid,
has led to sharp increases in pesticide use, reports Amy Harmon
in the New York Times: “Growers in Florida did not like to talk
about it, but the industry’s tripling of pesticide applications to kill
the bacteria-carrying psyllid was, while within legal limits, becom-
ing expensive and worrisome” (2013).
Genetic engineering could also address the challenges
of climate change, which includes more frequent droughts.
Although researchers have been able to create drought-tolerant
crops with conventional breeding methods, genetic engineering
can be faster and more direct. “Trying to create drought-
tolerant crops is not going to be easy to do,” Kent Bradford,
director of the Seed Biotechnology Center at the University of
California, Davis, told the Los Angeles Times (Lopez 2012).
“We certainly need all the tools [available] to do that, and that
includes conventional breeding and adding transgenic traits.”
GM seed and herbicide manufacturer Monsanto developed a
drought-resistant variety of corn that became available to farm-
ers in 2013. Of 250 farmers who tested the GM crop in dry
and water-limited land in Kansas, 72 percent said they had
increased production, according to the Midwest Producer
(Anderson 2013).
GM crops could also help infants and children in developing
countries get proper nutrition. One of the most famous geneti-
cally engineered crops is Golden Rice. This plant developed to
prevent vitamin A deﬁciency in children for whom rice is a staple
of their diet. The World Health Organization estimates that as
many as 500,000 children become blind every year because of
vitamin A deﬁciency (“Micronutrient Deﬁciencies”). Around half
154
GMO Food

of these children will die within a year of becoming blind because
they are more at risk for common childhood infections.
To try to address this issue, scientists genetically engineered
rice plants to produce β-carotene, which human cells convert
into vitamin A, in their rice grains (Paine et al. 2005; Ye et al.
2000). This change could not have been made by traditional
breeding, say scientists (Beyer 2010). In tests where people ate
the rice, scientists eventually showed that one serving of
Golden Rice can provide around 60 percent of a child’s daily
needs of vitamin A (Tang et al. 2012).
Despite its potential beneﬁts, some groups oppose any use of
GM crops. In the summer of 2013, a plot of Golden Rice
grown as part of another trial in the Philippines was vandalized
by GMO protestors (McGrath 2013). Still, the Golden Rice
trials continue, and supporters of Golden Rice expect it to be
available in the Philippines by 2016 (France-Presse 2013).
Many people are concerned that GM crops are a danger to
human health and the environment. There are conﬂicting stud-
ies, and introducing a new crop into the environment can have
unforeseen consequences. For instance, although some research
has shown that GM corn leads to less pesticide use, others have
shown that the absence of the targeted insect can lead to an
abundance of another pest (Lu et al. 2010).
The future may need GMOs, but we will also need to care-
fully introduce these organisms into the environment and peo-
ple’s diets. Although people have been consuming GM crops
for decades with no known ill effect on health, we should pru-
dently expand the use of genome editing tools to protect
human health and the environment and to make sure that
everyone has a full plate.
References
Anderson, T. 2013. “Test Plots Show Favorable Results with
DroughtGard.” Midwest Producer. http://www.midwest
producer.com/news/crop/test-plots-show-favorable-results
Perspectives
155

-with-droughtgard/article_41bb9896-b292-11e2-8243
-001a4bcf887a.html. Accessed on November 15, 2013.
Bebber, D. P. 2013. “Crop Pests and Pathogens Move
Polewards in a Warming World.” Nature Climate Change 3:
985–988.
Beyer, P. 2010. “Golden Rice and ‘Golden’ Crops for Human
Nutrition.” New Biotechnology 25(5): 478–481.
Brookes, G., and P. Barfoot. 2010. “Global Impact of Biotech
Crops: Environmental Effects, 1996–2008.” AgBioForum
13(1): 76–94.
Byrne, P. 2010. “Labeling of Genetically Engineered Foods.”
http://www.ext.colostate.edu/pubs/foodnut/09371.html.
Accessed on November 15, 2013.
Dai, A. 2013. “Increasing Drought under Global Warming in
Observations and Models.” Nature Climate Change 3: 52–58.
France-Presse, Ag. 2013. “Genetically Modiﬁed ‘Golden Rice’
Coming to Philippines by 2016.” The Raw Story. http://
www.rawstory.com/rs/2013/11/05/genetically-modiﬁed
-golden-rice-coming-to-philippines-by-2016/. Accessed on
November 15, 2013.
Harmon, A. 2013. “A Race to Save the Orange by Altering Its
DNA.” New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2013/
07/28/science/a-race-to-save-the-orange-by-altering-its-dna
.html?_r=2&. Accessed on November 15, 2013.
“How to Feed the World 2050: The Technology Challenge.”
2009. http://www.fao.org/ﬁleadmin/templates/wsfs/docs/
Issues_papers/HLEF2050_Technology.pdf. Accessed on
November 15, 2013.
Lopez, R. 2012. “As Drought Hits Corn, Biotech Firms See
Lush Field in GMO Crops.” Los Angeles Times. http://
articles.latimes.com/2012/sep/17/business/la-ﬁ-drought
-corn-research-20120917. Accessed on November 15, 2013.
156
GMO Food

Lu, Y., et al. 2010. “Mirid Bug Outbreaks in Multiple Crops
Correlated with Wide-Scale Adoption of Bt Cotton in
China.” Science 328(5982): 1151–1154.
Maxmen, A. 2013. “GMOs May Feed the World Using Fewer
Pesticides.” NOVA Next. http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/
next/nature/fewer-pesticides-farming-with-gmos/. Accessed
on November 15, 2013.
McGrath, M. 2013. “ ‘Golden Rice’ GM Trial Vandalised in
the Philippines.” BBC News. http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/
science-environment-23632042. Accessed on November
15, 2013.
“Micronutrient Deﬁciencies.” World Health Organization.
http://www.who.int/nutrition/topics/vad/en/. Accessed on
November 15, 2013.
Paine, J. A., et al. 2005. “Improving the Nutritional Value of
Golden Rice through Increased Pro-vitamin A Content.”
Nature Biotechnology 23(4): 482–487.
Phillips, P. W. B., and D. Corkindale. 2002. “Marketing GM
Foods: The Way Forward.” AgBioForum 5(3): 113–121.
Pilcher, C. D., et al. 2002. “Biotechnology and the European
Corn Borer: Measuring Historical Farmer Perceptions and
Adoption of Transgenic Bt Corn as a Pest Management
Strategy.” Journal of Economic Entomology 95(5):
878–892.
“Recent Trends in GE Adoption.” 2013. http://www.ers.usda
.gov/data-products/adoption-of-genetically-engineered
-crops-in-the-us/recent-trends-in-ge-adoption.aspx#.UoZN
XBDQw4k. Accessed on November 15, 2013.
“Revised UN Estimates Put World Population at over 9 Billion
by 2050.” 2009. http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?
NewsID=30159&Cr=family#.UoYmaBDQw4k. Accessed
on November 15, 2013.
Perspectives
157

Tang, G., et al. 2012. “ß-Carotene in Golden Rice Is as Good
as ß-carotene in Oil at Providing Vitamin A to Children.”
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 96(3): 658–664.
Ye, X., et al. 2000. “Engineering the Provitamin A (Beta-
carotene) Biosynthetic Pathway into (Carotenoid-Free) Rice
Endosperm.” Science 287(5451): 303–305.
Susan Young is a science writer currently living in Boston,
Massachusetts. She earned a PhD in molecular biology by studying
the origin of animals.
158
GMO Food



4
Profiles
Introduction
One way of understanding more about the development of
genetically modiﬁed foods throughout history and around the
world is by learning about the lives and work of individuals
and organizations that have been involved in that subject.
This chapter provides brief biographical sketches of a number
of important men and women in the ﬁeld as well as organiza-
tional sketches of groups that have supported that research or
worked for or against its implementation in everyday life.
American Academy of Environmental Medicine
6505 E. Central Ave., #296
Wichita, KS 67206
Phone: (316) 684-5500
Fax: (888) 411-1206
Email: administrator@aaemonline.org
URL: http://www.aaemonline.org/
161
Wenonah Hauter of Food and Water Watch carries a box containing public
comments opposing the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval of
genetically engineered salmon before speaking at an FDA veterinary
medicine advisory committee hearing on modiﬁed salmon in Rockville,
Maryland on September 20, 2010. (AP Photo/Charles Dharapak)

The American Academy of Environmental Medicine (AAEM)
was founded in 1965 under the name of the Society for
Human Ecology (SHE). The driving force behind the organiza-
tion was Theron Randolph, a specialist in allergy and immunol-
ogy. Randolph noted that a number of his patients appeared to
be developing allergic symptoms as the result of exposure to a
variety of synthetic products in the environment, such as cos-
metics, plastics, automotive fuels, exhaust fumes, and food
additives. His attempts to encourage other physicians to join
in the study of these interactions were largely ineffective, as
most traditional allergists and immunologists were not willing
to accept cause-and-effect relationships between human health
conditions and environmental factors. In an effort to overcome
this resistance, Randolph founded SHE in 1965. In 1985, SHE
changed its name to its current title.
The fundamental principles on which AAEM is based were
stated in an overview statement published by the association
in 1992. That statement said that
Environmentally Triggered Illnesses (EI) result from a
disruption of homeostasis by environmental stressors.
This disruption may result from a wide range of possible
exposures, ranging from a severe acute exposure to a single
stressor to cumulative relatively low grade exposures to
many stressors over time. The disruption can affect any
part of the body via dysfunctioning of any number of
the body's many biologic mechanisms and systems. The
ongoing manifestations of Environmentally Triggered
Illnesses are shaped by the nature of stressors and the tim-
ing of exposures to them, by the biochemical individuality
of the patient, and by the dynamic interactions over time
resulting from various governing principles such as the
total load, the level of adaptation, the bipolarity of
responses, the spreading phenomenon, the switch phe-
nomenon, and individual susceptibility (biochemical indi-
viduality). (Quoted in A Report on Multiple Chemical
162
GMO Food

Sensitivity (MCS), http://www.health.gov/environment/
mcs/toc.htm, accessed on December 8, 2013)
Today, the major focus of AAEM’s activities is the education
of physicians and the general public about the interrelationship
of environment chemicals and human health. The association is
accredited by the Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical
Education (ACCME) to provide continuing education instruc-
tion to physicians on a number of such topics and by a variety
of mechanisms. For example, the organization offers national
and regional conferences on environmental health topics such as
“Chronic Disease: Highlighting EMF Hypersensitivity, Lyme,
Mycotoxicity, Autism, Cancer and Much More” (2013 annual
conference), “Lifestyle Exposures Which Affect Human Health:
First Line Therapy for Chronic Disease,” “Environmental
Causes of Inﬂammation and Pain—Integrative Solutions,” and
“Fatigue—The Modern Dilemma.” AAEM also offers a series
of courses online. Some titles recently available are “The
Diagnosis and Treatment of Inhalant Allergies,” “The Diagnosis
and Treatment of Food Sensitivities,” “The Diagnosis and
Treatment of Chemical Sensitivities,” and “The Metabolism:
Nutrition and the New Endocrinology.”
On the association’s web page, the AAEM lists position
papers on a number of topics essential to its mission and work.
These position papers cover subjects such as radio frequency
exposure limits, chemical sensitivities, the use of mercury in
vaccines, the role of molds and mycotoxins in human health
disorders, the use of ﬂuorides in public water supplies, and
government policy on the use of biologically identical
compounds of estriol for women.
The issue of genetically modiﬁed (GM) foods is a reasonable
topic with which the AAEM would be concerned. In general,
the association has concerns about the safety of such foods, sug-
gesting that they have not been adequately tested to ensure that
they have no effects on human health. In a 2009 position
paper, the association recommended that physicians encourage
Profiles
163

their patients to avoid GM foods whenever possible, to con-
sider the possibility of GM foods as being a source of allergy
among their patients, to expand the research currently being
done on the safety of GM foods, and to promote a moratorium
on the development and production of GM foods until better
information is available about their safety.
Biological Regulatory Services
USDA APHIS BRS
4700 River Rd., Unit 147
Riverdale, MD 20737
Phone: (301) 851-3877
Email: biotechquery@aphis.usda.gov
URL: http://www.aphis.usda.gov/biotechnology/index.shtml
Biological Regulatory Services (BRS) is a division of the
U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Animal and Plant Health
Inspection Service (APHIS). In 1986, the White House Ofﬁce
of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) issued a directive that
divided up responsibility for the regulation of genetically engi-
neered organisms among three federal agencies: the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA), Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA), and APHIS. For example, the directive assigned respon-
sibility for the approval of genetically engineered animal drugs
to the FDA, for the approval of all contained uses to the EPA,
and for the approval of genetically engineered plants and animals
to APHIS. APHIS, in turn, assigned all responsibilities that it
received from the directive to its specialized division in charge of
all biotechnology issues, the BRS.
BRS has developed a strategic plan that contains four funda-
mental goals:
1. Strengthen safeguarding, which involves developing regula-
tory policies that are timely and commensurate with the
risks posed by GM products
164
GMO Food

2. Strengthen incident and emergency preparedness and
response, which involves the dissemination of information
about BRS’s role in managing and responding to emergen-
cies, responding effectively to such emergencies, and devel-
oping partnerships with other entities for dealing with
emergencies
3. Improve communication and outreach, which includes
improving contacts with stakeholders in the public and private
sector at all levels, from international to local communities
4. Create a highly effective organization, an objective directed at
internal issues within BRS, such as hiring the best possible
personnel, ensuring that adequate ﬁnancing is available, and
providing for the most supportive work environment possible
BRS carries out its regulatory responsibilities primarily in
one of two ways, either through permits and notiﬁcations or
through petitions. Permits and notiﬁcations are authorizations
issued by BRS for the release of genetically engineered organ-
isms that have the potential for causing harm to plants in the
environment. These statements of approval specify the precise
conditions under which importation, interstate transport, or
release into the environment may occur such that no real threat
to plants is likely to occur. Notiﬁcations are essentially compa-
rable to permits, although they are processed online in a more
streamlined fashion. Petitions are requests by the producers of
GM organisms for deregulation of a particular product, based
on a body of scientiﬁc evidence that shows that the organism
poses no threat to plants in the environment and that it
is essentially comparable to naturally occurring organisms to
which it is related.
Once permits or notiﬁcations have been approved, the BRS
has a detailed program of inspection and compliance to ensure
that researchers and producers are following conditions stipu-
lated in these documents. In case of an adverse event, research-
ers and producers are required to report to the agency about the
Profiles
165

event, providing all relevant details that will allow the agency to
make a determination of its severity and of actions that may
need to be taken. The agency itself also conducts inspections
of ﬁeld testing and other conditions in which GM organisms
may be involved to ensure that permit and notiﬁcation holders
are complying with the terms of their agreement with the
agency.
Details of the steps involved in the permit, notiﬁcation,
petition, and inspection aspects of the BRS’s work are avai-
lable on the agency’s website at http://www.aphis.usda.gov/
biotechnology/index.shtml. The website also contains a great
deal of valuable background and reference material, such as a
listing of all relevant legislation and administrative rules dealing
with the release of GM organisms, a collection of recent relevant
news and information, and a BRS library containing books,
articles, and other materials on the agency’s work.
Biotechnology Industry Organization
1201 Maryland Ave., SW, Suite 900
Washington, DC 20024
Phone: (202) 962-9200
Fax: (202) 488-6301
Email: info@bio.org
URL: http://www.bio.org
The Biotechnology Industry Organization (BIO) is the world’s
largest biotechnology trade organization, with more than
1,100 members worldwide. BIO is a 501(c)(6) nonproﬁt
organization that provides advocacy, business advice, and com-
munication services for its members. BIO members are drawn
from every aspect of the biotechnology community, ranging
from some of the largest companies in the world, including
Amgen, Lilly, Merck, Pﬁzer, and Sanoﬁ, to smaller companies
such as Atossa Genetics, Blueprint Medicines, Okanagan
Specialty Fruits, and Prosidion, Ltd. Many major academic
166
GMO Food

institutions
are
also members,
including
Emory, Johns
Hopkins, Northwestern, and Rush universities, as well as the
universities of California (12 campuses), Illinois, Notre Dame,
and Pittsburgh.
BIO maintains a very ambitious program of activities, one of
the most important of which is advocating for the interests of
all aspects of the biotechnology industry. It works on an
international, national, and state level for the adoption of legis-
lation, regulations, and other actions that promote biotechno-
logical research and development. As of early 2014, it had two
major initiatives: Unleashing the Promise of Biotechnology
and International Biotech Policy. The former program involves
the development of a comprehensive national strategy that will
allow the biotechnology industry to move forward more aggres-
sively, so as to achieve the potential of which it is capable. The
second initiative involves drawing upon what the organization
regards as the best policies currently in existence in nations
around to world to produce a model that can be applied world-
wide to produce the most favorable regulatory and political
setting for the further development of biotechnology.
Much of BIO’s work is organized into nine major areas:
health care, emerging companies, food and agriculture, intellec-
tual property, public policy, industrial and environmental,
bioethics, international trade, and small business early stage
investment. Most of these areas are further divided into more
specialized topics. For example, the health care area is further
divided into programs on biopharmaceutical manufacturing
and distribution, biosimilars, drug discovery and development,
Food and Drug Administration review, personalized medicine,
Prescription User Fee Act, reimbursement and health policy,
and vaccines and biodefense.
Another large category of the organization’s activities is cat-
egorized as industry intelligence and analysis, through which
BIO provides its members and other interested individuals
and organizations with a host of valuable information about
the status of the biotechnology industry. BIO backgrounders,
Profiles
167

for example, cover topics such as “How to Grow Jobs through
Biotech Industry Development,” “Current Uses of Synthetic
Biology,” “How Do Drugs and Biologics Differ?” “Background
Information on Plant Biotechnology,” and “2010: Awareness &
Impressions of Synthetic Biology and Nanotechnology.” The
organization’s monthly newsletter, BIOtech Now, is available free
of charge on the BIO website at http://www.bio.org/articles/
welcome-biotech-now.
BIO also provides a very large array of valuable publications,
some of which are restricted for member use, but many of
which are available online to the general public. The agriculture
product database, for example, is an interactive resource in
which one can ﬁnd detailed information about production
numbers for a number of important agricultural products from
a variety of manufacturers in countries throughout the world.
The industry intelligence and analysis page of the website also
contains some useful reviews of industry best practices and access
to the Battelle/BIO State Bioscience Industry Development,
which presents some key ﬁndings about the status of the biotech-
nology industry in the United States. The same page lists a
number of publications of general interest to the public, such
as “Healing, Fueling, Feeding: How Biotechnology Is Enrich-
ing
Your
Life,”
“Biotechnology
Solutions
for
Everyday
Life,” “Biotechnology . . . Fields of Beneﬁts,” “BIO Grassroots
Handbook,” and “Bioethics—Facing the Future Responsibly.”
The organization also sponsors a variety of conferences,
forums, and other meetings on topics of interest in biotechnol-
ogy, as well as the annual BIO International Conference. Other
such events are the annual BIO Investor Forum, the annual
CEO and Investor Conference, irregular BioSafe meetings,
and the World Conference on Industrial Biotechnology.
José Bové (1953–)
What do the French military, McDonald’s, U.S. tariff policies,
and GM soybean seeds have in common? The answer is José
168
GMO Food

Bové, a university trained biologist, sheep farmer, and politician
from Aveyron in the Pyrénées region of France. Over the past
two decades, Bové has organized or participated in a series of
political actions on social, economic, and scientiﬁc issues that
he sees of international signiﬁcance.
José Bové was born in Talence, Gironde, France, on June 11,
1953. His parents are Luxembourg-born Joseph-Marie Bové and
Colette née Dumeau Bové, specialists in the diseases of fruit trees.
José lived the ﬁrst seven years of his life in Berkeley, California,
where his parents conducted their research at the University of
California. He then returned to France, enrolling at a private
Jesuit bilingual secondary school in Athis-Mons, a small town
southeast of Paris. He was later expelled from the school for being
“faithless.” Although he did not return to school, he continued to
study on his own and eventually took the national baccalaureate
exam, the major college-entrance examination in France. He
passed the exam in economics avec mention (with honors).
In 1970–1971, Bové moved to the Bordeaux region,
where his parents had been working. He enrolled at the
University of Bordeaux, thinking perhaps to major in philoso-
phy. However, by that time, he had become so thoroughly
involved in political actions that he withdrew from the univer-
sity to devote all his time to those activities. While still a high
school student, for example, he had participated in demonstra-
tions on behalf of conscientious objectors and deserters.
His ﬁrst political involvement in Bordeaux concerned the
French government’s decision to expand its military base on
the Larzac plateau. In response to requests from peasants living
in the area, Bové and a group of other activists moved into the
Larzac area and began building a traditional stone sheep shelter,
which they believed would disrupt plans to expand the military
base. After working on the project for two years, Bové decided
that he like the idea of being a sheep farmer and added that
career to his work as a political activist.
In 1987, Bové combined his political and agricultural inter-
ests by forming an agricultural union called the Confédération
Profiles
169

Paysanne. The goal of the organization was the promotion of
human and environmental needs in the agricultural process, a
goal achieved by focusing local farming activities on organic
farming. The event that brought Confédération Paysanne its
greatest notoriety took place in 1999 when the McDonald’s
organization decided to build a new franchise in the town of
Millau in Bové’s home region of Larzac. Members of the
Confédération dismantled the half-built McDonald’s building,
resulting in a conviction of Bové that sent him to jail for six
weeks. The McDonald’s action was initiated not so much spe-
ciﬁcally against the American corporation itself as it was against
what Bové and his colleagues saw as a bastardization of tradi-
tional attitudes toward food production and distribution, in
which economic interest trumped all other concerns.
At about the same time as the McDonald’s incident, Bové
was also becoming increasingly agitated about the threats that
he saw GM seeds, crops, and foods posing to French consum-
ers. His position on GM products was that “[t]he greatest dan-
ger that genetically modiﬁed corn represents as well as other
GM crops resides in the impossibility of evaluating the long
term consequences and following the effects on the environ-
ment, animals, and humans.” As usual, he expressed his beliefs
and concerns with concrete political actions, destroying a stock
of GM seeds at a site in France owned by Swiss biotechnology
company Novartis in 1998 and destroying GM rice plants at
an experimental laboratory in Montpellier in 1999. For these
two crimes, Bové was sentenced to a total of 10 months in jail.
At the same time, his fame as a political activist and opponent
of GM crops and foods had spread worldwide, and he had
become a hero for opponents of GM products everywhere.
Bové is as strongly in favor of labeling GM products as he is
opposed to such products in general. He argues that the refusal
to label GM foods is simply evidence for the control that multi-
national businesses have over the food industry and agriculture
at every label of production, distribution, and sale.
170
GMO Food

In January 2007, Bové announced that he was a candidate
for president of the French Republic. Although he did gain
support from a number of French political leaders, he did poorly
in the election, garnering 483,000 votes, about 1.32 percent of
the popular vote cast in the election. Two years later, he ran
for the European Parliament on the slate of Europe Écologie, a
coalition of French environmentalist political parties. He won
16 percent of the popular vote in that election, a sufﬁcient num-
ber for him to be elected.
Herbert Boyer (1936–)
In the history of DNA technology, the names of Herbert Boyer
and Stanley N. Cohen will forever be paired with each other. In
1972, the two researchers were both attending a conference in
Hawaii on plasmids, circular loops of DNA found in bacteria
and protozoa. Over lunch, the two men found that they were
engaged in very similar research projects. Cohen was studying
the antibiotic properties of certain bacterial plasmids, whereas
Boyer was studying methods for introducing cut DNA into
precisely deﬁned segments with ends that could be attached to
other pieces of DNA. The two decided to collaborate and
within four months had carried out one of the classic studies
in the history of molecular biology. In these studies, they intro-
duced speciﬁed pieces of DNA into a bacterial plasmid (using
methods developed by Boyer) and then inserted the plasmid
into bacteria (using methods developed by Cohen). The results
of these experiments were bacteria whose DNA contained
clearly deﬁned segments of foreign DNA (genes) capable of
synthesizing speciﬁc proteins. When those bacteria reproduced,
they then became tiny “factories” for the production of those
proteins, the earliest forerunners of contemporary industrial
rDNA technologies.
Herbert Wayne Boyer was born in Derry, Pennsylvania, on
July 10, 1936. He received his AB from St. Vincent College,
Profiles
171

in Latrobe, Pennsylvania, in 1968, and his MS and PhD
(bacteriology) from the University of Pittsburgh in 1960 and
1963, respectively. He did his postdoctoral work at Yale
University as a U.S. Public Health Service research fellow from
1963 to 1966. In 1966, Boyer left Yale to accept a position at
the University of California at San Francisco (UCSF) as assis-
tant professor of microbiology. He was promoted to associate
professor of microbiology in 1971, associate professor of bio-
chemistry in 1975, and full professor in the department of
biochemistry and biophysics in 1976, a post he held until his
retirement in 1991. Boyer also served as director of the gradu-
ate program in genetics from 1976 to 1981. He currently holds
the title of emeritus professor of biochemistry and biophysics in
the UCSF School of Medicine.
In 1976, Boyer and venture capitalist Robert A. Swanson
founded the world’s ﬁrst corporation for the development of
commercial products made with rDNA research, Genentech,
Inc. Within its ﬁrst year of operation, Genentech had produced
the ﬁrst commercial rDNA product, the hormone somato-
statin. Boyer served as vice president of Genentech from its
founding until his retirement from the company, also in 1991.
Among the honors given to Boyer are the Albert Lasker
Award for Basic Medical Research (1980), Industrial Research
Institute Achievement Award (1982), National Medal of
Technology (1989), National Medal of Science (1990),
Helmut Horten Research Award (1993), Lemelson-MIT Prize
(1996),
Biotechnology
Heritage
Award
(2000),
Albany
Medical Center Prize (2004), Shaw Prize in Life Science and
Medicine (2004), the Perkin Medal of the American section
of the Society of Chemical Industry (2007), and Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory Double Helix Medal (2009). The graduate
faculty at UCSF has created the Herbert W. Boyer Program in
Biological Sciences in recognition of Boyer’s contribution to
the university. In 1990, Boyer and his wife Grace donated the
single largest sum ever given to the Yale School of Medicine
by an individual or family, $10,000,000. In recognition of that
172
GMO Food

gift, the university named a new facility in the Boyers’ honor,
the Boyer Center for Molecular Medicine, in 1991.
Canadian Biotechnology Action Network
180 Metcalfe St., Suite 206
Ottawa, Ontario, K2P 1P5
Canada
Phone: (613) 241-2267, ext.25
Fax: (613) 241-2506
Email: info@cban.ca
URL: http://www.cban.ca/
The Canadian Biotechnology Action Network (CBAN) had its
origins in informal meetings in 1999 among 23 environmental,
social justice, and consumer groups that met to develop a
common strategy for dealing with issues raised by the increas-
ing use of genetic engineering in the development of crops
and foods and in other areas. That information afﬁliation
was successful in achieving a number of goals, including the
prohibition of milk produced from cows treated with recombi-
nant bovine growth hormone (rBGH) and abandonment by
Monsanto of its plans to introduce genetically engineered
wheat into the country. In 2006, participating groups decided
to formalize its relationship with the creation of the CBAN
under the auspices of Tides Canada. Tides Canada is a national
charity that focuses on issues of importance to the people of
Canada and their natural environment by connecting donors
with worthy projects.
CBAN’s current mission statement calls for the organization
to promote food sovereignty and democratic decision-
making on science and technology issues in order to pro-
tect the integrity of the environment, health, food, and
the livelihoods of people in Canada and around the world
by facilitating, informing and organizing civil society
Profiles
173

action, researching, and providing information to gover-
nment for policy development.
Among the organizations that currently make up CBAN are
ACT for the Earth (Toronto), Canadian Organic Growers,
Ecological Farmers of Ontario, Food Action Committee
of
Ecology
Action
Centre
(Halifax),
GE
Free
Yukon,
GeneAction
(Toronto),
Greenpeace
Canada,
National
Farmers Union, P.E.I. Coalition for a GMO-Free Province,
Saskatchewan Organic Directorate, Society for a G.E. Free
B.C., and Union Paysanne. The organization also receives sup-
port from a variety of commercial enterprises, including The
Big Carrot Natural Foods (Toronto); Julie Daniluk, RHN,
Daniluk Consulting; Eatmore Sprouts (British Columbia);
ETC Group (Ottawa); Harmony Organic (Ontario); and
Mumm’s Sprouting Seeds (Saskatchewan).
CBAN activities are based on four primary objectives:
1. Facilitating collaborative campaigning at the local, regional,
national, and international levels
2. Enabling individual Canadians to take strategic and effec-
tive action
3. Researching and monitoring new technologies and provid-
ing credible information
4. Challenging government to transparency, accountability,
and democratic process
At the beginning of 2014, CBAN was pursuing four major
projects: No GM Fish, Get GM Sweet Corn Out, Stop
the GM Apple, and Stop Legalized Contamination from
Unapproved GM Foods: “Low Level Presence.” Each of these
projects has been created in opposition to speciﬁc efforts by com-
panies to introduce new GM products into Canada. The No GM
Fish project, for example, was developed to oppose the request by
a U.S. company, AquaBounty, to begin marketing a GM form of
174
GMO Food

salmon that grows throughout the year rather than during only a
certain season each year. The project consists largely of writing to
the Canadian Minister of the Environment, expressing one’s
objection to the approval of this request.
The CBAN website is also a very rich source of information
on a large variety of topics, such as agrofuels; corporate control
of the food supply; environmental impacts of GM crops; spe-
ciﬁc GM products, such as apples, alfalfa, ﬂax, potatoes, rice,
wheat, cotton, corn, canola, soybeans, sugar beets, and ﬁsh;
GE Free Zones; experimental work on GM goats, trees, and
other organisms; human health risks; labeling issues; nanotech-
nology; patents; regulation and policy; synthetic biology; and
terminator technology. It also provides some very useful infor-
mation on tools that can be used by individuals and organiza-
tions to express their opposition to GM products, such as
relevant articles, brieﬁng notes, consumer guides, e-news, ﬁlms,
maps, pamphlets, factsheets, photos and graphics, reports, and
workshops and presentations.
The organization also sponsors, cosponsors, and advertises a
variety of events of interest to individuals who oppose the
use of GM foods and crops in Canada. Some recent examples
include the recently produced play Seeds about the legal
battle between Saskatchewan farmer Percy Schmeiser and the
Monsanto company; the showing of the ﬁlm GMO OMG,
dealing with issues of GM products in today’s world; and a
webcast featuring a panel of four food experts on the challenges
of feeding a world of 9 billion people. A frequently asked ques-
tions section of the website also provides a brief but excellent
general introduction to the issue of GM crops and foods.
Center for Food Safety
660 Pennsylvania Ave., SE, #302
Washington, DC 20003
Phone: (202) 547-9359
Fax: (202) 547-9429
Profiles
175

Email: http://www.centerforfoodsafety.org/contact-us
URL: http://www.centerforfoodsafety.org
The Center for Food Safety (CFS) was founded in 1997 by
attorney, environmental activist, and consumer advocate
Andrew Kimbrell, who still serves as executive director of the
organization. CFS was founded as a nonproﬁt organization for
the purpose of working to protect human health and the natu-
ral environment by opposing the use of harmful food produc-
tion technologies and by promoting organic and other forms
of sustainable agriculture.
The center organizes its activities around 10 major themes:
genetic engineering, seeds, pollinators and pesticides, animal
cloning, food and climate, aquaculture, food safety, factory
farms, organic and beyond, and nanotechnology. Two of these
themes are further subdivided into more speciﬁc categories:
genetic engineering into GE foods, GE food labeling, GE ﬁsh,
GE animals, GE insects, and GE trees; and food safety into food
safety (in general), food irradiation, rbGH, mad cow disease, and
sewage sludge. For each of these topics, the CFS website provides
detailed information about the issue and suggestions for ways in
which consumers can become involved in actions to resolve spe-
ciﬁc issues. For each topic, there is also a list of publications and
resources that include reports on the topic, legal actions taken
with respect to the issue, policy statements by various organiza-
tions, testimony provided by CFS representatives and other indi-
viduals, and news about recent development with regard to the
issue. The web page on aquaculture, for example, provides an
essay deﬁning and describing the process, a discussion of the
forces responsible for the depletion of ocean resources, a descrip-
tion of the threats posed to the marine environment and marine
wildlife, a review of human health risks posed by the practice of
aquaculture, a description of special issues related to shellﬁsh
aquaculture, and a summary of regulation relevant to aquaculture
practices. The usual list of publications and other resources is also
included.
176
GMO Food

The center has also developed a number of initiatives to
which members and interested readers are invited to partici-
pate. Examples of those initiatives include campaigns to get
Lowe’s and Home Depot to stop selling pesticides that are toxic
to honeybees, to stop the development of genetically engi-
neered ﬁsh, and to stop GE crop ﬁeld tests; and petitions to
get the Environmental Protection Agency more involved in
efforts to protect honeybees, to urge the retailer Trader Joe’s
to stop selling meat containing antibiotics, and to convince the
U.S. Department of Agriculture to ban the growing and sale of
genetically engineered apples.
CFS also makes available to members and interested others a
wide range of print and electronic publications in the form of
fact sheets, newsletters, reports, policy statements, testimonials,
and legal actions. Examples of fact sheet topics that are available
are “Guide to Avoiding GE Fish,” “Factory Farms: Antibiotics
in Distiller Grains,” “Pollinators & Pesticides,” “Help the
Honeybees: A List of Pesticides to Avoid,” and “Genetically
Engineered Foods: The Labeling Debate.” The organization’s
primary newsletter is Food Safety Now. It also provides news
electronically to subscribers on its True Food Network.
Among the reports available from the organization on its
website are “Best Public Relations That Money Can Buy:
A Guide to Food Industry Front Groups,” “Genetic Engineered
Food Labeling Laws Map,” “Seed Giants vs. U.S. Farmers,”
“Pollinators & Pesticides: A Report by Center for Food Safety
on Pollinator Health, Research, and Future Efforts for Pollinator
Protection,” and “Food Safety Review: Going Backwards:
Dow’s 2,4-D-Resistant Crops and a More Toxic Future.”
Mary-Dell Chilton (1939–)
Chilton is best known for her research on the process by which
Agrobacterium bacteria infect tobacco plants. Her team showed
that a bacterium is able to transmit its DNA into the host plant
genome and that, furthermore, removal of disease-causing
Profiles
177

genes from the bacterial DNA does not affect this process. The
information gained from these studies demonstrated the fea-
sibility of producing transgenic plants by inserting foreign
genes into the genome of a host plant, giving it the ability to
produce proteins not typically associated with the native plant.
The experiments conducted by Chilton’s team have now
become classics in the ﬁeld of genetic engineering of plants. In
2013, Chilton was awarded a share of the World Food Prize,
widely recognized as one of the highest honors that can be
granted for accomplishments in the invention, development,
and application of new products through modern agricultural
biotechnology.
Mary-Dell Chilton was born in Indianapolis, Indiana,
on February 2, 1939. She was originally interested in astronomy
and was a ﬁnalist in the 1956 Westinghouse Science Talent
Search for building “a long telescope in a short tube.” She
planned to major in astronomy when she entered the University
of Illinois at Champaign Urbana in 1956, but soon she found
that her instructors did not take her seriously because she was a
woman. She brieﬂy transferred to physics but found that subject
boring, so eventually decided to major in chemistry, earning her
BSc in that subject in 1960 and her PhD, also in chemistry, in
1967. Chilton then accepted an appointment at the University
of Washington, in Seattle, where she remained until 1979.
It was at the University of Washington that she conducted much
of her initial work on the production of transgenic plants.
In 1979, Chilton moved to Washington University in
St. Louis, where she continued her research on the genetic
modiﬁcation of tobacco plants. After four years, she resigned
her academic position to take a job with the CIBA-Geigy
Corporation (now Syngenta Biotechnology, Inc.) in Research
Triangle Park, North Carolina. At Syngenta, she has been
involved in both research and administrative activities, serving
as principal scientist, distinguished science fellow, and vice
president of agricultural biotechnology. In addition to the
World Food Prize, Chilton has been honored with a number
178
GMO Food

of other awards, including the American Institute of Chemists
Bronze Medal (1960), Rank Prize in Nutrition of the United
Kingdom (1967), election to the National Academy of
Sciences (1986), the David Gottlieb Medal of the University
of Illinois (1986), the Hendricks Medal of the American
Chemical Society (1987), election to the American Academy
of Arts and Sciences (1993), election as a fellow to the
American Academy of Microbiology (1994), the John Scott
Award of the City of Philadelphia (2000), the Benjamin
Franklin Medal in Life Sciences of the Franklin Institute
in Philadelphia (2002), and the CSSA Presidential Award
of the Crop Science Society of America (2011). In 2009,
Washington University established the Mary-Dell Chilton
Distinguished Professorship in Arts and Sciences in her honor.
She has published well over 100 scientiﬁc papers in the ﬁeld
of the genetic modiﬁcation of organisms.
Chilton had been married for more than two decades to
Dr. Scott Chilton, professor of botany in the College of
Agriculture and Life Sciences at North Carolina State University.
He died unexpectedly in 2004. In her retirement years, Chilton
is no longer involved with company projects, although she does
continue to work in her laboratory at Syngenta, working on
projects that interest her, no matter the future practical value they
may or may not have.
Stanley N. Cohen (1935–)
Cohen and Herbert Boyer performed one of the classic experi-
ments in the early history of DNA technology in the early
1970s when they found a way to insert a foreign gene into a
plasmid, a double-stranded circular piece of DNA found in
bacteria and protozoa. This technology allowed Cohen and
Boyer to make duplicate copies (clones) of precise segments of
DNA from any given source.
Stanley Norman Cohen was born in Perth Amboy, New
Jersey, on February 17, 1935. His grandparents had emigrated
Profiles
179

from Eastern Europe and settled in Perth Amboy, where
Cohen’s parents were also born. In his autobiography, Cohen
remembers Perth Amboy as a “wonderful paradigm of ethnic,
religious, and racial diversity,” in which he lived a very typical
childhood and adolescence. He played basketball and football
and worked in a variety of jobs during the week and sold mag-
azine subscriptions on the weekend. He was torn between his
interests in physics and biology in high school, but eventually
he chose the latter and decided to become a geneticist.
He entered Rutgers University in the fall of 1952, where he
majored in premedical studies. He was granted his BA in bio-
logical sciences in 1956, and then enrolled at the University
of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, from which he received
his MD in 1960. He then did his residency, internship,
and medical research at a number of institutions, including
University Hospital at the University of Michigan, Mt. Sinai
Hospital in New York City, Duke University Hospital, and
the National Institute of Arthritis and Metabolic Diseases.
At some point during these studies, Cohen recognized the fact
that he was more interested in the research side of medicine than
in clinical work, so began to focus his postgraduate studies in the
former ﬁeld. His future was sealed when he was given a fellowship
at the U.S. National Institutes of Health, where he was intro-
duced to the new and growing ﬁeld of molecular biology. After
additional studies at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in
New York City, he accepted his ﬁrst academic appointment as as-
sistant professor of medicine at Stanford University, where he
spent the remainder of his academic career. He was named profes-
sor of medicine in the Stanford School of Medicine in 1975,
professor of genetics in the School of Medicine in 1977, and
Kwoh-Ting Li Professor of Medicine in 1993, titles that he con-
tinues to hold. Cohen also served as trustee at the University of
Pennsylvania and its Medical Center from 1989 through 2002.
An award of excellence in biomedical research has been named
in his honor at Pennsylvania.
180
GMO Food

Cohen and Boyer met at a conference in Hawaii on bacterial
plasma and over lunch discovered that their research interests
melded with each other beautifully. At the time, Cohen was
studying methods for inserting plasmids into bacteria to study
their ability to develop resistance to certain antibiotics. Boyer
was working on the development of certain kinds of enzymes
that cut DNA into precisely deﬁned segments with “sticky”
ends. The two combined their skills to develop a method for
inserting precise DNA segments into plasmids and then
inserting those plasmids into bacteria. The modiﬁed bacteria
could, by this method, be “engineered” to produce any desired
protein product speciﬁed by the inserted DNA and, in this
regard, marked the beginning of industrial biotechnology based
on rDNA molecules.
Cohen’s research interests range over a wide array of topics,
including the development and evolution of antibiotic resis-
tance, the function of ribonucleic acids (RNA) in cells, and
possible molecular mechanisms for the rise of neurological dis-
orders in animals.
In his long and illustrious career, Cohen has received a num-
ber of awards and honors, including the Wolf Prize in Medicine
(1971), Lemelson-MIT Prize (1996), Albert Lasker Basic
Medical Research Award (1980), National Medal of Science
(1988), National Medal of Technology (1989), Albany
Medical Center Prize (2004), Shaw Prize in Life Science and
Medicine (2004), and Double Helix Medal (2009).
Council for Biotechnology Information
United States
1201 Maryland Ave., SW, Suite 900
Washington, DC 20024
Phone: (202) 962-9200
Email: cbi@whybiotech.com
URL: http://www.whybiotech.com/
Profiles
181

Canada
105L 111 Research Dr.
Saskatoon, SK, S7N 3R3
Phone: (416) 922-1944
Toll-Free: (1) (866) 922-1944
Email: info@canadacbi.com
URL: http://www.whybiotech.ca/
Mexico
AgroBIO Mexico A.C.
Dakota No. 2004, Oﬁcina 302, Col. Nápoles
C.P. 03810, Mexico DF
Phone: +52 55 55438489
Email: agrobio@agrobiomexico.org.mx
URL: http://www.agrobiomexico.org.mx/
The Council for Biotechnology Information (CBI) is a non-
proﬁt 501(c)6 organization created for the purpose of providing
information about the beneﬁts and safety of agricultural bio-
technology and its role in sustainable development. The organi-
zation was created in April 2000 and has major ofﬁces in three
countries: Canada, Mexico, and the United States. Member
organizations of the CBI as of early 2014 were BASF, Bayer
CropScience, Dow AgroSciences LLC, DuPont, Monsanto,
and Syngenta.
The basic premise behind the CBI program is that bioengi-
neered organisms can improve human life around the world
by increasing the size and quality of harvests, ﬁnd new ways of
meeting the world’s energy needs, and develop new crops that
can survive in otherwise inhospitable areas, such as deserts,
saline environments, or unusually cold lands. Some of the spe-
ciﬁc messages that the council makes available are that
• New crops can be developed that have higher nutritional
content than comparably occurring nature crops.
182
GMO Food

• GM crops can improve the quality and quantity of crops in
developing nations, thus helping to solve one of the most
important problems faced by those nations.
• Respected authorities around the world have come to the
conclusion that bioengineered crops are safe and healthy
for humans and domestic animals.
• Bioengineered crops can help farmers save water, thus help-
ing to solve another environmental problem faced by many
places in the world.
• The use of GM crops can greatly reduce the amount of
pesticides used in agriculture, thus reducing both costs to
farmers and potential health risks for consumers.
• Crops can be engineered so as to make them useful as bio-
fuels, helping to deal with yet another important social issue.
The main focus of CBI’s work is on the dissemination of
information about the beneﬁts and safety of GM crops and
foods. It accomplishes this objective with a variety of print,
electronic, and visual materials. For example, its web page pro-
vides pages on topics such as third-party (neutral) studies on the
safety and efﬁcacy of genetically engineered crops, a list of
experts who are available to answer questions and provide infor-
mation about GM foods, a timeline of the development of agri-
cultural biotechnology, and a frequently asked questions (FAQ)
section that provides answers to common questions about engi-
neered crops and foods. The council also provides fact sheets in
print and electronic form that deal with fundamental issues
related to GM foods, including “Helping Increase Crop Yields
for America’s Farmers,” “Biotechnology and Biofuels: Providing
Renewable
Energy
while
Reducing
Carbon
Emissions,”
“Biotechnology and Drought: Producing More Crop per
Drop,” “Biotechnology and Food: Helping Increase Global
Food
Security,”
and
“Biotechnology
and
Sustainability:
Supporting Sustainable Solutions in Agriculture.”
Profiles
183

The
organization’s
visual
presentations
include
online
slideshows on topics such as “Agricultural Biotechnology and
Sustainaiblity,”
“How
Biotechnology
Is
Helping
Increase
Global Food Production,” “Biotechnology and Biofuels: Fueling
Growth for Today and Tomorrow,” and “Biotechnology and
Drought: Helping Produce ‘More Crop per Drop’.” CBI also
offers a number of video programs on similar topics (e.g.,
“World without Food Science” and “Connecting Farmers”), as
well as its own YouTube channel (http://www.youtube.com/
user/CBIWashingtonDC) and Green State TV, which provides
interviews with people interested in the use of GM foods to
help solve a variety of worldwide problems.
Groups opposed to the development and use of GM foods
have pointed out the association of CBI with biotechnology
ﬁrms and have raised questions as to how unbiased the infor-
mation is that is provided by the council. Without question,
however, the council does provide a host of useful and generally
accurate information about one side of the controversy about
GM agricultural products.
CropGen
PO Box 38589
London SW1A 1WE
United Kingdom
Phone (in UK) 020-7025-2333
(from overseas) +44-20-8451-0784
Email: cropgen@f2s.com
URL: http://www.cropgen.org/
CropGen is an organization targeted at the media and the
general public with the goal of promoting research on and
the use of GM crops and foods. The organization is based
in the United Kingdom, but it has members from many
other parts of the world, including Egypt, Germany, the
Philippines, Poland, South Africa, Switzerland, and the
184
GMO Food

United States. It provides expert advice on topics relating to the
genetic modiﬁcation of plants and animals in specialized ﬁelds
such as bioethics, biotechnology law, economics of GM agri-
culture, farming and agricultural chemicals, GM foods and
human health, GM issues and the public media, plant ecology
and weed control, plant genetics and agriculture, plant breeding
and biodiversity, and regulation and coexistence.
A core section of the association’s website is the question and
answer page that provides information on topics such as the
history of the genetic modiﬁcation of foods, the extent to which
GM foods are present in the marketplace, who produces GM
foods, what the justiﬁcation for GM foods is, how GM foods
can beneﬁt human life, what medical beneﬁts there may be
for GM foods and other products, what contributions the
genetic modiﬁcation of plants may have for other ﬁelds such
as energy production, and what dangers and risks GM crops
and foods may pose. The web page also provides links to about
four dozen organizations that can provide additional informa-
tion about and support for the invention and use of GM
products.
CropGen was established in 2000 with a grant of nearly
£500,000 from a consortium of biotechnology ﬁrms including
BASF, the Crop Protection Association, Dow AgroSciences,
DuPont, Monsanto, and Syngenta. For the ﬁrst three years
of its existence, it was operated by the public relations
ﬁrm Countrywide Porter Novelli, after which management
was transferred to another public relations ﬁrm, Lexington
Communications. CropGen says that its objective is to make
available unbiased scientiﬁc information in support of the
greater use of GM foods and that no one associated with the
organization is funded by any biotechnology company or by
any organization that works on behalf of GM products.
In addition to its very useful website, the organization takes
part in radio and television interviews, offers speakers for
debates and other types of meetings, and briefs journalists on
issues related to GM foods. An item of special interest on its
Profiles
185

website is a list of articles under the section “Highlights,” which
have dealt most recently with topics such as the safety of GM
foods for humans and domestic animals, the discovery of the
presence of modiﬁed gene fragments in human blood, changes
in Russian attitudes toward GM foods, the discovery of GM
wheat in Oregon, and current UK policy on GM foods and
crops.
Food & Water Watch
1616 P St., NW, Suite 300
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 683-2500
Fax: (202) 683-2501
Email: http://www.foodandwaterwatch.org/about/contact-us/
URL: http://www.foodandwaterwatch.org
Food & Water Watch was formed in 2005 by 12 members of
the Energy and Environment Program of the nonproﬁt organi-
zation Public Citizen. The organization’s mission is to work to
ensure that the food and water available to people is safe and
accessible and that it is produced by sustainable methods.
Over time, the organization has expanded its array of programs
that currently include speciﬁc issues such as bottled water, cli-
mate change, consumer labels desalination, factory farms and
factory ﬁsh farming, the federal budget, food and water justice,
food safety, fracking, genetically engineered foods, groundwater
protection, irradiation, nanotechnology, water conservation,
water privatization, and worldwide water resources.
The organization provides on its web page an overview of
some of its most important accomplishments over the past
decade. These achievements include the following:
• Playing a role in Maryland state legislation to ban the pres-
ence of arsenic in chicken feed
186
GMO Food

• Running a campaign to encourage Starbucks to stop using
milk produced by rBGH cows
• Working with inspectors from the U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA) to maintain the highest possible stan-
dards of food inspection
• Protecting small farms from new federal legislation designed
more speciﬁcally for large corporate farms
• Advocating for rigorous labeling regulations on foods
imported from outside the United States
• Organizing to protect water supplies by eliminating the use
of the hazardous chemical triclosan in consumer products
• Cooperating with other organizations to promote adoption
of a bill in New Jersey to ban fracking in the state
• Preventing the conversion of publicly owned water puriﬁca-
tion systems to private companies in a number of localities
across the United States
Food & Water Watch has adopted a four-pronged approach
in pursuit of its programs that includes a program of education
about such issues for the general public and policy makers; lobby-
ing of those policy makers for the adoption of programs consis-
tent with the organization’s mission; promotion of information
about food and water issues through a variety of media; and
encouragement of activism among members and other interested
parties primarily through its Internet site.
A vital aspect of Food & Water Watch work is providing
materials that educate the general public and policy makers on
critical issues. These materials are often available in the form
of fact sheets on topics such as “The World Food Prize,”
“Save Antibiotics for Medicine, Not Factory Farms,” “United
Water: A Corporate Proﬁle,” “Monsanto’s Seed Company
Subsidiaries,” and “How Much Do Labels Really Tell You?”
In addition to fact sheets, the organization offers other types
of research information in the form of reports, issue briefs, case
Profiles
187

studies, and corporate proﬁles. Examples of each are “The
Social Costs of Fracking,” “The EPA’s Failure to Track
Factory
Farms,”
“Citrus
County,
Florida,”
and
“Aqua
America,” respectively.
Food & Water Watch also provides a variety of tools to help
the average citizen better understand some important issues in
the ﬁeld and to learn how to deal with these issues. The
“Take Back the Tap Guide to Safe Tap Water,” for example,
provides guidance as to how citizens can understand water
quality reports that are commonly issued by local water compa-
nies and how they can use this information to purchase water
ﬁlters for their home and take such other actions that will
improve the likelihood of getting clean water in their homes.
The “Smart Seafood Guide” helps consumers learn more about
the ﬁsh products that are available for sale in their markets,
including knowing whether or not the ﬁsh is caught or farmed
locally, how the ﬁsh is caught or farmed, and what contami-
nants may be associated with ﬁsh products.
The news section of the organization’s website provides
access to a blog dealing with its major topics, a collection of
recent news reports, press releases about important issues,
events of interest to members and to the general public, and
video productions dealing with food and water issues.
Robert T. Fraley (1953–)
Fraley was honored with a share of the 2013 World Food Prize,
awarded annually by the World Food Prize Foundation to indi-
viduals “who have advanced human development by improving
the quality, quantity or availability of food in the world.” The
prize was conceived in the mid-1980s by Norman Borlaug,
who had himself won a Nobel Peace Prize for his contributions
to the relief of human hunger around the world. Fraley was
honored for his research on methods for transforming the
genome of plants important in agriculture.
188
GMO Food

Robert Thomas Fraley was born in Danville, Illinois, on
January 25, 1953. He was brought up on a farm in nearby
Hoopeston, Illinois; grew grain; and maintained livestock. It
goes almost without saying that this early experience made a
life-long impression on Fraley who was eager to have a chance
to improve agricultural technology to meet the needs of
hungry people worldwide. Upon completing high school,
Fraley entered the University of Illinois at Champagne-
Urbana, where he received his bachelor’s degree in biology in
1974, his master’s in 1976, and his PhD in microbiology and
biochemistry in 1978. He then spent a year as a postdoctoral
fellow at the University of California at San Francisco.
At the conclusion of his studies, Fraley took a position with
the Monsanto company, where he has remained ever since.
His ﬁrst appointment at Monsanto was as senior research spe-
cialist, after which he worked his way up through the ranks to
eventually become executive vice president and chief technol-
ogy ofﬁcer.
Fraley’s ﬁrst technical breakthrough in the engineering of
plants came in 1983 when he and three of his colleagues
reported on a method for introducing genes into plants provid-
ing those plants with immunity to certain diseases and adverse
environmental conditions. In recognition of this achievement,
Fraley was awarded a share of the 1986 Charles A. Thomas &
Carroll A. Hochwalt Award for innovative basic science by
Monsanto. A year later, Fraley worked on the team that devel-
oped and tested the ﬁrst genetically engineered tomato, the
Flavr Savr tomato. In 1996, Fraley was also involved in research
on another important GM breakthrough, the development of
plants resistant to Monsanto’s Roundup Ready insecticide.
In addition to the World Food Prize, Fraley has received a
number of other honors for his research on the genetic manipu-
lation of plants, including the Edgar M. Queeny award,
the highest honor that Monsanto offers for research in biotech-
nology (1996); the National Medal of Technology, given to
Profiles
189

Fraley in a ceremony at the White House by President Bill
Clinton (1999); and the National Academy of Sciences Award
for the Industrial Application of Science (2008). In 2004,
Fraley was also awarded an Alumni Achievement Award by
the University of Illinois. Since 1981, Fraley has also served as
adjunct professor at Washington University in St. Louis.
John E. Franz (1929–)
In the ﬁeld of GM crops, few discoveries have been as impor-
tant as that of the chemical known as glyphosate, whose
technical name is N-(phosphonomethyl)glycine. Glyphosate is
classiﬁed as a broad-spectrum systemic herbicide, a substance
that is taken up by a wide range of plants and is toxic to those
plants because it interferes with their growth. Glyphosate was
discovered in 1970 by Monsanto chemist John E. Franz, and
it is now the primary ingredient in the company’s widely popu-
lar herbicide, Roundup. Roundup became a critical tool in the
arsenal of modern agriculture when Monsanto developed GM
plants carrying a gene making them resistant to glyphosate.
Thus, farmers could plant a crop of GM corn, soybeans, cot-
ton, or some other crop resistant to glyphosate and then spray
the ﬁeld with Roundup. The pesticide kills most weeds present
in the ﬁeld but has no effect on the so-called Roundup Ready
GM crop.
John Edward Franz was born in Springﬁeld, Illinois, on
December 21, 1929. He became fascinated with the study of
chemistry at the age of 10 and decided that he would make
his career in that ﬁeld. His interest in chemistry was so intense
that he decided to ignore any other subject and had to be con-
vinced by one of his high school teachers that he really needed
to focus on physics, mathematics, and other subjects to do well
in college.
Franz matriculated at the University of Illinois, from which
he earned his bachelor of science degree (in chemistry, of
course) in 1951. He then continued his studies at the
190
GMO Food

University of Minnesota, which granted him his PhD in
organic chemistry in 1955. After graduation, he was offered
positions with both Monsanto and Dow Chemical, eventually
choosing to accept Monsanto’s offer. He began work as
a research chemist at the company’s Organic Chemicals
Division in St. Louis in 1955. He remained with the company
for his entire career, become group leader of the Organic
Chemicals Division in 1959, science fellow in the same division
in 1962, and then science fellow in the Agricultural Products
Division in 1967. It was in this position that he carried out
his research on herbicides for use in agricultural settings and
discovered glyphosate in the process. This research was based
on an incorrect interpretation of studies conducted on herbici-
dal action conducted over a nine-year period by his colleagues
that produced an effective compound nonetheless. Among
glyphosate’s many advantages is that it has no toxic effects on
a broad range of animal life, ranging from most bacteria to
insects, ﬁsh, birds, and mammals.
In 1975, Franz was appointed senior science fellow in the
Agricultural Products Division. Five years later, he was named
distinguished science fellow in the division, a title he held until
his retirement from Monsanto in 1994.
Franz has more than 840 patents to his credit, most of them
dealing with some aspect of glyphosate. He has also received
many honors based on that one discovery, including the
IR-100 award of Industrial Magazine in 1977, the ﬁrst J. F.
Queeny Award from Monsanto in 1981, the National Medal
of Technology in 1987, the Carothers Award of the American
Chemical Society in 1989, the Perkins Medal of the American
Section of the Society of Chemical Industry in 1990, the
Outstanding
Achievement
Award
of
the
University
of
Minnesota in 1988, the Missouri Award of the Missouri
Department of Economic Development in 1988, and the
Inventor of the Year Award of the St. Louis Metropolitan Bar
Association in 1986. He was inducted into the United States
Inventor’s Hall of Fame in 2007.
Profiles
191

Dennis Gonsalves (1943–)
American plant pathologist Dilworth D. Jensen wrote a paper
in 1949 describing a disease affecting the papaya plant in
Hawaii that he attributed to the papaya ringspot virus
(PRSV). The disease causes chlorosis (yellow splotches) to
develop on leaves and oily liquids to escape from the plant’s
petioles (the region at which a leaf is attached to a stem).
In more severe cases, the plant fails to produce healthy fruit
and is of no economic value. Given the critical role of the
papaya in the Hawaiian economy, agricultural researchers
began an aggressive campaign to ﬁnd ways of combating
PRSV disease. Conventional methods for the control of such
diseases were largely unsuccessful. For example, quarantining
of plants failed to control the disease because the disease vector,
an aphid, was able to reach quarantined areas rather easily.
Cross-protection (the introduction of a weaker strain of PRSV
with the intention of improving plant immunity) also proved
unsuccessful. In 1985, Cornell plant pathologist Dennis
Gonsalves began research on a genetically engineered form of
the papaya plant (Carica papaya). That research was based on
the principle that a plant that contains a gene or a DNA frag-
ment similar to that of a pest will have immunity to that pest.
So Gonsalves and his colleagues began to look for a way to
insert into the papaya genome a portion of the PRSV genome,
hoping that the product would have immunity to the viral
disease.
Gonsalves’s team achieved success in 1991 with a product
known as papaya 55-1. Field tests conﬁrmed that the varietal
was indeed resistant to the virus, and it soon became com-
mercially available under the trade names of SunUp and
Rainbow. Researchers were so excited by their discovery that
they began to distribute 55-1 seeds at no cost to Hawaiian
farmers after the U.S. Department of Agriculture approved
the new products. Today more than three-quarters of the
papaya grown in Hawaii is some form of the genetically
192
GMO Food

engineered product. It is no exaggeration to say that
Gonsalves’s research saved the papaya industry in Hawaii.
Dennis Gonsalves was born in Kohala, Hawaii, on April 2,
1943. His father was a Portuguese immigrant whose father’s
parents had come from the Azores and Madeira Islands and
whose mother was Hawaiian-Chinese. Gonsalves remembers
that he was not especially interested in an academic career from
childhood through his high school years. However, his atti-
tudes changed when he was accepted at the prestigious
Kamehameha School in Honolulu, which had been founded
for the speciﬁc purpose of educating native Hawaiian children.
Gonsalves decided to continue his education as an agricultural
engineer at the University of Hawaii, but when that ﬁeld no
longer seemed to hold employment opportunities, he switched
to horticulture. He eventually earned both his BS and MS
degrees from Hawaii in 1965 and 1968, respectively. He then
continued his education at the University of California at
Davis, from which he received his PhD in plant pathology
in 1972.
The event that Gonsalves said changed his life occurred
while he was still at the University of Hawaii, working as a
plant technician in the laboratory of Eduardo Trujillo, a plant
pathologist for the University of Hawaii on the island of
Kauai. Trujillo suggested to Gonsalves that the newly discov-
ered PRSV disease might be an interesting topic for research.
As soon as he began a study of the disease, Gonsalves later said,
he knew that he wanted to become a plant pathologist, with
special emphasis on the study of viral diseases in plants.
Gonsalves also picked up on Trujillo’s suggestion that he
should focus on research that has practical applications and
not to get carried away with abstract studies. It was under the
guidance of Trujillo, therefore, that Gonsalves set off on a
career of practical research in the study of viral diseases of the
papaya.
After completing his studies at Davis, Gonsalves took a job
as assistant professor at the University of Florida, where he
Profiles
193

remained until 1977. While at Florida, he worked at the
Agricultural Research and Education Center at the Institute of
Food and Agricultural Sciences at Lake Alfred, where he carried
out research on the diseases of citrus trees. He then moved to
Cornell University, where he spent the rest of his academic
career. He served as associate professor of plant pathology at
Cornell from 1977 to 1986 and full professor from 1987 to
his retirement in 2002, at which time he was named professor
emeritus at Cornell. In 2002, Gonsalves also decided to return
to his native Hawaii, where he took the position of University
of Hawaii graduate and center director of the USDA Paciﬁc
Basin Agricultural Research Center in Hilo. Gonsalves has
received the Alexander von Humboldt award of the Alexander
von Humboldt Foundation (2002) and the Leadership in
Science Public Service Award of the American Society of Plant
Biologists (2003).
Greenpeace International
Ottho Heldringstraat 5
1066 AZ Amsterdam
The Netherlands
Phone: +31 (0) 20 718 2000
Fax: +31 (0) 20 718 2002
Email: supporter.services.int@greenpeace.org
URL: http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/
Greenpeace United States
702 H St., NW, Suite 300
Washington, DC 20001
Phone: (202) 462-1177
Fax: (202) 462-4507
Email: info@wdc.greenpeace.org
URL: http://www.greenpeace.org/usa/en/
194
GMO Food

Greenpeace was founded in 1971 when a group of environ-
mentalists leased a small ﬁshing vessel to protest nuclear tests
being conducted off the coast of Alaska. The region in which
the testing was to take place was the last refuge of a number
of endangered and threatened species, so the mission was a
campaign against both the use of nuclear weapons and the
potential destruction of endangered wildlife. The ﬁshing boat
was intercepted and prevented from reaching its destination,
and the weapons test was carried out as planned. However,
the impetus for the campaign was by no means lost, and the
organization grew over the next 40 years to become one of the
largest and most inﬂuential environmental groups in the world.
Today, Greenpeace has a worldwide membership of about
2.8 million individuals and a membership of 250,000 in the
United States. The organization has 32 national and regional
ofﬁces, as well as international headquarters in Amsterdam.
The controlling legal structure of Greenpeace is a Dutch non-
proﬁt organization whose legal name is Stichting Greenpeace
Council that provides general oversight and direction for the
organization. A seven-member board of directors approves the
annual budget and appoints the executive director, who is respon-
sible for the day-to-day operations of the organization. Each
regional ofﬁce is organized in a similar fashion and elects a
representative to the organization’s annual general meeting,
which elects the board of directors, approves new Greenpeace
organizations, authorizes the annual budget, and sets policy prior-
ities for the coming year.
As of early 2014, Greenpeace has focused its efforts on six
major topics: climate change, forests, oceans, agriculture, toxic
pollution, and nuclear issues, for each of which it has developed
a comprehensive and detailed plan of action. The Greenpeace
campaign against GM foods is part of its agriculture mission.
The organization describes GM foods as possible threat to
human health and the environment and suggests that adequate
information on the safety of such products has not yet been
established. Their campaign is focused on three themes:
Profiles
195

1. GM organisms should not be released into the environ-
ment until adequate scientiﬁc evidence has been obtained
about their safety to human health and to the environment.
2. Food products containing GM elements should be labeled,
and GM foods should be physically separated from conven-
tional foods.
3. Patents should not be issued to organisms that have been
created by genetic engineering.
An important feature of the Greenpeace experience has
always been the active involvement of volunteers in achieving
the organization’s objectives. Some of the ways in which volun-
teers can participate are the following:
• Making ﬁnancial donations to the organization
• Volunteering to participate in Greenpeace campaign, rang-
ing from “licking envelopes to climbing smokestacks”
• Applying for employment with Greenpeace and putting to
use some speciﬁc practical skill needed by the organization
• Taking a job on one of the three large and many smaller
ships and boats used by the organization to carry out its
campaigns
• Making personal lifestyle changes that will contribute to
achieving the organization’s overall goals, such as changing
any number of factors in one’s home, yard, ofﬁce, and
community
• Developing and carrying out a campaign of one’s own
choosing on a local environmental problem of interest and
concern to the community (see http://www.greenpeace
.org/international/en/getinvolved/ for more details on ways
of becoming involved)
Greenpeace relies to a considerable extent on the use of
multimedia resources to get its message out to the general
196
GMO Food

public. Its website has a number of photographs, photos essays,
videos, slideshows, webcams, games, e-cards, and computer
supplements to describe the problems in which it is interested
and the programs it has developed to deal with those issues.
Institute for Responsible Technology
PO Box 469
Fairﬁeld, IA 52556
Phone: (641) 209-1765
Fax: (888) 386-6075
Email: info@responsibletechnology.org
URL: http://www.responsibletechnology.org/
The Institute for Responsible Technology (IRT) was founded
in 2003 by Jeffrey Smith, who calls himself “the leading con-
sumer advocate promoting healthier non-GMO choices.”
Smith is the author of two books on the subject, Seeds of
Deception: Exposing Industry and Government Lies about the
Safety of the Genetically Engineered Foods You’re Eating and
Genetic Roulette: The Documented Health Risks of Genetically
Engineered Foods. Smith created IRT as a mechanism for pro-
viding information about GM foods to the general public and
to policy makers around the world. The organization studies
risks posed by GM foods on human health, agriculture, the
environment, and the economy. The organization relies for its
research and analysis primarily on volunteers from a wide
variety of ﬁelds including media experts, social network cam-
paigners, writers, graphic designers, communications special-
ists, fundraisers, outreach professionals, and support staff.
Some of these individuals work out of the organization’s main
ofﬁce in Fairﬁeld, Iowa, whereas others work out of virtual
ofﬁces throughout the United States.
A major focus of IRT’s work is education about GM foods,
providing publications and essays on topics such as the genetic
Profiles
197

engineering process, GMOs in foods, health risks posed by GM
foods, risks to agriculture and the environment, issues related to
the use of genetically engineered hormones in dairy products,
special risks of GM foods posed to children, and 10 reasons to
avoid using GM foods. An important section of the organiza-
tion’s website is devoted to the topic of alleged fraud by
supporters of GM foods. The section purports to present the
techniques used by pro-GM individuals and companies to
make their case before the general public and decision makers,
such as the use of rigged studies, the manipulation of data by
pro-GM forces, the inadequacy of regulations dealing with
GM crops and foods, and efforts that have been made to silence
critics of the GM foods industry.
The institute also provides information for consumers about
places and ways at and by which they can avoid encountering
GM foods, with recommendations for places to buy non-
GMO products, ways to determine whether restaurants are
serving GMO products or not, and grocery stores and other
purveyors of foods that are particularly sensitive to GM food
issues. The organization also provides an iPhone app that can
be used as a guide to the purchase of non-GMO products.
IRT sponsors a number of programs, campaigns, and other
efforts to carry out its primary objectives. For example, the
Tipping Point Network is a network of local activists who are
committed to providing information about GMO products to
their neighbors, local ofﬁcials, and community organizations.
The organization also provides tool kits speciﬁcally designed
for parents, schools, and retailers, with information about GM
foods and activities that can help people choose to purchase
and eat non-GM products. IRT also has available a very wide
selection of print and electronic resources on GM topics,
including brochures and reports; a summary report called the
State of the Science Report; a newsletter, Spilling the Beans; an
archive of news reports about GM food topics; a list of speakers
who are available to address GM food–related issues; and
a number of audio and video programs on the topic.
198
GMO Food

Another especially helpful feature of the IRT website is a sub-
banner that displays sections of interest to specialized groups,
such as consumers, health care providers, retailers, manufacturers,
schools, parents, and individuals who are especially interested in
the subject of autism. In 2012, the organization released a new
ﬁlm on GMO issues titled Genetic Roulette: The Gamble of Our
Lives, which won the 2012 Movie of the Year award given by
the Solari Report and the top Transformational Film of the Year
award given by AwareGuide.
International Service for the Acquisition of Agri-Biotech
Applications
ISAAA SEAsiaCenter
Dr. Randy A. Hautea, Center Director and ISAAA
Global Coordinator
c/o IRRI
DAPO Box 7777, Metro Manila
The Philippines
Phone: +63 2 845-0563/0569/0573
Fax: +63 49 536-7216; +63 2 845-0606
Email: seasiacenter@isaaa.org
ISAAA AfriCenter
Dr. Margaret Karembu, Director
PO Box 70
ILRI Campus, Old Naivasha Rd.
Uthiru, Nairobi 00605
Kenya
Phone: +254 20 4223618
Fax: +254 20 4223600
Email: africenter@isaaa.org
ISAAA AmeriCenter
Ms. Patricia Meenen, Business Administrator
105 Leland Laboratory
Profiles
199

Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
Phone: (607) 255-1724
Fax: (607) 255-1215
(notify ofﬁce of incoming fax)
Email: americenter@isaaa.org
URL for ISAAA: http://www.isaaa.org
The International Service for the Acquisition of Agri-Biotech
Applications (ISAAA) is an international nonproﬁt organiza-
tion established in 1992 for the purpose of providing technical
information and tools related to agricultural biotechnology to
poor and underserved farmers around the world. The organiza-
tion’s objective is to make possible the transfer of this technol-
ogy to farmers who would otherwise not have access to it as a
way of achieving agricultural sustainability and development.
ISAAA has three centers of operation: SEAsiaCenter, hosted
by the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) in Los
Baños, Laguna, Philippines; ISAAA AfriCenter, hosted by the
International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI) located in
Nairobi, Kenya; and ISAAA AmeriCenter, hosted by Cornell
University, Ithaca, New York. Each center has additional spe-
cialized responsibilities. SEAsiaCenter also serves as the Global
Coordination Ofﬁce and the home of the Global Knowledge
Center on Crop Biotechnology. AfriCenter is involved pri-
marily with research on the tissue culture of bananas and rapid
propagation of multipurpose trees. AmeriCenter also serves
as the administrative and ﬁnancial headquarters for ISAAA
overall.
ISAAA is governed by a board of directors consisting of
experts from around the world who are especially interested in
developing agriculture systems that will help solve world
hunger problems while protecting the natural environment.
Current board members come from Brazil, Canada, China,
India, the Philippines, Singapore, South Africa, the United
Kingdom, and the United States. The organization’s work
200
GMO Food

receives ﬁnancial support from a number of private and
governmental organizations and agencies such as the African
Agricultural Technology Foundation; Association for Strength-
ening Agricultural Research in Eastern and Central Africa;
Bayer CropScience Ag; Cornell University; CropLife Inter-
national; Fondazione Bussolera (Italy); Government of Kenya;
Ibercaja (Spain); International Development Research Center
of Canada; Maharashtra Hybrid Seeds Pvt. Ltd (India);
Monsanto; National Council for Science and Technology
(Kenya); Department of Agriculture (Philippines); Economic
Commission
for
Africa;
United
Nations
Educational,
Scientiﬁc, and Cultural Organization; United States Depart-
ment of Agriculture; U.S. Soybean Export Council; U.S.
Agency for International Development (USAID); and Vibha
Agrotech Pvt. Ltd (India).
ISAAA’s
work
is
divided into four major categories:
Knowledge Sharing Initiative, Technology Transfer Projects,
Impact Assessment of Crop Biotechnology, and Support
Projects. The Knowledge Sharing Initiative was developed pri-
marily in response to requests from policy makers and program
directors in Southeast Asia for ISAAA to develop ways of provid-
ing information about agricultural biotechnology developments
for farmers in their area. That function is now handled primarily
by the Global Knowledge Center on Crop Biotechnology,
which provides information and assistance through technical
articles, reports, updates on developments, and a variety of
useful publications. Among the most important of these is the
Biotech Information Directory, which lists more than 500 links
to research institutes, universities, companies, sources of biotech
information, and other directories speciﬁc to agricultural biotech-
nology and related ﬁelds. Another useful publication is the weekly
Crop Biotech Update, which provides a summary of world devel-
opments in the ﬁeld of agricultural biotechnology. The center
also provides a list of courses, meetings, workshops, and other
events of potential interest to individuals and organizations
interested in agricultural biotechnology.
Profiles
201

ISAAA’s Technology Transfer Projects have had a number of
objectives, such as providing farmers with the tools to do diag-
nostic testing for speciﬁc plan diseases, learning how to develop
transgenic crops with speciﬁc genetic characteristics, making
use of molecular markers in crops, and designing plants
with speciﬁc market applications. Impact studies are research
attempts by ISAAA staff and colleagues to determine the
economic, environmental, and social impact of agricultural bio-
technology in speciﬁc areas. Some examples of studies of this
type are research on the environmental impact of Bt eggplant
in the Philippines, regulatory costs of commercializing papaya
ringspot virus (PRSV) in the Philippines and Indonesia, effects
on farm income and productivity of GM sweet potato in
Kenya, and the economic impact of Bt corn in the Philippines.
The ISAAA Impact Assessment of Crop Biotechnology area
of research involves using skills from the social sciences to mea-
sure the impact of crop biotechnology on factors such as eco-
nomic surplus, agricultural productivity and income, human
health and nutrition, and environmental effects of the technol-
ogy. Previous research has focused on the impact of engineered
papaya, banana, eggplant, corn, and sweet potato crops in areas
such as Kenya, the Philippines, and Indonesia.
ISAAA’s Support Projects are programs conducted with
other agencies (e.g., Cornell University and USAID) to move
GM products along the pipeline from academic research to
the marketplace. One such current program, the Agricultural
Biotechnology Support Project II (ABSP II), is focusing on
ways in which biotechnology products can be commercialized
in east and west Africa, India, Bangladesh, Indonesia, and the
Philippines.
Another of the ISAAA’s invaluable databases is its online
GM Approval Database, which contains information on any
GM crop that has been approved for use in nearly three dozen
countries and the European Union. An interactive tool allows
one, as just one example, to discover that three varieties
of herbicide-tolerant (Roundup Ready) alfalfa are currently
202
GMO Food

approved for use in eight countries around the world. The data-
base also provides detailed information about the nature of the
genetic modiﬁcation that has been used in the plant and other
relevant information about the product.
In addition to its regular print and electronic publications,
ISAAA maintains a very useful blog on its website at http://
isaaablog.blogspot.com/.
John D. Kemp (1940–)
Kemp and Timothy Hall headed a research team that, in 1983,
found a way to insert a gene from one plant, the common
bean (Phaseolus vulgaris), into a second plant, the sunﬂower
(Helianthus annuus), after which the gene was expressed as an
apparently normal part of the sunﬂower’s genome. The experi-
ment is of signiﬁcance because it was the ﬁrst time that the
transfer of genes between two plants as the result of human
intervention had been demonstrated, a procedure that provides
the basis for much of the genetic engineering of plants con-
ducted today. On August 10, 1981, Newsweek magazine ran a
story about Kemp and Hall’s “sunbeam” plant as a harbinger
of the future of plant biotechnology.
John Daniel Kemp was born in Minneapolis, Minnesota, on
January 20, 1940. He attended the University of California
at Los Angeles (UCLA), from which he received his BS in
chemistry in 1962 and his PhD in biochemistry in 1965.
He then remained at UCLA for postdoctoral studies from
1965 to 1968. Upon completing his postdoctoral studies,
Kemp accepted an appointment as assistant professor at the
University of Wisconsin, where he eventually became professor
of plant pathology in 1977. During his tenure at Wisconsin,
Kemp was concurrently a research chemist for the Agricultural
Research Service (ARS) of the U.S. Department of Agriculture
(USDA) and vice president, head of microbiology, acting direc-
tor, and associate director at the Agrigenetics Corporation in
Boulder, Colorado.
Profiles
203

In 1985, Kemp left Wisconsin to become professor of plant
pathology and director of the Plant Genetic Engineering
Laboratory at New Mexico State University in Las Cruces. He
retired from New Mexico State in 2002 and is currently profes-
sor emeritus at the university. Hall’s accomplishment is memo-
rialized today with a plaque at the History of Genetics section
of the Smithsonian Institution, in honor of the ﬁrst plant-to-
plant gene transfer in history.
Steve Lindow (1951–)
Lindow is a pioneer in the study of the ways in which bacteria
are involved in the formation of ice crystals on plants. This pro-
cess is responsible plant death caused by freezing temperatures.
The ability to ﬁnd ways of preventing these so-called ice-
nucleating bacteria from acting on plants provides a mechanism
for allowing those plants to survive low temperatures at which
they would otherwise freeze. This research led to the develop-
ment in the early 1980s of the ﬁrst GM organism to be released
into the environment, an ice-minus bacterium that was spread
on a plot of strawberries. The experiment was conducted in
December 1987 by the biotechnology company Advanced
Genetic Sciences (AGS). Shortly thereafter, a similar experi-
ment was conducted using ice-minus bacteria on potato seed-
lings. Both experiments were regarded as technical successes,
suggesting a promising future for the use of GM bacteria to
increase crop yields. Environmental groups took quite a differ-
ent view, however, expressing concerns about possible harmful
effects on other plants in the test area. Some members of these
groups expressed their concerns by launching a guerilla attack
on two test plots of strawberries and potatoes at Brentwood
and Tule Lake, California, respectively, in 1988. They noted
their objections to the experiments by simply tearing out all
the plants being tested with the ice-minus bacteria.
Steven E. Lindow was born in Portland, Oregon, on May 20,
1951. He attended Oregon State University, in Corvallis, from
204
GMO Food

which he earned a bachelor of science degree in botany in 1973.
He then matriculated at the University of Wisconsin at
Madison, where he was awarded his PhD in plant pathology in
1977. His doctoral thesis dealt with the topic on which he was
eventually to spend most of his academic career, the role of bacte-
ria in the destruction of plants by frost formation.
After completing a year’s postdoctoral research at Wisconsin-
Madison, he accepted an appointment as assistant professor of
plant pathology at the University of California at Berkeley.
He has remained at Berkeley ever since, with promotions to
associate professor in 1983 and full professor in 1989, a post
he continues to hold. The majority of his work has focused on
ice-minus bacteria, a topic on which he has written more than
125 peer-reviewed papers and more than 70 book chapters,
mini-reviews, and full books.
In addition to his academic research, Lindow has been
involved in a variety of professional activities. For example, he
was a member of the U.S. Department of Agriculture Biotech-
nology Research Advisory Committee from 1988 to 1990, the
Environment Protection Agency’s Subcommittee on Mitigation
and Containment of Recombinant Organisms in 1989, the
National Science Foundation Workgroup on Molecular Eco-
logical Methods in 1985, the National Academy of Science
Taskforce on Biological Control Research Needs and Priorities
in Plant/Microbe Interactions in Agriculture in 1988, and the
U.S. Department of Energy Workgroup on Molecular Methods
in Ecology in 1991. He has also served on the Public
and Scientiﬁc Affairs Board of the American Society for
Microbiology (1988–1990); the Honors and Awards committee
(1997–2000), Phyllosphere Microbiology committee (1989–
1992 and 1998–2001), and Epidemiology committee (1995–
1998) of the American Phytopathological Society; and the
Scientiﬁc Board of the International Society for Molecular
Plant-Microbe Interactions (2003 to present). He has also been
organizer or co-organizer on a number of conferences on ice-
nucleating bacteria, including the International Conferences on
Profiles
205

Biological Ice Nucleation held in San Francisco (1982); Flagstaff,
Arizona (1984); Newport, Oregon (1987); Saskatoon, Canada
(1989); and Madison, Wisconsin (1991).
Among Lindow’s many honors are the CIBA/Geigy and
Ruth Allen awards of the American Phytopathological Society,
election as fellow of that society in 1994, election to the
National Academy of Sciences in 1999, the Procter and
Gamble award of the American Society for Microbiology, and
election as fellow to the American Academy of Microbiology
and the American Association for the Advancement of
Science. In 2004, he was given a Distinguished Teaching
Award by the College of Natural Resources at Berkeley.
Mark Lynas (1973–)
Mark Lynas is a journalist, photographer, author, and environ-
mental activist who was actively involved in the anti-GM food
movement in the late 1990s. Lynas remembers that he became
involved in that movement after attending a small meeting of
activists in Brighton led by Jim Thomas, a campaigns director
for Greenpeace. Lynas reports that his ﬁrst reaction to the sto-
ries Thomas had to tell was horror at the things that modern
biotechnology companies were doing to the world’s food sup-
plies. He came to the conclusion, he later said, that “[b]ig cor-
porations were using more chemicals so that they could take
over the food chain.”
He soon became increasingly active in the anti-GMO move-
ment, taking part in “actions” at ﬁelds where new GM crops
were being tested. His protest activities may have reached a
zenith on April 29, 1998, when he took part in a sit-in at
Monsanto’s ofﬁces at High Wycombe, in Buckinghamshire,
England. His role in the action, he said, was that he “cased
the joint, printed the leaﬂets and hired the buses.”
Even at this early point in his career of activism against
GM products, he had begun to have second feelings about his
participation in such campaigns. He reports that he was
206
GMO Food

increasingly aware that his colleagues in protest had a tendency
to ignore the best scientiﬁc evidence about GM products and
hewed to preconceived notions about their effects on human
health and the natural environment. Although he remained
active in the anti-GMO movement for a number of years, he
ﬁnally broke with his previous allies in March 2013. That break
came in an address he made to the annual Oxford Farming
Conference, a meeting of the world’s leading representatives
of the agricultural community. It is regarded as a premier ses-
sion of the members of the agriculture “establishment.” At the
meeting, Lynas read a 5,000-word speech in which he apolo-
gized for having worked so hard in opposition to GM products
and explained that he now realized he was wrong in his under-
standing and interpretation of the work of agricultural biotech-
nology ﬁrms like Monsanto. (It perhaps goes without saying
that Lynas’s speech became the focus of a vigorous exchange
of views between pro- and anti-GM activists.)
Mark Lynas was born in Fiji and then traveled with his fam-
ily to Peru, Spain, and the United Kingdom. He attended the
University of Edinburgh, from which he received his degree in
history and politics. His father was a geologist who worked
on mapping projects for the government, which activity was
responsible for Lynas’s earliest interests in climate-change
issues. He describes a trip to his family’s home in 2000 during
which they looked at photographs taken 20 years earlier, when
his father was mapping on the remote eastern side of the
Cordillera Blanca, Peru’s highest range. The dominant feature
of these photographs was an enormous glacier in one of
the region’s valleys. When his father observed that the glacier
was probably decreasing in size because of global warming,
Lynas decided to set off on a world journey to collect evidence
of the way climate change was affecting Earth features.
In 2002, he completed that journey by returning to the
Cordillera Blanca, where he found that the glacier in his father’s
photographs had completely disappeared. That discovery
only conﬁrmed Lynas’s decision to devote his career to the
Profiles
207

campaign to work for the reduction of greenhouse gases and
further global warming.
The result of that commitment has been a number of
articles, speeches, books, ﬁlms, and other productions that
describe the risks posed by global climate change, the reasons
for that process, and the steps that must be taken to reverse
the process. The most important of those works are his
books High Tide: The Truth about Our Climate Crisis (Picador
2004), in which he provides before-and-after pictures of the
effect of climate change on geographic features, taken during
his 2000–2002 trip around the world; Gem Carbon Counter
(Collins 2007), a resource that shows how one can calculate
one’s own carbon footprint and how it can be changed; Six
Degrees: Our Future on a Hotter Planet (National Geographic
2007), in which Lynas provides verbal and photographic
descriptions of the effects of one-, two-, three-, four-, ﬁve-,
and six-degree increases in the planet’s annual average tempera-
ture; and The God Species: Saving the Planet in the Age of
Humans (National Geographic 2011), in which he describes
the threat that human life now poses to other plants and
animals on Earth.
In addition to his books, Lynas has contributed to a collec-
tion of essays on environmental issues, Fragile Earth: Views of
a Changing World (Collins 2006); been involved in the produc-
tion of a ﬁlm called The Age of Stupid, set in 2055 and showing
the long-term effects of global climate change; and contributed
regularly to a number of major newspapers and magazines,
including Ecologist, Geographical, Granta, the Guardian New
Statesman, and the Observer.
(Quotations in this article are taken from Will Storr, “Mark
Lynas: Truth, Treachery and GM Food,” Guardian, http://
www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/mar/09/mark-lynas
-truth-treachery-gm, accessed on December 9, 2013, and
Mark Lynas, “Vanishing Worlds,” Guardian, http://www
.theguardian.com/society/2004/mar/31/environment.environment,
accessed on December 9, 2013.)
208
GMO Food

Monsanto
800 N. Lindbergh Blvd.
St. Louis, MO 63167
Phone: (314) 694-1000
Email: http://www.monsanto.com/whoweare/Pages/contact-us.aspx
URL: http://www.monsanto.com/
Monsanto is a large, publicly traded, multinational chemical
and agricultural biotechnology company. Its name is probably
more closely associated with research on and the development
of agricultural biotechnology products of any company in the
world. It is seen by many people as having made enormous con-
tributions to the development of new agricultural products and,
therefore, contributing to the solution of some of the world’s
most serious problems (e.g., widespread hunger). Other people
argue that it has caused more problems for the world’s agricul-
tural systems and for human nutrition than any existing corpo-
ration. The company’s record is so extensive and expansive that
no such generalized statement can reasonably summarize its
historic and current achievements.
The Monsanto Company was founded in 1901 by John
Francis Queeny, a native of Chicago who had been working in
the pharmaceutical industry since the age of 12. Queeny took
his wife’s maiden name as the name for his new company. The
ﬁrst product made by the company was saccharin, a widely popu-
lar artiﬁcial sweetener, which it sold to the Coca-Cola company
and to the manufacturers of canned food products. Over the
years, the company diversiﬁed and expanded the variety of prod-
ucts it manufactured, adding the raw material salicylic acid,
aspirin, and vanillin, as well as a number of chemicals used in
the processing of natural rubber. It later added one of the most
important of all raw chemicals for industrial processes, sulfuric
acid, as well as a class of very popular industrial chemicals known
as the polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), which were later to be
associated with a variety of human health problems.
Profiles
209

Through a series of mergers and acquisitions, and through its
own research, Monsanto eventually added the personnel, tech-
nology, and facilities to extend even further the variety of prod-
ucts it made, which eventually include such items as light-
emitting diodes (LEDs), artiﬁcial dopamine (a drug used to
treat Parkinson’s disease), acetic acid (an essential raw material
for a variety of industrial chemical syntheses), and AstroTurf
(a plastic material used on athletic ﬁelds, home lawns, and other
settings in place of natural grass).
In the early 1980s, Monsanto began to focus on the develop-
ment and production of GM seeds, crops, and foods. A key step
in this decision was the purchase of an agricultural biotechnol-
ogy company called Agracetus (founded in 1981 under the
name Cetus). Agracetus had focused on the development of
technology for the production of genetically transformed
organisms (including the production of a “gene gun” used to
ﬁre transformed genes into host cells). Agracetus also developed
the ﬁrst successful genetically engineered crop, Roundup Ready
soybean, which it made available commercially in 1991. Today,
the Agracetus Campus of the Monsanto Company is located on
a 4.5-acre site in Middleton, Wisconsin, with a staff of more
than 21,000 employees.
Agracetus is only one of many Monsanto subsidiaries.
Other specialized divisions are Asgrow, a seed production and
marketing company specializing in research on soybeans,
maize, and sorghum; Calgene, specializing in herbicide-
tolerant and insect-resistant crops; DeKalb Genetics, the
world’s second largest seed company; First Line Seed, which
sells soybean seeds primarily; EID Parry, an Indian producer
of cotton seeds; Monsoy, the largest producer and seller of soy-
bean seeds in Brazil; and Plant Breeding International
Cambridge, Ltd, a British ﬁrm that specializes in research on
grass seeds, potatoes, barley, wheat, and rapeseed. Monsanto’s
revenue for all its operations in 2013 was $14.9 billion.
The controversy over Monsanto’s activities is too complex to
be discussed in this short article. Two pieces of datum reﬂect
210
GMO Food

the range of this controversy. In 2009, the business journal
Forbes named Monsanto its Company of the Year for its enor-
mous success during a period of economic recession in the
United States and the world (see http://www.forbes.com/
forbes/2010/0118/americas-best-company-10-gmos-dupont-planet
-versus-monsanto.html). Only a year later, the Swiss company
Covalence, which ranks companies on the basis of their business
ethics, placed Monsanto last on its list of 581 international cor-
porations (see http://web.archive.org/web/20100610062335/http://
www.covalence.ch/index.php/ethical-rankings/across-sectors).
Non-GMO Project
1200 Harris Ave., Suite #305
Bellingham, WA 98225
Phone: (877) 358-9240
Fax: (866) 272-8710
Email: info@nongmoproject.org
URL: http://www.nongmoproject.org
The Non-GMO Project was born in 2005, when two grocery
stores, The Natural Grocery Company in Berkeley, California,
and The Big Carrot Natural Food Market in Toronto, Canada,
combined to develop a standard deﬁnition for GM foods that
could be used in their own buying and selling activities. This
move grew out of a common experience in both stores in which
customers were increasingly interested in knowing which prod-
ucts contained GM elements and which did not. The stores both
discovered that responding to customers’ concerns was especially
difﬁcult because there was no widely accepted meaning as to what
it meant for a product to be a GMO food. The new organization
eventually accomplished its goal through a cooperative effort with
the Global ID Group, whose work is involved with the testing
and certiﬁcation of non-GMO foods.
Identiﬁcation and promotion of foods that do not contain
GM components is still a major part of the Non-GMO
Profiles
211

Project’s work. Its website, for example, provides lists of food
products, restaurants, and retailers who guarantee that all their
products are completely natural and contain no GM compo-
nents. A visitor to the website can click on the appropriate but-
ton and ﬁnd extensive lists of businesses in each category that it
can trust as a supplier of non-GMO products. The organization
also has a veriﬁcation process in place that allows a food sup-
plier, restaurant, or food retailer to apply for approval as a
non-GMO industry.
Another aspect of the Non-GMO Project’s work is commu-
nity involvement. Individuals and businesses are encouraged to
become involved in the effort to identify and distinguish GM
foods in a variety of ways, ranging from supplying recipes that
do not involve the use of GM products to participation in the
Non-GMO month activities to organizing or participating
in a variety of activities designed to promote the goals of the
Non-GMO Project.
Retailers are a special target of the organization’s activities
also. The Retailer Toolkit includes activities such as a quarterly
newsletter with articles relevant to the sale of non-GM foods by
retailers; webinars designed speciﬁcally for retailers interested in
handling non-GM foods; so-called shelf talkers, which are tags
that highlight the availability on shelves of foods that contain
no GM components; a FAQ trifold that contains basic facts
about GM foods in a brightly illustrated and interesting format;
a statement of policies about non-GMO food products; and a
plan for connected retailers with the parent organization and
with each other.
Non-GMO Project also has a special outreach to members
of the food industry, whom it works with and encourages to
promote the production and distribution of non-GM foods.
Access to the food industry page on the organization’s website
is password protected, allowing direct access from a speciﬁc
industry member directly to the organization itself.
The issue of food labeling is also a matter of major concern
to the organization. It provides information on the status of
212
GMO Food

current efforts throughout the United States to require the
labeling of GM foods and food products, and it offers sugges-
tions and materials for use by individuals who are interested
in participating in the food labeling campaign in their own state
and community.
The News and Events section of the organization’s website
provides a guide to forthcoming events at restaurants, food sup-
pliers, and food producers associated with the organization.
A recent listing of events, for example, mentioned the ofﬁcial
veriﬁcation recently received by a bakery, approval of certain
speciﬁc non-GMO foods at another bakery, and the awarding
of a seal of approval for its products to a food supplement
company.
Organic Consumers Association
6771 South Silver Hill Dr.
Finland, MN 55603
Phone: (218) 226-4164
Fax: (218) 353-7652
Email: http://www.organicconsumers.org/aboutus.cfm#contact
URL: http://www.organicconsumers.org/
The Organic Consumers Association (OCA) is a nonproﬁt,
online, grassroots, public interest 501(c)3 organization whose
mission is to promote health, justice, and sustainability. The
organization was founded in 1998 in response to a decision
by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) to establish a
set of regulations for organic food to which many food produc-
ers objected. A number of growers, distributors, and consumers
of organic foods concluded that the proposed USDA regula-
tions would dramatically degrade the quality of products sold
under the rubric of “organic,” and they organized a massive
protest that produced more than 280,000 letters and emails
complaining about the USDA decision. The organization has
continued to grow since then and now claims a worldwide
Profiles
213

membership of over 850,000 individuals. Included among
these members are thousands of natural food and organic gro-
cery stores, markets, and other retail outlets, as well as produc-
ers and consumers of such products. Some of the other
organizations afﬁliated with OCA are the National Coalition
against the Misuse of Pesticides, Consumers Union, Native
Forest Council of Oregon, Ashland Community Food Store
(Ashland, Oregon), Network for Safe & Secure Food and
Environment (Japan), Family Farm Defenders of Wisconsin,
and Research Foundation for Science, Technology, & Natural
Resource Policy (India).
A major feature of OCA’s program is a six-point Organic
Agenda 2005–2015 that calls for
1. The conversion of American agriculture to at least
30 percent organic products by 2015
2. A free trade approach to the distribution of food, in con-
trast to the existing system controlled by large multina-
tional corporations
3. A global moratorium on genetically engineered crops and
foods
4. A phase-out of the most dangerous industrial agriculture
and factory farming practices
5. Universal health care for all Americans, with an emphasis
on better nutrition, preventive health care, and wellness
programs
6. Energy independence with vastly increased emphasis on the
use of alternative and renewable energy sources
A major feature of OCA’s work is its Take Action program,
in which the organization encourages members and friends to
become involved in speciﬁc activities related to its overall mis-
sion. Some recent Take Action alerts involved opposition to a
federal bill that would prohibit state anti-GMO laws and
214
GMO Food

regulations; letter writing to two U.S. senators expressing
opposition to voluntary (but not mandatory) labeling of GM
foods; action to have the use of the antibiotic streptomycin
banned from use with organic apples and pears; speaking out
against membership of certain organizations and individuals in
the Grocery Manufacturers Association (GMA), which has
been involved in actions against state laws for the labeling of
GM products; letter writing to the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) in opposition to the approval of GM
foods; lobbying of national representatives and senators in
opposition to the proposed Farmers Assurance Provision, also
known by its opponents as the Monsanto Protection Act; and
expressions of opposition to new trade bills that are in conﬂict
with OCA’s stand on free trade.
The OCA website is also a gold mine of information on cur-
rent events worldwide related to organic farming and related
issues. In a recent posting, that website contained feature stories
on the French government’s initiative to double land devoted
to organic farming by 2017, the signing of a bill prohibiting
the farming of GM crops on the Big Island of Hawaii, the
advantages of grass-fed food animals over “factory-farmed” ani-
mals, the latest news on a controversial study on the health
effects of GM food by Belgian researchers Gilles Eric Séralini,
and recommendations for a variety of foods with supposedly
signiﬁcant nutritional advantages, such as cinnamon, nutmeg,
and kale.
The OCA website also has a very extensive listing of “green”
businesses, ranging from buying clubs and organic snacks to
holistic dentists and chiropractors to outdoor furniture and appli-
ances. For individuals with an interest in organic crops and foods,
the association also provides a variety of electronic newsletter with
current news about events in the ﬁeld, Organic Bytes (http://www
.organicconsumers.org/organicbytes.cfm).
A section of the website is also a useful resource for a variety
of topics relating to genetic engineering, such as pages on
Profiles
215

rBGH (recombinant bovine growth hormone), the Millions
against Monsanto campaign, issues related to cloning and pat-
enting of life forms, the nature and applications of nanotech-
nology, progress in the development of GM wheat, and
research on GM ﬁsh.
Ingo Potrykus (1933–)
Nutrition experts recommend a varied diet consisting of vegeta-
bles and fruits, as well as animal and dairy products for the
maintenance of good health. For millions of people around
the world, however, such a diet is next to impossible. Many of
those people rely almost entirely on a restricted diet of grains,
such as corn or rice, with a limited supply of other nutritional
foods. Lacking the complete diet needed to maintain good
health, many people are susceptible to nutritional disorders, as
well as being at increased risk for infectious diseases. These
health problems can lead to a number of disabling and even
fatal disorders that account for high morbidity and mortality
rates in developing countries around the world.
Researchers have been working for decades on ways of
resolving this basic problem of world nutrition. One of the
most promising solutions devised thus far has been the inven-
tion of GM foods that contain nutrients not found in the nor-
mal basic diet of individuals who cannot afford or do not have
access to a diet of healthy natural foods. A leader in this
researcher has long been Ingo Potrykus, a coinventor, with
German biologist Peter Beyer, of the GM food known as
Golden Rice. Golden Rice is a form of the crop that has been
engineered to contain the provitamin known as β-carotene, or
provitamin A. A provitamin is a substance that is converted
within the human body into the vitamin of the same name.
Thus, provitamin A is converted in the body to vitamin A, a
substance known to strengthen the human immune system in
general and, more speciﬁcally, to protect against diseases of
the eye that can result in blindness. According to some
216
GMO Food

estimates, as many as a half-million children worldwide die
each year as a result of vitamin A deﬁciency disorders. By genet-
ically modifying the food that many of those children eat as a
cornerstone of their daily diets—rice—Potrykus and Beyer cre-
ated a mechanism for saving hundreds of thousands of lives
each year. The presence of the orange-colored β-carotene in
the engineered rice accounts for the golden color of the
product, and hence its name.
Ingo Potrykus was born in Hirschberg im Riesengebirge,
Germany, on December 5, 1933. He attended the universities
of Erlangen and Cologne, where he studied biochemistry, bot-
any, genetics, philosophy, physical education, and zoology.
He received his PhD in plant genetics from the Max Planck
Institute for Plant Breeding Research in Cologne in 1968.
He then accepted an appointment as assistant professor at
the Institute of Plant Physiology at Stuttgart–Hohenheim,
where he served from 1970 to 1974 before becoming group
leader at the Max Planck Institute for Genetic at Ladenburg–
Heidelberg from 1974 to 1976. He then assumed a similar post
at the Friedrich Miescher Institute in Basel, Switzerland, from
1976 to 1986. During his stay in Basel, Potrykus received his
habilitation in botany from the University of Basel (1982).
The habilitation degree is the highest honor given to an aca-
demic in Europe and some other parts of the world. It is
awarded to a person with a PhD degree who has extended his
or her research to a higher level that leads to life-long tenured
positions in his or her ﬁeld. In 1986, Potrykus received such
an appointment when he was named full professor of plant sci-
ences at the Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zürich
(ETH, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology), a post he held
until his retirement in 1999.
Potrykus and Beyer began their research on Golden Rice in
the late 1980s and received a grant from the Rockefeller
Foundation in 1993 to carry out a seven-year project on the
development of the product. Since his retirement in 1999,
Potrykus has continued to work on the engineered crop
Profiles
217

through the International Humanitarian Golden Rice Board,
where he has served as president. His objective, and that of
the board, is to make available the fruits of their research on
Golden Rice to people living in impoverished nations where
rice is the primary component of a person’s diet, such
as China, India, Vietnam, Bangladesh, Indonesia, and the
Philippines.
Potrykus has authored more than 340 scientiﬁc papers on
Golden Rice and been awarded 30 patents for the product.
He has received numerous awards for his work, including
the Kumho Science International Award in Plant Molecular
Biology and Biotechnology (2000), the American Society of
Plant Biologists Leadership in Science Public Service Award
(2001), the Crop Science of America President’s Award and
European Culture Award in Science (2002), and the Bertebos
Prize of the Royal Swedish Academy of Agriculture and
Forestry (2007). He was also given an honorary doctorate by
the Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences in 2002 and
by the University of Freiburg in 2007. He was also named the
most inﬂuential scientist in the area of agricultural, industrial,
and environmental biotechnology for the decade 1995–2005
by the readers of the journal Nature Biotechnology in 2006 and
was featured on the cover of Time magazine on July 31, 2000,
as someone whose work could “save a million kids a year.”
Potrykus has also been honored by election to a number of
prestigious societies, including Academia Europaea, the Swiss
Academy of Technical Sciences, the Hungarian Academy of
Sciences, Academia Bibliotheca Alexandria, the Pontiﬁcal
Academy of Sciences, and the World Technology Network.
Maxine Singer (1931–)
In a biographical sketch of Singer, the National Library of
Medicine has noted that “[d]uring the early 1970s, as debate
over the environmental and health risks of the new technology
of gene recombination grew ever more heated, Maxine Singer
218
GMO Food

was a leading voice of prudence, patience, and dedication to
balancing scientiﬁc principles and public welfare.” The period
called for just such an outlook on new research on genetic engi-
neering. Only a few years earlier, the work of Arthur Kornberg,
Gobind Khorana, Paul Berg, Herbert Boyer, Stanley N.
Cohen, and others had shown that it was possible to modify
the DNA of an organism, opening a new line of research that
scientists could hardly have imagined only a few decades earlier.
And it was clear to those scientists that the modiﬁcations they
were now able to make could potentially produce revolutionary
changes in human society. They were confronted with the chal-
lenge of ﬁnding ways of going forward with this research, gain-
ing the greatest amount of new information from it, without
placing human health or the natural environment at risk.
It was a difﬁcult and challenging balancing act on which
Singer was to make as important contributions as anyone else
in the ﬁeld.
Maxine Frank Singer was born in New York City on
February 15, 1931, to Henrietta (née Perlowitz) Frank, a hospi-
tal admissions ofﬁcer, children’s camp director, and model, and
Hyman Frank, an attorney. She attended public schools in
Brooklyn, where she developed an interest in science early in
life. She has credited her high school chemistry teacher with
encouraging her to continue her studies in the ﬁeld when she
matriculated at Swarthmore College, from which she received
her bachelor’s degree in 1952. Singer then continued her stud-
ies at Yale University, which granted her a PhD in biochemistry
in 1957. Although her doctoral studies at Yale focused on
protein chemistry, she soon became fascinated by the newly
important subject of nucleic acids. (Watson and Crick had
announced the chemical structure of the DNA molecule in
1953.)
Upon graduation, Singer looked for a laboratory where she
could pursue her own research on nucleic acids. One of the
few options then available in the United States was the labora-
tory run by Leon Heppel at the National Institutes of Health
Profiles
219

(NIH) at Bethesda, Maryland. Heppel hired Singer to join his
team at the laboratory of biochemistry in the National
Institute of Arthritis and Metabolic Diseases (later renamed
the National Institute of Arthritis, Metabolism, and Digestive
Diseases [NIAMDD]). Singer was hired as a postdoctoral
fellow in spite of the fact that she had not ofﬁcially received
her doctorate from Yale. Two years later, she was appointed
to a regular full-time position at NIAMDD, where she
remained until 1974.
The mid-1970s were a period of discussion and debate about
the potential impacts of recombinant DNA research on human
health and the natural environment. That debate reached
a critical point at a 1973 session of the annual Gordon
Conference, a highly regarded series of meetings on current sci-
entiﬁc topics that always attracts leaders in the ﬁeld of physical,
biological, mathematical, and social sciences. Singer cochaired a
session on current research on DNA, and attendees at the ses-
sion discussed possible social consequences of this line of
research. They recommended writing a letter that would be
published in the journal Science calling for a meeting of
researchers in the ﬁeld to get closer attention to this problem.
Singer was one of the authors and signers of that letter, and
she went on to become one of the organizers of that meeting,
the Asilomar Conference on Recombinant DNA, held at
Asilomar State Park, California, in February 1975.
In 1974, Singer left NIAMDD to accept a new position at
NIH as chief of the Section on Nucleic Acid Enzymology at
the Division of Cancer Biology and Diagnosis (DCBD) at the
National Cancer Institute (NCI). Six years later, she was pro-
moted to chief of the DCBD Laboratory of Biochemistry, a
post she held until 1988. She then accepted appointment as
president of the Carnegie Institution, one of the nation’s
most prestigious research institutions, in Washington, DC.
She retired from Carnegie in 2002. During her tenure at
Carnegie, she retained her afﬁliation with NCI, where she
continued her research on human genetics.
220
GMO Food

Singer’s work has been recognized with a number of
awards and honors. She has been given honorary degrees by
Brandeis University, Dartmouth College, Harvard University,
New York University, Swarthmore College, the Weizmann
Institute of Science, Williams College, and Yale University.
She was elected to the American Academy of Arts and
Sciences in 1978, the National Academy of Sciences in 1979,
and the Pontiﬁcal Academy of Sciences in 1986. She was given
the Distinguished Presidential Rank Award in 1988 by
President Ronald Reagan and the National Medal of Science
in 1992 by President Bill Clinton. The citation accompanying
the National Medal noted that it was given for Singer’s “out-
standing scientiﬁc accomplishments and her deep concern for
the societal responsibility of the scientist.”
Singer married fellow research Daniel Morris Singer in 1952.
They have four grown children.
Marc van Montagu (1933–)
GM organisms are synthesized by inserting the DNA from
some organism, or artiﬁcially produced DNA, into the cells of
a host organism. Under the proper conditions, DNA in the
host cell takes up the introduced DNA to form a hybrid prod-
uct that consists of the host DNA and introduced DNA. A
key challenge faced by genetic researchers, then, is to ﬁnd a
way of producing this hybrid DNA by cutting the host DNA
and pasting in the foreign DNA.
During the 1970s, a number of research teams around
the world were attempting to solve this problem. In the early
1980s, a breakthrough occurred almost simultaneously in two
laboratories, one led by Mary-Dell Chilton, originally at the
University of Washington, and Marc van Montagu, then at
the University of Ghent, in Belgium. These discoveries eventu-
ally became the basis for the technology by which the vast
majority of genetically engineered organisms are produced
today.
Profiles
221

Marc van Montagu was born in Ghent, Belgium, on
November 10, 1933. He attended Ghent University, from which
he received his MSc in chemistry and organic chemistry in 1955
and his PhD in organic chemistry and biochemistry in 1965.
During the period from 1956 to 1960, van Montagu worked as
director of the Bureau of Studies at the Technical School for the
Nuclear Industry. Over his academic career, van Montagu di-
vided his time among three academic appointments, as part-
time professor at the Free University of Brussels (until 1989), full
professor of molecular genetics at the University of Ghent (until
1999), and director of the Department of Genetics at the
Flanders Institute of Biochemistry (until 1999).
In 1982, van Montagu drew on his experience with and dis-
coveries in genetic engineering to create a new company, Plant
Genetics Systems, Inc. (PGS), to bring those discoveries into
commercial realization. The company was a joint venture
between European investors and Advanced Genetic Systems, of
Oakland, California. Van Montagu served as scientiﬁc director
and a member of the board of directors of PGS until 1996.
PGS was acquired by the German company AgroEvo in 1995
and was later absorbed by the pharmaceutical giant Novartis. In
1998, van Montagu founded a second biotechnology company,
CropDesign, which was acquired in 1996 by BASF Plant Science.
Throughout his career, van Montagu has held a number of
additional scientiﬁc research and consulting posts that include
chair of the Scientiﬁc Advisory Committee of the Danforth
Center, St. Louis; member of the Science Board of the
Alellyx corporation, São Paulo; biotechnology advisor to the
International Center for Agriculture Research in Dry and Arid
Areas (ICARDA), Aleppo, Syria; member of the Board of
Governors and of the Scientiﬁc Advisory Board of the
Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel; member of
the Science Advisory Committee of the Institute of Molecular
Biology and Biotechnology, Heraklion, Crete; member of the
International Advisory Board at King Abdulaziz University,
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia; member of the Board of Directors of
222
GMO Food

the Avesthagen biotechnology company, Bangalore, India;
and scientiﬁc advisor to the biotechnology ﬁrms Tibotech
(Belgium) and Extracta (Brazil).
Van Montagu has been honored with a number of awards
and prizes, including the Theodor Bücher Medal of the
Federation
of European
Biochemical
Societies; Genome
Valley Excellence Award, presented by BioAsia, India; the
Rank Prize for Nutrition; the IBM-Europe Prize; the Charles
Leopold Mayer Prize of the Academy of Sciences, France; the
Dr. A. de Leeuw–Damry–Bourlart Prize of the Belgian
National Fund for Scientiﬁc Research; the Japan Prize; and
the World Food Prize, in 2013. The last of these awards is
widely considered to be one of the highest honors awarded to
food scientists in the world, accompanied by a $250,000 cash
award (shared among three winners in 2013). He has been
elected to a number of honorary societies, including the U.S.
National Academy of Sciences, Belgian Royal Academy of
Sciences, Academia Europea, Agricultural Academy of Russia,
Academy of Engineering of Sweden, Agricultural Academy of
France, Royal Academy of Overseas Sciences, Italian Academy
of Sciences dei XL, American Academy of Microbiology,
and Third World Academy of Sciences. He has been awar-
ded honorary doctorates by the universities of Helsinki,
Compiegne, Rio de Janeiro, Liege, Brussels, Habana, and Soﬁa.
Although ofﬁcially retired from his academic appointments
in 1999, van Montagu has remained active in GM food-
related work. In 2000, for example, he founded the Institute
of Plant Biotechnology Outreach to assist developing countries
with the implementation of latest research in the genetic engi-
neering of organisms and to encourage research in the ﬁeld in
their own countries.
World Health Organization
Avenue Appia 20
1211 Geneva 27
Profiles
223

Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 791 21 11
Fax: +41 22 791 31 11
Email: http://www.who.int/about/contact_form/en/index.html
URL: http://www.who.int
The World Health Organization (WHO) is a division of the
United Nations, the ﬁrst specialized agency of the United
Nations created during its founding in San Francisco in
July 1946. All 61 nations present at that conference signed
not only the founding documents of the United Nations but
also the new constitution of the WHO. The organization for-
mally became operational on April 7, 1948, also designated as
the ﬁrst World Health Day, after the 26th member state signed
the ratiﬁcation documents for the organization.
WHO currently consists of 194 member states, each of
whom sends delegates to the World Health Assembly, which
meets yearly to set overall policy for the group. That policy is
carried out on a day-to-day basis by a director-general and
34-member executive board, chosen by the assembly. Much
of the ongoing work of the organization is carried out through
WHO’s regional ofﬁces in the Brazzaville, Congo (Africa),
Washington, DC (Americas), Cairo (Eastern Mediterranean),
Copenhagen (Europe), New Delhi (Southeast Asia), and
Manila (Western Paciﬁc). The agency’s home ofﬁce is in
Geneva.
Every six years, WHO establishes a global health plan that
focuses on some large-scale health issue to which the organiza-
tion will give major attention over the ensuing period. For the
period 2008–2013, that health plan was directed at the preven-
tion and control of four noncommunicable diseases—cardio-
vascular diseases, diabetes, cancers, and chronic respiratory
diseases—and four shared risk factors—tobacco use, physical
inactivity, unhealthy diets, and the harmful use of alcohol (see
http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2009/9789241597418
_eng.pdf). For the period 2014–2019, the health plan focused
224
GMO Food

on the prevention of avoidable blindness and visual impair-
ment (see http://www.who.int/blindness/Zerodraftactionplan
2014-19.pdf).
In addition to this single large-scale effort, WHO has a
myriad number of speciﬁc health problems to which it devotes
its energy and with which it works in partnership with member
states. Some of those topics are accountability for women’s
and children’s health, African Programme for Onchocerciasis
Control, aging and life course, blood products and related
biologicals, blood transfusion safety, child growth standards,
children’s environmental health, climate change and human
health, diagnostic imaging, dracunculiasis, essential medicines
for children, food safety, gender, women and health, health
and human rights, HIV/AIDS, household water treatment
and safe storage, immunization ﬁnancing, leprosy elimination,
malaria, occupational health, prevention of deafness and hear-
ing impairment, social determinants of health, transplantation,
vaccine safety, and water sanitation and health. The organiza-
tion devotes a section of its website to information about bio-
technology, which includes information on GM foods and the
controversy that surrounds their use and labeling.
One of WHO’s most important functions is the production
of a large range of publications on virtually every possible health
topic. These publications are led by a group of peer-reviewed
and specialized journals in health science that include the
monthly journal, Bulletin of the World Health Organization;
the Weekly Epidemiological Record; the Eastern Mediterranean
Health Journal; the WHO South-East Asia Journal of Public
Health; Western Paciﬁc Surveillance and Response; and WHO
Drug Information. Publications also include reports and refer-
ence books on a wide range of health topics, such as the annual
World Health Report, a document that summarizes the status of
health status in member nations; World Health Statistics, an
annual compilation of data from the organization’s member
states; International Travel and Health, a publication on health
risks for international travelers, vaccination requirements, and
Profiles
225

precautions to take; International Health Regulations, a listing of
public health regulations that are legally binding on WHO
member states; The International Classiﬁcation of Diseases, the
international standard diagnostic classiﬁcation for epidemio-
logical and health management purposes; and International
Pharmacopoeia, a collection of quality speciﬁcations for phar-
maceutical substances and dosage forms. WHO also publishes
an extensive collection of reports, reviews, statistical informa-
tion, guidelines, and other documents for each of its six regions.
A complete list of all WHO publications is available on
the organization’s website at http://apps.who.int/bookorders/
anglais/home1.jsp?sesslan=1.
WHO also collects, collates, archives, and distributes statisti-
cal information on virtually every health issue of concern today.
These data cover topics such as mortality and morbidity esti-
mates, health systems, the health workforce, health ﬁnancing,
noncommunicable diseases, infectious diseases, road safety,
substance abuse, and women’s health issues.
226
GMO Food



5
Data and Documents
Introduction
One can learn a great deal about the history, background, and
current issues related to genetically modiﬁed (GM) foods by
examining the documentary history of that subject. This chap-
ter provides brief excerpts from a number of laws, regulations,
court cases, reports, and other documents dealing with GM
foods. The last part of the chapter also provides some interest-
ing statistical data about GM foods.
Data
229
Vernon Hugh Bowman, a 75-year-old Indiana soybean farmer, speaks with
reporters outside the Supreme Court in Washington. On May 13, 2013, the
Supreme Court said that the Indiana farmer violated Monsanto Co.’s pat-
ents on soybean seeds resistant to its weed-killer. Bowman had been grow-
ing the beans without buying new seeds from the corporation. (AP Photo/
J. Scott Applewhite)
Table 5.1
Genetically Engineered Crops in the United States, 2000–2013
(percent of all planted crop; all genetically engineered varieties)
As of 2013, three of the most important crops in the United States, cotton,
corn, and soybeans, have been planted primarily in the form of genetically
engineered seeds. This table shows the increase in the use of GM seeds in the
United States between 2000 and 2013.
Year
Corn
Cotton
Soybeans
2000
25
61
54
2001
26
69
68
2002
34
71
75
(continued )

230
GMO Food
Table 5.1
(continued )
Year
Corn
Cotton
Soybeans
2003
40
73
81
2004
47
76
85
2005
52
79
87
2006
61
83
89
2007
73
87
91
2008
80
86
92
2009
85
88
91
2010
86
93
93
2011
88
90
94
2012
88
94
93
2013
90
90
93
Source: “Genetically Engineered Varieties of Corn, Upland Cotton, and Soybeans,
by State and for the Unites States, 2000–13.” USDA Economic Research Service.
http://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/adoption-of-genetically-engineered-crops
-in-the-us.aspx#.Ug0OJZLCZ8F. Accessed on August 15, 2013.
Table 5.2
Laws and Regulations on Genetically Modiﬁed Crops and Foods
No federal laws exist to prohibit the production, culturing, planting, growth,
processing, sale, or other use of GM products in the United States. However, a
number of state and local jurisdictions have adopted various forms of regu-
lation to limit or promote the use of such products. This table summarizes
most of those laws and regulations as of late 2013.
State
Laws and/or Regulations
Arkansas
Restrictions on production, sale, transport, use, storing,
harvesting, and so on of certain types of GM rice
California
Marin county: GM crops prohibited within county
Mendocino county: GM crops prohibited within county
Santa Cruz county: Moratorium on propagation and growing of
GM crops within county
Trinity county: GM crops prohibited within county
City of Arcata: GM crops prohibited within city
City of Point Arena: GM crops prohibited within city
Colorado
City of Boulder: GM crops prohibited on city land
Florida
Restrictions on transport and use of Bt cotton within the state
Permit required for culturing of transgenic ﬁsh
Hawaii
Bt cotton banned in the state
Idaho
GM plants and plant pests prohibited within state
(continued )

Data and Documents
231
Table 5.2
(continued )
State
Laws and/or Regulations
Indiana
Seed suppliers prohibited from entering private farm land to test
for GM products
Maine
Town of Montville: GMO-free zone (no GM seeds permitted)
Maryland
Permit required for the raising of GM ﬁsh in the state
Michigan
Raising of GM ﬁsh prohibited in state
Minnesota
Permit required for the release of GM organisms in the state
Permit required for ﬁeld experiments with GM pesticides
Mississippi
Permit required for cultivation of GM ﬁsh in the state
Missouri
Control on the planting, culturing, sale, and so on of GM rice in
the state
Nebraska
Seed suppliers prohibited from entering private farm land to test
for GM products
Oregon
GM ﬁsh may not be released in areas where they will compete
with native ﬁsh
Bentgrass Control Area established with separation between
native and GM varieties of the crop
South Dakota
Seed suppliers prohibited from entering private farm land to test
for GM products
Washington
San Juan county: GM crops prohibited within county
Creation of Canola Control Areas to ensure separation of native
and GM forms of the crop
Transgenic ﬁsh banned from state
Wisconsin
Permit required for the release of GM organisms into the
environment
Note: The following states have passed laws prohibiting local jurisdictions from
adopting laws controlling one or another aspect of the planting, growth, cultivation,
transport, sale, and other use of GM organisms: Arizona, Florida, Georgia, Idaho,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, South
Dakota, Texas, and West Virginia.
Source: Adapted from “State/Local Efforts to Control GMOs.” Organic Consumers
Association. http://www.organicconsumers.org/articles/article_27247.cfm. Accessed
on August 20, 2013.

232
GMO Food
Table 5.3
Characteristics of Permits on Genetically Modiﬁed Crops Issued
by Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
One component of the U.S. system for regulating GM crops involves approval
by the U.S. Department of Agriculture Animal and Plant Health Inspection
Service (APHIS) for the release of GMOs into the environment. Data on the
types of permits approved provide a good overview of the types of GM
products that are being tested or developed in the United States.
Number of Releases Approved by APHIS, 1985–2013
Year
Number of Approved Releases
1985
4
1986
11
1987
11
1988
16
1989
30
1990
51
1991
90
1992
160
1993
301
1994
579
1995
711
1996
612
1997
763
1998
1,071
1999
983
2000
925
2001
1,083
2002
1,194
2003
813
2004
893
2005
955
2006
865
2007
932
2008
871
2009
751
2010
660
2011
792
2012
665
2013 (as of November 1, 2013)
537
(continued )

Data and Documents
233
Table 5.3
(continued )
Release Counts for 10 Most Regulated Products
Product
Number of Approved Releases
Corn
7,779
Soybean
2,225
Cotton
1,104
Potato
904
Tomato
688
Wheat
485
Alfalfa
452
Tobacco
427
Rapeseed
310
Rice
294
Number of Approved Releases by Modiﬁed Trait
Trait
Number of Approved Releases
Herbicide tolerance
6,772
Agronomic property1
5,293
Product quality
4,898
Insect resistance
4,809
Other
1,986
Marker gene
1,892
Virus resistance
1,425
Fungal resistance
1,191
Bacterial resistance
224
Nematode resistance
149
1Such as tolerance to cold, soil salinity, stress, drought, or pests.
Top 10 Permit Holders
Permit Holder
Number of Permits
Monsanto
6,782
Pioneer Hi-Bred International
1,085
Syngenta
566
Dow Agrosciences
400
U.S. Department of Agriculture
370
AgrEvo
326
Du Pont
320
ArborGen
311
Bayer CropScience
260
Seminis Vegetable Seeds
210
(continued )

234
GMO Food
Table 5.3
(continued )
Ten Most Frequent Locations for Release of GMO
State
Number of Permits
Hawaii
3,057
Illinois
2,937
Puerto Rico
2,931
Iowa
2,639
California
1,869
Indiana
1,504
Nebraska
1,832
Minnesota
1,183
Wisconsin
1,027
Florida
1,022
Source: All data from Release Summary Data and Charts (1987 to Present).
Information Systems for Biotechnology. Virginia Tech University. http://www.isb
.vt.edu/release-summary-data.aspx. Accessed on October 23, 2013. All data used
by permission.

Table 5.4
Trends in Approved Phenotype Releases in the United States, 1987–2012, by Percent of All Permits Issued
by APHIS (rounded to nearest whole number)
Over the past three decades, crops have been genetically altered for a variety of reasons. This table shows the proportion of GM crops
approved by the U.S. Department of Agriculture Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) from 1987 to 2012.
Year
BR
VR
FR
OO
NR
IR
MG
HT
AP
PQ
N
1987
100
5
1988
19
6
31
6
31
5
16
1989
21
3
27
6
33
9
33
1990
37
7
24
4
19
1
7
68
1991
8
20
5
3
22
7
19
4
14
107
1992
2
25
2
2
16
1
33
3
15
201
1993
1
15
4
2
1
21
1
32
2
22
362
1994
1
16
3
2
1
19
2
26
3
29
674
1995
1
14
4
4
1
26
2
22
4
24
829
1996
1
15
7
5
25
3
24
3
17
746
1997
1
13
6
4
1
21
3
31
7
15
986
1998
1
13
8
2
23
3
28
7
15
1,465
1999
1
15
5
6
21
5
21
10
15
1,255
2000
1
8
6
6
1
25
5
29
8
13
1,109
2001
1
5
5
6
1
32
6
23
8
15
1,269
2002
1
2
3
4
33
4
29
9
16
1,426
2003
1
3
4
5
1
18
6
31
11
21
1,022
(continued )

Table 5.4
(continued )
Over the past three decades, crops have been genetically altered for a variety of reasons. This table shows the proportion of GM crops
approved by the U.S. Department of Agriculture Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) from 1987 to 2012.
Year
BR
VR
FR
OO
NR
IR
MG
HT
AP
PQ
N
2004
1
2
4
7
1
16
6
29
16
20
1,155
2005
1
1
4
6
1
15
6
24
17
27
1,358
2006
1
2
5
8
1
13
8
29
19
24
1,386
2007
1
2
3
6
1
22
7
24
22
14
1,774
2008
1
1
4
15
1
9
8
20
26
17
1,854
2009
1
1
3
5
1
11
7
22
30
29
1,279
2010
1
1
3
9
1
8
9
22
28
18
1,688
2011
1
1
4
9
1
9
10
20
31
14
2,143
2012
1
1
4
11
1
10
10
21
29
13
2,109
BR, bacterial resistance; VR, virus resistance; FR, fungal resistance; OO, other; NR, nematode resistance; IR, insect resistance; MG, marker gene;
HT, herbicide tolerance; AP, agronomic properties; PQ, product quality; N, number of all permits issued.
Source: Adapted from “Releases and Permits by Phenotype per Year.” Information Systems for Biotechnology. Virginia Tech University. http://
www.isb.vt.edu/phenotype-by-years.aspx. Accessed on October 24, 2013.

Data and Documents
237
Table 5.5
Global Farm Income Beneﬁts from Growing Genetically Modiﬁed
Crops, 1996–2011 (million US$)
The British research ﬁrm of PG Economics, Ltd, has been following the eco-
nomic costs and beneﬁts to farmers worldwide as a result of the use of GM
crops for more than a decade. Tables 5.5, 5.6, and 5.7 reprint some of the most
basic data they have found in their most recent (2013) study.
Trait
Increase in
farm income
2011
Increase in
farm income
1996–2001
Percent of
total value1
Percent of
total value2
GM herbicide-
tolerant soybeans
3,879.2
32,211.9
3.8
3.2
GM herbicide-
tolerant maize
1,540.2
4,212.2
1.5
0.7
GM herbicide-
tolerant cotton
166.9
1,224.1
0.4
0.3
GM herbicide-
tolerant canola
433.2
3,131.4
1.4
1.2
GM insect-resistant
maize
7,104.9
25,762.0
6.8
3.3
GM insect-resistant
cotton
6,559.6
31,263.2
14.7
11.6
Others
83.3
412.0
n/a
n/a
Total
19,767.3
98,216.8
6.3
5.9
n/a, not applicable.
1Farm income beneﬁt in 2011 as percent of total value of production of those crops
in GM adopting countries.
2Farm income beneﬁt in 2011 as percent of total value of global production of crop.
Source: Brookes, Graham, and Peter Barfoot. 2013. GM Crops: Global Socio-
economic and Environmental Impacts 1996–2011, Table 1, 10–11. Dorchester,
UK: PG Economics, Ltd.

Table 5.6
Genetically Modiﬁed Crop Farm Income Beneﬁts of 1996–2011: Selected Countries (million US$)
More data from the 2013 PG Economics, Ltd, survey.
Country
GM HT
soybeans
GM HT maize
GM HT cotton
GM HT canola
GM IR
maize
GM IR cotton
Total
United States
13,835.9
3,110.5
924.8
241.5
21,497.3
3,769.4
43,379.4
Argentina
12,624.6
510.5
89.0
n/a
380.7
362.3
13,967.1
Brazil
4,314.5
431.5
82.6
n/a
1,796.9
19.9
6,645.4
Paraguay
732.4
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
732.4
Canada
231.6
66.7
n/a
2,862.5
820.5
n/a
3,981.3
South Africa
7.0
3.8
3.0
n/a
887.3
31.6
932.7
China
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
13,067.8
13,067.8
India
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
12,579.5
12,579.5
Australia
n/a
n/a
58.4
27.5
n/a
525.4
611.3
Mexico
4.9
n/a
51.4
n/a
n/a
123.9
180.2
Philippines
n/a
88.2
n/a
n/a
176.1
n/a
264.3
Romania
44.6
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
44.6
Uruguay
83.4
n/a
n/a
n/a
11.7
n/a
95.1
Spain
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
139.1
n/a
139.1
Other EU
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
16.2
n/a
16.2
Colombia
n/a
0.9
14.9
n/1
29.2
13.7
58.7
Bolivia
327.0
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
327.0
Burma
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
338.7
338.7
Pakistan
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
334.2
334.2
HT, herbicide tolerant; IR, insect resistant; n/a, not applicable.
Source: Brookes, Graham, and Peter Barfoot. 2013. GM Crops: Global Socio-economic and Environmental Impacts 1996–2011, Table 2, 11.
Dorchester, UK: PG Economics, Ltd.

Data and Documents
239
Table 5.7
Genetically Modiﬁed Crop Farm Income Beneﬁts of 2011:
Developing versus Developed Countries (million US$)
Additional data from the 2013 PG Economics, Ltd, survey.
Crop
Developed Countries
Developing
Countries1
GM HT soybeans
1,794.2
2,085.0
GM IR maize
5,710.4
1,394.5
GM HT maize
897.1
643.1
GM IR cotton
650.7
5,908.9
GM HT cotton
80.7
86.2
GM HT canola
433.2
0
GM virus-resistant papaya and
squash and GM HT sugar
beets
83.3
0
Total
9,649.6
10,117.7
HT, herbicide tolerant; IR, insect resistant.
1Developing countries: all countries in South America, Mexico, Honduras, Burkina
Faso, India, China, the Philippines, and South Africa.
Source: Brookes, Graham, and Peter Barfoot. 2013. GM Crops: Global Socio-
economic and Environmental Impacts 1996–2011, Table 3, 12. Dorchester, UK:
PG Economics, Ltd.

Documents
Plant Patent Act of 1930
During the ﬁrst three decades of the twentieth century, American bot-
anist Luther Burbank developed a number of new plant species
through the process of hybridization. As a result of his work, a number
of political ﬁgures recommend that the U.S. Congress adopt a law
permitting Burbank and inventors like him to patent their discov-
eries. And thus was born the Plant Patent Act of 1930, which, in
1980, the U.S. Supreme Court extended to cover genetically engi-
neered plants, as well as naturally occurring plants.
§161. Patents for plants
Whoever invents or discovers and asexually reproduces any
distinct and new variety of plant, including cultivated sports,
mutants, hybrids, and newly found seedlings, other than a
tuber propagated plant or a plant found in an uncultivated
state, may obtain a patent therefor, subject to the conditions
and requirements of this title.
The provisions of this title relating to patents for inventions
shall apply to patents for plants, except as otherwise provided.
§162. Description, claim
No plant patent shall be declared invalid for noncompliance
with section 112 if the description is as complete as is reason-
ably possible.
The claim in the speciﬁcation shall be in formal terms to the
plant shown and described.
§163. Grant
In the case of a plant patent, the grant shall include the right to
exclude others from asexually reproducing the plant, and from
using, offering for sale, or selling the plant so reproduced, or any
of its parts, throughout the United States, or from importing the
plant so reproduced, or any parts thereof, into the United States.
Source: U.S. Code. Chapter 15, Sections 161–163. http://
uscode.regstoday.com/35USC_CHAPTER15.aspx. Accessed on
May 17, 2014.
240
GMO Food

Diamond v. Chakrabarty, 447 U.S. 303 (1980)
In 1971, microbiologist Ananda Mohan Chakrabarty, while
employed by the General Electric (GE) corporation, invented a
bacterium capable of digesting crude oil, a potentially useful inven-
tion for the removable of oil spills on water or land. GE applied for
a patent for Chakrabarty’s discovery, which was denied by the U.S.
Patent Ofﬁce on the grounds that patents could not be issued for
living objects. That decision was appealed through the courts until
it reached the U.S. Supreme Court, which decided on a ﬁve-to-four
vote that the patent could be issued. Portions of the majority and
dissenting opinions are quoted here. Omitted sections are indicated
by ellipses (. . .).
Chief Justice Burger, for the majority:
We have also cautioned that courts “should not read into the
patent laws limitations and conditions which the legislature has
not expressed.” . . . Guided by these canons of construction,
this Court has read the term “manufacture” in § 101 [the rel-
evant patent law, Title 35 U.S.C. § 101] in accordance with its
dictionary deﬁnition to mean “the production of articles for
use from raw or prepared materials by giving to these materials
new forms, qualities, properties, or combinations, whether by
hand labor or by machinery.” . . . Similarly, “composition of
matter” has been construed consistent with its common usage
to include “all compositions of two or more substances and . . .
all composite articles, whether they be the results of chemical
union, or of mechanical mixture, or whether they be gases, ﬂu-
ids, powders or solids.” . . . In choosing such expansive terms as
“manufacture” and “composition of matter,” modiﬁed by the
comprehensive “any,” Congress plainly contemplated that the
patent laws would be given wide scope.
. . .
Judged in this light, respondent’s micro-organism plainly
qualiﬁes as patentable subject matter. His claim is not to a hith-
erto unknown natural phenomenon, but to a nonnaturally
occurring manufacture or composition of matter—a product
Data and Documents
241

of human ingenuity “having a distinctive name, character [and]
use.”
. . .
Our task, rather, is the narrow one of determining what
Congress meant by the words it used in the statute; once that
is done, our powers are exhausted. Congress is free to amend
§ 101 so as to exclude from patent protection organisms pro-
duced by genetic engineering. . . . Or it may choose to craft a
statute speciﬁcally designed for such living things. But, until
Congress takes such action, this Court must construe the
language of § 101 as it is. The language of that section fairly
embraces respondent’s invention.
Writing for the four dissenting judge, Justice Brennan pointed
out that:
In this case, however, we do not confront a complete legisla-
tive vacuum. The sweeping language of the Patent Act of 1793,
as reenacted in 1952, is not the last pronouncement Congress
has made in this area. In 1930, Congress enacted the Plant
Patent Act affording patent protection to developers of certain
asexually reproduced plants. In 1970, Congress enacted the
Plant Variety Protection Act to extend protection to certain new
plant varieties capable of sexual reproduction. Thus, we are not
dealing—as the Court would have it—with the routine problem
of “unanticipated inventions.” . . . In these two Acts, Congress
has addressed the general problem of patenting animate inven-
tions and has chosen carefully limited language granting protec-
tion to some kinds of discoveries, but speciﬁcally excluding
others. These Acts strongly evidence a congressional limitation
that excludes bacteria from patentability.
. . .
. . . the 1970 Act clearly indicates that Congress has included
bacteria within the focus of its legislative concern, but not within
the scope of patent protection. Congress speciﬁcally excluded bac-
teria from the coverage of the 1970 Act. . . . The Court’s attempts
to supply explanations for this explicit exclusion ring hollow. It is
true that there is no mention in the legislative history of the
242
GMO Food

exclusion, but that does not give us license to invent reasons. The
fact is that Congress, assuming that animate objects as to which it
had not speciﬁcally legislated could not be patented, excluded
bacteria from the set of patentable organisms.
Source: “Diamond v. Chakrabarty—447 U.S. 303 (1980).”
Justia.com. http://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/447/303/
case.html. Accessed on August 15, 2013.
Coordinated Framework for the Regulation
of Biotechnology (1986)
Authority for the control over the approval of research on and
commercialization of bioengineered products in the United States
is a complex system ﬁrst announced in a 1986 document issued
by the Ofﬁce of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP). The key
sections of that document that divide up this responsibility are
reprinted here. For acronyms, see footnotes; FDA = Food and
Drug Administration, EPA = Environmental Protection Agency,
and S&E = Science and Education Administration of the U.S.
Department of Agriculture.
CHART I.—COORDINATED FRAMEWORK—APPROVAL OF COMMERCIAL
BIOTECHNOLOGY PRODUCTS
Subject
Responsible Agency(ies)
Foods/Food Additives
FDA*
FSIS1
Human Drugs, Medical Devices, and Biologics
FDA
Animal Drugs
FDA
Animal Biologics
APHIS
Other Contained Uses
EPA
Plants and Animals
APHIS*
FSIS1
FDA2
Pesticide Microorganisms Released in the
Environment
EPA*
APHIS3
(continued )
Data and Documents
243

CHART I.
(continued )
Subject
Responsible Agency(ies)
All
Other Uses (Microorganisms)
Intergeneric Combination
Intrageneric Combination
Pathogenic Source Organism
1. Agricultural Use
2. Nonagricultural Use
No Pathogenic Source Organisms
EPA*
APHIS3
APHIS
EPA*,4
APHIS3
EPA Report
Nonengineered Pathogens
1. Agricultural Use
2. Nonagricultural Use
APHIS
EPA4
APHIS3
Nonengineered Nonpathogens
EPA Report
*Lead agency.
1FSIS, Food Safety and Inspection Service, under the assistant secretary of agri-
culture for marketing and inspection services, is responsible for food use.
2FDA is involved when in relation to a food use.
3APHIS, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, is involved when the micro-
organism is plant pest, animal pathogen, or regulated article requiring a permit.
4EPA requirements will only apply to environmental release under a “signiﬁcant
new use rule” that EPA intends to propose.
CHART II.—COORDINATED FRAMEWORK—BIOTECHNOLOGY RESEARCH
JURISDICTION
Subject
Responsible Agency(ies)
Contained Research, No Release in the
Environment
1. Federally Funded
2. Nonfederally Funded
Funding agency1
NIH or S&E
Voluntary review
APHIS2
Foods/Food Additives, Human Drugs, Medical
Devices, Biologics, Animal Drugs
1. Federally Funded
2. Nonfederally Funded
FDA*, NIH
Guidelines and review
FDA*, NIH
Voluntary review
Plants, Animals, and Animal Biologics
1. Federally Funded
2. Nonfederally Funded
Funding agency*,1
APHIS2
APHIS*
S&E
Voluntary review
(continued )
244
GMO Food

CHART II.
(continued )
Subject
Responsible Agency(ies)
Pesticide Microorganisms
EPA*
Genetically Engineered
Intergeneric
Pathogenic Intergeneric
Intrageneric Nonpathogen
Nonengineered
Nonindigenous Pathogens
Indigenous Pathogens
Nonindigenous Nonpathogen
APHIS2
S&E
Voluntary review
EPA*
APHIS2
S&E
Voluntary review
EPA,* S&E
Voluntary review
EPA*
APHIS
EPA*,3
APHIS
EPA*
Other Uses (Microorganisms) Released in the
Environment:
Genetically Engineered
Intergeneric Organisms
1. Federally Funded
2. Commercially Funded
Intrageneric Organisms
Pathogenic Source Organism
1. Federally Funded
2. Commercially Funding
Intrageneric Combination
No Pathogenic Source Organisms
Nonengineered
Funding agency*,1
APHIS2
EPA4
EPA, APHIS
S&E
Voluntary review
Funding agency*,1
APHIS,2
EPA4
APHIS2
EPA (*if nonagricultural use)
EPA Report
EPA Report*
APHIS2
*Lead Agency.
1Review and approval of research protocols conducted by NIH, S&E, or NSF.
2APHIS issues permits for the importation and domestic shipment of certain plants
and animals, plant pests and animal pathogens, and for the shipment or release in
the environment of regulated articles.
3EPA jurisdiction for research on a plot greater than 10 acres.
4EPA reviews federally funded environmental research only when it is for commer-
cial purposes.
Source: Ofﬁce of Science and Technology Policy. 1986. Coordinated Framework for
Regulation of Biotechnology. http://www.aphis.usda.gov/brs/fedregister/coordinated
_framework.pdf. Accessed on August 19, 2013.
Data and Documents
245

Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety (2000)
The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety was adopted in 2000 and signed
by 77 nations. It entered into force on September 11, 2003, when a
sufﬁcient number of nations had ratiﬁed the treaty. The treaty outlines
provisions for the movement of living modiﬁed organisms (LMOs)
resulting from modern biotechnology from one country to another.
The treaty has a number of provisions, perhaps the most important
of which is Article 11, which is reproduced in its entirety here.
Article 11
Procedure for Living Modiﬁed Organisms Intended for
Direct Use as Food or Feed, Or For Processing
1. A Party that makes a ﬁnal decision regarding domestic use,
including placing on the market, of a living modiﬁed
organism that may be subject to transboundary movement
for direct use as food or feed, or for processing shall, within
ﬁfteen days of making that decision, inform the Parties
through the Biosafety Clearing-House. This information
shall contain, at a minimum, the information speciﬁed in
Annex II. The Party shall provide a copy of the informa-
tion, in writing, to the national focal point of each Party
that informs the Secretariat in advance that it does not have
access to the Biosafety Clearing-House. This provision shall
not apply to decisions regarding ﬁeld trials.
2. The Party making a decision under paragraph 1 above, shall
ensure that there is a legal requirement for the accuracy of
information provided by the applicant.
3. Any Party may request additional information from the
authority identiﬁed in paragraph (b) of Annex II.
4. A Party may take a decision on the import of living
modiﬁed organisms intended for direct use as food or
feed, or for processing, under its domestic regulatory
framework that is consistent with the objective of this
Protocol.
246
GMO Food

5. Each Party shall make available to the Biosafety Clearing-
House copies of any national laws, regulations and guidelines
applicable to the import of living modiﬁed organisms intended
for direct use as food or feed, or for processing, if available.
6. A developing country Party or a Party with an economy in
transition may, in the absence of the domestic regulatory
framework referred to in paragraph 4 above, and in exercise
of its domestic jurisdiction, declare through the Biosafety
Clearing-House that its decision prior to the ﬁrst import
of a living modiﬁed organism intended for direct use as
food or feed, or for processing, on which information has
been provided under paragraph 1 above, will be taken
according to the following:
(a) A risk assessment undertaken in accordance with Annex
III; and
(b) A decision made within a predictable timeframe, not
exceeding two hundred and seventy days.
7. Failure by a Party to communicate its decision according to
paragraph 6 above, shall not imply its consent or refusal to
the import of a living modiﬁed organism intended for
direct use as food or feed, or for processing, unless other-
wise speciﬁed by the Party.
8. Lack of scientiﬁc certainty due to insufﬁcient relevant sci-
entiﬁc information and knowledge regarding the extent of
the potential adverse effects of a living modiﬁed organism
on the conservation and sustainable use of biological diver-
sity in the Party of import, taking also into account risks to
human health, shall not prevent that Party from taking a
decision, as appropriate, with regard to the import of that
living modiﬁed organism intended for direct use as food
or feed, or for processing, in order to avoid or minimize
such potential adverse effects.
9. A Party may indicate its needs for ﬁnancial and technical
assistance and capacity-building with respect to living
Data and Documents
247

modiﬁed organisms intended for direct use as food or feed,
or for processing. Parties shall cooperate to meet these
needs in accordance with Articles 22 and 28.
Source: “Text of the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety.”
Convention
on
Biological
Diversity.
http://bch.cbd.int/
protocol/text/. Accessed on September 6, 2013.
Guidance for Industry: Voluntary Labeling Indicating
Whether Foods Have or Have Not Been Developed Using
Bioengineering (2001)
As of late 2013, there were no federal, state, or local laws that require
foods containing genetically modiﬁed ingredients to carry that infor-
mation on their labels. However, in 2001, the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) did release a statement suggesting the
types of information that food producers might include on labels, indi-
cating the presence of GM products. A portion of that statement is as
follows (omitted footnotes are indicated by ellipses [. . .]):
STATEMENTS ABOUT FOODS DEVELOPED USING
BIOENGINEERING
FDA recognizes that some manufacturers may want to use
informative statements on labels and in labeling of bioengi-
neered foods or foods that contain ingredients produced from
bioengineered foods. The following are examples of some state-
ments that might be used. The discussion accompanying each
example is intended to provide guidance as to how similar state-
ments can be made without being misleading.
“Genetically engineered” or “This product contains corn-
meal that was produced using biotechnology.”
The information that the food was bioengineered is optional
and this kind of simple statement is not likely to be misleading.
However, focus group data indicate that consumers would
prefer label statements that disclose and explain the goal
of the technology (why it was used or what it does for/to the
248
GMO Food

food). . . . Consumers also expressed some preference for the
term “biotechnology” over such terms as “genetic modiﬁca-
tion” and “genetic engineering”. . . .
“This product contains high oleic acid soybean oil from soy-
beans developed using biotechnology to decrease the amount of
saturated fat.”
This example includes both required and optional informa-
tion. As discussed above in the background section, when a
food differs from its traditional counterpart such that the
common or usual name no longer adequately describes the
new food, the name must be changed to describe the difference.
Because this soybean oil contains more oleic acid than tradi-
tional soybean oil, the term “soybean oil” no longer adequately
describes the nature of the food. Under section 403(i) of the
act, a phrase like “high oleic acid” would be required to appear
as part of the name of the food to describe its basic nature. The
statement that the soybeans were developed using biotechnol-
ogy is optional. So is the statement that the reason for the
change in the soybeans was to reduce saturated fat.
“These tomatoes were genetically engineered to improve texture.”
In this example, the change in texture is a difference that
may have to be described on the label. If the texture improve-
ment makes a signiﬁcant difference in the ﬁnished product, sec-
tions 201(n) and 403(a)(1) of the act would require disclosure
of the difference for the consumer. However, the statement
must not be misleading. The phrase “to improve texture” could
be misleading if the texture difference is not noticeable to the
consumer. For example, if a manufacturer wanted to describe
a difference in a food that the consumer would not notice when
purchasing or consuming the product, the manufacturer should
phrase the statements so that the consumer can understand the
signiﬁcance of the difference. If the change in the tomatoes was
intended to facilitate processing but did not make a noticeable
difference in the processed consumer product, a phrase
like “to improve texture for processing” rather than “to improve
texture” should be used to ensure that the consumer is not
Data and Documents
249

misled. The statement that the tomatoes were genetically
engineered is optional.
“Some of our growers plant tomato seeds that were devel-
oped through biotechnology to increase crop yield.”
The entire statement in this example is optional information.
The fact that there was increased yield does not affect the char-
acteristics of the food and is therefore not necessary on the label
to adequately describe the food for the consumer. A phrase like
“to increase yield” should only be included where there is sub-
stantiation that there is in fact the stated difference.
Where a beneﬁt from a bioengineered ingredient in a multi-
ingredient food is described, the statement should be worded so
that it addresses the ingredient and not the food as a whole; for
example, “This product contains high oleic acid soybean oil
from soybeans produced through biotechnology to decrease
the level of saturated fat.” In addition, the amount of the bioen-
gineered ingredient in the food may be relevant to whether the
statement is misleading. This would apply especially where the
bioengineered difference is a nutritional improvement. For
example, it would likely be misleading to make a statement
about a nutritionally improved ingredient on a food that con-
tains only a small amount of the ingredient, such that the food’s
overall nutritional quality would not be signiﬁcantly improved.
Source: “Guidance for Industry: Voluntary Labeling Indicating
Whether Foods Have or Have Not Been Developed Using
Bioengineering; Draft Guidance.” http://www.fda.gov/Food/
GuidanceRegulation/GuidanceDocumentsRegulatoryInformation/
LabelingNutrition/ucm059098.htm. Accessed on August 17, 2013.
Regulation of Genetically Modiﬁed Foods
by the European Union (2003)
Genetically modiﬁed (GM) foods are regulated in the European
Union by an extensive body of legislation adopted by a variety
250
GMO Food

of organizations. Probably the most important single document is
Regulation (EC) No 1829/2003 of the European Parliament,
adopted in 2003. The document is a very long one that explains
the basis for the regulations provided and that includes every con-
ceivable aspect of the production, distribution, and consumption
of GM foods. The core of that document is reprinted here.
Article 4
Requirements
1. Food referred to in Article 3(1) must not:
(a) have adverse effects on human health, animal health or
the environment;
(b) mislead the consumer;
(c) differ from the food which it is intended to replace to
such an extent that its normal consumption would be nutri-
tionally disadvantageous for the consumer.
2. No person shall place on the market a GMO for food use
or food referred to in Article 3(1) unless it is covered by an
authorisation granted in accordance with this Section and the
relevant conditions of the authorisation are satisﬁed.
3. No GMO for food use or food referred to in Article 3(1)
shall be authorised unless the applicant for such authorisation
has adequately and sufﬁciently demonstrated that it satisﬁes
the requirements of paragraph 1 of this Article.
4. The authorisation referred to in paragraph 2 may cover:
(a) a GMO and foods containing or consisting of that GMO
as well as foods produced from or containing ingredients pro-
duced from that GMO; or
(b) food produced from a GMO as well as foods produced
from or containing that food;
(c) an ingredient produced from a GMO as well as food con-
taining that ingredient.
5. An authorisation as referred to in paragraph 2 shall not be
granted, refused, renewed, modiﬁed, suspended or revoked
except on the grounds and under the procedures set out in this
Regulation.
Data and Documents
251

6. The applicant for an authorisation as referred to in
paragraph 2 and, after the authorisation is granted, the
authorisation-holder or his representative, shall be established
in the Community.
7. Authorisation under this Regulation shall be without
prejudice to Directive 2002/53/EC, Directive 2002/55/EC
and Directive 68/193/EEC.
Source: “Regulation (EC) No 1829/2003 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 22 September 2003 on
Genetically Modiﬁed Food and Feed.” EUR-Lex. http://eur-lex
.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32003R1829
:EN:HTML. Accessed on August 15, 2013.
Mendocino County (California) Ban on Genetically
Modiﬁed Crops (2004)
In 2004, the voters of Mendocino County, California, voted by a
margin of 57 percent to 43 percent to ban the planting of GM
crops in the county. The text of that law, in part, is as follows
(omitted text is indicated by ellipses [. . .]):
CHAPTER 10A.15 PROHIBITION ON
THE PROPAGATION, CULTIVATION, RAISING
AND GROWING OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED
ORGANISMS IN MENDOCINO COUNTY
Sec. 10A.15.010 Finding.
The people of Mendocino County wish to protect the
County’s agriculture, environment, economy, and private
property from genetic pollution by genetically modiﬁed organ-
isms. (Measure H-2004, passed March 2, 2004.)
Sec. 10A.15.020 Prohibition.
It shall be unlawful for any person, ﬁrm, or corporation
to propagate, cultivate, raise, or grow genetically modiﬁed
252
GMO Food

organisms in Mendocino County. (Measure H-2004, passed
March 2, 2004.)
Sec. 10A.15.030 Deﬁnitions.
. . . [This section deﬁnes terms used in the law.]
Sec. 10A.15.040 Penalties.
(A) The Agricultural Commissioner shall notify any person,
ﬁrm, or corporation that may be in violation of Section
10A.15.020 of this Chapter, that any organisms in
violation of this Chapter are subject to conﬁscation and
destruction.
(B) Any
person,
ﬁrm,
or
corporation
that
receives
notiﬁcation under subsection (A) shall have ﬁve (5)
days to respond to such notiﬁcation with evidence that
such organisms are not in violation of this Chapter.
(C) Upon receipt of any evidence under subsection (B), the
Agricultural Commissioner shall consider such evidence and
any other evidence that is presented or which is relevant
to a determination of such violation. The Agricultural
Commissioner shall make such determination as soon as
possible, but at least before any genetic pollution may occur.
(D) Upon making a determination that a violation of this
Chapter exists, the Agricultural Commissioner shall
cause
to
be
conﬁscated
and
destroyed
any
such
organisms that are in violation of this Chapter before
any genetic pollution may occur.
(E) If the Agricultural Commissioner determines there has
been a violation of this Chapter, in addition to
conﬁscation and destruction of any organisms that are
found to be in violation, the Agricultural Commissioner
shall impose a monetary penalty on the person, ﬁrm, or
corporation responsible for the violation, taking into
account the amount of damage, any potential damage,
and the willfulness of the person, ﬁrm, or corporation.
(Measure H-2004, passed March 2, 2004.)
Data and Documents
253

Source: “Chapter 10A.15 Prohibition on the Propagation,
Cultivation, Raising and Growing of Genetically Modiﬁed
Organisms in Mendocino County.” Municode. http://library
.municode.com/index.aspx?clientId=16484. Accessed on
August 20, 2013.
The Safety of Genetically Modiﬁed Foods,
GAO Report (2002)
In 2002, U.S. Representatives John E. Baldacci and John F.
Tierney asked the U.S. General Accounting Ofﬁce (GAO) to
conduct a study on the safety of GM crops and foods. The GAO
summarized its ﬁndings on that topic as follows:
GM foods pose the same types of inherent risks to human
health as conventional foods: they can contain allergens, toxins,
and compounds known as antinutrients, which inhibit the
absorption of nutrients. Before marketing a GM food, com-
pany scientists evaluate these risks—even though they are not
routinely evaluated in conventional foods—to determine if
the foods pose any heightened risks. While some GM foods
have contained allergens, toxins, and antinutrients, the levels
have been comparable to those foods’ conventional counter-
parts. In evaluating GM foods, scientists perform a regimen of
tests. Biotechnology experts whom we contacted agree that this
regimen of tests is adequate in assessing the safety of GM foods.
While some consumer groups, as well as some scientists from
the European Union, have questioned the ethical or cultural
appropriateness of genetically modifying foods, experts whom
we contacted from these organizations also believe the tests are
adequate for assessing the safety of these foods.
While FDA reports that its evaluation process includes the
necessary controls for ensuring it obtains the safety data needed
to evaluate GM foods, some biotechnology experts state that
aspects of its evaluation process could be enhanced. FDA’s con-
trols include (1) communicating clearly—through the agency’s
1992 policy statement and subsequent guidance—what safety
254
GMO Food

data are necessary for its evaluations of GM food safety;
(2) having teams of FDA experts in diverse disciplines evaluate
company submissions for GM foods and request additional
safety data, if necessary; and (3) tailoring the level of evaluation
to match the degree of each submission’s novelty, thereby
assuring that staff have time to obtain necessary safety data.
Nonetheless, FDA’s overall evaluation process could be
enhanced, according to some experts, by randomly verifying
the test data that companies provide and by increasing the
transparency of the evaluation process—including communi-
cating more clearly the scientiﬁc rationale for the agency’s ﬁnal
decision on a GM food safety assessment.
In the future, scientists generally expect that genetic modiﬁ-
cations will increasingly change the composition of GM foods
to enhance their nutritional value. For example, one company
has modiﬁed a type of rice to contain beta-carotene. In coun-
tries where rice is a dietary staple, this rice may reduce the inci-
dence of blindness caused by vitamin-A deﬁciency. Current
tests have been adequate for evaluating the few GM foods with
relatively simple compositional changes that FDA has reviewed
so far. New testing technologies are being developed to evaluate
the increasingly complex compositional changes expected.
Some scientists view these new technologies as a potentially
useful supplement for existing tests, while others believe that
the technologies will offer a more comprehensive way of assess-
ing the safety of all changes in GM foods.
Monitoring the long-term health risks of GM foods is gener-
ally neither necessary nor feasible, according to scientists and
regulatory ofﬁcials we contacted. In their view, such monitor-
ing is unnecessary because there is no scientiﬁc evidence, or
even a hypothesis, suggesting that long-term harm (such as
increased cancer rates) results from these foods. Furthermore,
there is consensus among these scientists and regulatory ofﬁcials
that technical challenges make long-term monitoring infeasible.
Experts cite, for example, the technical inability to track the
health effects of GM foods separately from those of their
Data and Documents
255

conventional counterparts. A recent report by food and health
organizations afﬁliated with the United Nations also expresses
skepticism about the feasibility of identifying long-term health
effects from GM foods.
Source: Genetically Modiﬁed Foods: Experts View Regimen of
Safety Tests as Adequate, but FDA’s Evaluation Process Could Be
Enhanced. 2002. United States General Accounting Ofﬁce.
GAO-02-566. http://www.gao.gov/assets/240/234718.pdf. Acc-
essed on August 21, 2013.
Invoking of Preemption (North Dakota, SB2277; 2005)
A number of states have become concerned about the actions of
individual towns, cities, counties, and other jurisdictions in passing
legislation outlawing the use of genetically modiﬁed crops within
their boundary. (See “Mendocino County,” presented earlier, as
an example.) In reaction to these actions, some states have adopted
preemptive legislation that bans individual jurisdictions within the
state from taking such actions. An example is a bill passed in the
state of North Dakota in 2005, where such action is prohibited
by the clause reproduced here. Brief comments by legislators at a
meeting of the House Agriculture Committee at the time on both
sides of the bill are also reproduced here. The comments are taken
from notes taken at the committee session and are reproduced here
verbatim.
4-35-06.1 LIMITATION ON AUTHORITY OF
POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS REGARDING PESTICIDES
No political subdivision, including a home rule city or county,
may adopt or continue in effect any ordinance, resolution,
or home rule charter regarding the registration, labeling, distri-
bution, sale, handling, use, application, transportation, or dis-
posal of pesticides. This section does not apply to city zoning
ordinances.
256
GMO Food

CHAIRMAN NICHOLAS: Committee Members, I would
like to roll out one more bill. It is the preemption bill SB
2277. This bill committee members we heard last week and
this bill is dealing with regulation and distribution of seed. It
will allow preemption [by the state] and somewhat over rule
local ordinances. County ordinances that such in California
where the map of California looks like a checkerboard as to reg-
ulations on seeding, etc. Environmentally groups Coming in
and basically over ruling farmers abilities to use the type of seed
and grow The kind of crops they want. This, hopefully, is a
farmer friendly bill.
. . .
REPRESENTATIVE MUELLER: . . . I guess given what
this bill is doing is a pretty far reaching bill. We are actually say-
ing to the townships in the counties that you can’t put any laws
in place. Like that. I think that is kind of what the problem is.
We are tying the hands of our people back home in our town-
ships and counties to say which ever direction you can’t do any-
thing about it and for that reason I am in opposition to the bill.
Source: 2005 State Agriculture. OMB/Records Management
Division. SFN 2053. http://www.legis.nd.gov/ﬁles/resource/
59-2005/library/sb2277.pdf?20131023162344. Accessed on
October 23, 2013. Also see “State/Local Efforts to Control
GMOs.” Organic Consumers Association. http://www.organic
consumers.org/articles/article_27247.cfm. Accessed on October
23, 2013.
Monsanto Co. v. Geertson Seed Farms, 561 U.S. ___ (2010)
The ﬁrst case reaching the U.S. Supreme Court regarding geneti-
cally engineered crops came on appeal by the Monsanto Company
of a pair of adverse rulings from a District Court and from the
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. Both these courts
ruled that U. S. Department of Agriculture’s Animal and Plant
Health Inspection Service (APHIS) had improperly deregulated a
Data and Documents
257

Monsanto product, Roundup Ready alfalfa (RRA), for use by farm-
ers. The courts said that further studies were needed to ensure that
genes from the engineered plant would not enter those of natural
alfalfa. The Supreme Court ruled 7 to 1 that the lower courts were
in error in making those decisions for a number of complex reasons.
The core of their decision was as follows (ellipses [. . .] indicated the
omission of notes and unrelated text):
We agree that the District Court’s injunction against plant-
ing went too far, but we come to that conclusion for two inde-
pendent reasons. First, the impropriety of the District Court’s
broad injunction against planting ﬂows from the impropriety
of its injunction against partial deregulation. If APHIS may
partially deregulate RRA before preparing a full-blown EIS
[environmental impact statement]—a question that we need
not and do not decide here—farmers should be able to grow
and sell RRA in accordance with that agency determination.
Because it was inappropriate for the District Court to foreclose
even the possibility of a partial and temporary deregulation, it
necessarily follows that it was likewise inappropriate to enjoin
any and all parties from acting in accordance with the terms
of such a deregulation decision.
Second, respondents have represented to this Court that the
District Court’s injunction against planting does not have any
meaningful practical effect independent of its vacatur [a court
order setting aside an administrative decision]. . . . An injunction
is a drastic and extraordinary remedy, which should not be
granted as a matter of course. . . . If a less drastic remedy (such
as partial or complete vacatur of APHIS’s deregulation deci-
sion) was sufﬁcient to redress respondents’ injury, no recourse
to the additional and extraordinary relief of an injunction was
warranted. . . .
In sum, the District Court abused its discretion in enjoining
APHIS from effecting a partial deregulation and in prohibiting
the possibility of planting in accordance with the terms of
such a deregulation. Given those errors, this Court need not
express any view on whether injunctive relief of some kind
258
GMO Food

was available to respondents on the record before us. Nor does
the Court address the question whether the District Court was
required to conduct an evidentiary hearing before entering the
relief at issue here. The judgment of the Ninth Circuit is
reversed, and the case is remanded for further proceedings con-
sistent with this opinion.
In his dissent, Justice Breyer succinctly summed up the issues
involved in the case and explained why he could not agree with
the majority in its decision:
The Court does not dispute the District Court’s critical ﬁnd-
ings of fact: First, Roundup Ready Alfalfa (RRA) can contami-
nate other plants. . . . Second, even planting in a controlled
setting had led to contamination in some instances. . . . Third,
the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) has
limited ability to monitor or enforce limitations on planting.
. . . And fourth, genetic contamination from RRA could deci-
mate farmers’ livelihoods and the American alfalfa market for
years to come. . . . Instead, the majority faults the District
Court for “enjoining APHIS from partially deregulating
RRA.” . . .
. . .
In my view, the District Court may not have actually
ordered such relief, and we should not so readily assume that
it did. Regardless, the District Court did not abuse its discre-
tion when, after considering the voluminous record and mak-
ing the aforementioned ﬁndings, it issued the order now
before us.
* * *
The District Court in this case was put in an “unenviable
position.” . . . In front of it was strong evidence that RRA poses
a serious threat to the environment and to American business,
and that limits on RRA deregulation might not be followed or
enforced—and that even if they were, the newly engineered
gene might nevertheless spread to other crops. Confronted with
those disconcerting submissions, with APHIS’s unlawful
deregulation decision, with a group of farmers who had staked
Data and Documents
259

their livelihoods on APHIS’s decision, and with a federal statute
that prizes informed decisionmaking on matters that seriously
affect the environment, the court did the best it could. In my
view, the District Court was well within its discretion to order
the remedy that the Court now reverses. Accordingly, I respect-
fully dissent.
Source: “Monsanto Co. vs. Geertson Seed Farms, 561 U.S.
___.”
http://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/09pdf/09-475
.pdf. Accessed on August 28, 2013.
Proposition 37. Genetically Engineered Foods. Labeling.
Initiative Statute (2012)
In November 2012, a citizen-initiative placed on the California
ballot a proposition requiring the labeling of genetically modiﬁed
food sold in the state. The proposition was defeated by a vote of
6,442,371 (51.4%) to 6,088,714 (48.6%). A summary of the
provisions of the proposition was provided by the state’s legislative
analyst, which read, in part:
This measure makes several changes to state law to explicitly
require the regulation of GE foods. Speciﬁcally, it (1) requires
that most GE foods sold be properly labeled, (2) requires
DPH [Department of Public Health] to regulate the labeling of
such foods, and (3) allows individuals to sue food manufac-
turers who violate the measure’s labeling provisions.
Labeling of Foods. This measure requires that GE foods sold at
retail in the state be clearly labeled as genetically engineered.
Speciﬁcally, the measure requires that raw foods (such as fruits
and vegetables) produced entirely or in part through genetic engi-
neering be labeled with the words “Genetically Engineered” on
the front package or label. If the item is not separately packaged
or does not have a label, these words must appear on the shelf
or bin where the item is displayed for sale. The measure also
requires that processed foods produced entirely or in part through
260
GMO Food

genetic engineering be labeled with the words “Partially Produced
with Genetic Engineering” or “May be Partially Produced with
Genetic Engineering.”
Retailers (such as grocery stores) would be primarily
responsible for complying with the measure by ensuring that
their food products are correctly labeled. Products that are
labeled as GE would be in compliance. For each product that
is not labeled as GE, a retailer generally must be able to docu-
ment why that product is exempt from labeling. There are two
main ways in which a retailer could document that a product is
exempt: (1) by obtaining a sworn statement from the provider of
the product (such as a wholesaler) indicating that the product has
not been intentionally or knowingly genetically engineered or (2)
by receiving independent certiﬁcation that the product does not
contain GE ingredients. Other entities throughout the food sup-
ply chain (such as farmers and food manufacturers) may also be
responsible for maintaining these records. The measure also
excludes certain food products from the above labeling require-
ments. For example, alcoholic beverages, organic foods, and res-
taurant food and other prepared foods intended to be eaten
immediately would not have to be labeled. Animal products—
such as beef or chicken—that were not directly produced through
genetic engineering would also be exempted, regardless of
whether the animal had been fed GE crops.
In addition, the measure prohibits the use of terms such as
“natural,” “naturally made,” “naturally grown,” and “all natural”
in the labeling and advertising of GE foods. Given the way the
measure is written, there is a possibility that these restrictions
would be interpreted by the courts to apply to some processed
foods regardless of whether they are genetically engineered.
Source: “Prop 37. Genetically Engineered Foods. Labeling.
Initiative Statute.” Ofﬁcial Voter Information Guide. http://
vig.cdn.sos.ca.gov/2012/general/pdf/complete-vig-v2.pdf.
Accessed on August 17, 2013.
Data and Documents
261

Bowman v. Monsanto, et al. 569 U.S. 11-796 (2013)
This case arose when an Indiana farmer, Vernon Bowman,
decided to harvest some of the seeds from the ﬁrst generation of a
soybean crop, originally grown with seeds purchased from the
Monsanto Company, holder of a patent on those seeds. The seeds
are genetically engineered to survive treatment with a popular
Monsanto pesticide, Roundup. Bowman argued that Monsanto’s
patent was exhausted when it sold the seeds to him (a doctrine
known as patent exhaustion) and did not apply to future genera-
tions of seeds grown from the original seeds. The case ruled against
Bowman in a unanimous verdict. Commentators on the case noted
that the decision was likely to have “signiﬁcant consequences” for
growers who choose to use GM seeds. The core of the Court’s deci-
sion is as follows (omitted text is indicated by ellipses [. . .]):
The doctrine of patent exhaustion limits a patentee’s right to
control what others can do with an article embodying or con-
taining an invention. Under the doctrine, “the initial author-
ized sale of a patented item terminates all patent rights to that
item.” . . . And by “exhaust[ing] the [patentee’s] monopoly” in
that item, the sale confers on the purchaser, or any subsequent
owner, “the right to use [or] sell” the thing as he sees ﬁt.
. . .
Unfortunately for Bowman, that principle decides this case
against him. Under the patent exhaustion doctrine, Bowman
could resell the patented soybeans he purchased from the grain
elevator; so too he could consume the beans himself or feed
them to his animals. Monsanto, although the patent holder,
would have no business interfering in those uses of Roundup
Ready beans. But the exhaustion doctrine does not enable
Bowman to make additional patented soybeans without
Monsanto’s permission (either express or implied). And that is
precisely what Bowman did. He took the soybeans he pur-
chased home; planted them in his ﬁelds at the time he thought
best; applied glyphosate to kill weeds (as well as any soy plants
lacking the Roundup Ready trait); and ﬁnally harvested more
262
GMO Food

(many more) beans than he started with. That is how “to
‘make’ a new product,” to use Bowman’s words, when the
original product is a seed. . . . Because Bowman thus repro-
duced Monsanto’s patented invention, the exhaustion doctrine
does not protect him.
Source:
Vernon
Hugh
Bowman,
Petitioner
v.
Monsanto
Company et al., 569 U.S. 11-796 (2013). http://www.supreme
court.gov/opinions/12pdf/11-796_c07d.pdf. Accessed on August
17, 2013.
H. R. 1699 (2013)
Bills that require the labeling of genetically modiﬁed foods have
been introduced into the U.S. Congress on a number of occasions,
but as of the end of 2013, none had proceeded any further than
assignment to committee. The most recent example of such a bill
is one offered by Rep. Peter De Fazio (D-OR) and Sen. Barbara
Boxer (D-CA). It read as follows (ellipses [. . .] indicate the omis-
sion of text):
A BILL
To amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to
require that genetically engineered food and foods that contains
genetically engineered ingredients be labeled accordingly.
. . .
SEC. 2. PURPOSE AND FINDINGS
(a) PURPOSE.—The purpose of this Act is to establish a con-
sistent and enforceable standard for labeling of foods produced
using genetic engineering, including ﬁsh, thereby providing
consumers with knowledge of how their food is produced.
(b) FINDINGS.—Congress ﬁnds that—
(1) the process of genetically engineering food organisms
results in material changes to food derived from those organisms;
Data and Documents
263

(2) the Food and Drug Administration requires the labeling
of more than 3,000 ingredients, additives, and processes;
(3) individuals in the United States have a right to know if
their food was produced with genetic engineering for a variety
of reasons, including health, economic, environmental, reli-
gious, and ethical;
(4) more than 60 countries, including the United Kingdom
and all other countries of the European Union, South Korea,
Japan, Brazil, Australia, India, China, and other key United
States trading partners have laws or regulations mandating dis-
closure of genetically engineered food on food labels;
(5) in 2011, Codex Alimentarius, the food standards organi-
zation of the United Nations, adopted a text that indicates that
governments can decide on whether and how to label foods
produced with genetic engineering; and
(6) mandatory identiﬁcation of food produced with genetic
engineering can be a critical method of preserving the economic
value of exports or domestically sensitive markets with labeling
requirements for genetically engineered foods.
SEC. 3. AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL FOOD,
DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 403 of the Federal Food, Drug,
and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 343) is amended by adding at
the end the following:
“(z)(1) If it is a food that has been genetically engineered or
contains 1 or more genetically engineered ingredients, unless such
information is clearly disclosed, as determined by the Secretary.
“(2) This paragraph does not apply to food that—
“(A) is served in restaurants or other similar eating establish-
ments, such as cafeterias and carryouts;
“(B) is a medical food (as deﬁned in section 5(b) of the
Orphan Drug Act);
“(C) is a food that would be subject to this paragraph solely
because it was produced using a genetically engineered vaccine; or
264
GMO Food

“(D) is a food or processed food that would be subject to this
paragraph solely because it includes the use of a genetically
engineered processing aid (including yeast) or enzyme.
[Remaining sections of the bill deal with technical issues associ-
ated with its implementation.]
Source: H.R. 1699, 113th Congress (2013–2014). http://beta.
congress.gov/bill/113th-congress/house-bill/1699. Accessed on
March 31, 2014.
Raised Bill No. 6519, State of Connecticut (2013)
Connecticut became the ﬁrst state to pass a law requiring the label-
ing of foods that contain genetically modiﬁed components. The fol-
lowing are the relevant portions of that act.
Sec. 3. (NEW) (Effective October 1, 2013) (a) On October
ﬁrst following the date the Commissioner of Consumer
Protection recognizes the occurrence of both of the following:
(1) Four states, not including this state, enact a mandatory
labeling law for genetically-engineered foods that is consistent
with the provisions of this subsection, provided one such state
borders Connecticut; and (2) the aggregate population of
such states located in the northeast region of the United States
that have enacted a mandatory labeling law for genetically-
engineered foods that is consistent with this subsection exceed
twenty million based on 2010 census ﬁgures, (A) food intended
for human consumption, and (B) seed or seed stock that is
intended to produce food for human consumption, that is
entirely or partially genetically-engineered, except a processed
food subject to the provisions of this section solely because
one or more processing aids or enzymes were produced or
derived from genetic engineering, shall be labeled as follows:
(i) In the case of such food that is sold wholesale and is not
intended for retail sale, on the bill of sale accompanying such
food during shipping, with the clear and conspicuous words:
“Produced with Genetic Engineering”; (ii) in the case of such
Data and Documents
265

food for retail sale contained in a package, with the clear and
conspicuous words: “Produced with Genetic Engineering”;
(iii) in the case of such food that is a raw agricultural commod-
ity, on the package offered for retail sale or, in the case of any
such commodity that is not separately packaged or labeled, on
the bill of sale or invoice for such commodity and on the retail
store shelf or bin that holds such commodity displayed for sale
with the clear and conspicuous words: “Produced with Genetic
Engineering”; and (iv) in the case of any such seed or seed
stock, on the container holding the seed or seed stock displayed
for sale or on any label identifying ownership or possession of
the commodity with the clear and conspicuous words:
“Produced with Genetic Engineering”. Such food labeling shall
be displayed in the same size and font as the ingredients in the
nutritional facts panel on the food label. Not later than thirty
days after the Commissioner of Consumer Protection recog-
nizes the occurrence of the events described in subdivisions
(1) and (2) of this subsection, the commissioner shall cause to
be published in the ﬁve newspapers in the state having the larg-
est circulation, notice of the date the requirements of this sec-
tion become effective. For purposes of this section, “states
located in the northeast region of the United States” means
Maine, Vermont, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode
Island, New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania.
The act continues with a revised section on the misbranding
of foods:
(a) A food shall be deemed to be misbranded: . . . (12) if it is
intended for human consumption and genetically-engineered,
as deﬁned in section 2 of this act, and does not bear labeling
as required in accordance with section 3 of this act, unless (A)
it is a food intended for human consumption produced without
the producer’s knowledge that a seed or other component of
such food was genetically-engineered, or (B) on or before
July 1, 2019, it is a processed food, as deﬁned in section 2 of
this act, that is subject to the provisions of section 3 of this
act, solely because it contains one or more materials that have
266
GMO Food

been produced with genetic engineering, as deﬁned in section 2
of this act, provided such genetically-engineered materials do
not, in the aggregate, account for more than nine-tenths of
one per cent of the total weight of the processed food.
(b) Seed or seed stock that is intended to produce food for
human consumption shall be deemed misbranded if it is
genetically-engineered, as deﬁned in section 2 of this act, and
does not bear labeling as required in accordance with section
3 of this act.
Protection for food retailers is provided in subsection (f) of
section 2 of the act:
(f) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (c) of this
section, a retailer shall not be penalized or otherwise held liable
for the failure to label pursuant to this section unless (1) the
retailer is the producer or the manufacturer of the genetically-
engineered food, seed or seed stock and sells the genetically-
engineered food under a brand it owns, or (2) the retailer’s fail-
ure to label was knowing and wilful. In any action in which it is
alleged that a retailer has violated the provisions of this section,
it shall be a defense that such retailer reasonably relied on (A)
any disclosure concerning genetically-engineered foods con-
tained in the bill of sale or invoice provided by the wholesaler
or distributor pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, or (B)
the lack of any such disclosure.
Source: Amendment: *HB0652708508SDO*. General Asse-
mbly. State of Connecticut. http://www.cga.ct.gov/2013/
lcoamd/2013LCO08508-R00-AMD.htm. Accessed on December
5, 2013.
Data and Documents
267


6
Resources for Further
Research
The topic of genetically modiﬁed (GM) food is one that has
aroused a great deal of debate and controversy in the past, a sit-
uation that continues to the present day. This chapter provides
an annotated bibliography of a selection of the books, articles,
reports, and Internet sources that provide background for this
debate and that present some of the arguments on all sides of
the controversy.
Books
Andersson, Meike S., and M. Carmen de Vicente. 2010. Gene
Flow between Crops and Their Wild Relatives. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press.
This book provides an extensive review of all that is
known about the transfer of genes in the wild between
domesticated GM crops and their wild relatives.
Bennett, David J., and Richard C. Jennings, eds. 2013.
Successful Agricultural Innovation in Emerging Economies: New
269
Products labeled with Non Genetically Modiﬁed Organism (GMO) are
sold at the Lassens Natural Foods & Vitamins store in Los Feliz district of
Los Angeles. A number of states and local communities have now voted
to require the labeling of genetically modiﬁed foods in their jurisdictions.
(AP Photo/Damian Dovarganes)

Genetic Technologies for Global Food Production. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
The authors point out that a growing world population
requires the development of new types of agriculture to
feed that population. They suggest that genetic engineer-
ing may be one method for doing so. The essays in this
book are organized into four major sections: issues relating
to plant science and food security; new genetic crops in
developing nations; policy lessons learned in the develop-
ment of genetically modiﬁed foods; and social, legal, and
ethical issues related to GM foods.
Bertheau, Yves, ed. 2013. Genetically Modiﬁed and Non-
genetically Modiﬁed Food Supply Chains: Co-existence and
Traceability. Chichester, West Sussex, UK: Co-Extra; Wiley-
Blackwell.
The essays in this book are divided into eight major sec-
tions: introduction; managing gene ﬂow; co-existence in
food and feed supply chains; traceability and controls in
food and feed supply chains; legal regimes, liability, and
redress issues; data integration and DSS (decision support
systems); related issues; and conclusion.
Bodiguel, Luc, and Michael Cardwell, eds. 2010. The
Regulation of Genetically Modiﬁed Organisms: Comparative
Approaches. New York: Oxford University Press.
The question as to how genetically modiﬁed organisms
should be regulated has been answered in a variety of ways
by different governmental jurisdictions around the world.
This collection of essays reviews some of the regulatory
mechanisms that have been developed in the European
Union, which has perhaps devoted the greatest amount of
time and energy to the issue, and in other parts of the world.
Carter, Colin Andre, GianCarlo Moschini, and Ian M.
Sheldon, eds. 2011. Genetically Modiﬁed Food and Global
Welfare. Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publishing.
270
GMO Food

The essays in this book deal with the belief that genetically
modiﬁed crops and foods can be a signiﬁcant factor in
dealing with the world’s hunger issues, but that unneces-
sarily harsh regulatory systems (e.g., those in place in the
European Union) have hampered the development of
the full potential of the new technology.
Epstein, Samuel, and Beth Leibson. 2013. Good Clean Food:
Shopping Smart to Avoid GMOs, rBGH, and Products That
May Cause Cancer and Other Diseases. New York: Skyhorse
Publishing, Inc.
Operating on the assumption that GM foods are not
“good clean foods,” the authors recommend a number of
practices that will allow consumers to ﬁnd, purchase, and
prepare such foods.
Falck-Zepeda, José, Guillaume Grueère, and Idah Sithole-Niang,
eds. 2013. Genetically Modiﬁed Crops in Africa: Economic and
Policy Lessons from Countries South of the Sahara. Washington,
DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.
This book deals with the unique opportunities and prob-
lems faced by nations in southern Africa in the use of
genetically modiﬁed products for the improvement of
crop and food systems as a crucial way of meeting the
nutritional needs of their citizens.
Ferry, Natalie, and A. M. R. Gatehouse, eds. 2009. Environ-
mental Impact of Genetically Modiﬁed Crops. Wallingford, UK;
Cambridge, MA: CABI.
The essays in this anthology discuss the results of research
on the environmental impact of GM plants and seeds and
the signiﬁcance of this research on the development of
policy on GM products. Some attention is also paid to
the effects of GM products on human health.
Flachowsky, Gerhard, ed. 2014. Animal Nutrition with
Transgenic Plants. Wallingford, UK: CAB International.
Resources for Further Research
271

This valuable book provides a comprehensive review of
the types of transgenic plants that have been developed
for use as animal feeds and detailed information about
speciﬁc aspects of that topic, such as studies on both ﬁrst-
and second-generation GM crops, applications in differ-
ent parts of the world, public attitudes about the use of
GM crops for animals, and ethical issues raised by the
development of GM food crops.
Forman,
Lillian
E.
2009.
Genetically
Modiﬁed
Foods.
Minneapolis, MN: Abdo Group.
This book is a part of the publisher’s Essential Viewpoints
series in which a variety of positions on the use of geneti-
cally modiﬁed products is provided by specialists and
stakeholders in the ﬁeld.
Halford, Nigel G. 2012. Genetically Modiﬁed Crops, 2nd ed.
London: Imperial College Press.
This book provides a general introduction to the subject
of GM crops, with a review of the history of the technol-
ogy, steps in its practical development for today’s agricul-
ture, and problems and issues that have arisen as a result
of its introduction to the ﬁeld.
Hauter, Wenonah. 2012. Foodopoly: The Battle over the Future
of Food and Farming in America. New York: New Press.
The author is an organic farmer who is also a member of
the national Community Supported Agriculture (CSA)
movement. She explains in this book why efforts by local
organic food farmers and the organizations they have cre-
ated are not going to be enough to stem the growing con-
trol of the nation’s food supply by international industries
such as Monsanto and Dow Chemical.
Heller, Chaia. 2013. Food, Farms & Solidarity: French Farmers
Challenge Industrial Agriculture and Genetically Modiﬁed Crops.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
272
GMO Food

The author reviews the events that led up to an uprising of
French farmers in opposition to the use of genetic seeds and
genetic crops in French agriculture, and the signiﬁcance this
movement has had and is likely to have for the expanded use
of GM products in agriculture in France and elsewhere.
Herring, Ronald J., ed. 2013. Transgenics and the Poor:
Biotechnology in Development Studies. Hoboken, NJ: Taylor
and Francis.
Genetically modiﬁed crops and foods have been touted as a
potentially critical element in helping to solve the world’s
hunger problems. Yet that success has been somewhat lim-
ited. The essays in this book review some of the hoped-for
achievements of modern agricultural biotechnology, some
problems that have prevented more widespread adoption
of the technology, and some speciﬁc case studies where the
technology has and has not succeeded.
Hillstrom, Kevin. 2012. Genetically Modiﬁed Foods. Detroit:
Gale Cengage Learning.
This book provides a general introduction for young
adults to the topic of genetically modiﬁed foods and the
debates surrounding their use.
Ho, Mae-Wan, and Eva Sirinathsinghji. 2013. Ban GMOs
Now: Health & Environmental Hazards: Especially in the Light
of the New Genetics. London: ISIS.
This book summarizes the risks to human health and the
natural environment posed by the released of genetically
engineered product into the environment. The authors
encourage local communities to begin to take action
against the continuing and expanded use of such products
in countries throughout the world.
Jain, S. Mohan, and S. Dutta Gupta. 2013. Biotechnology
of Neglected and Underutilized Crops. Dordrecht; London:
Springer.
Resources for Further Research
273

The 16 essays in this book are divided into four sections
that deal with (1) three relatively unknown plants as possible
food sources, (2) the development of techniques for dealing
with certain so-called orphan crops, (3) a discussion of some
neglected but potential oil crops, and (4) the potential for
the genetic engineering of some better-known crops, such
as Safﬂower, Jatropha, Bael, Taro, and Mangrove.
Kaufman, Frederick. 2012. Bet the Farm: How Food Stopped
Being Food. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Kaufman discusses the scientiﬁc basis for the development
of GM foods, reviews the history of their development
and spread throughout the world, and points out the
connection between GM foods and crops and worldwide
economics and politics.
Kempken, Frank, and Chritian Jung, eds. 2010. Genetic
Modiﬁcation of Plants. New York: Springer.
This collection of essays provides a comprehensive and
complete overview of the technologies involved in the
production of genetically modiﬁed plants.
Kimbrell, Andrew. 2007. Your Right to Know: Genetic
Engineering and the Secret Changes in Your Food. San Rafael,
CA: Earth Aware Editions.
This well-illustrated book is organized into ﬁve sections,
dealing with human health issues, effects on the natural
environment, the use of genetically altered seeds, GM
foods found in the supermarket, and the future of food.
Appendices provide useful guides for consumers who wish
to know more about GM foods and their alternatives.
Komen,
John,
and
David
Wafula.
2013.
Trade
and
Tribulations: An Evaluation of Trade Barriers to the Adoption of
Genetically Modiﬁed Crops in the East African Community.
Washington, DC: Center for Strategic & International Studies.
274
GMO Food

East Africa would appear to be one of the places in the
world where the adoption of genetically modiﬁed crops
would provide a key factor in dealing with the region’s
food security issues. Yet, that process has been slow in
happening. The authors explore trade, political, social,
and other reasons for this situation.
Marchant, Gary Elvin, Guy A. Cardineau, and Thomas P.
Redick. 2010. Thwarting Consumer Choice: The Case against
Mandatory
Labeling
for
Genetically
Modiﬁed
Foods.
Washington, DC: AEI Press.
The authors argue that mandatory labeling of GM food
products will not provide consumers with more choices
about which they have greater information but fewer
choices overall. They say that such laws and regulations
only tend to reduce the number and quantity of GM
foods that are available in the marketplace when, overall,
the presence of such food products poses no threats to
consumers and may actually improve their food choices
and overall nutritional opportunities.
Miller, Debra A., ed. 2012. Genetically Engineered Food.
Detroit: Greenhaven Press.
This book is part of Greenhaven’s At Issue series that
focuses on important and controversial social issues. A
number of writers express a variety of views on the topic
of GM foods.
Oliver, Melvin J., and Yi Li, eds. 2013. Plant Gene
Containment. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell.
One of the most contentious issues surrounding the use of
genetically modiﬁed seed and crops is the risk of escape of
modiﬁed genes into other crops and/or wild plants. This
book provides a number of articles dealing with technical
aspects of this problem and its potential solutions.
Resources for Further Research
275

Panesar, Parmjit S., and Satwinder S. Marwaha, eds. 2013.
Biotechnology in Agriculture and Food Processing: Opportunities
and Challenges. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
The 16 essays in this book deal with topics such as plant
cell and tissue culture techniques in crop improvement,
genetic transformation and crop improvement, produc-
tion of biofertilizers, production of biopesticides, biotech-
nology in food processing, production of fermented foods,
functional foods, and enzymes in food processing.
Pechlaner, Gabriela. 2012. Corporate Crops: Biotechnology,
Agriculture, and the Struggle for Control. Austin: University of
Texas Press.
This book deals with the issues that have been raised
involved large multinational corporations and individual
farming units over the purchase and use of genetically
modiﬁed seeds and crops. The author presents four case
studies dealing with speciﬁc examples of the types of issues
that arise, using regulatory provisions, court cases, and
other types of source documents.
Pollack, Mark A., and Gregory C. Shaffer. 2009. When
Cooperation Fails: The International Law and Politics of
Genetically Modiﬁed Foods. Oxford; New York: Oxford
University Press.
The authors review the systems that have been developed
for the regulation of genetically modiﬁed products, pri-
marily in the European Union and the United States,
how those policies differ, and what effects they have had
on the development of GM food technology.
Popp, Jennie, Marty D. Matlock, Nathan Kemper, and Molly
Jahn. 2012. The Role of Biotechnology in a Sustainable Food
Supply. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
The 15 essays in this book consider a number of facets of
the question as to whether genetically modiﬁed crops and
foods can play a signiﬁcant role in dealing with the world’s
276
GMO Food

hunger problems, and what challenges and issues are
raised by that question.
Robin, Marie-Monique.
2010. The World According to
Monsanto: Pollution, Corruption, and the Control of the World’s
Food Supply, trans. from French by George Holoch. New
York: New Press.
One of the best of the many books written about the his-
tory and activities of the world’s largest biotechnology
ﬁrm, which was the innovator of a host of genetically engi-
neered foods, seeds, crops, and other products.
Segger, Marie-Claire Cordonier, Frederic Perron-Welch, and
Christine Frison, eds. 2013. Legal Aspects of Implementing the
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety was a complex docu-
ment that laid out provisions for the shipment of GM
crops and foods in the European Union and its trade part-
ners. This book deals with the variety of legal issues that
have arisen—and that may be expected to arise—as a con-
sequence of that agreement. Various chapters deal with
topic such as the involvement of the general public in
the process, the compliance mechanism laid out by the
treaty, the development of systems permitted by the treaty
in various countries and regions, and global policy trends
with regard to biosafety.
Smith, Jeffrey M. 2007. Genetic Roulette: The Documented
Health Risks of Genetically Engineered Foods. Fairﬁeld, IA: Yes!
Books.
This book is a classic in the ﬁeld because of its wide-
ranging attack on the use of genetically modiﬁed organ-
isms in agriculture and the food supply system. The
author is the founding executive director of the Institute
for Responsible Technology, an organization created to
provide information about the risks and dangers of
Resources for Further Research
277

genetically modiﬁed crops and foods. His earlier book
on the topic, Seeds of Deception: Exposing Industry and
Government Lies about the Safety of the Genetically
Engineered Foods You’re Eating, was published by Yes!
Books in 2003.
Thompson, R. Paul. 2011. Agro-technology: A Philosophical
Introduction. Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University
Press.
This textbook reviews the development of agricultural
biotechnology over the centuries and considers the moral
and ethical issues that have arisen as the technology of
the ﬁeld has expanded to include a host of processes from
the ﬁeld of genetic engineering.
Thomson, Jennifer A. 2013. Food for Africa: The Life and Work of
a Scientist in GM Crops. Claremont, South Africa: UCT Press.
The author has been involved in research and develop-
ment of GM crops since the 1970s. She describes her
experiences in all aspects of that program, from develop-
ment of GM plants to policy making to implementation
of technology throughout Africa over a period of four
decades.
Tutelyan, Victor, ed. 2013. Genetically Modiﬁed Food Sources.
Amsterdam: Academic Press.
The essays in this book provide a comprehensive and tech-
nically detailed description of the safety issues involved in
the production, distribution, and use of GM food prod-
ucts, along with the many actions that have been taken
to regulate speciﬁc GM products.
Weasel, Lisa H. 2009. Food Fray: Inside the Controversy over
Genetically Modiﬁed Food. New York: Amacom.
The author notes that the spread of GM foods and crops
has, largely without concern in the United States, grown
rapidly over the past few decades. She reviews that process
278
GMO Food

and highlights some of the most important issues relating
to the use of GM crops and foods.
Weirich, Paul, ed. 2007. Labeling Genetically Modiﬁed Food:
The Philosophical and Legal Debate. Oxford; New York:
Oxford University Press.
The dozen essays in this book deal with a variety of issues
associated with the labeling of GM foods, such as the cur-
rent art and state of the procedure, European Union regu-
lations, ethical issues in labeling GM foods, consumer
responses to labeling procedures and regulations, and dif-
fering conceptions by consumer of GM food labeling.
Wozniak, Chris A., and Alan McHughen, eds. 2012.
Regulation of Agricultural Biotechnology: The United States and
Canada. Dordrecht; New York: Springer.
The 17 essays in this book focus on a general overview of
the regulations dealing with genetically engineered products
in the United States and Canada, as well as discussions of
individual more speciﬁc issues related to this topic.
Zhang, Baohong, ed. 2013. Transgenic Cotton: Methods and
Protocols. New York: Humana Press.
This book provides a technical review of the procedures
for developing strains of transgenic cotton, places and
types of adoptions, and effects on agriculture and the
natural environment.
Articles
Acharjee,
Sumita,
and
Bidyut
Kumar
Sarmah.
2013.
“Biotechnologically Generating ‘Super Chickpea’ for Food
and Nutritional Security.” Plant Science: An International
Journal of Experimental Plant Biology 207: 108–116.
The authors present a fascinating case study of an agricul-
tural product, chickpeas, with a number of nutritional
deﬁcits that, in theory, could be improved by genetic
Resources for Further Research
279

engineering. They point out the technical problems involved
with this challenge and describe some technical ﬁxes for
them.
Agarwal, Pradeep K., et al. 2013. “Bioengineering for Salinity
Tolerance in Plants: State of the Art.” Molecular Biotechnology
54(1): 102–123.
This article provides an excellent introduction to the tech-
nology whereby plans can be genetically engineered for
the development of speciﬁc desirable characteristics, in
this case, an ability to grow and thrive in soil that would
otherwise not be acceptable for their cultivation.
Aris, Aziz, and Samuel Leblanc. 2011. “Maternal and Fetal
Exposure to Pesticides Associated to Genetically Modiﬁed
Foods
in
Eastern
Townships
of
Quebec,
Canada.”
Reproductive Toxicology 31(4): 528–533.
The authors report ﬁnding Bt toxins from GM crops in
the blood of pregnant women and their fetuses at a hospi-
tal in Eastern Canada. The ﬁndings may contradict gen-
eral expectations that the use of GM foods would have
any signiﬁcant effects on human health.
Arjó, G., et al. 2013. “Plurality of Opinion, Scientiﬁc
Discourse and Pseudoscience: An In Depth Analysis of the
Séralini et al. Study Claiming That Roundup™Ready Corn or
the Herbicide Roundup™Cause Cancer in Rats.” Transgenic
Research 22(2): 255–267.
The authors mount a vigorous attack on an article (men-
tioned in the title; also see later), claiming possible health
effects from two popular Monsanto GM products. Also
see “Robinson” under Internet resources and “Séralini et
al.” in this section.
Armenakas, Sophia, and Macrene Alexiades-Armenakas. 2013.
“Genetically-Modiﬁed Organisms in United States Agriculture:
280
GMO Food

Mandate for Food Labeling.” Food and Nutrition Sciences 4(8):
807–811.
The authors review the role of GM organisms in the
American agricultural system and suggest reasons for the
labeling of food products with GM components.
Bennett, Alan B., et al. 2013. “Agricultural Biotechnology:
Economics, Environment, Ethics, and the Future.” Annual
Review of Environment and Resources 38: 249–279.
The authors provide an overview of the development of
agricultural biotechnology over the past 15 years and sug-
gest some possible future directions for genetic engineer-
ing of crops and foods.
Bouët, Antoine, Guillaume Gruère, and Laëtitia Leroy. 2013.
“Market Effects of Information Requirements under the
Biosafety Protocol.” International Economics 134: 15–28.
The authors attempt to predict the effect on world mar-
kets of the document requirements imposed by the
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety. They ﬁnd that signato-
ries to the treaty and producers of GM crops and food
are likely to suffer signiﬁcant market losses, whereas pro-
ducers of non-GM foods in signatory nations are likely
to beneﬁt from the treaty. Developing nations are likely
to experience a negative impact also under terms of the
treaty.
Brookes, Graham, and Peter Barfoot. 2013. “The Global
Income and Production Effects of Genetically Modiﬁed (GM)
Crops 1996–2011.” GM Crops & Food 4(1): 74–83.
The authors estimate that the planting of the four major
GM crops—corn, soybeans, cotton, and canola—have
resulted in a total beneﬁt of $98.2 billion over the period
covered by the report, with the majority of that proﬁt
going to developing nations.
Resources for Further Research
281

Burening, G., and J. M. Lyons. 2000. “The Case of the
FLAVR SAVR Tomato.” California Agriculture 54(4): 6–7.
The authors provide a concise history of the development,
testing, and attempted commercialization of the world’s
ﬁrst GM tomato, a product that ultimately failed in the
marketplace.
Dibden, Jacqui, David Gibbs, and Chris Cocklin. 2013.
“Framing GM Crops as a Food Security Solution.” Journal of
Rural Studies 29(2): 59–70.
The adoption of GM foods is often recommended as a
contribution to the improvement of food safety.
Du, Bin, and Feng-Mei Zhu. 2013. “Safety Assessment and
Countermeasures of Genetically Modiﬁed Food Advance.”
Journal of Food Science and Technology 5(3): 318–322.
The authors review the general question of the safety of
GM foods and discuss methods by which safety can be
improved.
Entine, Jon. 2013. “Notorious Séralini GMO Cancer Rat
Study Retracted, Ugly Legal Battle Looms.” Forbes. http://
www.forbes.com/sites/jonentine/2013/11/29/notorious-seralini
-gmo-cancer-rat-study-retracted-ugly-legal-battle-looms/. Accessed
on November 30, 2013.
This article was written in response to a decision by the
editor of the journal Food and Chemical Toxicology to
retract an article about the health effects of GM foods on
rats. See Séralini et al. (2012) in this section.
Espley, Richard V., et al. 2013. “Analysis of Genetically
Modiﬁed Red-Fleshed Apples Reveals Effects on Growth and
Consumer Attributes.” Plant Biotechnology Journal 11(4):
408–419.
The authors discuss tests they have conducted on a genet-
ically engineered apple with consumers and ﬁnd that
those consumers have no negative response to changes
282
GMO Food

that have been made in the apple (improved color and
ﬂavor).
Flipse, Steven M., and Patricia Osseweijer. 2013. “Media
Attention to GM Food Cases: An Innovation Perspective.”
Public Understanding of Science 22(2): 185–202.
The authors discuss in detail three speciﬁc cases in which
media attention to a speciﬁc GM food–related case caused
food manufacturers to alter their business practices. They
make some generalizations about the relationship of
media attention to GM food cases and innovation by the
food industry.
Forabosco, F., et al. 2013. “Genetically Modiﬁed Farm
Animals and Fish in Agriculture: A Review.” Livestock Science
153(1–3): 1–9.
The authors provide a very complete and helpful review of
the status of the development of GM animals. They note
that a number of modiﬁed species are being studied in
research laboratories, but that only a small number of
GM animals are close to being ready for marketing.
Frewer, L. J., et al. 2013. “Genetically Modiﬁed Animals
from Life-Science, Socio-economic and Ethical Perspectives:
Examining Issues in an EU Policy Context.” New Biotechnology
30(5): 447–460.
The Pegasus project is a program designed to study issues
raised by the development, implementation, and commer-
cialization of genetically modiﬁed animals and products
produced from them. This paper describes a wide variety
of activities designed by member of the project to deter-
mine public attitudes about these animals and products,
with a view toward developing base concepts in the design
of EU regulations of such products.
Galli, Gad, and Rachel Amir. 2013. “Fortifying Plants with the
Essential Amino Acids Lysine and Methionine to Improve
Resources for Further Research
283

Nutritional Quality.” Plant Biotechnology Journal 11(2): 211–
222.
Lysine and methionine are two essential amino acids that
humans are unable to synthesize and that must, therefore,
be obtained from plants in the diet. The authors discuss
efforts to engineer plants to introduce or improve their
ability to produce these two amino acids. They also dis-
cuss some of the technical problems involved in this line
of research.
Gayen,
Dipak,
et
al.
2013.
“Comparative
Analysis
of
Nutritional Compositions of Transgenic High Iron Rice with
Its Non-transgenic Counterpart.” Food Chemistry 138(2–3):
835–840.
The nutritional value of GM and non-GM rice are com-
pared, with the results being that the two are essentially
identical except for the one trait (higher iron content)
introduced by the GM process.
Heap, Brian. 2013. “Europe Should Rethink Its Stance on GM
Crops.” Nature 498(7455): 409.
Heap, president of the European Academies Science
Advisory Council, suggests that changes in second-
generation GM crop production have made it possible
for the European Union to reconsider its tradition of rela-
tively severe restrictions on the use of such crops.
Hollingworth, Robert M., et al. 2003. “The Safety of Genetically
Modiﬁed Foods Produced through Biotechnology.” Toxicological
Sciences 71(1): 2–8.
The Society of Toxicologists presents its ofﬁcial view on
the use of GM foods in this editorial, pointing out that
the issue is not so much GM foods as it is the principle
of “substantial equivalence,” in which the safety of
foods is based on a comparison with comparable natural,
traditional, or conventional foods. On the basis of that
284
GMO Food

standard, the writers say, most GM foods appear to be safe
for human use.
Kamle, Suchitra, and Sher Ali. 2013. “Genetically Modiﬁed
Crops: Detection Strategies and Biosafety Issues.” Gene 522
(2): 123–132.
This paper provides “an overview on the production of
GM crops, their acceptabilities, detection strategies, bio-
safety issues and potential impact on society” and “overall
future prospects.”
Kouser, Shahzad, and Matin Qaim. 2013. “Valuing Financial,
Health,
and
Environmental
Beneﬁts
of
Bt
Cotton
in
Pakistan.” Agricultural Economics 44(3): 323–335.
This article attempts to place a dollar value of the conver-
sion of cotton farming in Pakistan from traditional to GM
crops. The authors report that the conversion has resulted
in an increase in value of $79 per acre, half of which is
attributable to health beneﬁts and half to environmental
beneﬁts.
Lang, John T. 2013. “Elements of Public Trust in the
American
Food
System:
Experts,
Organizations,
and
Genetically Modiﬁed Food.” Food Policy 41(2): 145–154.
When confronted with complex socioscientiﬁc issues,
such as the use of GM foods, the public may turn to
trusted organizations for reliable information on which
to base their opinions and decisions. How does the public
decide which organizations to trust? That question pro-
vides the motivation of the research that led to this paper.
Lemaux, Peggy G. 2008. “Genetically Engineered Plants and
Foods: A Scientist’s Analysis of the Issues (Part I).” Annual
Review of Plant Biology 59: 771–812.
The author provides a very complete and even-handed
review of the process of plant biotechnology and a discus-
sion of the pros and cons associated with that technology.
Resources for Further Research
285

Marcous, Jean-Michel, and Lyne Létourneau. 2013. “A
Distorted Regulatory Landscape: Genetically Modiﬁed Wheat
and the Inﬂuence of Non-safety Issues in Canada.” Science
and Public Policy 40(4): 514–528.
The authors discuss the ways in which social and political
factors were involved in the normal process of regulatory
decision making on the release of GM crops in Canada,
showing that this process was treated quite differently
from comparable issues in the same general category
because of these factors.
Martin, Cyrus. 2013. “The Psychology of GMO.” Current
Biology 23(9): R356–R359.
The author notes that GM foods have received the “seal of
approval” from most scientists, yet large numbers of the
general population remain opposed to the production
and use of these foods. He explores some political and
cultural reasons for this phenomenon.
Martinelli, Lucia, Malgorzata Karbarz, and Helena Siipi. 2013.
“Science, Safety, and Trust: The Case of Transgenic Food.”
Croatian Medical Journal 54(1): 91–96.
The authors consider the reality that scientists and the lay
public view safety issues associated with GM products in
quite different ways, largely determined by the attitudes
required of researchers about controversial topics.
Masip, Gemma, et al. 2013. “Paradoxical EU Agricultural
Policies on Genetically Engineered Crops.” Trends in Plant
Science 18(6): 312–324.
The authors review current regulatory policies in the
European Union with regard to genetically modiﬁed crops
and foods and raise a number of issues about those poli-
cies. They call those policies “contradictory and irrational”
and suggest that they are damaging EU and world
economies.
286
GMO Food

McColl, K. A., B. Clarke, and T. J. Doran. 2013. “Role of
Genetically Engineered Animals in Future Food Production.”
Australian Veterinary Journal 91(3): 113–117.
The authors note that the commercialization of geneti-
cally engineered animals has proceeded at a pace much
slower than that for GM plants. They review progress in
the ﬁeld for the purpose of providing information “so that
veterinarians and animal health scientists are better able to
participate in the debate on GE animals.”
McHughen, Alan, and Stuart Smyth. 2008. “US Regulatory
System
for
Genetically
Modiﬁed
[Genetically
Modiﬁed
Organism (GMO), rDNA or Transgenic] Crop Cultivars.”
Plant Biotechnology Journal 6(1): 2–12.
This paper provides a superb review of the history of regu-
latory actions in both the United States and the European
Union beginning in the mid-1980s until almost the
present day.
Mehrotra, Shweta, and Vinod Goyal. 2013. “Evaluation of
Designer Crops for Biosafety—a Scientist’s Perspective.” Gene
515(2): 241–248.
Noting the essential role that safety determination plays in
the development and commercialization of GM crops, the
authors explore the methods that are available to scientists
for determining how safe these crops are likely to be.
Mutuc, Maria, Roderick M. Rejesus, and Jose M. Yorobe, Jr.
2013. “Which Farmers Beneﬁt the Most from Bt Corn
Adoption? Estimating Heterogeneity Effects in the Philippines.”
Agricultural Economics 44(2): 231–239.
The authors point out that a number of studies have been
done on the extent to which farmers adopt the technology
of GM crops, but few studies have been done on factors
that affect differences in acceptance within a country or
region. In this study, they ﬁnd that the new technology
Resources for Further Research
287

is least likely to be adopted by farmers who do not irrigate
their farms, who are located far from seed distribution
centers, and who have little background in disease
identiﬁcation.
Nap, Jan-Peter, et al. 2003. “The Release of Genetically Modiﬁed
Crops into the Environment.” The Plant Journal 33: 1–18.
This early article discusses the environmental effects of
releasing GM crops into the natural environment and
regulations dealing with the procedure.
Nep, Shauna, and Kieran O’Doherty. 2013. “Understanding
Public Calls for Labeling of Genetically Modiﬁed Foods:
Analysis of a Public Deliberation on Genetically Modiﬁed
Salmon.” Society & Natural Resources 26(5): 506–521.
The authors describe their analysis of public discussion in
British Columbia about the possible approval of geneti-
cally engineered salmon in Canada and classify the types
of arguments they heard in the discussion.
Nielsena, Thea. 2013. “Consumer Buying Behavior of
Genetically Modiﬁed Fries in Germany.” Journal of Food
Products Marketing 19(1): 41–53.
The author describes an experiment in which consumers
in Germany are given the option of purchasing French
fries from street carts that are either GM or non-GM
products. She analyzes the reasons that purchasers gave
for choosing one product over another.
Oczek, Jeremy P. 2000. “In the Aftermath of the ‘Terminator’
Technology Controversy: Intellectual Property Protections for
Genetically Engineered Seeds and the Right to Save and
Replant Seed.” Boston College Law Review 41(3): 627–658.
The author discusses legal issues related to the develop-
ment and use of genetic use restriction technology
(GURT; so-called terminator technology) for the produc-
tion and sale of seed for crops.
288
GMO Food

Okeno, James A., et al. 2013. “Africa’s Inevitable Walk to
Genetically Modiﬁed (GM) Crops: Opportunities and Challenges
for Commercialization.” New Biotechnology 30(2): 124–130.
The authors argue that the lack of sufﬁcient arable land
in most parts of Africa means that African nations will
inevitably take greater advantage of the opportunities of
improved food production provided to them by GM
goods. They review some of the policy decisions that have
already been take for the encouragement of research and
expanded planting of GM crops on the continent.
Panda, Rakhi, et al. 2013. “Challenges in Testing Genetically
Modiﬁed Crops
for Potential
Increases
in Endogenous
Allergen Expression for Safety.” Allergy 68(2): 142–151.
This article reviews the regulatory procedures involved in
testing for the possible allergenicity of genetically modi-
ﬁed food products and raises the question as to the efﬁcacy
of such procedures and the conditions under which such
testing may or may not be necessary.
Phillips,
Diane
M.,
and
William
K.
Hallman.
2013.
“Consumer Risk Perceptions and Marketing Strategy: The
Case of Genetically Modiﬁed Food.” Psychology & Marketing
30(9): 739–748.
The authors note that the way new products are received
by consumers is determined to a considerable extent on
the way they are marketed. They examine this idea by pre-
senting a series of consumer panels with GM foods labeled
in a variety of ways to see how the labeling process affects
acceptance of the products.
Price, William D., and Lynne Underhill. 2013. “Application of
Laws, Policies, and Guidance from the United States and
Canada to the Regulation of Food and Feed Derived from
Genetically Modiﬁed Crops: Interpretation of Composition
Data.” Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 61(354):
8349–8355.
Resources for Further Research
289

The authors provide a review of the ways in which
Canadian and U.S. governmental agencies have dealt with
the problem of regulating and labeling genetically modi-
ﬁed foods and feeds.
Schwartz, Stephan A. 2013. “The Great Experiment: Genetically
Modiﬁed
Organisms,
Scientiﬁc
Integrity,
and
National
Wellness.” Explore 9(1): 12–16.
The author comments in detail on the controversial report
that ingestion of GM foods reduces the life span of rats
and increases the risk of tumors. (See Arjó et al. and
Seralini et al. in this section and Robinson in the
Internet section.
Séralini, Gilles-Eric, et al. 2012. “Long Term Toxicity of a
Roundup Herbicide and a Roundup-Tolerant Genetically
Modiﬁed Maize.” Food and Chemical Toxicology 50(11):
4221–4231.
This is a very important paper that reports on a study in
which rats fed food containing GM products died at a
greater rate and developed more tumors than did control
animals who did not receive those foods. This article was
late attacked vigorously by a number of scientists who
objected to a variety of features of the report. See Arjó et
al. in this section and Robinson in the Internet section.
In November 2013, Elsevier, publisher of Food and
Chemical Toxicology, announced that it was retracting the
paper, not because the data were fraudulent or incorrect,
but because the results were “inconclusive” and therefore
“do not reach the threshold of publication.” The publish-
er’s decision was met with a ﬁrestorm of protest by oppo-
nents of GM crops and foods who claimed that the
retraction was motivated by political, economic, or other
nonscientiﬁc factors. For more on the case, also see the
Elsevier announcement at http://www.elsevier.com/about/
press-releases/research-and-journals/elsevier-announces-article
290
GMO Food

-retraction-from-journal-food-and-chemical-toxicology
and
articles by “Entine” in this section.
Silva Dias, João, and Rodomiro Ortiz. 2012. “Transgenic
Vegetable Breeding for Nutritional Quality and Health
Beneﬁts.” Food and Nutrition Sciences 3: 1209–1219.
This article provides an excellent review of research done
on the genetic modiﬁcation of plants for the purpose of
increasing their nutritional value. It deals both with prod-
ucts that are well along in the development stage and with
those that are still in the early stages of research.
Van
Zwanenberg,
Patrick,
and
Valeria
Arza.
2013.
“Biotechnology, Controversy, and Policy: Challenges of the
Bioeconomy in Latin America.” Technology in Society 35(2):
105–117.
The authors consider the various ways in which new
forms of agricultural biotechnology can impact farming
communities by comparing the process by which GM cot-
ton crops were introduced into two very different farms in
Argentina.
Vàzquez-Salat, Núria, and Louis-Marie Houdebine. 2013.
“Will GM Animals Follow the GM Plant Fate?” Transgenic
Research 22(1): 5–13.
The authors of this paper trace the history of the develop-
ment and commercialization of genetically engineered
plants and animals and point out common issues and
differences between the two experiences retrospectively
and prospectively.
Verma, Charu, et al. 2011. “A Review on Impacts of
Genetically Modiﬁed Food on Human Health.” The Open
Nutraceuticals Journal 4: 3–11.
The authors of this article cite a large number of studies
that support their views that the health risks posed by
Resources for Further Research
291

genetically modiﬁed foods and crops are too extensive and
too well studied to ignore.
Zhao, J., et al. 2013. “Nutritional Composition Analysis of
Meat from Human Lactoferrin Transgenic Bulls.” Animal
Biotechnology 24(1): 44–52.
The researchers compared the nutritional value of tradi-
tional (non-GM) and GM beef and found no differences
on a number of measures.
Reports
Barker, Debbie, Bill Freese, and George Kimbrell. 2013. Seed
Giants vs. U.S. Farmers: A Report by the Center for Food Safety
& Save Our Seeds. Washington, DC: Center for Food Safety.
This report discussed the ways in which seed production
and sales have changed over the past few decades in the
United States and how farmers have essentially become
“serfs” to large biotechnology companies that invent, pro-
duce, and sell those seeds.
Bull, Alan T., Geoffrey Holt, and Malcolm D. Lilly. 1982.
Biotechnology: International Trends and Perspectives.
This report discusses in detail virtually all that was known
at the time about the risks and beneﬁts involved in the
genetic engineering of plants and animals for a variety of
purposes.
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological
Diversity. 2000. Montreal: Secretariat of the Convention on
Biological Diversity. http://bch.cbd.int/protocol/text/. Accessed
on August 18, 2013.
This treaty provides an outline for the transport of engi-
neered organisms across international borders. It is an
addendum to the 1993 Convention on Biological Diversity.
Committee on Identifying and Assessing Unintended Effects of
Genetically Engineered Foods on Human Health, Board on
292
GMO Food

Life Sciences, Food and Nutrition Board, Board on Agriculture
and Natural Resources, Institute of Medicine, and National
Research Council of the National Academies. Safety of
Genetically
Engineered
Foods:
Approaches
to
Assessing
Unintended Health Effects. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press, 2004.
Although now somewhat dated, this book is important
because it provides the views of a group of the most highly
qualiﬁed scientists and other stakeholders in the debate
over GM foods with regard to the safety of GM products
and steps that should be taken to continue testing for
and validity that safety.
Genetically Engineered Crops: Agencies Are Proposing Changes to
Improve Oversight, but Could Take Additional Steps to Enhance
Coordination and Monitoring. 2008. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Accountability Ofﬁce. GAO-09-60. http://www
.gao.gov/assets/290/283060.pdf. Accessed on August 21, 2013.
The Government Accountability Ofﬁce (GAO) reports on
its investigation of six instances in which GM seeds or crops
were released into the environment and the ways in which
federal agencies responsible for oversight of GM crop use
responded to these events. The agency makes a number of
recommendations for improving the response to such events.
Genetically Modiﬁed Foods: Experts View Regimen of Safety Tests
as Adequate, but FDA’s Evaluation Process Could Be Enhanced.
2002. Washington, DC: U.S. General Accounting Ofﬁce.
GAO-02-566.
http://www.gao.gov/assets/240/234718.pdf.
Accessed on August 21, 2013.
In the single most important report on GM foods by a
U.S. governmental agency, the General Accounting
Ofﬁce (now the Government Accountability Ofﬁce)
assesses the risks posed by such products and concludes
that they “pose the same types of inherent risks to human
health as conventional foods.”
Resources for Further Research
293

Gurian-Sherman, Doug. 2009. Failure to Yield: Evaluating the
Performance of Genetically Engineered Crops. Cambridge, MA:
Union of Concerned Scientists.
The author begins by noting the promises made by propo-
nents of GM crops and foods with regard to an expected
increase in crop yields. He then surveys the available liter-
ature and comes to the conclusion that these promises
have not been kept, and crop yield improvements were
seen over the preceding decade where the result of factors
other than the use of GM products.
National Research Council, et al. 2010. The Impact of
Genetically Engineered Crops on Farm Sustainability in the
United States. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
The authors of this extensive and intensive report call it
“the ﬁrst comprehensive assessment of the effects of GE-
crop adoption on farm sustainability in the United
States.” The study examined the ways in which genetically
engineered crops have affected the incomes, agronomic
practices, production decisions, environmental resources,
and personal well-being of American farmers.
Safety Evaluation of Foods Derived by Modern Biotechnology:
Concepts
and
Principles.
1993.
Paris:
Organisation
of
Economic Co-operation and Development.
This report provides a general overview of the principles
involved in the genetic modiﬁcation of organisms, some
of the many applications that may result from such
research, potential risks associated with genetic engineer-
ing, and some principles on which the monitoring and
regulation of GM genetically modiﬁed organisms can be
based.
“State/Local Efforts to Control GMOs.” Organic Consumers
Association.
http://www.organicconsumers.org/articles/article
_27247.cfm. Accessed on August 20, 2013.
294
GMO Food

This website provides an invaluable resource on the types
of laws and regulations adopted by state and local jurisdic-
tions on the use or prohibition of GM organisms within
their districts.
Strategies for Assessing the Safety of Foods Produced by Biotechnology.
1991. Geneva: Food and Agriculture Organisation and World
Health Organisation.
This joint report reviews some applications to which
genetic engineering has been put and is likely to be put
in the future, along with potential risks associated with
those applications and methods for assessing those risks
in the future.
Internet Sources
“8.1 Genetically Modiﬁed Organisms (GMOs).” World Trade
Organization.
http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/sps_e/sps
_agreement_cbt_e/c8s1p1_e.htm. Accessed on August 30, 2013.
This publication by the World Trade Organization deals
with the special issues involved in the transboundary trade
of such products among different countries and steps that
have been taken to deal with those issues.
“20 Questions on Genetically Modiﬁed Foods.” World Health
Organization. http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/
20questions/en/. Accessed on August 29, 2013.
This fact sheet provides a very complete and detailed
introduction to the subject of GM foods, dealing with
issues such as why GM foods are produced, how they dif-
fer from traditional foods, what potential risks they pose
to human health and to the environment, and how they
are regulated nationally.
“AgBioWorld.”
http://www.agbioworld.org.
Accessed
on
December 12, 2013.
Resources for Further Research
295

AgBioWorld
is
the
website
of
the
AgBioWorld
Foundation, a 501(c)(3) nonproﬁt organization located
in Auburn, Alabama, designed to provide science-based
information on all aspects of agricultural biotechnology.
The website provides not only current news and informa-
tion on agricultural biotechnology but also current and
past issues of the organization’s newsletter, AgBioView
Newsletter.
Antoniou, Michael, Claire Robinson, and John Fagan. 2012.
“GMO Myths and Truths.” Earth Open Source.org. http://
earthopensource.org/ﬁles/pdfs/GMO_Myths_and_Truths/GMO
_Myths_and_Truths_1.3.pdf. Accessed on December 13, 2013.
A very well-documented and written report on many essen-
tial aspects of GM foods, such as the techniques used in
genetic engineering, regulations on GM products, health
hazards of GM foods, speciﬁc health issues related to
Roundup products and glyphosate, effect of GM crops on
farms and the natural environment, the effects of climate
change on the debate over GM crops and foods, and prob-
lems involved in feeding the world now and in the future.
“Are Biotech Foods Safe to Eat?” WebMD. http://www
.webmd.com/food-recipes/features/are-biotech-foods-safe-to-eat.
Accessed on August 29, 2013.
WebMD is a highly regarded and trustworthy website
dealing with a host of health and medical issues. On this
web page, it reviews the nature of GM foods, their risks
and beneﬁts, and the best current information available
on their safety.
Beans,
Laura.
2013.
“New
Generation
of
Genetically
Engineered Crops Found to Drastically Increase Use of Toxic
Pesticides.” EcoNews. http://ecowatch.com/2013/08/30/new
-generation-genetically-engineered-crops-increase-toxic-pesticides/.
Accessed on December 13, 2013.
296
GMO Food

The author reports on and discusses new research that
suggests that farmers in the United States are drastically
increasing their use of pesticide because of the genetically
modiﬁed crops they are now planting.
Benbrook, Charles M. 2012. “Impacts of Genetically Engineered
Crops on Pesticide Use in the U.S.—the First Sixteen Years.”
Environmental
Sciences
Europe.
http://www.enveurope.com/
content/24/1/24/abstract. Accessed on August 21, 2013.
The author ﬁnds that the amount of herbicide used on
engineered corn, cotton, and soybean crops has actually
increased over the period of time for his study, a seeming
contradiction to what one might expect. The change has
occurred because of the evolution of herbicide-resistant
weeds that require ever-increasing amounts of herbicide
for their control.
Biello, David. 2010. “Genetically Modiﬁed Crop on the Loose
and Evolving in U.S. Midwest.” Scientiﬁc American. http://
www.scientiﬁcamerican.com/article.cfm?id=genetically-modiﬁed
-crop. Accessed on December 13, 2013.
This very interesting article reports on the spread of
GM canola among native and cultivated version of the
crop in parts of the Midwest. Especially interesting is
the host of comments from readers about the role that
Monsanto’s policies and practices have or have not had
in this phenomenon.
Bocco, Diana. “Top 10 Genetically Modiﬁed Food Products.”
Science and Society. http://dsc.discovery.com/tv-shows/curiosity/
topics/10-genetically-modiﬁed-food-products.htm. Accessed on
September 2, 2013.
The author reviews the status of 10 major food products
that have been genetically modiﬁed: sugar beets, corn,
potatoes, tomatoes, squash, Golden Rice, soybeans, oils,
animal feed, and salmon.
Resources for Further Research
297

Boyle, Rebecca. 2011. “How to Genetically Modify a Seed,
Step
by Step.”
Popular
Science.
http://www.popsci.com/
science/article/2011-01/life-cycle-genetically-modiﬁed-seed.
Accessed on December 13, 2013.
This very well-written article explains the process of genet-
ically engineering a seed in sufﬁcient detail to understand
the process but not to overwhelm the reader.
Carpenter, Janet, and Leonard Gianessi. 1999. “Herbicide
Tolerant Soybeans: Why Growers Are Adopting Roundup
Ready Varieties.” AgBioForum. http://agbioforum.org/v2n2/
v2n2a02-carpenter.htm. Accessed on August 21, 2013.
The authors provide a very detailed history and discussion
of the development of genetically modiﬁed soybean crops
in the United States.
“Contribution from the Network of ‘GM-Free’ European
Regions and Local Authorities on the Subject of Co-existence
between GMOs and Conventional and Organic Farming.”
http://www.gmo-free-regions.org/ﬁleadmin/ﬁles/gmo-free-regions/
GMO-Free-Network_Flyer_EN.pdf. Accessed on August 21,
2013.
This brochure was developed by the Network for the
Vienna conference held in April 2006. Its purpose was to
explain the goals and activities of the Network in regulat-
ing and controlling the use of GMO products within the
region that, at the time, consisted of 43 regions in Europe.
“Daisy Q&As.” AgResearch, New Zealand.
http://www
.agresearch.co.nz/news/Lists/news/Attachments/74/Daisy%20Q
+A%201%20Oct%2012%20for%20web.pdf.
Accessed
on
December 11, 2013.
This fact sheet provides answers to a number of basic
questions about a genetically engineered cow, Daisy,
produced by this New Zealand company that produces
hypoallergenic milk, milk lacking in a protein that causes
allergic reaction in humans who consume it.
298
GMO Food

Dugan, Sean. “The Pros and Cons of Genetically Modifying
Your Foods.” Article 3. http://www.article-3.com/the-pros
-and-cons-of-genetically-modifying-your-food-912185. Accessed
on August 29, 2013.
The author provides a good general introduction to the
topic of GM foods, mentions that, for the most part, they
are safe to eat, and then explains why such a controversy
has arisen over them.
“Environmental Concerns.” Biotechnology and Agricultural
Education Program. University of Hawaii. http://www.cta
hr.hawaii.edu/biotech/EnvironmentalConcerns.html. Accessed
on December 4, 2013.
This web page provides a clear and concise summary of
the potential risks to the natural environment posed by
the presence of GM seeds and crops.
Enviropig™. University of Guelph. http://www.uoguelph.ca/
enviropig/. Accessed on December 11, 2013.
This website provides a comprehensive description of the
research program conducted at Guelph to produce a more
environmentally friendly domestic pig, along with infor-
mation about the technology involved, environmental
beneﬁts, commercialization, societal issues, and other
related topics.
Fresco, Louise O. “Genetically Modiﬁed Crops Are Here to
Stay.” Spotlight 2001. http://www.fao.org/ag/magazine/0111
sp.htm. Accessed on August 29, 2013.
The author is assistant director-general of the Food and
Agriculture Organization Agriculture Department. As
the title makes clear, she does not think there is any way
to stop the use of GM crops around the world. She recom-
mends instead considering the role of GM crops in
the overall scheme of agriculture, remaining aware of the
many other forms of agriculture to which farmers do and
should have access.
Resources for Further Research
299

“Genetically Engineered Animals.” U.S. Food and Drug
Administration. http://www.fda.gov/animalveterinary/development
approvalprocess/geneticengineering/geneticallyengineeredanimals/
default.htm. Accessed on December 13, 2013.
This website provides a host of useful information about
the genetic engineering of animals from the standpoint
of one of the U.S. government’s primary regulatory agen-
cies. Included are sections on the process by which the
genetic engineering of animals is carried out, current
research in the ﬁeld, general questions and answers about
genetically engineered animals, and actions by the Food
and Drug Administration related to supervision and regula-
tion of genetically engineered animals in the United States.
“Genetic Engineering.” Grace Communications Foundation.
http://www.sustainabletable.org/264/genetic-engineering.
Accessed on December 13, 2013.
This website provides a comprehensive and easy-to-
understand introduction to the topic of GM foods with
links to useful articles and websites that provide more
detailed information on the topic.
“Genetically Modiﬁed Crops.” Case Studies in Agricultural
Biosecurity. Federation of American Scientists. http://www
.fas.org/biosecurity/education/dualuse-agriculture/2.-agricultural
-biotechnology/genetically-engineered-crops.html. Accessed on
December 12, 2013.
This excellent video and accompanying text reviews all
major aspects of the technology of and debate over the
use of GM crops, including sections on methods of gene
transfer in plants, Bt corn, StarLink corn, Biopharming,
edible vaccines, and the potential risks involved in genetic
modiﬁcation of plants.
“Genetically Modiﬁed Crops.” Green Facts. http://www.green
facts.org/en/gmo/index.htm. Accessed on December 11, 2013.
300
GMO Food

This website is an excellent resource of information on a
variety of environmental issues, such as air pollution, bio-
diversity, chemical substances, climate change, consumer
safety, and GM crops.
“Genetically Modiﬁed Food.” Social Issues Research Center.
http://www.sirc.org/gate/. Accessed on August 30, 2013.
This organization claims to believe in a balanced debate
on issues surrounding the use of GM food. The majority
of its articles appear to argue in support of such foods,
however. In any case, the articles do provide a fair presen-
tation of reasons not to fear about the use of GM foods as
well as to understand the beneﬁts they may offer human
societies.
“Genetics and Genomics Timeline.” Genome News Network.
http://www.genomenewsnetwork.org/resources/timeline/index
.php. Accessed on August 13, 2013.
This website provides a comprehensive and understand-
able introduction to major events in the story of the
research on genes, DNA, and DNA technology.
Gilbert, Natasha. 2013. “Case Studies: A Hard Look at GM
Crops.”
Nature.
http://www.nature.com/news/case-studies-a
-hard-look-at-gm-crops-1.12907#/superweeds. Accessed on
August 21, 2013.
This article reviews the status of three speciﬁc issues
related to the development and use of GM crops: the
appearance and spread of herbicide-resistant “super-
weeds,” the spread of transgenes to nonengineered natural
crops, and the psychological stress on some farmers as a
result of dealing with these new products. The same article
is available on the Scientiﬁc American website at http://
www.scientiﬁcamerican.com/article.cfm?id=a-hard-look-at
-3-myths-about-genetically-modiﬁed-crops.
Resources for Further Research
301

“GM-Free Regions Networks Declaration of Rennes.” http://
www.gmo-free-regions.org/ﬁleadmin/ﬁles/declaration_rennes_en
_051130.pdf. Accessed on August 21, 2013.
This web page contains the text of the Declaration of
Rennes, adopted in 2005 by member regions of the
European Network for the control of genetically modiﬁed
organisms.
“GMOs: Engineering and Environmental Disaster.” Earth Justice.
http://earthjustice.org/gmo. Accessed on August 21, 2013.
This website presents the argument that the distribution
of GM organisms in the environment will produce a host
of new problems, such as the growth of herbicide-resistant
“superweeds” and the spread of new genetic material
throughout the environment.
“Golden Rice Is Part of the Solution.” Golden Rice. http://
www.goldenrice.org/. Accessed on August 26, 2013.
This web page provides a good background on the history,
nature, and applications of one of the world’s best-known
(and often controversial) engineered food crops, Golden Rice.
Gonsalves, Carol, David R. Lee, and Dennis Gonsalves. 2004.
“Transgenic Virus-Resistant Papaya: The Hawaiian ‘Rainbow’
was Rapidly Adopted by Farmers and Is of Major Importance in
Hawaii Today.” APSnet. http://www.apsnet.org/publications/
apsnetfeatures/Pages/PapayaHawaiianRainbow.aspx. Accessed on
December 11, 2013.
The authors describe the problems created in Hawaii by
the spread of papaya ringspot virus (PRSV) beginning in
1992, and the way in which a genetically modiﬁed form
of the papaya plant, introduced in 1998, provided a rapid
and highly effective solution to this problem.
Grant, Bob. “AAAS: Don’t Label GM Foods.” The Scientist.
http://www.thescientist.com/?articles.view/articleNo/33057/title/
AAASDontLabelGMFoods/. Accessed on August 30, 2013.
302
GMO Food

This article reports on an action by the American
Association for the Advancement of Science in opposition
to the labeling of GM foods. Of special interest is
the extensive list of responses and commentaries to the
article.
Harmon, Amy, and Andrew Pollack. 2012. “Battle Brewing
over Labeling of Genetically Modiﬁed Food.” New York
Times.
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/05/25/science/dispute
-over-labeling-of-genetically-modiﬁed-food.html?_r=0. Accessed
on December 13, 2013.
The authors review the debates going on in state legisla-
tures and at the ballot box over the labeling of GM foods,
providing a nice review of both the pros and cons of that
practice. The article drew a very large number of com-
ments from readers that are well worth reading.
Jaffe, Greg. 2013. “What You Need to Know about Genetically
Engineered Food.” The Atlantic. http://www.theatlantic.com/
health/archive/2013/02/what-you-need-to-know-about-genetically
-engineered-food/272931/#comments. Accessed on December 13,
2013.
The value of this article is not so much the clear, general
introduction it provides to the topic but the vigorous
exchange of views in the blog section of the website that
discusses the activities of a variety of organizations that
support or oppose the use of GM products.
“Journal Retraction of Séralini Study Is Illicit, Unscientiﬁc, and
Unethical.” GM Watch. http://www.gmwatch.org/index.php/
news/archive/2013/15184-journal-retraction-of-seralini-study
-is-illicit-unscientiﬁc-and-unethical. Accessed on November 30,
2013.
This article was written about the decision by the journal
Food and Chemical Technology to retract an important
article on the health effects of GM corn on rats. See
Séralini et al. in the Articles section.
Resources for Further Research
303

Mannion, A. M., and Stephen Morse. 2013. “GM Crops
1996–2012: A Review of Agronomic, Environmental and
Socio-economic Impacts.” University of Surrey Centre for
Environmental Strategy Working Paper 04/13. http://www
.surrey.ac.uk/ces/ﬁles/pdf/04-13%20Morse_Mannion_GM%20
Crops.pdf. Accessed on December 4, 2013.
This research paper examines the available research on a
host of issues related to the use of GM products, including
advantages and disadvantages of such products, agro-
nomic impacts, environmental and ecological impacts,
economic impacts, and social impacts, followed by a dis-
cussion of the import of this evidence and conclusions
that can be drawn from the available research. A very use-
ful list of references is also included.
Mather, Robin. 2012. “The Threats from Genetically Modiﬁed
Foods.” Mother Earth News. http://www.motherearthnews
.com/homesteading-and-livestock/genetically-modiﬁed-foods-zm
0z12amzmat.aspx#axzz2nNYmt2k7. Accessed on December 13,
2013.
The author argues that “[g]enetically modiﬁed foods and
crops pose serious threats to human and animal health,
but Big Ag doesn’t want you to know that.” Some inter-
esting reactions and responses from readers are included
in the blog for this website.
McCarthy, Erin. 2011. “Label GM Foods? Our Right2Know.”
Grace Communications Foundation. http://gracelinks.org/
blog/661/label-gmo-foods-our-right2know. Accessed on December
13, 2013.
This essay makes the point that the debate over GM foods
is not likely to end soon, but one fundamental point that
remains is that consumers have the right to know what is
in their foods and that, therefore, there should be no hesi-
tation in labeling of foods containing GM products.
304
GMO Food

Mestel, Rosie. 2012. “GMO Foods Don’t Need Special Label,
American Medical Assn. Says.” Los Angeles Times. http://
articles.latimes.com/2012/jun/21/news/la-heb-gmo-foods-medical
-association-20120620. Accessed on August 30, 2013.
This article reviews the actions of the American Medical
Association in opposition to the required labeling of GM
foods.
Meyer, Hartmut. 2007. “GMO-Free Regions Manual: Case
Studies from around the World.” http://www.gmo-freeregions
.org/ﬁleadmin/ﬁles/gmo-free-regions/GMO_free_regions_manual
.pdf. Accessed on August 21, 2013.
This brochure describes the general philosophy and practice
of GM-free zones in regions around the world, with detailed
descriptions of such programs in the United States, Chile,
New Zealand, Philippines, and the European Union.
Miller, Henry I. 2013. “Debunking ‘The Big Lie’ about
Genetically Engineered Crops.” Forbes. http://www.forbes
.com/sites/henrymiller/2013/05/23/debunking-the-big-lie-about
-genetically-engineered-crops/. Accessed on December 13, 2013.
Miller writes in response to the upcoming March Against
Monsanto by pointing out what he sees as the many falla-
cies perpetrated by opponents of GM crops and foods.
“Outcrossing
and
Gene
Flow.”
GM
Compass.
http://
www.gmo-compass.org/eng/safety/environmental_safety/170
.genetically_modiﬁed_plants_out_crossing_gene_ﬂow.html.
Accessed on December 4, 2013.
This article explains the process by which genes can be
transferred from one organism to another organism of
the same or different species in nature and how this infor-
mation relates to safety issues posed by GM crops.
Pearce, Fred. 2012. “What Are Environmentalists Taking Anti-
Science Positions?” Environment 360. http://e360.yale.edu/
Resources for Further Research
305

feature/why_are_environmentalists_taking_anti-science_posi-
tions/2584/. Accessed on December 4, 2013.
The writer accuses some members of the environmental
movement of ignoring sound scientiﬁc evidence on some
controversial topics, including GM crops and foods. The
article engendered a large number of (generally) very
thoughtful responses.
“Pest Resistant Crops.” Gene Watch. http://www.genewatch
.org/sub-568238. Accessed on August 28, 2013.
This valuable web page provides a very complete discus-
sion of the history and current use of pest-resistant crops,
with a number of useful links to related pages.
Phillips, Theresa. 2008. “Genetically Modiﬁed Organisms
(GMOs): Transgenic Crops and Recombinant DNA Tech-
nology.” Scitable by Nature Education. http://www.nature.com/
scitable/topicpage/genetically-modiﬁed-organisms-gmos-transgenic
-crops-and-732. Accessed on December 13, 2013.
This article provides an excellent general overview of the
current and possible future uses of GM crops and foods,
with a discussion of some of the safety and other issues
related to the ﬁeld.
Pollack, Andrew. 2013. “In a Bean, a Boon to Biotech.” New
York Times. November 15, 2013. http://www.nytimes.com/
2013/11/16/business/in-a-bean-a-boon-to-biotech.html?page
wanted=all&_r=0. Accessed on December 11, 2013.
The author describes the development of a genetically
modiﬁed form of soybeans that have reduced (or zero)
trans fat, making the product safer and healthier for the
human diet. The product was ﬁrst introduced in the
United States in 2011, and its use was promoted indi-
rectly by the Food and Drug Administration’s 2013 deci-
sion to recommend or require the elimination of trans fat
from many foods.
306
GMO Food

Robinson, Clare. 2013. “Tumorous Rats, GM Contamination,
and Hidden Conﬂicts of Interest.” Spinwatch. http://www
.spinwatch.org/index.php/issues/more/item/5495-tumorous-rats
-gm-contamination-and-hidden-conﬂicts-of-interest. Accessed on
August 21, 2013.
Robinson discusses in detail the publication of a report on
possible health risks posed by GM foods, reaction to that
report by a number of scientists, and possible conﬂicts of
interest associated with those reactions. For more detail,
see Séralini et al. and Arjo et al. under the Articles section.
Ronald, Pamela. 2013. “The Truth about GMOs.” Boston
Review.
http://www.bostonreview.net/forum/pamela-ronald
-gmo-food. Accessed on October 30, 2013.
The author points out that the development of GM crops
can provide one important way of increasing the world’s
food supply, thus helping to solve one of the world’s most
serious problems: mass hunger. She explains why she
thinks GM crops are a safe and effective way for dealing
with this issue.
Schauzu,
Marianna. 2000. “The Concept of Substantial
Equivalence in Safety Assessment of Foods Derived from
Genetically Modiﬁed Organisms.” AgBiotechNet. http://www
.bfr.bund.de/cm/349/schauzu.pdf. Accessed on August 20, 2013.
The author reviews the development and meaning of the
term substantial equivalence and its continued use in the
assessment of the safety of GM foods around the world.
“Should We Grow GM Crops?” Harvest of Fear. PBS. http://
www.pbs.org/wgbh/harvest/exist/yes2.html. Accessed on Dec-
ember 4, 2013.
This web page reviews some of the socioeconomic objec-
tions that have been raised to the use of GM crops.
Then, Christoph. 2013. “30 Years of Genetically Engineered
Plants—20 Years of Commercial Cultivation in the United
Resources for Further Research
307

States:
a
Critical
Assessment.”
Testbiotech.
http://www
.testbiotech.de/sites/default/ﬁles/TESTBIOTECH%20Cultivation
_GE_%20plants_US.pdf. Accessed on September 11, 2013.
This report provides an excellent review of the develop-
ment of agricultural biotechnology in the United States
and Europe since the 1980s, with emphasis on differences
in the ways in which the two regions have dealt with the
new technology.
Tyson, Peter. “Show We Grow GM Crops?” Frontline. Harvest
of Fear. http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/harvest/exist/. Accessed on
August 30, 2013.
This presentation is an extraordinary piece that allows
readers to hear arguments both for and against the use of
GM crops in such a way that they can adjust their opin-
ions as they hear more and more points on each side of
the debate.
“Weighing
the
GMO
Arguments:
For/Against.”
FAO
Newsroom. http://www.fao.org/english/newsroom/focus/2003/
gmo7.htm
and
http://www.fao.org/english/newsroom/focus/
2003/gmo8.htm. Accessed on August 29, 2013.
These two pieces by the U.N. Food and Agriculture
Organization provided two of the most complete, lucid,
and unbiased arguments for and against the use of GM
foods available on the Internet.
308
GMO Food



7
Chronology
Humans have been modifying plants and animals for thousands
of years. For most of that time, the process of organism modiﬁ-
cation was carried out knowing little or nothing about the
actual genetic mechanism by which such changes occurred.
Since the last half of the twentieth century, plant and animal
organism has become a much more sophisticated art and sci-
ence that has resulted in the production of genetically modiﬁed
(GM) seeds, crops, foods, and other organisms today. This
chapter provides a brief overview of some of the most impor-
tant events in that long history, including some of the impor-
tant social, political, economic, and other events that have
accompanied that progress.
c. 12000 BCE
The date often cited for the ﬁrst domestica-
tion of a wild animal, the dog from the grey wolf. Estimated
dates for the domestication of other animals are about
8000 BCE for sheep and goats, about 7000 BCE for pigs, and
4000 BCE for horses. All domestication occurred by cross-
breeding on a trial-and-error basis.
311
Greenpeace activists hold banners reading “Contaminated by Monsanto?”
after they dumped nine tons of corn in front of the headquarters of the
French conservative Union for a Popular Movement party in Paris on
March 31, 2008, to protest against the planting of genetically modiﬁed
corn. (AP Photo/Jacques Brinon)

c. 10000 BCE
Estimated date for the ﬁrst domestication of a
wild plant, wild emmer (Triticum dicoccum), to a domesticated
variety.
c. 1800 BCE
Possible earliest date for the hybridization of
plants, carried out by farmers in Babylonia.
c. 1550 BCE
First hybrid animal, the mule, reputed to have
been developed during the Egyptian New Kingdom (c. 1550–
1067 BCE).
1720
English gardener Thomas Fairchild is credited with
having produced the ﬁrst hybrid plant in Europe, Dianthus
Caryophyllus barbatus, a cross between sweet william and pink
carnation species.
1865
Austrian monk Gregor Mendel announces the results of
his research on the transmission of genetic traits in pea plants in
a paper titled “Versuche über Pﬂanzenhybriden” (“Experiments
on Plant Hybridization”) at two meetings of the Natural
History Society of Brno. The paper is published a year later in
the journal Verhandlungen des naturforschenden Vereins Brünn
(Proceedings of the Natural History Society of Brünn).
1869
Swiss biologist Friedrich Miescher discovers a weakly
acidic substance whose function is unknown in the nucleus of
cells, the ﬁrst mention of what was to become known as deoxy-
ribonucleic acid (DNA).
1908
American plant geneticist George Harrison Shull
invents the ﬁrst commercially successful corn hybrid.
1909
Danish botanist Wilhelm Johannsen suggests the name
gene for the unit in cells responsible for the transmission of
hereditary characteristics.
1919
Hungarian agricultural engineer Károly Ereky invents
the word biotechnology to describe methods for converting waste
agricultural products into useful materials.
1926
Future vice president of the United States Henry A.
Wallace develops the ﬁrst commercial hybrid corn and founds
the Pioneer Hi-Bred Corn Company to market his product.
312
GMO Food

1928
British bacteriologist Frederick Grifﬁth provides the
ﬁrst experimental evidence that a bacterium is able to change
in both form and function. Grifﬁth attributes this change to
the presence in the bacterium of a transforming factor, later
shown to be DNA.
1935
Russian chemist Andrei Nikolaevitch Belozersky iso-
lates pure DNA for the ﬁrst time.
1941
American geneticists George Beadle and Edward
Tatum propose the one-gene, one-protein hypothesis, namely
that each gene in an organism’s genome is responsible for the
production of a single unique protein.
1944
The
research
team
of
Canadian-born
American
molecular biologist Oswald Avery, Canadian microbiologist
Colin MacLeod, and American geneticist Maclyn McCarty
demonstrate that DNA is the “transforming factor” identiﬁed
by Frederick Grifﬁth (1928), responsible for changing the form
and function of a bacterium.
1952
American molecular biologist Joshua Ledeberg suggests
the name plasmid for all extra-chromosomal material in a cell
capable of transmitting genetic information. Plasmids have
become an essential tool in the practice of genetic engineering.
1952
American bacteriologist Alfred Hershey and American
geneticist Martha Chase provide convincing evidence that
DNA is the genetic material through which traits are inherited
in organisms.
1953
English chemist Francis H. C. Crick and American
biologist James D. Watson discover the chemical structure of
DNA.
1957
Crick proposes the Central Dogma of molecular biol-
ogy, namely that the direction of events in a cell is always
DNA —> RNA —> protein and never the reverse.
1967
Researchers at ﬁve different laboratories announce the
discovery of DNA ligases, substances that joined two separate
molecules or fragments to form a new molecule or fragment.
Chronology
313

1970
American microbiologist Hamilton O. Smith isolates
the ﬁrst restriction enzyme, a substance that recognizes and
cleaves DNA at speciﬁc points in the molecule. Almost concur-
rently, American molecular biologist Daniel Nathans uses that
enzyme, HindII, to make the ﬁrst restriction map of the simian
virus SV40.
1970
Morton Mandel and Akiko Higa provide the ﬁrst dem-
onstration of induced (artiﬁcial) competence, when they use a
solution of calcium chloride to induce Escherichia coli bacteria
to incorporate a bacteriophage  unit.
1970
Indian geneticist Chandrakant T. Patel develops the
world’s ﬁrst commercial cotton hybrid, known as Sankar-4
(Hybrid-4).
1972
American biochemist Paul Berg produces the ﬁrst
recombinant DNA molecule.
1973
American biochemists Herbert Boyer and Stanley N.
Cohen devise a method for cloning genetically engineered
DNA molecules in foreign cells, providing the ﬁrst reliable
system of recombinant DNA synthesis.
1974
German biochemist and geneticist Rudolf Jaenisch
produces the ﬁrst transgenic mouse by splicing viral DNA into
an early-stage mouse embryo.
1975
About 140 biologists, physicians, and lawyers meet at
the Asilomar Conference Center, near Monterey, California,
to discuss safety issues associated with research involving
recombinant DNA technology.
1976
Biochemist Herbert Boyer and venture capitalist
Robert Swanson found Genentech, the ﬁrst company devoted
entirely to genetic engineering. The company’s ﬁrst commercial
production somatostatin is produced a year later.
1976
Belgian molecular biologist Walter Fiers sequences the
genome of bacteriophage MS2, which was thought by some
historians to be the ﬁrst complete sequencing of an organism’s
genome.
314
GMO Food

1976
The U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) creates
an advisory committee on research and development of
recombinant DNA research.
1976
The Monsanto Company patents Roundup® herbicide.
1980
In the case of Diamond v. Chakrabarty, the U.S.
Supreme Court rules that genetically altered life forms can be
patented.
1982
The
European
Organisation
for
Economic
Co-
operation and Development (OECD) issues a report, the ﬁrst
of its kind, outlining issues related to the development of
genetic engineering of plants and animals.
1982
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
approves the ﬁrst genetically engineered drug, Humulin, a form
of insulin produced by genetically altered bacteria.
1983
Four independent groups of researchers almost simulta-
neously announce the synthesis of the ﬁrst transgenic plant, a
genetically engineered tobacco plant.
1983
The
biotechnology
company
Advanced
Genetic
Sciences (AGS) requests permission from the U.S. government
to ﬁeld test a type of bacterium (called Frostban) capable of
resisting low temperatures at which it would normally freeze.
Legal challenges delay the test for four years.
1983
An advisory committee on rDNA research and applica-
tions is established in the White House Ofﬁce of Science and
Technology Policy (OSTP).
1983
The World Health Organization (WHO) uses the
Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) bacterium to combat infections by
black ﬂies in Africa.
1985
Researchers from the U.S. Department of Agriculture
and the University of Pennsylvania produce the ﬁrst transgenic
domestic animal, a pig.
1986
In a document called the “Coordinated Framework for
the Regulation of Biotechnology,” the OSTP assigns various
Chronology
315

aspects of the regulation of GMOs to the Department of
Agriculture (USDA), FDA, and Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA).
1986
The EPA approves the release of the ﬁrst commercial
crop produced by biotechnology, GM tobacco plants.
1987
AGS ﬁeld tests its experimental ice-minus bacterium,
Frostban, on strawberry and potato plots in experiments that
are disrupted by protestors. Frostban never reaches commercial
production, although not primarily because of these protests.
1987
Researchers at the Waite Institute in Australia modify a
type of soil bacterium that causes crown gall disease. The modi-
ﬁed bacterium is tested successfully on almond seedlings.
1987
The U.S. Department of Agriculture approves com-
mercial production of a modiﬁed type of tomato with extended
shelf life by the Calgene company. The product is the forerun-
ner of the ﬁrst commercially available GM plant, the Flavr Savr
tomato (1994).
1991
A joint committee of the Food and Agriculture
Organisation (FAO) and the World Health Organisation
(WHO) issues a report on strategies for assessing the safety of
foods produced by genetic engineering.
1991
The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Animal and
Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) publishes guidelines
for the ﬁeld testing of genetically engineered crops.
1992
China becomes the ﬁrst nation in the world to permit
the growing of a GM crop, tobacco.
1992
The FDA announces that it has concluded that GM
foods are “not inherently dangerous” and, therefore, do not
require governmental regulation.
1993
The FDA approves the use of Monsanto’s recombinant
bovine somatotrophin (rBST) for use in cows to produce milk
production. The company makes available the product under
the trade name Posilac in 1994.
316
GMO Food

1993
The ﬁrst herbicide-resistant soybeans (resistant to the
herbicide sulfonylurea) become available.
1993
The OECD publishes a report dealing with the monitor-
ing of the safety of GM foods titled “Safety Evaluation of Foods
Derived by Modern Biotechnology: Concepts and Principles,”
laying down many of the fundamental principles on that topic
that remain in force today. The report introduces the concept
and terminology of the substantial equivalence of GM foods.
1994
France approves the planting of the ﬁrst genetically
engineered crop in Europe, tobacco.
1994
The FDA approves the sale of Calgene’s Flavr Savr
tomato, although the product never becomes commercially
successful.
1996
The ﬁrst domestic mammal to be cloned from an adult
somatic cell, a sheep named Dolly, is born at the Roslin
Institute in Scotland.
1996
Monsanto introduces its ﬁrst genetically engineered
crop (cotton), resistant to the Roundup Ready® herbicide.
1996
The ﬁrst glyphosate-resistant weed (Lolium rigidum) is
detected in a canola crop in Australia.
1997
The European Union adopts Regulation 258/97/EC,
the Novel Foods Regulation, which requires that products con-
taining GM materials carry labels to that effect.
1997
Austria bans the planting of a GM form of corn, an
action followed quickly by seven other European nations.
1998
Rainbow, a GM form of papaya resistant to papaya
ringspot virus (PRSV) is planted for the ﬁrst time in Hawaii,
making possible the survival of an important cash crop that
had nearly been destroyed by the pest.
1998
In Directive 90/220, the European Union adopts a
policy for the use of GM crops and foods in Europe but delays
the implementation of that policy for a period of six years while
further research and analysis is conducted.
Chronology
317

1998
The European Union approves the ﬁrst GM crop in
the region, a modiﬁed form of maize known as MON810,
produced by Monsanto.
1998
Researchers at the Sanger Institute and Washington
University announce the complete genome for the ﬁrst animal,
a nematode Caenorhabditis elegans.
1998
The Delta & Pine Land Company, an American cotton
seed company, and the USDA receive a patent for genetic use
restriction technology (GURT), also known as terminator tech-
nology, a procedure that produces sterile seeds, thereby prevent-
ing farmers from harvesting seeds from ﬁrst-year plants to be
used for replanting a year later.
2000
The invention of Golden Rice is announced. Golden
Rice is a genetically engineered form of natural rice enriched with
three genes for the biosynthesis of beta-carotene.
2000
The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety (CPB) is adopted
as an extension to the Convention on Biological Diversity,
adopted in 1993. The CPB is designed to govern the move-
ment of biologically engineered organisms across international
borders. The treaty comes into effect in September 2003 after
50 nations had ratiﬁed it. The United States is not a signatory
to the treaty.
2000
An international team of researchers sequence the com-
plete genome of the plant Arabidopsis thaliana, the ﬁrst such
accomplishment for a plant.
2001
The European Commission publishes a report on the
safety of genetically engineered crops, concluding that they
pose no more of a threat to human health and the environment
than do conventional crops.
2001
The European Union adopts Directive 2001/18/EC,
which repeals Directive 90/220 and replaces it with signiﬁ-
cantly more stringent requirements for the planting, produc-
tion, and distribution of GM crops and foods. (Also see
1998.)
318
GMO Food

2001
Researchers at the University of California at Davis and
the University of Toronto announce to production of a new
type of tomato tolerant of high-salt environments.
2003
Argentina, Canada, and the United States ﬁle a com-
plaint with the World Trade Organization (WTO), claiming
that the European Union’s policies on GM food constitute an
unfair and illegal protectionist move against foreign trade.
2003
Ten European regions organize to form a network of
GMO-free jurisdictions. They include Aquitaine (France),
Basque
Country
(Spain),
Thrace-Rodopi
(Germany),
Limousin (France), Marche (Italy), Upper Austria (Austria),
Salzburg (Austria), Schleswig-Holstein (Germany), Tuscany
(Italy), and Wales (United Kingdom).
2003
The Codex Alimentarius Commission of the FAO/
WHO publishes a document, “Principles and Guidelines on
Foods Derived from Biotechnology,” designed to assist
European nations to coordinate and standardize their regula-
tion of GM food as a way of ensuring public safety and facilitat-
ing international trade.
2003
The ﬁrst Bt-toxin-resistant organism, the bollworm
moth Helicoverpa zea, is found in parts of Arkansas and
Mississippi.
2004
The European Union’s total prohibition on the plant-
ing of GM crops ends with its authorization for the use of a
GM form of corn, Bt-11 maize.
2005
In February, the European Network (see 2003), grown
to 20 members, adopts a Charter of the Regions and Local
Authorities of Europe on the Subject of Coexistence of Genetically
Modiﬁed Crops with Traditional and Organic Farming, other-
wise known as the Charter of Florence, outlining the group’s
philosophy about GM organisms and their common intentions
to prevent their use in the regions.
2005
In November, the Network meets again in Rennes,
France, now grown to 40 members to revise and update the
Chronology
319

Charter of Florence with a new document known as the
Declaration of Rennes.
2006
The WTO rules in favor of Argentina, Canada, and
the United States on the 2003 (q.v.) complaint against the
European Union’s ban on GM crops and food. Some individ-
ual European nations ignore this decision, at least in the short
term.
2008
The FDA announces that meat and milk from cow,
pig, and goat clones is of equal safety and equal nutritional
value as that from nonengineered animals.
2009
Researchers from the Monsanto company announce
that the pink bollworm in certain parts of India has become
resistant to the company’s GM Bt cotton, the ﬁrst instance in
which an organism has become resistant to a GM crop in the
world.
2010
The Canadian Department of Environment approves
the release of Enviropigs into the environment, as long as they
are kept separate from traditional pigs. The pigs have been
genetically engineered to digest large quantities of phosphorus,
reducing dramatically the amount of wastes they produce.
(Also see 2012.)
2011
Researchers at the University of Sherbrooke Hospital
Centre ﬁnd Bt toxins from GM crops in the blood of pregnant
women and their fetuses.
2011
A form of soybeans genetically engineered to be high in
monounsaturated fats is made commercially available for the
ﬁrst time.
2012
New Zealand researchers announce the development of
a cow, Daisy, that produces milk free of ß-lactoglobulin protein
that can causes allergic skin, digestive, and respiratory reactions,
predominantly in infants.
2012
The University of Guelph, in Ontario, loses its funding
for the Enviropig program (see 2010), and all remaining
animals are destroyed.
320
GMO Food

2012
Voters in California defeat Proposition 37, requiring
that all foods containing GM components be so labeled. The
vote was 51.41 percent to 48.59 percent.
2012
A French court ﬁnds Monsanto guilty of poisoning
farmer Paul Francois, who had claimed that he had suffered
neurological problems, including memory loss, headaches, and
stammering as a result of inhaling Monsanto’s Lasso weedkiller
in 2004.
2013
A farmer in eastern Oregon discovers a strain of GM
wheat growing on his property. Researchers are unable to trace
the origin of the strain, which the Monsanto company had
developed but had ceased testing in 2005.
2013
Opponents of GM foods carry out two March against
Monsanto rallies in more than 400 cities in more than 50 coun-
tries. Organizers claim 2 million marchers in the ﬁrst event and
3 million in the second.
2013
Voters in Washington state defeat Initiative 522 requir-
ing the labeling of all GM food products. The ﬁnal vote was
51.09 percent “no” to 48.91 percent “yes.”
2013
Connecticut becomes the ﬁrst state to pass a law requir-
ing the labeling of food that contains GM components. The
state of Maine follows with a similar law a few weeks later.
2014
The FDA approves public sale and distribution of
AquAdvantage Salmon, a type of salmon that has been geneti-
cally modiﬁed to grow year around instead of only in spring
and summer.
Chronology
321


Glossary
The study of genetically modiﬁed (GM) organisms involves an
extensive vocabulary of terms from a variety of ﬁelds. This
chapter provides deﬁnition of some of the terms most com-
monly used in speaking and writing about GM products.
allergen
A substance capable of producing an allergic reac-
tion in an animal.
androgenesis
A process by which an embryo is produced that
contains genetic data only from the male parent; a process that
is sometimes used in the production of genetically modiﬁed
organisms.
antisense technique
A method used in genetic engineering
that involves the production of a gene that has the opposite
effect of some desired gene, such that the two forms of the
genes bond to each other, producing an inactive complex.
artiﬁcial competence
See competence.
Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt)
A soil bacterium that produces
toxins that are deadly to some pests.
bacteriophage
A virus that infects a bacterium.
baculovirus
A virus that is effective against a host organism
at only certain states of that organism’s life cycle; a principle
that is used in the development of genetically modiﬁed organ-
isms needed at only certain times in a growing cycle.
ballistic gun
See gene gun.
323

biofortiﬁcation
Any process by which the nutritional value
of a plant or animal is improved by genetic modiﬁcation or
some other synthetic process.
bioremediation
Any process by which the natural environ-
ment or some other system is improved by a synthetic pro-
cedure, such as the use of genetic engineering.
Bt
See Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt).
Bt crop
A crop that has been genetically engineered to carry
the gene for the bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis, thus allowing
it to produce natural pesticides for a number of organisms.
competence
The ability of a cell to take up free DNA in a cell
and be thereby transformed into a new form. Competence can
be either natural, when it occurs without external actions, or
induced or artiﬁcial, when it occurs under such external action.
complementary herbicide
The herbicide that is selected for
use with a crop that has been genetically engineered to be toler-
ant of that herbicide.
cross-pollination
Fertilization of a plant with pollen from
another plant.
cultivar
A form of a plant that has been produced by selective
breeding and maintained by cultivation but that is not different
enough from the parents to be classiﬁed as a distinct species;
from cultivated variety.
DNA sequencing
See gene sequencing.
electroporation
A method for introducing a gene into a host
organism by directing a pulse of electricity at the organism that
brieﬂy opens the pores of the organisms and allows the gene to
enter.
ﬁeld trial
A test of a new type of plant or form of technology,
including genetically modiﬁed organisms, which is carried out
outside the laboratory. Such tests are carefully controlled with
speciﬁc requirements for location, plot size, weather conditions,
and other factors.
324
Glossary

food security
The extent to which adequate supplies of food
are available to a country, a region, or individual consumers.
gene ﬂow
See horizontal gene ﬂow; vertical gene ﬂow.
gene gun
A device that is used to ﬁre a gene into a host
organism; one of the methods used to produce a chimeric prod-
uct. Also known as a ballistic gun or particle gun.
gene mapping
The process of determining the relative physi-
cal locations of genes on a chromosome.
gene sequencing
The process of determining the exact
sequence of nucleotide bases in a strand of DNA. Also known
as DNA sequencing.
genetic engineering
The deliberate modiﬁcation of the
DNA of an organism by any one of a number of methods.
genetic use restriction technology (GURT)
A procedure
used for the production of sterile seeds, thus requiring farmers
to purchase new seeds for their crops every year. Also known
as terminator technology.
genetically engineered organism (GEO)
See genetically
modiﬁed organism.
genetically modiﬁed organism (GMO)
Any organism that
has been modiﬁed by the insertion or removal of one or more
genes. Also called genetically engineered organism (GEO).
GEO
See genetically modiﬁed organism.
GMO
See genetically modiﬁed organism.
horizontal gene ﬂow (HGF)
The transfer of genes between
two organisms in some manner other than traditional repro-
duction. Also known as horizontal gene transfer.
horizontal gene transfer (HGT)
See horizontal gene ﬂow.
identity preservation
A technical and administrative pro-
cedure for segregating one crop type from another crop type
at every stage from production and processing to distribution.
induced competence
See competence.
Glossary
325

intellectual property rights
Creations of the mind, such as
works of art, literary works, and inventions for which the
creator receives exclusive rights of production and use.
molecular marker
A speciﬁc section of DNA that can “ﬂag”
the position of a particular gene or a speciﬁc genetic
characteristic.
mutagen
Any substance or other factor that is capable of
producing mutations.
natural competence
See competence.
oncogenic
Capable of causing cancer.
organic agriculture
A method of farming that avoids the use
of synthetic materials, including any type of genetically modi-
ﬁed organism. Unlike somewhat similar terms such as natural,
healthy, or safe, organic has ofﬁcial governmental deﬁnitions.
particle gun
See gene gun.
pharming
The practice of genetically engineering a plant or
animal so as to have it produce a drug or pharmaceutical.
polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
A type of chemical tech-
nology used for making multiple copies of sections of DNA.
recombinant DNA (rDNA)
DNA that consists of DNA
segments from two different organisms.
substantial equivalence
The concept that, if a new food is
found to be essentially equivalent to a natural or existing food,
it can be regarded as safe as the natural or existing food.
sustainability
The conditions under which humans can exist
in harmony with nature in such a way as to ensure that
adequate supplies of necessary materials will continue to be
available to humans over time.
terminator technology
See genetic use restriction technol-
ogy (GURT).
traceability
With regard to genetically modiﬁed products,
the ability to verify the origin, history, transport, use, and other
characteristics of a synthetically produced seed, crop, or food.
326
Glossary

transgenic
Referring to an organism whose genome has been
altered by the insertion of DNA from a different species.
vector
A material, such as a bacteriophage or virus, that can
be used to insert a gene from one organism or synthetic source
into a second organism.
vertical gene ﬂow (VGF)
The transfer of genes from one
organism to another by traditional means of reproduction,
from parents to offspring. Also known as vertical gene transfer
(VGT).
vertical gene transfer (VGT)
See vertical gene ﬂow.
wild type
The form of an organism that occurs naturally, in
contrast to a form produced by breeding, genetic engineering,
or some other procedure.
Glossary
327


Index
2001/18/EC, 318
285/97/EC, 317
90/220, 317
Aleshnick, Barry, 49
Allergen, 323
Altmann, Richard, 8
American Academy of
Environmental Medicine,
161–64
Androgenesis, 323
Antisense technique, 323
AquAdvantage salmon, 38, 321
Arber, Werner, 16
Asilomar I, 21
Asilomar II, 22–23, 314
Avery, Oswald, 313
Bacillus thuringiensis, 323.
See also Bt
Bacteriophage, 323
Baculovirus, 323
Baltimore, David, 22
Beadle, George, 313
Becker, Sandy, 117–20
Belozersky, Andrei
Nikolaevitch, 8, 313
Berg, Paul, 18, 22, 314
Biofortiﬁcation, 85, 324
Biological Registry Services,
164–66
Bioremediation, 324
Biotechnology Industry
Organization, 166–68
Bové, José, 168–71
Bovine spongiform encepha-
lopathy (BSE), 61–63
Bowman, Vernon Hugh,
228, 229
Bowman v. Monsanto, et al.
569 U.S. 11–796 (2013),
262–63
Boyer, Herbert W., 19,
171–73, 314
BSE. See Bovine spongiform
encephalopathy
Bt, 118, 120, 123, 315
Bt crop, 324
Bt technology, 30–32
Bush, George H. W., 60
Cambridge (Massachusetts)
Recombinant DNA
Technology Ordinance, 27
329

Canadian Biotechnology
Action Network, 173–75
Canal, Tami, 52
Cardineau, Guy A., 134
Cartagena Protocol on
Biosafety, 65–66,
246–48, 318
Center for Biotechnology
Information, 181–84
Center for Food Safety,
175–77
Central Dogma, 313
Chargaff, Erwin, 9
Chargaff’s rule, 9, 11
Charter of Florence, 319, 320
Charter of the Regions and
Local Authorities of
Europe on the Subject of
Coexistence of
Genetically Modiﬁed
Crops with Traditional
and Organic Farming. See
Charter of Florence
Chase, Martha, 313
Chilton, Mary-Dell, 177–79
Chimera, 19
Cohen, 314
Cohen, Stanley N.,
19, 22, 179–81
Competence, 324
Complementary herbicide, 324
Conference on Biohazards in
Biological Research. See
Asilomar I
Convention on Biological
Diversity (CBD), 66
Coordinated Framework for
the Regulation of
Biotechnology, 26–27,
60, 243–45, 315–16
Correns, Carl, 7
Crick, Sir Francis, xv,
9–11, 313
CropGen, 184–86
Cross-pollination, 324
Cultivar, 324
Daisy (genetically engineered
cow), 320
De Vries, Hugo, 7
Deb, Debal, 120–29
Declaration of Rennes, 320
Deoxyribonucleic acid. See
DNA
Diamond v. Chakrabarty
447 U.S. 303 (1980),
241–43, 315
Directive 90/219/EEC
(European Union), 61
DNA ligase, 18
DNA, 8–12
Dolly (genetically engineered
sheep), 63, 317
Earth Liberation Front (ELF),
51, 52
Electroporation, 324
Enviropigs, 320
Ereky, Károly, 312
Field trial, 324
Fiers, Walter, 15, 314
330
Index

Flavr Savr tomato, 33–34,
316, 317
Food & Water Watch,
186–88
Food security, 325
Fraley, Robert T., 188–90
Francois, Paul, 321
Franklin, Rosalind, 9
Franz, John E., 34, 190–91
Frostban, 33, 80, 316
Gene gun, 325
Gene mapping, 325
Gene sequencing, 325
Gene silencing, 121
Genentech, Inc., 28
Genetic code, 12–14
Genetic engineering,
14–20, 325
Genetic use restriction
technology, 325
Genetically engineered
organism, 325. See also
Genetically modiﬁed
organism
Genetically modiﬁed
animals, 37
Genetically modiﬁed
organism, 325
ban by Mendocino County
(California), 252–54
regulation of genetically
modiﬁed foods by the
European Union, 250–52
Genetically modiﬁed
plants, 32–37
data, 229–30, 235–39
regulations, 230–34
Genetics history, 6–11
GEO. See genetically
engineered organism
GloFish, 29
Glyphosate, 34–35
GM Crops: Global Socio-economic
and Environmental Impacts
1996–2011 (report), 82
GMO foods
labeling, 98–101, 129–33
potential beneﬁts, 78–88
potential harm, 88–98
production, 75
public opinion, United
States, 52–58
Europe, 58–60
regulation, labeling, 70–77
European Union, 60–74
worldwide, 74–77
Golden Rice, 85, 120, 123, 318
Gonsalvez, Dennis, 192–94
Greenpeace, 50, 310,
194–97, 311
Grifﬁth, Frederick, 313
Gruère, Guillaume P., 76
“Guidance for Industry:
Voluntary Labeling
Indicating Whether
Foods Have or Have Not
Been Developed Using
Bioengineering,”
(publication) 248–50
GURT. See genetic use
restriction technology
Index
331

H.R. 1699, 263–65
Hannah, L. Curtis, 80
Hauter, Wenonah, 160, 161
Hershey, Alfred, 313
HGF. See horizontal gene
ﬂow
HGT. See horizontal gene
transfer
Higa, Akiko, 314
Horizontal gene ﬂow, 94, 325
Horizontal gene transfer, 325
Humulin, 315
Hybridization, 4–6
history, 312
Ice minus bacteria, 33, 50
identity preservation, 325
Initiative 522 (Washington
state), 321
Institute for Responsible
Technology, 197–99
Intellectual property rights,
326
International Service for the
Acquisition of Agri-
Biotech Applications,
199–203
Invoking of Preemption
(North Dakota
legislation), 256–57
Jaenisch, Rudolf, 20, 314
Johannsen, Wilhelm, 7, 312
Jones, Phill, 129–33
Kemp, John D., 203–204
Labeling of GMO foods. See
GMO foods, labeling
Lederberg, Joshua, 313
Liberty (herbicide), 79
Lindow, Steve, 204–206
Living modiﬁed organisms, 66
Lynas, Mark, 89, 206–208
MacLeod, Colin, 313
Mad cow disease. See Bovine
spongiform encephalopathy
Mandel, Morton, 314
March against Monsanto,
52, 321
Marchant, Gary E., 134
Martin, Henri, 34
Matthei, Johann H., 11
McCarty, Maclyn, 313
Mendel, Gregor, 6, 312
Mendocino County
(California), ban on
GMO crops, 252–54
Meselson, Matthew, 16
Miami Group, 66
Miescher, Friedrich, 8, 312
Mintz, Beatrice, 20
Molecular marker, 326
Molloy, Dannel P., 99
Monsanto, 209–11
Monsanto Co. v. Geertson Seed
Farms 561 U.S. ____
(2010), 257–60
Mutagen, 326
Nathans, Daniel, 22, 314
Nemade, Rashmi, 133–37
332
Index

Nirenberg, Marshall,
3, 11, 13
Non-GMO Project, 211–13
Novel Foods Regulation. See
Regulation 258/97
Oncogenic, 326
Organic agriculture, 326
Organic Consumers
Association, 213–16
Owen, Tony, 137–40
Pandey, Santosh, 140–44
Patel, Chandrakant T., 314
Pharming, 326
Plant Patent Act of 1930, 240
Polymerase chain reaction, 326
Posilac 316
Potrykus, Ingo, 216–18
Precautionary principle, 60,
124–25
Proposition 37 (California),
260–61, 321
Public opinion about GMO
foods. See GMO foods,
public opinion
Rainbow (genetically
engineered papaya), 317
Raised Bill No. 6519, State of
Connecticut (2013), 265–67
Rao, S. R., 76
Reagan, Ronald, 25, 60
Recombinant DNA, 19, 326
regulation, 24–27
research, concerns, 20–24
Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee (RAC), 22
Regulation 50/2000
(European Union), 72–73
Regulation 258/97 (European
Union), 64, 70–71
Regulation 1139/98
(European Union), 71–72
Regulation 1830/2003
(European Union), 73
Regulation 2001/18/EC
(European Union), 69
Regulation of GMO foods.
See GMO foods,
regulation
Restriction endonuclease, 16
Rifkin, Jeremy, 50
RNA interference, 118–20
Roundup (herbicide), 35,
120, 315
Roundup Ready, 120
Roundup Ready plants, 35,
79, 317
“Safety of Genetically
Modiﬁed Foods, The”
(report), 254–56
Seeds of Resistance, 51
Sequencing, gene, 15
Shoo, Elizabeth, 145–49
Shull, George Harrison, 312
Singer, Maxine, 218–21
Sleeper genes, 96
Smith, Hamilton O., 16, 314
Stacking (plant modiﬁcation
technique), 36
Index
333

Substantial equivalence
principle, 64, 317, 326
Sustainability, 326
Swanson, Robert, 314
Sweta, 149–52
Tatum, Edward, 313
Terminator technology, 318
Traceability, 326
Transgenic, 327
Van Montagu, Marc, 221–23
Vector, 327
Vertical gene ﬂow, 327
Von Tschermak, Erich, 7
Wallace, Henry A., 312
Washington Tree Improvement
Association, 51
Watson, James, xv,
9–11, 22, 313
White Paper on Food
Safety (European
Union), 67
White Paper on the
Precautionary
Principle (European
Union), 67
Wilcox, Kent W., 16
Wild type, 327
Wilkins, Maurice, 9
World Health Organization,
223–26
Young, Susan,
152–58
Yuan, Robert, 16
334
Index

About the Author
David E. Newton holds an associate’s degree in science from
Grand Rapids (Michigan) Junior College, a BA in chemistry
(with high distinction) and an MA in education from the
University of Michigan, and an EdD in science education from
Harvard University. He is the author of more than 400 text-
books, encyclopedias, resource books, research manuals, labora-
tory manuals, trade books, and other educational materials.
He taught mathematics, chemistry, and physical science in
Grand Rapids, Michigan, for 13 years; was professor of chemis-
try and physics at Salem State College in Massachusetts for
15 years; and was adjunct professor in the College of
Professional Studies at the University of San Francisco for
10 years.
Previous books for ABC-CLIO include Global Warming
(1993), Gay and Lesbian Rights—A Resource Handbook (1994,
2009), The Ozone Dilemma (1995), Violence and the Mass
Media (1996), Environmental Justice (1996, 2009), Encyclo-
pedia of Cryptology (1997), Social Issues in Science and
Technology: An Encyclopedia (1999), DNA Technology (2009),
and Sexual Health (2010). Other recent books include Physics:
Oryx Frontiers of Science Series (2000), Sick! (4 volumes;
2000), Science, Technology, and Society: The Impact of Science
in the 19th Century (2 volumes; 2001), Encyclopedia of Fire
(2002), Molecular Nanotechnology: Oryx Frontiers of Science
Series (2002), Encyclopedia of Water (2003), Encyclopedia of
Air (2004), The New Chemistry (6 volumes; 2007), Nuclear
Power (2005), Stem Cell Research (2006), Latinos in the

Sciences, Math, and Professions (2007), and DNA Evidence and
Forensic Science (2008). He has also been an updating and con-
sulting editor on a number of books and reference works,
including Chemical Compounds (2005), Chemical Elements
(2006), Encyclopedia of Endangered Species (2006), World of
Mathematics (2006), World of Chemistry (2006), World of
Health (2006), UXL Encyclopedia of Science (2007), Alternative
Medicine (2008), Grzimek’s Animal Life Encyclopedia (2009),
Community Health (2009), Genetic Medicine (2009), The Gale
Encyclopedia of Medicine (2010–2011), The Gale Encyclopedia
of Alternative Medicine (2013), Discoveries in Modern Science:
Exploration, Invention, and Technology (2013–2014), and
Cengage Science in Context (2013–2014).
336
About the Author



