SAN RAFAEL PUBLIC LIBRARY
3 1111 01643 0264
The Motion of Planets Around the Sun
David L. Goodstein & Judith R. Goodstein 
/
? . 
'J 
' 
'

Feynman's Lost 
Lecture
by David L. Goodstem & 
Judith R Goodstein
Feynman s Lost Lecture reveals the real 
Richard Feynman—the brilliant theoretical 
physicist who left an indelible mark on 
twentieth-century science
On March 13, 1964, Feynman delivered 
a lecture to the Caltech freshman class. 
“The Motion of Planets Around the Sun”— 
why the planets move elliptically instead of 
in perfect circles For reasons unknown, 
most probably for his own amusement, he 
chose to make the argument using mathe­
matics no more advanced than high-school 
plane geometry. Isaac Newton had pulled 
off much the same trick nearly 300 years 
earlier in his masterpiece, the Principia. 
Feynman, unable to follow Newton’s 
obscure proof, invented his own original, 
geometrical proof in the Caltech lecture.
The subject of Feynman s lecture was 
the watershed discovery that separated the 
ancient world from the modern world—the 
culmination of the Scientific Revolution. 
Before Copernicus, Kepler. Galileo, and 
Newton, the universe was Earth-centered. 
After their discoveries, our idea of the uni­
verse steadily altered and expanded, mov­
ing outward to the infinity we try to under­
stand in our own time Thus Feynman 
deals here with a crowning achievement 
of the human mind, comparable to 
Beeihoven’s symphonies. Shakespeare’s 
plays, or Michelangelo’s Sistine Chapel. 
Feynman conclusively demonstrates the 
astonishing fact that has mystified and
(«xMtinued on back flap)

_____________DATE DUE
APR 2 0 199S
MAR Sb
ГА 1 I'T» I MjeUC ШМК» 
ttm №№. ашгмм
DEC 3 0 YflOF 
APR' 2 9 2006
APR 2 2 1ЯЯР
MAY 2 6 1998
M6 2 9 1998—
■1П 
' 'ЧЧЯ
OCT 26 199g T
NOV 0 S 1998
NOV 2 0 1998
ПЕС Y У1998
OCT 2 9 1999
MAR 2 7 2000
MAR 1 6 2002
.
NOV 2 0 7003
“VTEB 1 0 7000
PRINTED IN U.S.A.


FEYNMAN’S 
LOST 
LECTURE


BY THE SAME AUTHORS
David L, Goodstein
The Mechanical Universe and Beyond 
(PBS television senes)
States of Matter
Judith R. Goodstein
Millikan’s School

r ?’T 7 ~^ptGlp

FEYNMAN’S 
LOST 
LECTURE
Tike Mlofion of 
Planers .Around 
it Ik e Sun
DAVID L. GOODSTEIN AND 
JUDITH R. GOODSTEIN
W•W•NORTON & COMPANY
NEW YORK LONDON

Copyright © 1996 by the California Institute of Technology
All rights reserved 
Printed in the United States of America 
First Edition
For information about permission to reproduce selections from this book, 
write to Permissions, W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue, 
New York, NY 10110.
The text of this book is composed in Times Roman, 
with the display set in Times Roman Bold and Caslon Openface. 
Composition by Crane Typesetting Service, Inc. 
Manufacturing by The Courier Companies, Inc. 
Book design by Margaret M. Wagner
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Goodstein, David L., 1939-
Fyenman’s lost lecture : the motion of planets around the sun I by David L. Goodstein 
and Judith R. Goodstein.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-393-03918-8
1. Planets—Orbits. 2. Celestial mechanics. 3. Conic sections.
4. Feynman, Richard Phillips. I. Goodstein, Judith R. П. Title.
QB603.M6G66 1996
52Г.З—dc20 
95-38719
W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10110 
W. W. Norton & Company Ltd., 10 Coptic Street, London WC1A 1PU 
1234567890

To the memory of R.P.F., 
who would be appalled that we found it 
necessary to explain what he had 
said so clearly.


Contenis
Preface
11
Introduction
17
1
From Copernicus to Newton
2 1
2 
Feynman: A Reminiscence 
45
3
Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 
63
4
“The Motion of Planets Around the Sun” 
(March 13, 1964)
145
9

10 Contents
Epilogue
171
Feynman’s Lecture Notes 
179
Bibliography
183
Index
185

This is the story of how Feynman’s lost lecture came to be lost, and 
how it came to be found again. In April 1992, as Caltech’s archivist, 
I was asked by Gerry Neugebauer, the chairman of the Physics Depart­
ment, to go through the files in Robert Leighton’s office. Leighton was 
ill and had not used his office for several years. Marge Leighton, his 
wife, had told Neugebauer that it was all right to clean out the office— 
she’d already collected her husband’s books and personal effects. I 
could take what I wanted for the archives, and the Physics Department 
would dispose of the rest.
Besides heading the Physics Department from 1970 to 1975, Leigh­
ton, together with Matthew Sands, had overseen the editing and publica­
tion of Richard Feynman’s two-year course of lectures in introductory 
physics, delivered to Caltech freshmen and sophomores. The lectures, 
published in the early 1960s in three volumes by Addison-Wesley, dealt 
with virtually every subject in physics, with a point of view that remains 
fresh and original to this day. I was hoping to find some tangible evidence 
of the Leighton-Feynman collaboration.
It took me a couple of weeks to sift through the stacks of paper, 
which were stashed everywhere, but Leighton didn’t disappoint me. 
I unearthed two folders, one marked “Feynman Freshman Lectures, 
11

12 Preface
unfinished,” another labeled “Addison-Wesley,” wedged between bud­
get sheets and purchase orders from earlier decades and reams of yel­
lowing computer paper covered with endless columns of numbers, all 
thrown together in a storage closet just outside his office. Leighton’s 
correspondence with the publisher contained details about the format, 
the color of the cover, comments by outside readers, adoptions at other 
schools, and estimates of how well the volumes would sell. That folder 
I put in the “Save” pile. The other folder, the one containing the 
unedited Feynman physics lectures, I carried back to the archives myself.
In his June 1963 preface to The Feynman Lectures on Physics, Feyn­
man commented on some of the lectures not included there. He’d given 
three optional lectures in the first year on how to solve problems. And, 
indeed, three of the items in Leighton’s folder turned out to be the raw 
transcripts for Reviews A, B, and C, offered by Feynman in December 
1961. A lecture on inertial guidance, which Feynman gave the following 
month, didn’t make the cut either—an unfortunate decision, according 
to Feynman—and I found a partial transcript of this lecture in Leighton’s 
folder. The folder also contained the unedited partial transcript of a later 
lecture, dated March 13, 1964, along with a sheaf of notes in Feynman’s 
handwriting. Entitled “The Motion of Planets Around the Sun,” it was 
an unorthodox approach to Isaac Newton’s geometric demonstration of 
the law of ellipses, in the Principia Mathematica.
In September 1993, I had occasion to draw up a list of the original 
audiotapes of the Feynman lectures, which had also been contributed 
to the archives. They included five lectures that were not to be found 
in the Addison-Wesley books. Then I remembered the five unpublished 
lectures in Leighton’s file; sure enough, the unedited transcripts matched 
the tapes. The archives also had photographs of the blackboard diagrams 
and equations for four of these lectures—the four mentioned by Feyn­
man in his preface—but I could find none for the March 1964 lecture 
on planetary motion. (In the course of selecting illustrations for this 
book, I did stumble upon one photograph of Feynman taken during this 
special lecture. It is reproduced here as the frontispiece.) Although 
Feynman had given Leighton his notes on the 1964 lecture, which 
included sketches of his blackboard drawings, Leighton apparently de­
cided not to include it in the last (1965) volume of The Feynman Lectures 

Preface 13
on Physics, which dealt primarily with quantum mechanics. In time, 
this lecture was forgotten. For all practical purposes, it was lost.
The idea of rescuing all five unpublished Feynman lectures from 
oblivion appealed to David and me. So the following December, when 
we went, as we often do, to the Italian hill town of Frascati, we took 
along copies of the tapes, the transcripts, the blackboard photographs, 
and Feynman’s notes. In the course of the next two weeks, we listened 
to the tapes, took notes, laughed at the jokes, strained to hear the 
students’ questions and Feynman’s answers after each lecture was over, 
took more notes. But in the end, we decided that the only lecture that 
still had the vitality, originality, and verve we associated with Feynman’s 
presence in the classroom was the 1964 lecture on planetary motion— 
the one lecture that demanded a full complement of blackboard photo­
graphs. And we didn’t have them. Reluctantly, we abandoned the proj­
ect.
Or so I thought. As it turned out, bits and pieces of the lecture haunted 
David, especially when he came to teach the same material in freshman 
physics the following year. He had the tape. But could he reconstruct 
the blackboard demonstrations from the few tantalizing sketches in Feyn­
man’s notes and the few words Feynman had jotted down more for 
himself than for the students? “Let’s try again,” he announced, early 
in December 1994, as we were packing for a trip through the Panama 
Canal. This time, we would take along only the transcript of the 1964 
lecture, the lecture notes, and selected pages from Kepler’s The New 
Astronomy and Newton’s Principia for good measure.
It took the S.S. Rotterdam eleven days to sail from Acapulco to Fort 
Lauderdale. For two to three hours each day, David would hole up in 
our cabin and work on deciphering Feynman’s lost lecture. He began, 
as Feynman had, with Newton’s geometrical proofs. The initial break 
came when he was able to match up Feynman’s first sketch with one 
of Newton’s diagrams, on page 40 of the Cajori edition of the Principia. 
We’d been at sea for three, maybe four days, Costa Rica’s shoreline 
plainly visible, when David announced that he, too, could follow New­
ton’s line of reasoning up to a point. By the time we’d exchanged the 
Pacific Ocean for the Atlantic, he was completely absorbed in Feynman’s 
sparse, neatly labeled pencil drawings of curves and angles and inter­

14 Preface
secting lines. He stayed in the cabin, ignoring the scenery in favor of 
geometric figures—Newton’s, Feynman’s, and his own—longer and 
longer each morning and in the evening as well. When we arrived in 
Fort Lauderdale, on December 21, he knew and understood Feynman’s 
entire argument. On the plane home, the book took shape.
Its final form owes much to the contributions of family and friends. 
Marcia Goodstein ingeniously outwitted simple-minded software to pro­
duce the nearly 150 figures needed to tell Feynman’s geometric tale. 
Sara Lippincott, skilled editor and diplomat, gently massaged the prose 
and the presentation. Ed Barber, vice-chairman at W. W. Norton, in­
vested years of friendly persuasion, which paid off when the lost lecture 
showed up. Robbie Vogt supplied the story of how it originated. Jim 
Blinn read the manuscript and made helpful suggestions. Valentine 
Telegdi called our attention to the proof by James Clerk Maxwell. 
Finally, we wish to thank Carl and Michelle Feynman for their kind 
cooperation and Mike Keller, Caltech’s intellectual property lawyer, for 
his cheerful help. Proceeds from this book will be used to support 
scientific and scholarly research at Caltech.
All the photographs in the book are from the Caltech archives.
J.R.G.
Pasadena, May 1995

FEYNMAN’S 
LOST 
LECTURE


Introduction
/ would rather discover a single fact, even a small one, than debate the 
great issues at length without discovering anything at all.
— Galileo Galilei
This is a book about a single fact, although certainly not a small one. 
When a planet, or a comet, or any other body arcs through space 
under the influence of gravity, it traces out one of a very special set of 
mathematical curves—either a circle or an ellipse or a parabola or a 
hyperbola. These curves are known collectively as the conic sections. 
Why in the world does nature choose to trace out in the sky those, and 
only those, elegant geometrical constructions? The problem turns out 
to be not only of profound scientific and philosophical significance but 
of immense historical importance as well.
In August of 1684, Edmund Halley (after whom the comet would be 
named) journeyed to Cambridge to speak to the celebrated but somewhat 
strange mathematician Isaac Newton about celestial mechanics. The 
idea was abroad in scientific circles that the motions of the planets might 
be a consequence of a force from the Sun that diminished as the inverse 
square of the distance between the Sun and the planets, but no one had 
yet been able to produce a satisfactory demonstration. Yes, Newton let 
on, he had been able to demonstrate that such a force would give rise 
to elliptical orbits—exactly what Johannes Kepler had deduced some 
seventy years earlier from observations of the heavens. Halley urged 
Newton to let him see the demonstration. Newton apparently begged 
17

18 Introduction
off, saying he had misplaced it, but promised to work it out again and 
send it to Halley. In fact, a few months later, in November 1684, 
Newton did send Halley a nine-page treatise in which he demonstrated 
that an inverse-square law of gravity, together with some basic principles 
of dynamics, would account for not only elliptical orbits but Kepler’s 
other laws of planetary motion as well, and more besides. Halley knew 
that he held in his hands nothing less than the key to understanding the 
universe as it was then conceived.
He urged Newton to let him arrange for its publication. But Newton 
was not entirely satisfied with his work and delayed, wanting to make 
revisions. The delay lasted almost three years, during which Newton, 
now thoroughly hooked on the problem, seems to have done nothing 
else but work on it. What emerged at the end, in 1687, was Philosophiae 
Naturalis Principia Mathematica, Newton’s masterpiece and the book 
that created modem science.
Nearly three hundred years later, the physicist Richard Feynman, 
apparently for his own amusement, undertook to prove Kepler’s law of 
ellipses himself, using no mathematics more advanced than elementary 
plane geometry. When he was asked to give a guest lecture to the 
Caltech freshman class in March 1964, he decided to base it on that 
geometric proof. The lecture was duly recorded on audiotape and tran­
scribed. Usually, photographs were made of the blackboard during Feyn­
man’s lectures; however, if they were made in this case, they have not 
survived. Without any indication of what geometric diagrams he was 
referring to, the lecture was incomprehensible. But when Feynman’s 
own notes for, that lecture were rediscovered among the papers of his 
colleague Robert Leighton, it became possible to reconstruct his entire 
argument.
The discovery of Feynman’s lost lecture notes affords us an extraordi­
nary opportunity. For most people, Feynman’s fame rests on his pica­
resque exploits, recounted in two anecdotal books (“Surely You’re 
Joking, Mr. Feynman!’’ and “What Do You Care What Other People 
Think?’’) which he produced late in life in collaboration with Leighton’s 
son, Ralph. The stories in these books are amusing enough, but they 
take on a special resonance because the protagonist was also a theoretical 
physicist of historic proportions. Yet for the nonscientist reader there 

Introduction 19
is no way to peer into Feynman’s mind and see that other side of him— 
the powerful intellect that left an indelible imprint on scientific thought. 
In this lecture, however, Feynman uses all his ingenuity, insight, and 
intuition, and his argument is not obscured by the layers of mathematical 
sophistication that made most of his accomplishments in physics impene­
trable to the uninitiated. This lecture is an opportunity for anyone who 
has mastered plane geometry to see the great Feynman at work!
Why did Feynman undertake to prove Kepler’s law of ellipses using 
only plane geometry? The job is more easily done using the powerful 
techniques of more advanced mathematics. Feynman was evidently in­
trigued by the fact that Isaac Newton, who had invented some of those 
more advanced techniques himself, nevertheless presented his own proof 
of Kepler’s law in the Principia using only plane geometry. Feynman 
tried to follow Newton’s proof, but he couldn’t get past a certain point, 
because Newton made use of arcane properties of conic sections (a hot 
topic in Newton’s time) that Feynman didn’t know. So, as he says in 
his lecture, Feynman cooked up a proof of his own.
Moreover, this is not just an interesting intellectual puzzle that Feyn­
man has doodled with. Newton’s demonstration of the law of ellipses 
is a watershed that separates the ancient world from the modem world— 
the culmination of the Scientific Revolution. It, is one of the crowning 
achievements of the human mind, comparable to Beethoven’s symphon­
ies, or Shakespeare’s plays, or Michelangelo’s Sistine Chapel. Aside 
from its immense importance in the history of physics, it is a conclusive 
demonstration of the astonishing fact that has mystified and intrigued 
all deep thinkers since Newton’s time: nature obeys mathematics.
For all these reasons, it seems worthwhile to open Feynman’s lecture 
for the world to see. The price, for the reader, is not cheap. This 
particular lecture must have been daunting even for the mathematical 
whizzes in Caltech’s freshman class. Even though each individual step 
is elementary, the proof taken as a whole is not simple. And at one 
remove from Feynman’s blackboard and his vivid presence in the class­
room, the lecture becomes a good deal more difficult to follow. Never­
theless, it is the purpose of this book to draw the reader in by describing 
the historical significance of Newton’s demonstration of the law of 
ellipses, and of Feynman’s own life and work; and then to do no less 

2 0 Introduction
than reconstruct the proof that Feynman set out in his lecture, and 
explain it so meticulously that readers who remember what they were 
taught in high school geometry will understand Feynman’s brilliant 
formulation. Then the reader will be ready for the written and audio 
versions of the lecture itself, which are included with this book.

In 1543, as he lay on his deathbed, the Polish cleric Nicolaus Copernicus 
was shown the first copies of his book, On the Revolutions of the 
Celestial Spheres. He had purposely delayed its publication until he no 
longer would have to face the consequences. The book proposed the 
unthinkable: that the Sun, not the Earth, was the center of the universe. 
The book was about revolutions, real ones in the sky, and it kicked off 
what came to be called, metaphorically, the Scientific Revolution. To­
day, when we refer to political and other upheavals as revolutions, we 
are paying homage to Copernicus, whose book about revolutions started 
the first revolution.
Before Copernicus, our view of the world was derived from the 
ancient Greek philosophers and mathematicians, frozen in time in the 
teachings of Plato and Aristotle, who lived and taught in the fourth 
century b.c. In the Aristotelian world, all matter was made of four 
elements: earth, water, air, and fire. Each element had its natural place— 
earth, surrounded by water, at the center of the universe, then air and 
fire, in ascending spheres. Natural motion consisted of elements seeking 
their natural places. Thus, heavy, predominantly earthy bodies tended 
to fall, while bubbles would rise through water and smoke would rise 
through air. All other motions were violent, requiring a proximate cause.
21

22 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
For example, an oxcart would not move unless an ox was pulling it. 
Outside the spheres of earth, water, air, and fire, the heavenly bodies 
revolved on crystal spheres of their own. The heavenly spheres, where 
only the perfection of circular motion was permitted, were serene, har­
monious, and eternal. Only down here on Earth was there change, death, 
and decay. It was a coherent system of the world, unmistakably designed 
to put us in our place, but that place was the center of the universe, 
and we could, for all our faults, easily imagine ourselves to be the 
purpose of creation. “We were quite happy with Aristotle’s cosmos,’’ 
remarks a character in Tom Stoppard’s Arcadia, a play that pokes fun 
at historians and scientists alike. “Personally I preferred it. Fifty-five 
crystal spheres geared to God’s crankshaft is my idea of a satisfying 
universe.’’
But there were a few problems even in the serene heavens of the 
Aristotelian cosmos. The Sun, the Moon, and the stars executed their 
motions faithfully enough (for the most part), but a small number of 
prominent bodies called planets (from the Greek for “wanderer’’) failed 
to behave themselves properly. Predicting the positions of these bod­
ies—where they would appear in the sky on any given night—was the 
professional responsibility of astronomers. The information was of some 
importance for agriculture, for navigation, and, above all, for casting 
horoscopes in a world deeply steeped in astrology. The idea that the 
planets went around the Earth in perfect circles didn’t accord with 
observation, but Plato had said that in the heavens only circular motion 
was possible. So astronomers concocted the scheme of having the planets 
move in circles, called epicycles, that were themselves centered on other 
circles, called deferents. If an observation of a planet in the sky didn’t 
quite fit the existing system of deferents and epicycles, another epicycle 
could be added to refine the calculations and improve the accuracy of 
the predictions—a practice known as “saving the appearances.” This 
ancient system of astronomy was codified in the second century a.d. 
by the Alexandrian Greek astronomer Ptolemy, in a book called the 
Almagest. The Almagest remained the principal textbook of astronomy 
for fourteen hundred years, until the time of Copernicus.
In his book, Copernicus pointed out that the whole balky system of 
epicycles and deferents could be simplified somewhat if, strictly as a 

From Copernicus to Newton 2 3
mathematical convenience, one placed the Sun rather than the Earth at 
the center of things. That was the first chapter. The rest of the book is 
filled with astronomical tables, calculated using epicycles and deferents 
centered on the Sun. The ruse of mathematical convenience fooled no 
one—but, on the other hand, very few paid any attention to Copernicus 
at all in the decades following his death, and even fewer actually both­
ered to read the book. It is true that during this period Jesuit missionaries 
were teaching the Copernican system in China, but at its headquarters 
in Rome the Church was much more concerned with Martin Luther than 
with Nicolaus Copernicus. Nevertheless, there were a few who noticed, 
and who cared. Three men in particular were destined to play crucial 
roles in overthrowing the geocentric universe. They were Tycho Brahe, 
Johannes Kepler, and Galileo Galilei.
Copernicus’s view of the solar system, from De revolutionibus 
orbium coelestium, 1543.

24 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
Tycho Brahe (1546-1601) was a Danish nobleman, who as a boy 
learned to his amazement that it was possible to predict events in the 
sky, such as the solar eclipse of August 21, 1560, and then learned to 
his even greater amazement, while observing a conjunction of Jupiter 
and Saturn in August 1563, that the astronomical tables (including the 
Copernican tables!) were off by several days—presumably for lack of 
accurate astronomical data.
After studying law, traveling in Europe, losing his nose in a duel, 
and replacing it with one of gold, silver, and wax, Tycho scandalized 
Danish society by marrying a commoner and becoming an astronomer. 
He set up a small observatory on some family lands, and there, on 
November 11, 1572, he discovered a brilliant new star where none had 
been before, in the constellation Cassiopeia. New stars were not sup­
posed to appear in the immutable Aristotelian heavens. His book De 
nova Stella (On the New Star) offended the Church, established his 
reputation, and earned him the patronage of Denmark’s king, Frederick 
П.
Frederick gave Tycho the island of Hveen, near Copenhagen, and 
the financial support to build there the greatest astronomical observatory 
the world had ever seen. Giant measuring instruments were con­
structed—Tycho’s “great equatorial armilia” was some nine feet across; 
the diameter of his “great mural quadrant” measured thirteen feet— 
to make sitings of unprecedented precision, together with magnificent 
buildings in which to live and work, printing presses to publish new 
findings, and much more. Tycho called the place Uraniborg, after Ura­
nia, the muse of astronomy. Begun in 1576, it operated until 1597. Just 
a few years later, in 1610, the invention of the telescope would end 
forever this kind of naked-eye astronomy. Nevertheless, the observations 
made at Uraniborg during its brief period of existence would decrease 
the uncertainty of astronomical tables from ten minutes of arc to two 
minutes of arc. (If you hold your index finger up at arm’s length, it 
covers an angle of about one degree. Ten minutes of arc is one-sixth 
of that; two minutes of arc is another five times smaller.)
In 1588, Frederick II died, to be succeeded by his son, Christian IV. 
Christian was irritated by Tycho’s incessant demands for lavish support, 
and by 1597 the situation had deteriorated to the point where Tycho 

From Copernicus to Newton 25
felt obliged to close up Uraniborg, leave Denmark, and establish himself 
in Prague, where he became imperial mathematician to Rudolph П, king 
of Hungary and Bohemia and Holy Roman Emperor.
Tycho Brahe at age forty. Frontispiece from Tycho’s Astronomiae 
instauratae mechanica, 1602.

26 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
By the time Tycho departed for Prague, he had made an indelible 
contribution to astronomy. That did not satisfy him. The job that still 
lay before him was to put his precious (and still largely secret) observa­
tions to the service of the new cosmology. Not, however, to the cosmol­
ogy of Copernicus, and certainly not to that of Ptolemy; Tycho had 
invented a cosmos of his very own. In the Tychonic universe, all the 
planets revolved around the Sun, and the Sun with the other planets 
revolved around the Earth, which was restored to the center of the 
universe. To the modem eye, the Tychonic universe seems to be a 
compromise between Aristotle and Copernicus, but in his own time 
Tycho’s cosmos was in some ways an even more audacious departure 
from Aristotle than Copernicus’s had been, because it smashed the 
crystal spheres that were supposed to fill the heavens regardless of 
whether the Earth or the Sun was at the center. The question was: 
Would the Tychonic data support the Tychonic universe? To answer the 
question required a mathematical talent far greater than that possessed by 
the imperial mathematician. In all of Europe, there may not have been 
more than one mathematician with the necessary abilities. But at least 
there was one. His name was Johannes Kepler.
Kepler was bom in 1571, the son of a mercenary soldier who quickly 
evaporated from the scene and a shrewish innkeeper’s daughter who 
would later be tried for witchcraft. Small in stature, fragile in health, 
and poor, Kepler’s obvious keen intelligence nevertheless won him a 
scholarship that permitted him to attend the University of Tubingen. 
There he studied under one of Europe’s earliest advocates of the Coperni­
can system, Michael Mastlin. After he had obtained his bachelor’s and 
master’s degrees, the Tubingen faculty rescued him from a career as a 
Lutheran minister by recommending him for a post teaching high school 
mathematics in the Austrian town of Graz.
According to legend, one day in the summer of 1595, Kepler’s body 
was lecturing about geometry to a class of bored adolescents while 
his mind went rummaging through the tabulated data of Copernican 
astronomy, his lifelong passion. Inscribing circles inside and outside an 
equilateral triangle, he suddenly realized that the ratio of the diameters 
of the two circles (the outer one is just twice as big as the inner) was 
essentially the same as the ratio of the diameters of the orbits of Jupiter 

From Copernicus to Newton 
2 7
and Saturn. The discovery sent Kepler himself into orbit. He quickly 
devised a model in which the six invisible spheres that regulated the 
orbits of the six planets then known were fitted on either side of each 
of the five “perfect solids” of antiquity (solids having all sides the 
same: the tetrahedron, cube, octahedron, dodecahedron, and icosahe­
dron), nested one inside the other. Sure enough, by arranging the solids 
in the right order, the diameters of the spheres came out to be in almost 
the same ratios as those of the orbits of the planets.
The nested solids (the outermost sphere is Saturn’s), from Johannes 
Kepler’s Mysterium cosmographicum, 1596.

28 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
Kepler’s model explained why there were six, and only six, planets— 
because there were five, and only five, perfect solids—and why their 
orbits had the ratios they did. The whole arrangement fitted miraculously 
together. Kepler thought, not for the last time in his life, that he had 
seen into the mind of the Creator. In 1596, he published his inspiration 
in the book Mysterium cosmographicum, which brought him to the 
attention of Tycho Brahe.
Tycho was not enchanted by Kepler’s Copernican views, but he was 
impressed with his mathematical talent. He invited Kepler to join him 
in Prague. Kepler had by now built up a considerable reputation as a 
skillful astrologer (his predictions of plague, famine, and Turkish inva­
sion often turned out to be correct), but his finances were still precarious, 
and as a Lutheran he felt persecuted in Catholic Graz. On the first day 
of January in the year 1600, Johannes Kepler set out to join the Danish 
astronomer in Prague.1
The timid Johannes Kepler did not get on well with the boisterous, 
metal-nosed Tycho Brahe, but they needed each other. Kepler needed 
Tycho’s data to do his life’s work, and Tycho needed Kepler’s genius 
to organize his observations and provide confirmation of the Tychonic 
universe. The mismatch lasted eighteen months, until, in 1601, Tycho 
Brahe died suddenly of an acute urinary infection. It is reported that 
his last words to Kepler were “Let me not seem to have lived in vain.” 
But Kepler, the dedicated Copernican, had no intention of pursuing 
Tychonic cosmology.
After Tycho’s death, Kepler managed, with difficulty (nothing in 
Kepler’s life came easy), to be named his successor as imperial mathe­
matician—a title that turned out to be more honorific than remunera­
tive—and to wrest the superb Tychonic data from Tycho’s heirs. He 
also published a book on astrology. (He regarded all other astrologers 
to be charlatans and frauds, but for his own part he couldn’t suppress 
entirely the feeling that there might be a certain harmony between human 
destiny and the heavenly panorama.) And in 1604, while observing a
'Why, the reader may ask, do we always refer to Tycho by his first name and Kepler by his last 
(for example, Tychonic universe, but Kepler’s laws)? There is no obvious answer. It may be 
because Johannes is too common and Brahe is unfamiliar. We also refer to Galileo by his first 
name, but in his case it hardly matters, because his first name was the same as his last.

From Copernicus to Newton 2 9
rare conjunction of Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, he saw the appearance 
of a supernova, a new star that remained visible in the sky for seventeen 
months.
Kepler’s greatest struggle was his “war on Mars”—his attempt to 
find an orbit for the planet that would be consistent with Tycho’s obser­
vations. A circle could be fitted to the orbit of Mars if the uncertainty 
in the observations was ten minutes of arc, as it had been before Tycho. 
But Tycho’s magnificent legacy required something different. Kepler 
calculated prodigiously, first using an ingenious method to deduce the 
orbit of the Earth, the uncertain celestial platform from which Tycho’s 
observations had been made. The Earth’s orbit could be described well 
enough by a circle with the Sun slightly displaced from the center. But 
not the orbit of Mars. Try as he might, no circle would fit. In Astronomia 
nova (The New Astronomy), published in 1609, Kepler quotes Virgil to 
describe his quest:
Galatea seeks me mischievously, the lusty wench: 
She flees to the willows, but hopes I’ll see her first.
In the Copernican system, the Earth is one of the planets. But Earth, 
being the site of change, death, and decay, is obviously not in a state 
of Platonic perfection, as planets had been supposed to be—so maybe 
the orbits of the planets did not need to be Platonic circles at all! (“Oh 
ridiculous me!” says Kepler, of his failure to grasp this point earlier; 
we don’t write scientific papers that way anymore.) The orbit of Mars 
was not a circle. It was an ellipse, with the Sun at one focus (a word 
adopted for the purpose by Kepler from the Latin for “fireplace”).
An ellipse with the Sun at one 
focus (the orbit of Mars is much 
more nearly circular than this 
ellipse).

30 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
The ellipse is a closed geometric curve known from antiquity. Apol­
lonius of Perga (c. 262-c. 190 b.c.) showed that intersecting a cone 
and a plane produced two closed curves, a circle and an ellipse,
Left, plane intersects cone, producing a circle when seen head-on (below). 
Right, tilted plane intersects cone, producing an ellipse when seen head-on 
(below).

From Copernicus to Newton 3 1
and two open curves, the parabola and the hyperbola.
c
в
D
Left, plane intersects cone parallel to the opposite side of the cone. Seen 
head-on the result is a parabola (below). Right, plane intersects both branches 
of an extended cone. Seen head-on, the result is a hyperbola (below). Unlike 
the other conic sections, the hyperbola always has two branches.

3 2 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
Collectively, these figures are known as the conic sections. The ellipse, 
in particular, may be drawn by a string-and-thumbtacks construction, 
with the tacks located at the two foci:
We’ll get back to the special properties of the ellipse in Chapter 3.
In Astronomia nova, Kepler tells us that in fact the orbits of all the 
planets are ellipses with the Sun at one focus—a statement that became 
known as Kepler’s first law, the law of ellipses. He also tells us that a 
planet moves faster when it is in that part of its orbit closest to the Sun 
and slower when it is farther away. Moreover, this speeding up and 
slowing down of the planet’s motion has a most peculiar kind of regular­
ity about it: a line from the Sun to the planet would sweep out equal 
areas in equal times. This became known as Kepler’s second law. Ten 
years later, in 1619, Kepler published another book, Harmonices mundi 
(Harmony of the World), in which he expounded yet a third law. The 
first two laws describe the motion of a single planet in its own orbit. 
The third law compares the orbits of the planets. It says that the farther 
a planet is from the Sun, the slower it moves in its orbit. In particular, 
a year in the life of a planet (the amount of time it takes to make one 
complete orbit) is proportional to the three-halves power of the size of 
the orbit (technically, the longer diameter of the ellipse). Together, 
these three statements are Kepler’s great contribution—Kepler’s three 
laws of planetary motion. In 1627, Kepler published the Rudolphine 
Tables, named for his patron, Rudolph II. These astronomical tables, 
based on Tycho’s meticulous observations combined with Kepler’s three 
laws, made astronomy a hundred times more accurate than it had ever 
been before.

From Copernicus to Newton 3 3
Frontispiece, Tabulae Rudolphinae, 1627. Designed by Kepler, this 
elaborate engraving depicts the giants of astronomy gathered in the 
temple of Urania. Kepler put himself and the titles of four of his 
books in the left panel on the base of the temple.

34 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
At about the same time, in Italy, Galileo Galilei wrote in II Saggia- 
tore, “The book of nature lies continuously open before our eyes (I 
speak of the universe) but it can’t be understood without first learning 
to understand the language and characters in which it is written. It is 
written in mathematical language, and its characters are geometrical 
figures.’’ Galileo was not writing to celebrate Kepler’s laws, which, 
ironically, he never even acknowledged, much less embraced. He was, 
however, writing in defense of the Copernican system. In 1616, the 
Catholic Church’s chief theologian, Cardinal Robert Bellarmine, had 
declared Copemicanism to be “false and erroneous” and had placed 
Copernicus’s book on the index of forbidden books. Now, however, a 
new pope, Urban VIII, long a friend and supporter of Galileo’s, had 
been installed, and Galileo hoped to divert the Church from its disastrous 
collision course with science. He would not succeed.
Galileo was bom in Pisa, in 1564, the son of a musician, Vincenzio 
Galilei. (It was fashionable at the time among Tuscan families to give 
the firstborn child the family surname as a first name.) Galileo studied 
medicine at the University of Pisa, but withdrew without graduating, 
for lack of funds. He taught himself mathematics, published a few 
essays, and secured a position lecturing on mathematics at Pisa. While 
at Pisa, he discovered the law of the pendulum (a pendulum takes the 
same amount of time for a complete cycle, no matter how big or small 
its arc) and the law of falling bodies (all bodies, regardless of mass, 
fall with the same constant acceleration in a vacuum); and he did a 
series of kinematical experiments, using balls and inclined planes, that 
amounted to nothing less than the invention of experimental science as 
we know it today. (The title of his book II Saggiatore is usually rendered 
in English as The Assayer, but the modem term ‘ The Experimentalist” 
more accurately describes what he had in mind.) He apparently embraced 
Copemicanism early in life, but kept his belief hidden for fear of ridicule. 
In one of his rare letters to Kepler—really a thank-you note for a copy 
of Kepler’s Mysterium cosmographicum—he wrote in 1597, “I indeed 
congratulate myself on having an associate in the study of Truth who is 
a friend of Truth. ’ ’ Truth with a capital T is a disguised but unmistakable 
reference to Copernicus.
The Copernican system, however, was not only an affront to Aristote­
lian and Church dogma; it seemed also to be an affront to common 

From Copernicus to Newton 3 5
sense. Any fool could plainly see that the Earth was solidly at rest. If the 
Earth was spinning on its axis and hurtling through space, as Copemicans 
claimed, why couldn’t we sense all that motion? To put a sharper point 
on the question, consider the following thought experiment: suppose 
someone were to drop some heavy object from the top of the Tower of 
Pisa. Regardless of our cosmological orientation, we can all agree on 
this much at least: the object will fall straight down to the foot of the 
tower (ignoring for the moment the tower’s famous tilt). But according 
to the Copemicans the Earth is spinning on its axis as the object falls. 
If the force of gravity causes the object to fall directly toward the center 
of the Earth, the object should fall straight down, while the tower rotates 
away. How far away? It takes an object about two seconds to reach the 
ground if dropped from the top of the tower. Given the size of the Earth 
and the fact that it makes a complete rotation once each day, the distance 
is not hard to compute. The tower should move about half a mile while 
the object is falling! In other words, if Copernicus was right and the 
Earth made a complete rotation on its axis each day, then an object 
dropped from the top of the Leaning Tower of Pisa should hit the ground 
half a mile away. The fact that it does no such thing seems a pretty 
decisive refutation of Copemicanism.
The problem for Copemicans in the sixteenth century was not only 
that such objections were difficult to answer but—even worse—that 
there seemed to be no starting point for formulating an answer. When 
Copernicus tore the Earth from the center of the universe, he also tore 
the heart out of Aristotelian mechanics, the intellectual glue that held 
everything together. For example, why should a heavy object fall at 
all, if it was not seeking its natural place? To answer that it fell because 
of gravity, as was done and still is, merely gives the mystery a name. 
For believers in Copernicus, the Aristotelian world lay in mins, and 
there was nothing to take its place. This was the dilemma that confronted 
Galileo.
To find out how the world actually works, Galileo conceived the idea 
of doing experiments whose results could be analyzed using mathemat­
ics. It was an idea that would change forever the course of human 
history. He could not study falling bodies directly, because they fell 
too fast and there were no good clocks: the first accurate timepieces, 
based on his own discovery of the isochrony of the pendulum, would 

3 6 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
come much later. To slow down the motion of falling bodies, he mea­
sured the time taken by balls rolling down gently inclined planes— 
planes that were made as smooth as possible to minimize friction. (Repli­
cas of these instruments, made by skilled craftsmen, may be found in 
the Museum of the History of Science in Florence.) He tried many 
schemes to measure accurately the elapsed time while the balls were 
rolling. The best of these was a kind of water chronometer. Water was 
allowed to run through a tube—which he could open and close by means 
of his finger—into a second container while the ball was rolling. Then 
he would weigh the water that had run out. The weight of the water 
would be proportional to the elapsed time. Modem reproductions of his 
experiments have shown that with practice he could achieve in this way 
a precision of about two-tenths of a second. Better measurements of 
elapsed time were seldom made until the twentieth century.
Using this technique, Galileo discovered his law of falling bodies. 
He found that given twice the time, a ball would roll four times as far. 
This result did not change when he made the slope gentler or steeper, 
so with a giant leap of imagination he assumed that it would still be 
true if the slope were vertical—a true falling body. To that he added 
mathematical analysis: if the distance was proportional to the square of 
the time, that meant, as he showed by geometric arguments, that the 
motion was uniformly accelerated. Finally, he imagined the body falling 
in a vacuum. In Aristotelian mechanics, a place is where something is. 
To imagine a place where there is nothing—a vacuum—is a contradic­
tion in terms, an unthinkable logical absurdity. But Galileo broke free 
of at least some of the tethers of Aristotelian thought. He imagined a 
vacuum and realized that in a vacuum the acceleration of a falling body 
would not depend on how heavy the body was; only air resistance makes 
lighter bodies fall slower than heavy ones. That completed his law of 
falling bodies.
It did not, however, explain why a body would fall to the foot of 
the Tower of Pisa instead of landing half a mile away. Nevertheless, 
the answer to that dilemma, too, came out of the experiments with balls 
and inclined planes. Galileo found that if a ball was allowed to roll 
down one plane and back up another, it would tend to keep rolling up 
the second plane until it had reached the same height it started at. If

From Copernicus to Newton 3 7
Portrait of Galileo, from// Saggiatore, 1623.
the slope of the second plane was steeper than the first, the ball would 
roll a shorter distance, and if the slope was gentler, the ball would roll 
farther, achieving in both cases the same altitude it began with. Today 
we understand this behavior to be a manifestation of what we call the 
conservation of energy. But Galileo saw in it something else. Making 

3 8 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
another leap of the imagination, he reasoned that if the second plane 
were horizontal, the ball would never stop rolling, because it would 
never reach its original height. Thus, he concluded, the natural state of 
an object in horizontal motion was to keep on moving horizontally, at 
constant speed, forever.
This idea was a radical departure from Aristotelian philosophy, in 
which any horizontal motion required a proximate cause. It would even­
tually be transformed into Newton’s first law of motion, the law of 
inertia. It was also exactly what was needed to resolve the dilemma of 
the object dropped from the Tower of Pisa—and, indeed, the more 
general question of why we don’t sense the motion of the Earth. The 
surface of the Earth and everything upon it are all in horizontal motion 
together, due to the Earth’s rotation. Their natural state is to continue 
that way, so to an observer on Earth’s surface, everything, moving 
together, seems to be at rest. If the experiment at the Tower of Pisa 
were viewed by an observer truly at rest, it would be seen that both the 
tower and the falling object naturally move together in the horizontal 
direction, even as the object falls. Thus the object lands at the foot of 
the tower.
The same reasoning applied, said Galileo, to any projectile—for 
example, a cannonball. In the horizontal direction, a cannonball (ignor­
ing air resistance) would retain the initial speed given it by the exploding 
gunpowder. Meanwhile, in the vertical direction, his law of falling 
bodies would apply, even while the cannonball was on the upward part 
of its trajectory. Combining these two types of motion, and unleashing 
his mathematics, Galileo showed that the path of any projectile near the 
surface of the Earth was a parabola. “It has been observed,” he wrote 
in 1638 in Two New Sciences, “that . . . projectiles follow some kind 
of curved path, but that it is a parabola no one has shown. I will show 
that it is, together with other things, neither few in number nor less 
worth knowing, and, what I hold even more important, they open the 
door to a vast and crucial science.” Once again, Galileo was correct: 
it was indeed to be a vast and crucial science. His discovery that inertia 
(the tendency of a body to keep moving at constant speed in the hori­
zontal direction) combined with gravity (as represented by his law of 
falling bodies) produced trajectories near the Earth’s surface in the form

39
D I A L О G О
D I
GALILEO GALILEI LINCEO
MATEMATICO SOPRAORDINARIO
DELLO STVDIO DI PISA.
E Filofofo, e Maitmatico frimario del 
SERENISSIMO 
GR.DVCA DI TOSCANA. 
Doue ne i congrefTi di quattrogiomate fi difcorrc 
fopra i due
MASSIMI SISTEMI DEL MONDO 
TOLEM AJCO, E COPERNICANOj
TrapwenJe itukterminatamentt It ragiani Filofijhie, e Natural) 
ttntaper Fvna, quanto per Faltra parte.
Title page, Dialogo 
. . . sopra i due 
massimi sistemi del 
mondo, Tolemaico, 
e Copernicano, 
1632. For defending 
the Copernican 
theory in this book, 
Galileo was brought 
to trial before the 
Roman Inquisition 
and sentenced to 
perpetual house 
arrest. The book 
remained on the 
index of forbidden 
books until 1823.
of one of the come sections, the parabola, was the very idea that Isaac 
Newton would later use to show how the universe works.
Galileo’s eventual troubles with the Church—an epic tale, but not 
the subject of this book—had the effect of expelling the Scientific 
Revolution from Italy. It would come to rest in England, in the person 
of Isaac Newton. On the way north, however, it stopped briefly in 
France, where it found Rene Descartes. Descartes understood straight 
lines. In fact, the familiar x-y-z system of Cartesian coordinates is named 
for him. Galileo’s version of inertia worked only in the horizontal direc­
tion. But when it is extended globally, horizontal motion at constant 
speed becomes circular motion about the center of the Earth. For all 
his nimble wit, Galileo could not quite escape this one remaining Pla­
tonic ideal. Descartes succeeded in straightening it all out. He put the 
Jaw of inertia in the form used by Newton: in the absence of any external

40 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
Rene Descartes.
ДЙ.Д.ЗДИ
Bt de
Bi J LOS<
force acting on it, a body at rest will remain at rest, and a body in 
motion will remain in motion, at constant speed, in a straight line.
Isaac Newton is generally supposed to have been bom in 1642, the 
year of Galileo’s death, as if it were required that one such genius be 

From Copernicus to Newton 4 1
present on Earth at all times. In reality, he was bom on January 4, 
1643, according to our modem calendar and the one then used in Gali­
leo’s Italy. In England, because of King Henry VIII’s marital (or perhaps 
conceptual) difficulties, the latest papal calendar reform had not yet 
been adopted, and the date was rendered December 25, 1642. In any 
case, Newton was bom both posthumously and prematurely, an unusual 
combination. His father (also Isaac Newton) died three months earlier, 
and the new Isaac was a frail creature, who did not seem destined to 
live on for eighty-four years.
Isaac’s mother hoped he would grow up to manage the considerable 
properties left her by her second husband, who died when Isaac was 
about eleven years old. In fact, if Isaac’s father had lived, or if his 
stepfather had been a more sympathetic person, Isaac might have grown 
up to be a reasonably well-adjusted, extremely bright fanner. But such 
a fate was not to be. Instead he grew up to be a man whose towering 
rage sometimes edged over into outright insanity, and who at the end 
of his life proclaimed himself to have remained a virgin. But he was 
also a man who would change human history as few others have done.
In 1661, the young Isaac matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, 
where Aristotle still commanded the cuniculum but where the Scientific 
Revolution was in the air. Newton received his bachelor’s degree in 
1665, then fled to the family lands in Lincolnshire to escape the bubonic 
plague. It is thought that he made many of his most important discoveries 
during the two years he spent there, but the world would not hear of 
them until much later.
Among Newton’s abundant accomplishments, the most important 
was to formulate a set of dynamical principles that would replace the 
Aristotelian worldview. By 1687, when he published his masterwork, 
the Principia, he had reduced it all to three laws, augmented by a 
number of definitions and corollaries. The first law was the principle 
of inertia, inherited from Galileo and Descartes:
Law 1
Every body continues in its state of rest, or of uniform motion in a 
straight line, unless it is compelled to change that state by forces im­
pressed upon it.

42 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
Newton’s second law, the real centerpiece of his dynamics, tells what 
happens to a body when forces are indeed impressed upon it:
Law 2
The change in motion is proportional to the motive force impressed; 
and is made in the direction of the straight line in which that force is 
impressed.
Earlier in the Principia, Newton defined quantity of motion to be the 
product of velocity (that is, speed plus direction) and quantity of mat­
ter—or precisely what today’s physicists would call momentum. Long 
after Newton’s death, his second law would come to be summarized in 
the equation F = ma (force equals mass times acceleration); however, 
Newton never expressed it quite that way.
Newton’s third law is called the law of action and reaction:
Law 3
To every action there is always opposed an equal reaction: or, the 
mutual actions of two bodies upon each other are always equal, and 
directed to contrary parts.
The third law helps to eliminate a potentially messy complication in 
the problem of planetary motion. The planets (including the Earth) are 
great big complicated bodies, whose internal parts apply forces to one 
another. According to Newton’s third law, these forces all cancel one 
another out, regardless of their nature. Every force due to one bit of a 
planet acting on a second bit is exactly balanced by an equal and opposite 
force due to the second bit acting on the first. The net result is that the 
bulk nature of the planet can be ignored completely in calculating its 
course around the Sun. The planet behaves exactly as if its mass were 
concentrated at a geometrical point located at its center.
The third law also implies that the planets impress forces upon the 
Sun equal and opposite to the Sun’s forces on the planets. To get around 
any difficulties this might cause, Newton in his formal proofs refers not 
to the Sun but to “an immovable centre of force.” In effect, he is 
assuming (correctly) that the Sun is so massive that it is not much 
influenced by the tug of gravitational forces from the planets. The third 

From Copernicus to Newton 43
law would later prove vitally important in other areas of physics: it is 
the source of the laws of conservation of momentum, angular momen­
tum, and energy. For the problem of planetary motion, however, its 
principal virtue is that all its effects may be ignored.
Isaac Newton, 
engraving by В. 
Reading, 1799, 
after a portrait 
by Sir Peter 
Lely.
Newton’s three laws are the dynamical principles that replace the 
“natural motions” and “violent motions” of Aristotelian mechanics. 
To these laws, which apply to all forces and all bodies, Newton added 
the specific nature of a particular kind of force acting between the Sun 
and the planets, or between a planet and its moons—or, indeed, between 
any two bits of matter in the universe. This was the force of gravity, 

44 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
and as we shall see, he used Kepler’s second and third laws to deduce 
the properties of the force of gravity. Then he demonstrated that his 
three laws, combined with the force of gravity, gave rise to elliptical 
orbits for the planets.
Isaac Newton invented differential and integral calculus. There is 
little doubt that he used these powerful analytic tools to make his great 
discoveries. When he wrote the Principia, however, he had not yet 
published his calculus. (There would later be a typically nasty dispute 
over priority with the German philosopher and mathematician Gottfried 
Leibniz, who made the same mathematical discoveries independently.) 
The Principia is presented in the classical languages of Latin and Euclid­
ean geometry. The reason is obvious enough: Newton had to speak to 
his contemporaries in a language they would understand. There may 
have been another advantage to this method of presentation. Many years 
later, Richard Feynman (a man as different from Newton as history has 
yet produced, except for matters scientific) was intrigued enough to 
invent his own purely geometric proof of the law of elliptic orbits. “It 
is not easy to use the geometrical method to discover things,” he said 
in his lecture on the subject (Chapter 4 of this book), “but the elegance 
of the demonstrations after the discoveries are made is really very great. ’ ’
Isaac Newton is famously quoted as saying, ‘ ‘If I have seen further it 
is by standing on the shoulders of Giants.” The giants were Copernicus, 
Brahe, Kepler, Galileo, and Descartes. Before Newton, the collapse of 
the Aristotelian worldview had left in its wake only buzzing confusion, 
without the remotest hint of how it might be replaced. Each of Newton’s 
giants put in place a bit of the building material or some piece of the 
scaffolding, but the shape and design of the final structure could not be 
seen. (Descartes thought he saw it, but he was wrong.) Then along 
came Newton, and suddenly the world was orderly, predictable, and 
comprehensible once more. Newton had figured out how it all worked, 
and the proof that he was right was his demonstration of Kepler’s law 
of ellipses. Soon we will do our own demonstration of the law of 
ellipses—not quite as Newton proved it but as Richard Feynman did 
almost three hundred years later.
First, a look at Richard Feynman.

In 1965, when Richard Feynman shared the Nobel Prize with Julian 
Schwinger and Shinichiro Tomonaga for the invention of quantum elec­
trodynamics, he was unknown to the general public, but he was already 
a hero of legendary proportions among physicists. At the time, the 
authors of this book were both graduate students at the University of 
Washington in Seattle, a lovely campus that seemed very far from the 
center of the intellectual universe. Nevertheless, early in 1966, when I 
(D.L.G.) started seriously looking for my first job, Caltech had an 
opening in experimental low-temperature physics. I was invited to come 
to Pasadena and give a seminar.
These were heady times in low-temperature physics. Low-tempera- 
ture physics, the study of the behavior of matter at temperatures just 
above the unattainable absolute zero, was a coherent discipline rather 
than a mere set of techniques, because it had been organized around 
two central unsolved problems of many years’ standing: superfluidity 
and superconductivity. Superfluidity is the mysterious ability of liquid 
helium to flow with no resistance at temperatures within two degrees 
of absolute zero. Superconductivity is the analogous ability of many 
metals to conduct electric current with no resistance at similar low 
temperatures. These phenomena had been unexplained for decades.
45

46 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
Then, in the 1950s, both problems were broken wide open, due in no 
small measure to Feynman’s efforts. An intense period of creativity in 
both fields followed. For example, the new understanding of supercon­
ductivity made it possible to imagine ordinary electric circuits designed 
to use quantum mechanical devices. The most promising of these would 
be based on experiments by James Mercereau, a Caltech Ph.D. who had 
developed the Superconducting Quantum Interference Device, known 
universally in physics as the SQUID.
Feynman followed Mercereau’s experiments avidly, and in fact could 
often be found in those days in Caltech’s low-temperature physics labo­
ratory, partly because of his intense interest in the experiments being 
performed there and partly because the low-temperature group had an 
extremely attractive secretary (who later became Mrs. Mercereau).
Under the circumstances, to be asked to fly out of the Seattle drizzle 
into the Pasadena sunshine to give a seminar to the low-temperature 
physics group was an offer I found irresistible. And Caltech had a few 
more tricks up its sleeve. Mercereau, who was seeking to strengthen 
Caltech’s experimental low-temperature physics efforts, met me himself 
at the airport, and asked me whether I minded going to lunch before 
checking in at Caltech, mentioning that he had arranged for Dick Feyn­
man to join us. The lunch with Feynman and Mercereau took place at 
a topless restaurant in Pasadena, Feynman’s favorite hangout at the 
time. The only thing I can remember about that hour of culture shock 
is thinking to myself over and over again, “No one in Seattle is going 
to believe this.” I had recovered well enough by the time I was due to 
give the seminar, and as it happened, in a few months we would come 
to Caltech to stay.
Richard Feynman was bom on May 11, 1918, to Lucille and Melville 
Feynman. The powerful streetwise accent that he retained, and even 
honed, throughout his life suggested to most listeners that he was a 
native of Brooklyn, but in fact he was bom and raised in Far Rockaway, 
in the sedate borough of Queens.
Feynman’s father, whom Feynman revered in later days, was not 
very well off, but young Richard was recognized early as a prodigy, 
and so it was arranged for him to go to MIT, where he got his bachelor 

Feynman: A Reminiscence 
4 7
of science degree in 1939, and then to Princeton for his Ph.D. At 
Princeton, where his thesis adviser was John Archibald Wheeler, he 
worked on applying the principle of least action to quantum mechanics. 
His thesis laid the groundwork for some of the most important accom­
plishments of his later life.
During his graduate school days at Princeton, Feynman had his one 
and only encounter with Albert Einstein. Einstein was in Princeton at 
the Institute for Advanced Study, an establishment quite separate from 
the university. Nevertheless, members of the institute and members 
of the university’s Physics Department often attended one another’s 
seminars.
One day it was announced that the graduate student Richard Feynman 
would be presenting his first seminar. Not only was it to be his first 
seminar but he was to present and defend the startling idea that he and 
Wheeler had been working on: that an electron could move both forward 
and backward in time. Word got around that Einstein and a number of 
other famous physicists who happened to be visiting would attend.
Understandably nervous, the young Feynman decided to skip the 
usual pre-seminar tea and cookies, and instead prepared for his talk by 
going to the seminar room and filling the blackboard with equations. 
At a certain moment during this exercise, he sensed that someone was 
watching him. He turned around to see Albert Einstein in the doorway. 
The two great physicists looked at each other briefly, and then had the 
only private verbal exchange that ever occurred between them: “Young 
man,” Einstein said, “where are they serving tea?” Years later, Feyn­
man did not remember exactly what he said in reply.
While still at Princeton, Feynman married the girl of his dreams, 
Arlene Greenbaum. By the time he received his Ph.D., in 1942, the 
nation was at war. The young couple set out for Los Alamos, New 
Mexico, where a supersecret project to build an atomic bomb was being 
organized. Feynman joined the Theoretical Division at Los Alamos 
under the leadership of Hans Bethe, the great theorist who had figured 
out how the Sun and the stars bum their nuclear fuel. Arlene, who was 
already dying of tuberculosis, entered the hospital in Albuquerque.
During his days at Los Alamos, it became clear that Feynman could 
compete on equal terms with the intellectual giants of his day, including 

48 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
Bethe, Enrico Fermi, and John von Neumann. At the same time, charac­
teristics that would eventually become part of his legend surfaced: he 
showed his taste for mischief, cracking safes with simple tricks and 
planting teasing notes inside, and exchanging letters with his wife that 
were cut up like a jigsaw puzzle, so that the censors would have to 
spend a lot of time reconstructing them.
One day rather late in the game, Feynman had lunch with the patent 
officer for the Los Alamos project. Even though every aspect of the 
project, including its very existence, was strictly secret, this officer’s 
job was to patent any new inventions that came up—probably in order 
to reserve the government’s right to use them. Much to the patent 
officer’s dismay, however, the scientists seemed to have little time and 
less inclination to seek patents. Come on, the officer complained to 
Feynman, you guys are creating a whole new world! Surely there must 
be some new things that can be done with it! Feynman thought briefly 
and said that he guessed there were—you could have an atomic subma­
rine, for example, or an atomic airplane.
The morning after this feckless lunch, Feynman found on his desk 
complete patent applications, waiting for his signature, for the “Atomic 
Submarine” and the “Atomic Airplane.” This is how Feynman came 
to hold the patent on the nuclear submarine, a device of considerable 
military significance but little commercial value. It has been said that 
years later, when Hughes Aircraft considered developing a nuclear- 
powered atomic airplane, they offered Feynman a vice-presidency 
(which he promptly turned down) because he held the patent. In any 
case, according to the patent agreement that Los Alamos workers signed, 
Feynman was entitled to one dollar for each patent. When he demanded 
his two dollars, it turned out that no fund had been set up for this 
purpose, so the patent officer was forced to pay the sum out of his own 
pocket. Feynman used the money at the canteen, to buy oranges and 
chocolates for everyone in the Theoretical Division.
In 1945, Arlene died in the hospital in Albuquerque, an episode 
Feynman wrote about movingly many years later, in ‘ ‘What Do You 
Care What Other People Think?” Feynman, who had borrowed his 
roommate’s car to be at her bedside, returned to Los Alamos so de­
spondent that he could not face the immediate prospect of talking about 

Feynman: A Reminiscence 49
his wife’s death. Instead his roommate arranged for the two of them 
to spend a quiet evening with some friends, who were not told what 
had happened that day. Years later, Feynman would recall marveling 
to himself that evening that others could remain oblivious of the enor­
mous secret inside his head. His roommate was Klaus Fuchs, who had 
a few secrets of his own and was later convicted as a spy for the Soviet 
Union.
After the war, Feynman accepted from Hans Bethe a position at 
Cornell University, where he turned his attention to the quantum me­
chanical description of the interaction between light and matter. Al­
though Schwinger and Tomonaga, who developed equivalent solutions 
to the problem independently, would share the Nobel Prize with him 
for this work, Feynman’s approach was by far the most original. His 
technique discarded the electromagnetic field of James Clerk Maxwell 
and replaced it entirely with interactions among particles, following all 
possible paths with probabilities governed by the principle of least ac­
tion, as adumbrated in his doctoral thesis. (In Chapter 3, we will see 
an echo of this approach to physics, when Feynman uses a kind of least­
action principle as part of his geometric proof of the law of ellipses.) 
He also invented a method of using pictorial representations to keep track 
of the complex calculations his approach required. These representations 
have come to be known universally as Feynman diagrams. Feynman’s 
work amounted to nothing less than a reformulation of quantum mechan­
ics itself. His diagrammatic method is widely used in many areas of 
theoretical physics.
In 1950, Feynman left Cornell to join the faculty of the California 
Institute of Technology, where, except for a year in Brazil (1951-52), 
he would spend the rest of his career. At Caltech, he turned his attention 
to the problem of superfluidity in liquid helium. The Russian theorist 
Lev Landau had shown that the ability of superfluid helium to flow 
without resistance was due to the fact that the liquid could take up energy 
from its surroundings only in certain very restricted ways. Feynman 
succeeded in tracing Landau’s observation to its quantum mechanical 
roots. Feynman diagrams would later become an important research tool 
in this field, but Feynman did not use them to solve this problem. 
Instead, he reverted to the old-fashioned, Schrodinger formulation of 

50 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
quantum mechanics and used his remarkable intuition to guess the nature 
of a giant quantum system.
During this period, Feynman’s private notes show that he also tried 
very hard to solve the companion problem of superconductivity. The 
problem seemed ideally suited for Feynman’s talents. As in the case of 
superfluidity, the solution would involve a gap in the energies that an 
electric current could absorb from its surroundings. Furthermore, that 
gap would arise as a consequence of the interactions between electrons 
in the metal and sound waves, or phonons. That part of the problem is 
closely analogous to the interactions between electrons and light waves, 
or photons, which had been the basis of Feynman’s theory of quantum 
electrodynamics. Therefore (and unlike the matter of superfluidity), the 
Feynman diagram techniques, of which Feynman was, of course, the 
supreme master, seemed perfectly suited to the work. Feynman’s chief 
competitors, John Bardeen, Leon Cooper, and J. Robert Schrieffer, 
were keenly and gloomily aware of all this. However, as it turned out, 
Feynman’s powerful techniques led him inevitably in a direction that 
could not succeed, and it was Bardeen, Cooper, and Schrieffer who, 
early in 1957, found a dramatic solution to the problem. For their efforts, 
they won the Nobel Prize, Bardeen for the second time. (His first was 
in 1956 with William Shockley and Walter Brattain, for the transistor.)
Superconductivity was not the only problem Feynman tried but failed 
to conquer. In the course of his life, he also made forays into such 
arenas as experimental biology, statistical mechanics, Mayan hiero­
glyphics, and the physics of computing machines, with varying degrees 
of success. He was extremely reluctant to advertise or publish results 
in which he did not have complete confidence, or that might have stolen 
credit from deserving rivals; his list of publications is thus not long, 
and they are almost never wrong.
Shortly after arriving at Caltech, Feynman was joined there by Murray 
Gell-Mann, who was later to win his own Nobel Prize (1969) for reveal­
ing symmetries in the properties of the elementary particles of matter. 
With Feynman and Gell-Mann in residence, Caltech became the center 
of the universe of theoretical physics. In 1958, they published jointly 
a paper entitled “Theory of the Fermi Interaction’’—an explanation of 
what has come to be known as the weak interaction, a fundamental

Feynman: A Reminiscence 5 1
Feynman and Gell-Mann, 1959.
force that governs the decay of certain nuclear particles. Feynman and 
Gell-Mann were aware at the time that their theory was contradicted by 
experiments, but they had sufficient self-confidence to publish it anyway. 
The experiments later turned out to be mistaken: the theory was correct.
Also during this period, Feynman contributed to the work by Gell- 
Mann and by George Zweig, another Caltech professor of theoretical 
physics, that produced the theory of quarks, which is central to our 
present ideas of the nature of matter.
In 1952, Feynman married Mary Louise Bell, a university instructor 
in the history of decorative art. They were divorced in 1956. He was 
married for the third and final time on September 24, 1960, to Gweneth 

5 2 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
Howarth. Their son, Carl, was bom in 1962, and in 1968 they adopted a 
daughter, Michelle. Feynman cultivated a public persona—well known 
among his colleagues—that featured sketching nude women and spend­
ing time in topless bars, but his private life was solidly conventional 
and middle class, played out in a comfortable home in Altadena at the 
base of the San Gabriel Mountains, not far from the Caltech campus.
In 1961, Feynman undertook a project that would have far-reaching 
impact on the entire scientific community. He agreed to teach the two- 
year sequence of introductory physics courses that were required of all 
incoming Caltech students. His lectures were recorded and transcribed, 
and all the blackboards he filled with equations and sketches were photo­
graphed. From this material, his colleagues Robert Leighton and Mat­
thew Sands, with help from Rochus Vogt, Gerry Neugebauer, and 
others, produced a series of books called The Feynman Lectures on 
Physics, which have become genuine, enduring classics of the scientific 
literature.
Feynman was a truly great teacher. He prided himself on being able 
to devise ways to explain even the most profound ideas to beginning 
students. Once, I said to him, “Dick, explain to me, so that I can 
understand it, why spin one-half particles obey Fermi-Dirac statistics.” 
Sizing up his audience perfectly, Feynman said, “I’ll prepare a freshman 
lecture on it.” But he came back a few days later to say, “I couldn’t 
do it. I couldn’t reduce it to the freshman level. That means we don’t 
really understand it.”
Feynman delivered the Feynman Lectures to the Caltech freshman 
class in the academic year 1961-62 and to the same students as sopho­
mores in 1962-63. His taste in physics topics was perfectly eclectic; 
he devoted just as much creative energy to describing the flow of water 
as to discussing curved spacetime. Of all the subjects he covered in that 
introductory course, perhaps his most impressive accomplishment is the 
presentation of quantum mechanics (Volume III of the series); in only 
slightly disguised form, it is the new view of quantum mechanics that 
he himself had developed.
While Feynman was a riveting, dramatic performer in the classroom, 
the period 1961-63 was to be the only time he ever taught formal 
undergraduate courses. For the rest of his professional life, before and 

Feynman: A Reminiscence 5 3
after, he taught only courses designed for graduate students. The lecture 
that is the subject of this book was not part of the original course but 
rather a “guest lecture” to the freshman class at the end of the winter 
quarter in 1964. Rochus Vogt had taken over the teaching of introductory 
physics by then, and he invited Feynman to give the talk as a treat for the 
students. The Feynman Lectures were never successful as introductory 
textbooks—not even at Caltech, where they originated. They would 
instead make their lasting contribution as a source of insight and inspira­
tion for accomplished scientists who had learned their physics by more 
conventional means.
In the immediate aftermath of his Nobel Prize in 1965, Feynman 
suffered a brief period of dejection, during which he doubted his ability 
to continue to make useful, original contributions at the forefront of 
theoretical physics. It was during this time that I joined the Caltech 
faculty. The Feynman physics course was now being taught by Gerry 
Neugebauer. When Feynman himself had been giving the lectures, 
Gerry, as a young assistant professor, had had the difficult job of making 
up homework assignments from them for the two hundred or so stu­
dents—difficult in large part because no one, maybe not even Feynman 
himself, knew in advance exactly what he was going to say. Just as he 
did for the lost lecture of Chapter 4 in this book, Feynman would come 
to class with no more preparation than one or two pages of scribbled 
notes. Neugebauer, to make his own task somewhat easier, would join 
Feynman, Leighton, and Sands for lunch after each lecture, in the 
Caltech cafeteria, known to generations of students as “the Greasy”; 
Caltech’s elegant faculty club, the Athenaeum, was not Feynman’s style. 
During these lunches, the lecture would be rehashed, with Leighton 
and Sands competing to score points with Feynman, while Neugebauer 
desperately tried to figure out the essence of the lecture.
Now, in 1966, Neugebauer was giving the lectures, and I was pressed 
into service as a T.A. (teaching assistant), in charge of one of the small 
recitation sections that supplemented the main course of lectures. The 
by now traditional lunches at the Greasy continued, with Feynman still 
in attendance. It was here that I first really got to know him, mostly 
exchanging ideas with him on how to teach physics. That fall, he got 
an invitation to give a public lecture at the University of Chicago the

54 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
Above. “I don’t want to open it right away, so I fool around awhile.” 
Feynman telling Caltech students how he cracked safes at Los Alamos, 1964.
Below. Feynman and Leighton, 1962.

Feynman: A Reminiscence 55
Below.
Feynman on the 
motion of 
waves, 
1962.
Left.
Feynman at the 
blackboard, 
1961.

56 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
following February. At first he was inclined to refuse (invitations to 
speak arrived almost daily), but then he decided to accept and to talk 
about our ideas on teaching, if I would agree to come with him. He 
said that he would pay for my travel expenses out of the absurdly 
large ($1000) honorarium they were offering. I thought the matter over 
carefully for a microsecond or so, and agreed to go. When he told the 
University of Chicago that I would be joining him, they were no doubt 
mystified about who I was and why I was needed, but they invited me 
with good grace and paid my way in the bargain.
At Chicago, Feynman and I shared a suite in the Quadrangle Club, 
the university’s faculty club. On the evening after his talk, we had 
dinner at the home of friends, Vai and Lia Telegdi. The next morning, 
I wandered down to the faculty club dining room for breakfast a bit 
late. Feynman was already there, eating with someone I didn’t know. 
I joined them, introductions were mumbled but not heard, and I sleepily 
drank my morning coffee. As I listened to the conversation, it dawned 
on me that this person was James Watson, discoverer with Francis 
Crick of the double-helical structure of DNA. He had with him a typed 
manuscript entitled Honest Jim (the title would later be changed by the 
publisher to The Double Helix), which he wanted Feynman to read, in 
the hope that Feynman might contribute something to the dust jacket. 
Feynman agreed to look at the manuscript.
That evening there was a cocktail party and dinner in Feynman’s 
honor at the Quadrangle Club. At the cocktail party, the worried host 
asked me why Feynman wasn’t there. I went up to the suite and found 
him immersed in Watson’s manuscript. I insisted that since he was the 
honoree, he had to come down to the party. Reluctantly, he did, but 
he fled after dinner at the earliest moment permitted by civility. When 
the party broke up, I went back up to the suite. Feynman was waiting 
for me in the living room. “You’ve gotta read this book,” he said.
“Sure,” I said, “I’ll look forward to it.”
“No,” he shot back, “I mean right now.” And so, sitting in the 
living room of our suite, from one to five in the morning, with Feynman 
waiting impatiently for me to finish, I read the manuscript that would 
become The Double Helix. At a certain point, I looked up and said, 
“Dick, this guy must be either very smart or very lucky. He constantly 

Feynman: A Reminiscence 5 7
claims he knew less about what was going on than anyone else in the 
field, but he still made the crucial discovery.” Feynman virtually dove 
across the room to show me the notepad on which he’d been anxiously 
doodling while I read. There he had written one word, which he had 
proceeded to illuminate with drawings, as if he were working on some 
elaborate medieval manuscript. The word was “Disregard!”
“That’s what I’d forgotten!” he shouted (in the middle of the night). 
“You have to worry about your own work and ignore what everyone 
else is doing.” At first light, he called his wife, Gweneth, and said, “I 
think I’ve figured it out. Now I’ll be able to work again!”
By the end of the 1960s, Feynman was back in action, consumed 
with the problem that would occupy his attention for the next decade 
or more. Collisions at extreme high energy of heavy particles such as 
neutrons and protons could be described entirely in terms of interactions 
of their internal parts. This was the “parton” theory, the internal parts 
being the quarks that his colleagues Murray Gell-Mann and George 
Zweig had earlier proposed, to which were later added particles known 
as gluons and so called because their role was to “glue” the quarks 
together. This model had such impressive success in predicting the 
results of experiments in high-energy particle accelerators that quark 
theory has come to be universally accepted among physicists, even 
though it has proved impossible to extract a quark from inside a proton 
or neutron for separate study.
Feynman’s sense of humor was as singular as everything else about 
the man. In 1974, the world of physics was set on its ear by the nearly 
simultaneous discovery—at the Stanford Linear Accelerator (SLAC) 
and the Brookhaven National Laboratory, on Long Island—of a new 
particle. Called the J particle by the Brookhaven group and the ф (psi) 
particle by the SLAC group, it quickly came to be known as the J/ф 
particle. The discovery was in the form of two very narrow peaks, 
called “resonances,” in a plot of detector signal versus accelerator­
beam energy. At all other accelerator-beam energies, the detectors regis­
tered only a meaningless, low-level background noise. At the time, I 
was chairman of the Caltech Physics Department’s colloquium commit­
tee. Since I was known to be a friend of Feynman’s, the committee 
prevailed upon me to ask Dick to give a colloquium explaining the 

5 8 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
meaning of these stunning new discoveries. Feynman agreed immedi­
ately, and outlined for me the kind of talk he had in mind to give. We 
penciled in the earliest available date—January 16, 1975—and let it go 
at that. Having filled that date on my colloquium calendar, I put it out 
of mind as a fait accompli.
Three weeks before the appointed date, during the Christmas vaca­
tion, the editor of the weekly Caltech Calendar called me up. The title 
of Professor Feynman’s colloquium was due immediately for publication 
in the calendar. Feynman was away at a family retreat in Baja California 
that, quite purposely, had no telephone. I had a big problem.
I invented a title for Feynman’s talk. It was “The Broad Theoretical 
Background of Two Narrow Resonances.” To a physicist it was a mild 
play on words; to anyone else it was incomprehensible. But it did 
describe perfectly the talk Feynman was planning. I called a mutual 
friend, Jon Mathews, to ask his advice. Jon laughed when he heard my 
title, but then sobered instantly and said, “Don’t do it. Dick has a 
wonderful sense of humor about everything else, but he has no sense 
of humor at all about physics.”
But I really liked my title, and it had made Jon laugh. I called it in 
to the calendar editor and promptly forgot the whole matter.
Feynman’s colloquium was to be the second of the new year. On the 
day of the preceding one—Thursday, January 9—when we gathered 
for tea at 4:45,1 saw Feynman for the first time since the vacation, and 
it all came flooding back to me. I also realized that the next week’s 
calendar was out that day and that Feynman would have seen my in­
vented title. By now, I feared the worst, but I met the problem head- 
on. “Look, Dick, I’m sorry,” I babbled, “I had to give them a title, 
and you weren’t there, so I did the best I could.”
He stared down his nose at me, in a way that only he could do. “It’s 
all right,” he said, in a tone of voice that let me know that the story 
was far from over. “It’s all right,” he repeated ominously.
After a few minutes of tea drinking, we all went upstairs to the 
hallowed hall in which Caltech physics colloquia have been held since 
time immemorial (1921). As he often did, Feynman sat down next to 
me in the first row—informally but rigidly reserved for professors of 
physics. The talk was theoretical, technical, and difficult: “Equilibration 
Processes in Nuclei,” by Steven Koonin, then a graduate student at MIT 

Feynman: A Reminiscence 59
(he is currently Caltech’s provost). Throughout, Feynman whispered 
commentary and wisecracks in my ear, so that by the end of the talk I 
had lost the thread of Koonin’s argument entirely.
At the conclusion of the talk, another first-row seat holder, the nuclear 
physicist Willy Fowler, asked a question. (Willy would, in 1983, win 
his own Nobel Prize for the work he did on the production of elements 
in stars.) Although I hadn’t understood much of the talk, I thought I 
did understand Willy’s question, and I thought I knew the answer. 
Turnabout being fair play, I whispered my answer into Feynman’s ear. 
Feynman’s hand shot up instantly.
To speakers at the Caltech physics colloquia in those days, the audi­
ence consisted of Richard Feynman and a blur of other, indistinguishable 
faces. When Feynman’s hand went up, young Koonin, who had been 
struggling to formulate an answer to Willy’s question, called on him in 
manifest relief. Feynman solemnly rose to his feet (something that was 
never done during the question-and-answer period after a colloquium). 
“Goodshtein says”—he intoned my name in a stentorian voice, pur­
posely mispronouncing it to sound like the German pronunciation of 
“Einstein”—“Goodshtein says . . . ,” and he proceeded to give my 
answer, not as I had mumbled it to him but beautifully, elegantly 
phrased, as I could not possibly have done.
‘ ‘That’s it! ’ ’ Koonin exclaimed. ‘ ‘That’s exactly what I’ve been trying 
to say!”
“Well,” said Feynman, as I tried to slip under the seat, “don’t ask 
me. I don’t understand it. That’s what Goodshtein says.” He had had 
his revenge. The matter was never mentioned again.
On a Friday in early June 1979, Feynman’s trusted secretary, Helen 
Tuck, quietly called me up to say that he had been told that he had 
stomach cancer. He was to go into the hospital for surgery at the end 
of the following week. It was not entirely certain that he would come 
out again. I was not to tell him that I knew.
That Friday was commencement day at Caltech. There was Feynman, 
robing up to march in the academic procession. I told him that someone 
had reported a mistake in some work we had done together but that I 
couldn’t find the source of the error. Would he like to talk about it? 
We agreed to meet in my office Monday morning.
On Monday morning we got to work. Or, rather, he did. I looked 

60 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
over his shoulder, commented, kibitzed, and mostly marveled to myself 
that this man, who was facing in secret a possibly fatal operation, was 
working with unflagging energy on an unimportant problem in two- 
dimensional elastic theory. The solution to the problem could be found 
in standard textbooks, but that wasn’t the point. When we did the 
original work together, Feynman had insisted on working out this minor 
result himself, on a napkin in a topless bar, and we had unwisely 
published the result (a small part of a much larger theory) without 
checking it against the standard formula. At that point in his life, in 
spite of the time spent in topless bars, Feynman never drank anything 
alcoholic, out of fear of diminishing his mental powers. He could not 
be accused of Deriving Under the Influence. Nevertheless, something 
had gone wrong. The question was, what subtle error had he made that 
led to a slightly wrong answer?
The problem proved intractable. At 6 p.m., we declared the situation 
hopeless and went our separate ways. Two hours later, he called me 
up at home. He had the answer! He had not been able to stop working 
on it, he told me excitedly, and had finally tracked it down. He dictated 
the solution to me. Four days before entering the hospital for his first 
cancer operation, Richard Feynman was bursting with joy.
The tumor that was removed from his body the following weekend 
was large but seemed to the doctors to be well encapsulated, and a 
hopeful prognosis was given. Nevertheless, he would eventually die of 
the disease.
In the 1980s, in the last decade of his life, Feynman became a genuine 
public figure, perhaps the best-known scientist since Albert Einstein. 
Earlier in his career, even while cultivating his very special image among 
scientists, he had largely shunned public notice. He had even briefly 
considered refusing to accept the Nobel Prize, until he realized that such 
a gesture would bring him more attention than the prize itself. However, 
at the end of his career, a number of events conspired to make Feynman 
a celebrity.
In 1985, “Surely You re Joking, Mr. Feynman!’’ became a surprise 
runaway best-seller. Tales that Feynman had been telling about himself 
for years had been collected by Feynman’s bongo-drumming buddy 
Ralph Leighton and edited by Edward Hutchings, a longtime Caltech

Feynman: A Reminiscence 6 1
journalism instructor. Subtitled Adventures of a Curious Character (the 
double meaning was intentional), the book recounted Feynman’s nonsci- 
entific adventures, from his amilitaristic antics at Los Alamos to dancing 
in the Carnival at Rio. This unconventional view of the great scientist 
at play enthralled a public that had no idea why Feynman deserved his 
fame. The book was followed three years later by a second volume, 
“What Do You Care What Other People Think?,’’ subtitled Further 
Adventures of a Curious Character, also “as told to’’ Ralph Leighton.
In the meantime, however, a disastrous event had captured the na­
tional attention. On January 28, 1986, the space shuttle Challenger 
exploded just a few moments after liftoff. Seen live by millions and 
repeated endlessly on television, the scene burned itself into the Ameri­
can consciousness. A few days later, the acting head of the National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), William Graham, who 
had been a Caltech student and had attended the lectures that Feynman 
gave regularly at Hughes Aircraft Company, called Feynman to invite 
him to serve on a presidential commission to investigate the accident.
The commission was headed by former secretary of state William P. 
Rogers, who had considerable difficulty containing the ebullient scien­
tist. Feynman did not permit his advancing illness to interfere with his 
self-appointed role as an aggressive investigator. The peak moment of 
his public fame came when, during a nationally televised hearing of the 
commission, he squeezed a bit of gasket material from one of the shut­
tle’s solid-fuel booster rockets in a clamp and dropped the sample into 
a glass of ice water, to demonstrate that the gasket material lost its 
resiliency at freezing temperature. (Contrary to the electrifying impres­
sion he created at the time, the demonstration had been carefully re­
hearsed in advance.) This defect did indeed prove to be the principal 
cause of the Challenger disaster.
Feynman’s lost lecture on planetary motion was by no means the 
only ad-hoc lecture he ever gave for the benefit of the Caltech undergrad­
uates. Over the years, he was often asked to make a guest appearance, 
and he nearly always complied. The last of these guest lectures took 
place on Friday morning, December 4, 1987. I was now teaching the 
freshman introductory physics course, and he agreed to my request to 
give the final lecture of the fall quarter.

62 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
The subject of Feynman’s lecture on this occasion was to be curved 
spacetime (Einstein’s theory of general relativity). Before starting, how­
ever, he had a few words to say on a subject that excited him greatly. 
That year a supernova had occurred at the edge of our galaxy. “Tycho 
Brahe had his supernova,” Feynman told the class, “and Kepler had 
his. Then there weren’t any for four hundred years. Now I have mine\”
This remark was greeted with a stunned silence by the freshmen, 
who had reason enough to be in awe of Feynman even before he opened 
his mouth. Dick grinned with obvious pleasure at the effect he had 
created, and defused it in the next breath. “You know,” he mused, 
“there are about a hundred billion stars in a galaxy—ten to the eleventh 
power. That used to be considered a huge number. We used to call 
numbers like that ‘astronomical numbers.’ Today it’s less than the na­
tional debt. We ought to call them ‘economical numbers.’ ” The class 
dissolved in laughter, and Feynman went on with his lecture.
Richard Feynman died two months later, on February 15, 1988.

“Simple things have simple demonstrations,” Feynman wrote in his 
lecture notes. Then he crossed out the second “simple” and replaced 
it with “elementary.” The simple thing he had in mind was Kepler’s 
first law, the law of ellipses. The demonstration he was about to present 
would indeed be elementary, in the sense that it used no mathematics 
more advanced than high school geometry, but it would be far from 
simple.
To begin with, Feynman reminds us that an ellipse is a kind of 
elongated circle that can be made with two tacks, a string, and a pencil, 
like this:
63

64 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
Each tack is at a point called a focus of the ellipse. The string makes 
a line from one focus to a point on the ellipse and back to the other 
focus. The total length of the string stays the same as the pencil goes 
around the curve. Here’s a slightly more proper geometric diagram:
Here F' and F are the two foci, and P may be any point on the curve. 
The distance from F' to P and back to F is the same, no matter where 
P is on the curve.
Here is a small point worth remembering: If the string is made a little 
shorter and the tacks stay where they are, we get another ellipse, inside 
this one; and if the string is made longer while the tacks stay where 
they are, we get an ellipse that lies outside this one. It follows that any 
point in the plane—say, q—such that the distance from F' to q to F is 
less than the distance from F' to P to F (in other words, any point that 
can be reached by a shorter string) lies inside our original ellipse. 
Likewise, any point Q such that F'Q + QF (another way of saying the 
distance from F' to Q plus the distance from Q to F) is larger than F'P 
+ PF (the length of the original string) lies outside our ellipse. Here’s 
a picture illustrating the idea:
Any point Q outside the 
ellipse lies on a bigger ellipse, 
reached by a longer string. Any 
point q inside the ellipse lies on 
a smaller ellipse, reached by a 
shorter string.

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 
6 5
A little later in the discussion, Feynman uses this idea, but he doesn’t 
prove it as we have just done. Instead he asks the students to work it 
out for themselves.
An ellipse has another special property. If a lightbulb were turned 
on at F, and if the inner surface of the ellipse reflected light like a 
mirror, then all the reflected light rays would come back together at F', 
the other focus, like this:
And vice versa: all the light rays starting at one focus will be focused 
to a point at the other focus. Feynman cites this as the second elementary 
property of the ellipse, and then he sets out to prove that these two 
properties are really equivalent. (His strategy here is to lead us to a 
more arcane property of ellipses—one that will prove indispensable 
later on.)
Picture any point P on the ellipse. At that point (as at any point) on 
the ellipse (or any other curve), there is a single, unique straight line 
that just touches the curve without penetrating it, like this:

66 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
This line is called the tangent to the curve at that point. A light ray, 
mirror-reflected from the curve at any point, like this,
follows the same path it would follow if it were mirror-reflected at that 
point from the tangent line, like this:
The reason that light reflects from the curve just as it would from 
the tangent line at the same point is that the tangent indicates the direction 
of the curve at exactly that point. If one starts with a curve and its 
tangent at a point,
tangent line

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 6 7
and magnifies the picture greatly about that point, the curve is stretched 
out to become much more nearly equal to the tangent line:
The more closely we look, the less difference there is between the curve 
and its tangent line at that point. Thus, if light is reflected from a curve 
at a single point, it reflects just as it would from the tangent line at that 
point. For the same reason, the tangent line has another property that 
will be important to us later on: if the curve is actually the path of a 
moving object, the tangent line shows the direction of the object’s 
motion at each point. When we think of the ellipse as the path followed 
by a planet in its orbit around the Sun, the tangent to the ellipse at each 
point will be in the direction of the planet’s instantaneous velocity at 
that point.
The law of reflection from a flat mirror is that the ray strikes the 
mirror and is reflected from it at the same angle, like this:

68 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
is equal to 
this angle
this angle
So here is the property for light rays:
The incident ray from F to P makes the same angle with the tangent 
line at P as does the reflected ray, which goes to F'. Our job is to prove 
that this statement is equivalent to saying that the distance F'P plus the 
distance PF is the same for any point P on the curve.
The proof involves some new construction. A line is drawn from F'
perpendicular to the tangent line, like this:
t is where the new line 
meets the tangent line
new line, at right angle 
to the tangent line
Then it is extended the same distance, to a point called G': 
F

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 6 9
Thus the line F'G' has been constructed in such a way that the line 
tangent to the ellipse at point P is its perpendicular bisector. Feynman 
calls G' the image point of F'. What he means is that if the tangent 
line were indeed a mirror, and if the point F' looked at itself in that 
mirror, its image would appear to be at G', an equal distance behind 
the mirror.
One more piece of construction is called for. Connect the points G' 
and P with a straight line:
Now take a look at the two triangles that have been formed, one shown 
with solid lines and the other with broken lines:

70 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
These two triangles are congruent, which means that they are identical 
in all respects except orientation. Here’s the proof. Since we constructed 
the intersection at t to be a crossing of perpendicular lines, each triangle 
has one right angle:
They share one side in common:
common side

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 7 1
And another side of each was constructed to have equal length (remem­
ber, the tangent line bisects F'G'\
Any two triangles that have one equal angle and two equal sides are 
congruent; QED, as we used to say in high school. That means all the 
corresponding sides are equal. In particular, note that the side G'P is 
equal to the side F'P:

7 2 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
And the angles F'Pt and G'Pt are equal:
Okay, now back to the full diagram to see what we’ve learned.

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 7 3
By this time, it’s easy to have lost sight of what we’re assuming and 
what we want to prove. To clarify the situation, let’s reconstruct the 
same diagram from scratch. Start with two points, F' and F, that for 
the moment have no particular significance. They are any two points 
in a plane:
• 
•
F' 
F
Then draw any straight line from F' in any direction:
arbitrary line in any direction
(in principle, this line continues to 
infinity)
F
Now pick a point t on the line and draw a perpendicular line through 
it. The point t must be far enough away from F' so that the perpendicular 
line doesn’t pass between F and F':

74 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
Mark a point G' on the arbitrary line, such that F't is equal to tG'. 
Then the perpendicular we constructed is the perpendicular bisector of 
F'G'-.
Next draw a line connecting G' and F:

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 7 5
Label the point where this new line crosses the perpendicular bisector 
P, and draw the line connecting P to F'\
The two triangles are congruent as before, so the angles F'Pt and G'Pt 
are equal:

76 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
And the angle G'Pt is also equal to the opposite angle where G'PF 
crosses the perpendicular bisector (when two straight lines cross, the 
opposite angles are always equal):
Therefore all these angles are equal:

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 7 7
This means the perpendicular bisector line would reflect light from F 
to F' at the point P (because, at that point, the angles of incidence and 
reflection are equal). Not only that, the line FPG' has a really spectacular 
property, which can be seen by going back to the congruent triangles:
Because of the congruency of the triangles, the length F'P is the same 
as the length G'P. It follows that the distance from F' to P and back 
to F is the same as the distance in a straight line from F to G'. But that 
distance is just the length of the string we used to draw our original 
ellipse. In other words, if we draw an ellipse by the string method, G' 
is the point we reach by straightening out the string:

7 8 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
So we’ve discovered a strange and marvelous new way to construct 
an ellipse. Here’s how it works. Take two points in a plane, F' and F. 
Then take a string of constant length (larger than the distance F'F) and 
connect one end to the point F. Stretch the string straight in any direction, 
mark the endpoint, and call it G':
Next, connect F' and G', and draw the perpendicular bisector of F'G'. 
The perpendicular bisector crosses the line FG' at a point P:

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 7 9
Now let the point G' at the end of the string move in a circle of constant 
radius centered at F:
As it does so, the point P, formed by the intersection of FG' and the 
perpendicular bisector of F'G', traces out exactly the same ellipse that 
would have been formed using the same string with its ends tacked to 
F' and F\ We know that, because we’ve proved that when P is con­
structed in this way, the distance FPG' (which goes from F to the circle) 
is always equal to the distance FPF' (which constructs the ellipse):
When G' moves from
G'i to &2, P moves from 
Pi to P2, tracing out the 
ellipse

80 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
So, within every circle there lurks, for every off-center point, an off- 
center ellipse. However, while this is very interesting (and will later 
turn out to be very valuable), it’s not the property we set out to prove.
What we did set out to prove is that the string-and-tacks construction 
of the ellipse is equivalent to its property of reflecting light rays from 
F to F'. What we have is an ellipse that obeys the string-and-tacks 
construction (that is, F'P + PF is the same all the way around the 
ellipse), and the line that reflects light that arrives from F at point P, 
with equal angles of incidence and reflection, back to F'. That reflecting 
line happens to be the perpendicular bisector of F'G'\
All that’s left to prove is that the reflecting line at point P is also tangent 
to the ellipse at point P. We know that each point on the ellipse has 
the same mirror-reflection properties as a tangent line at that point. 
Thus, if the reflecting line at P is also tangent to the ellipse at P, then 
the ellipse reflects light from F to F' at any point P, and we have proved 
that the two properties (string-and-tacks and reflecting light from one 
focus to the other) are equivalent.

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 8 1
The proof is made by showing that while the point P is (by construc­
tion) on both the line and the ellipse, every other point on the line lies 
outside the ellipse. That is the unique property of the tangent to any 
curve at a point: it touches the curve without crossing it. If the line 
crossed the ellipse at P, part of the line would necessarily be inside it:
Go back to the construction and pick any point on the line other than 
P. Label that point Q, and connect it to F' and G':

8 2 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
It should be easy to see now that the distances F’Q and G'Q are equal 
(PQ is the perpendicular bisector of F'G', the triangles F'tQ and G'tQ 
are congruent, and so on, QED). Now draw the line QF:
The distance from F’ to Q to F is equal to the distance from G’ to Q 
to F; we know this because we know that the first steps are equal (F'Q 
and G'Q) and the second steps are the same (QF). Now compare the 
lengths FQ + QG' (solid lines) and FP + PG' (broken line):

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 8 3
Obviously, FPG' is shorter, since it’s a straight line, and a straight line 
is the shortest distance between two points. But we’ve just shown that 
the solid lines G'QF in the drawing above cover the same distance as 
the solid lines F'QF in the drawing below, and likewise for the broken 
lines (for the broken lines, we saw that earlier; it’s the length of the 
string):
We have proved that the solid lines cover a bigger distance than the 
broken lines. In other words, if we wanted to reach point Q with a 
string stretched from tacks at F' and F, the string would have to be 
longer than the one needed to reach the unique point P. We showed 
much earlier that this means all such points are outside the ellipse. Thus, 
the line is tangent to the ellipse at point P. QED.
Speaking of QED, there’s something particularly interesting in Feyn­
man’s use of this method of proof. We have shown in effect that the 
shortest path from F' to the tangent line and thence to F is the path that 
reflects light at point P. This is a special case of Fermat’s principle 
(light always takes the quickest path between two points) and is closely 
related to Feynman’s approach to quantum electrodynamics, which is 
also known as QED and won him his Nobel Prize. Fermat’s principle 
is a special case of the principle of least action.
In any case, Feynman has now told us all we’ll need to know about 
the ellipse. He turns now to dynamics—that is, forces and the motions 
that result from them. The diagram that Feynman has sketched in his 
lecture notes is copied directly out of Newton’s Principia. That much 
is obvious from comparing them:

8 4 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
Feynman’s Diagram
Newton’s Diagram

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 8 5
In Newton’s diagram, S represents the position of the Sun (the “im­
movable centre of force”), while А, В, C, D, E, and F are successive 
positions, at equal intervals of time, of a planet in orbit about the Sun. 
The motion of the planet is the result of a competition between the 
planet’s tendency to move at constant speed in a straight line if no forces 
act upon it (the law of inertia) and the motion due to the force that is 
acting on the planet—that is, the gravitational force directed toward the 
Sun. In reality, these combined effects produce a smoothly curved orbit, 
but for purposes of seventeenth-century geometrical analysis, Newton 
represents them by a series of straight-line segments due to inertia, 
interrupted by sudden changes in direction due to impulsive (essentially 
instantaneous) applications of the Sun’s force. Thus, the first bit of the 
diagram starts this way:

86 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
In a certain interval of time, the planet would move from A to В, if no 
force were acting on it. In the next equal interval of time, if there were 
no force acting, the planet would continue the straight line for an equal 
distance, Be:
Instead, however, the Sun’s force (which really acts continuously) is 
represented by an impulse applied at point В, which results in a compo­
nent of motion directed toward the Sun, BV:
• C

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 8 7
The motion the planet would have without the force, Be, and the motion 
due to the force, BV, are compounded into a parallelogram; its diagonal 
is the “actual” motion:
Thus, the planet “actually” follows the path ABC. Notice that Cc is 
not directed toward the Sun. It is strictly parallel to VB, which is directed 
toward the Sun. Incidentally, all of these points lie in a plane: any three 
points, S, A, B, define a plane. The lines connecting S, A, and В are 
in the plane. The segment BV lies in the same plane, because it’s on 
the line BS. The segment Be is in the plane, because it extends the 
line AB. The line BC is in the plane, because it’s the diagonal of the 
parallelogram formed by BV and Be. Now the same procedure is repeated 
at each point, so that the next step looks like this:

88 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
And so on. In the end, Newton applies the same analysis to shorter 
and shorter equal time intervals, and the resulting path, ABCD . . . , 
becomes arbitrarily close to a smooth orbit, on which both inertia and 
the Sun’s force act continuously. The orbit always lies in a single plane.
Before shrinking the time interval, Newton (and Feynman) now 
proves that the planet’s orbit sweeps out equal areas in equal times. In 
other words, the triangle SAB, swept out by the planet in the first time 
interval, has the same area as the triangle SBC, swept out in the second 
equal time interval, and so on. The first step, however, is to show that 
triangle SAB has the same area as SBc—a triangle that would have been 
swept out in the second time interval if there were no force from the 
Sun. Here’s what the three triangles look like:
s
A

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 8 9
The area of a triangle is equal to one-half its base times its altitude. 
For example, one way to calculate the area of the triangle SAB would 
be to choose SA as the base, in which case the altitude would be the 
perpendicular distance from the continuation of SA to the highest point 
on the triangle:
We get the same result if we choose SB as the base and construct the 
altitude like this:
Now we want to compare that area to the area of SBc,

90 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
where we’ve chosen SB to be the base and constructed the altitude as 
shown. Look at the diagram formed by the construction of the altitudes 
of the two triangles:
altitude 
ofSAB
altitude 
of SBc
For the moment, the comers where right angles were constructed are 
labeled x and y. The triangles ABx and cBy are congruent, because they 
have one equal side and two equal angles. The equal sides are AB and 
Be (equal because they are the distances the planet would go in equal 
time intervals if there were no force from the Sun), and the equal angles 
are the right angles (AxB and Bye) and the opposite angles made by the 
crossing of the two straight lines xBy and ABc. Since the triangles are 
congruent, the two altitudes, Ax and cy, are equal; and since the triangles 
SAB and SBc have the same base (SB) and equal altitudes, their areas 
are equal. QED.1
’In Feynman’s lecture, on page 155, where he does this proof, he chose AB and Be as the bases 
of the two triangles. Then they both have the same altitude, formed by extending the line ABc 
downward, and constructing a perpendicular from it to S. This proof and the one in the text work 
equally well.

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 9 1
Next (following Newton and Feynman), we show that the area of SBc 
(solid lines) is also equal to the area of SBC (broken lines):
The two triangles have the same base, SB. The altitude of SBC is the 
perpendicular distance from the extension of SB to C:
The altitude of SBc is the perpendicular distance from a farther extension 
of SB to c:
s

92 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
Put the two diagrams back together, and remember that Cc is strictly 
parallel to SB:
C _ c altitude of SBC
altitude of SBc
Ум
«л*****1^ 
this is parallel
^***^*»*********^ 
t0
S
The two altitudes are the perpendicular distances between the same two 
parallel lines, and are therefore equal. Thus triangles SBC and SBc have 
the same base and equal altitudes. They therefore have the same areas. 
Once again, QED.
Aside from being very pretty geometry, this last proof is very im­
portant for physics. The path Be would have been taken if there were 
no force at all. Instead, there is a force, directed toward 5. That force 
changes the trajectory from path Be to path BC, but it cannot change 
the area swept out during a fixed interval of time. In later years (after 
Newton but long before Feynman), this area would be understood to 
be proportional to a quantity called the angular momentum. In the 
language of latter-day physics, we have proved that a force on a planet 
directed toward S cannot change the angular momentum of the planet 
measured with respect to S'. Although Newton never used the term 
“angular momentum,’’ it is clear that he understood the significance of 
that quantity, and the fact that it could be changed only by a force along 
some direction not pointing at the center, S.
In any case, we have now shown that the area of SAB is equal to the 
area of SBc and that the area of SBc is equal to the area of SBC. It 
follows that SAB and SBC have the same areas. Looking back at the 
original diagram,

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 9 3
it is obvious that we could apply the same arguments to successive 
triangles—SCD, SDE, and so on. These are the triangles swept out by 
the planet in equal intervals of time. We have thus succeeded in proving 
Kepler’s second law of planetary motion: a planet sweeps out equal 
areas in equal times.
Now that we can see where we have arrived, it is worthwhile to look 
back and see how we got here. What exactly did we have to know about 
dynamics—that is, about forces and the motions they produce—in order 
to get this far?
The answer is this: We have used Newton’s first law (the law of 
inertia), Newton’s second law (any change of motion is in the direction 
of the impressed force), and the idea that the force of gravity on the 
planet is directed toward the Sun. Nothing else. For example, we have 
not used the idea that the force of gravity is inversely proportional to the 
square of the distance. So the inverse-square-of-the-distance character of 
gravity has nothing to do with Kepler’s second law. Any other kind of 
force would have produced the same result, provided only that the force 
is directed toward the Sun. What we have learned is that if Newton’s 
first and second laws are correct, then Kepler’s observation that planets 
sweep out equal areas in equal times means that the gravitational force 
on the planet is directed toward the Sun.

94 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
You may wonder exactly where we used Newton’s first and second 
laws. We used the first law when we said the planet would move from 
A to В to c if there were no force on it, and the second when we said 
that the change in the motion, BV, due to the force from the Sun, is 
directed toward the Sun. Incidentally, we have also used Newton’s first 
corollary to his laws— that the net motion produced by both tendencies 
in the time interval is given by the diagonal of the parallelogram of the 
separate motions that would have occurred:
At this point in his lecture, Feynman says, “The demonstration that 
you have just seen is an exact copy of one in the Principia Mathematica 
by Newton,” but he goes on to say that he could not follow Newton’s 
arguments any further, and that he “cooked up” the rest of the demon­
stration of the law of ellipses himself. Before turning to Feynman’s 
demonstration, however, let us interject another argument that Feynman 
has disposed of earlier in his lecture: where does the inverse-square-of- 
the-distance force of gravity come in?
The inverse-square-of-the-distance (from now on we’ll just call it the 
7?-2) nature of gravity is deduced from Kepler’s third law, which says 
that the time it takes a planet to make one complete orbit (that is, one 
year in the life of the planet) is proportional to the 3/2 power of the 
planet’s distance from the Sun. Actually, since the orbits of the planets 
are ellipses with the Sun at one focus, a given planet is not always the 
same distance from the Sun:

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 9 5
The distance from the center of the ellipse (not from the Sun, which is 
off-center) to the farthest point on the ellipse is called the semimajor 
axis, labeled a (the shorter axis, labeled b, is called the semiminor axis). 
The semimajor axis is called that because it is one-half the longest axis 
of the ellipse. Kepler’s third law says that the time it takes a planet to 
execute one complete orbit is proportional to the 3/2 power of a, the 
semimajor axis.
Just to be sure the meaning of that statement is clear, imagine a sun 
with two planets in orbit around it (or a planet with two moons in orbit 
around it—the same law would be obeyed):

96 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
The two arrows show the distances from the centers of the two ellipses 
to the farthest point of each. Those distances are the semimajor axes, 
a1 and a2- Now suppose that a2 is twice as big as Then Kepler’s 
third law says that the time planet 2 takes to make a complete orbit is 
longer than the orbital period of planet 1 by a factor 2 to the 3/2 power: 
that is, take 2, cube it to get 8, and take the square root of 8 to get 2.83. 
The year of planet 2 is 2.83 times longer than the year of planet 1.
The law would still be true, and all the behavior of the planets would 
be much simpler (but much less interesting), if only Plato had been 
right and the orbits of the planets were perfect circles. A circle can be 
thought of as an especially simple ellipse. Starting from an ellipse,
a circle can be constructed by moving both foci, F’ and F, to the center:

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 
9 7
Then the semimajor axis a will be the same length as the semiminor 
axis b, and we will call both of them the radius, R. Notice that since 
a circle is an ellipse (a special case of an ellipse, to be sure), Kepler’s 
laws allow planetary orbits to be circles but don’t require it. In reality, 
the orbits of the planets in our solar system are all very nearly (but not 
exactly) circles—although other objects obeying Kepler’s laws (such 
as Halley’s comet, for example) have orbits that are very far from 
circular.
Getting back to our point, we wish to demonstrate that Kepler’s third 
law means that the force of the Sun’s gravity diminishes as the square 
of the distance from the Sun. Following Feynman, we’ll simplify the 
argument by pretending that the planetary orbits really are circles. Sym­
bolically, we’ll call the time to complete an orbit T. Then Kepler’s third 
law says T ~ R312 (read, “T goes as, or is proportional to, /?3/2”), where 
R is the distance to the Sun. How is that related to the R~2 law?
Like Feynman, we are unable to follow Newton’s argument here, 
and even Feynman’s argument is a bit cryptic, so we’ve formulated our 
own. This argument is designed not only to make the point about 
Kepler’s third law and Newton’s R2 law, but also to introduce some 
geometrical techniques we’ll need for the grand finale.
The diagram that we (and Feynman) have copied from Newton shows 
successive positions of a planet in space:

98 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
In equal intervals of time, the planet moves from A to B, from В to C, 
and so on. We can also represent on this diagram the velocity of the 
planet during each segment (due to inertia, the planet moves from A to 
В at constant velocity, from В to C at constant velocity, and so on). 
The velocity can be represented by an arrow pointing in the direction 
of motion (remember that the word “velocity,” as it is used in physics, 
means not just speed but also direction):
There is no reason for the velocity arrows to be drawn next to the 
corresponding line segment of the orbit; we can collect them together 
on the side at a common origin:

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 9 9
The new diagram is a velocity diagram rather than a position diagram. 
The direction of the arrow shows the direction of the planet’s motion, 
so must be parallel to AS,
and the length of the arrow is proportional to the speed. In other words, 
the faster the planet is moving in that segment, the longer the arrow. 
If the planet moves more slowly on the segment from S to C than it 
did from A to S, we might get a diagram like this:
However, the change in velocity, according to Newton’s second law, 
must be in the direction of the Sun, at point B, where the impulsive 
force causes the velocity to change: If vAB is the velocity before the 
change,
V ДВ
velocity before change

100 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
and vBC is the velocity after the change,
velocity after change
then the change in velocity is also an arrow,
velocity changed from her
so this is the change
and that arrow must be in the direction of the line from В to S:
(position diagram)
(velocity diagram)

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses J 01
The change in velocity at point B, AvB, is thus in the direction of the 
force from the Sun, and is also proportional to the strength of the force. 
If the Sun’s force were twice as big at point В, AvB would be twice as 
big. That’s the meaning of Newton’s second law. The change in velocity 
at each of the (imaginary) points А, В, C, ... on Newton’s diagram 
also depends on the (equal) time intervals between those points. Newton 
can (and does) imagine approximating the same orbit by time intervals 
half as big, to get closer to the actual smooth curve that the orbit makes 
in space. If all else is the same, and the time intervals are half as big, 
then each change in velocity will also be half as big but there will be 
twice as many of them:
(velocity diagram)
This is the same orbit, produced by the same force as the previous 
diagram. The force is proportional to the change in velocity at each 
point (half as big for this diagram) divided by the time interval (also 
half as big): F ~ Ду/Дг, where F is the force and Д/ is the time interval. 
The force in this diagram is the same as the force in the previous 
diagram.
There is, as we have seen, an actual correspondence between direction 
on the position diagram and on the velocity diagram. However, the 
sizes of the diagrams bear no relation to one another at all. We could

10 2 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
choose to make the entire velocity diagram twice as big (which wouldn’t 
change any of the directions) and it would still be correct:
both these velocity diagrams are correct
Let’s look at the simplest possible specific example. Suppose the 
orbit were just a circle, of radius R. Then the Newtonian diagram would 
look like this:
Newton's construction
real orbit

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 103
Each of the distances—SA, SB, SC, and so on—would be equal to R, 
the radius of the circle. Also, each change of velocity, due to the 
impulsive force at А, В, C, D, and so on, would be the same no matter 
how the force from the Sun depends on distance, because all these 
points are at the same distance from the Sun. It follows that the speeds 
along AB, BC, and so on must all be the same, and the lengths of the 
segments AB, BC, and so on are all the same. That’s the only way the 
orbit can follow the same path, time after time. In other words, the 
figure drawn by Newton is a regular polygon, a figure of equal sides 
and angles, inscribed in the circle, which is the real orbit.
Regular polygons include the equilateral triangle, the square, the penta­
gon, the hexagon, and so on. The more sides a regular polygon has, 
the more it resembles a circle. Newton imagined using shorter time 
intervals for his figure, giving a regular polygon with more sides,

104 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
and thus more closely approximating the real circle, ad infinitum, until 
the real orbit is achieved.
In the velocity diagram for a circular orbit, all the velocities are of 
equal length and at equal angles apart, so that all the changes Av are 
the same:
(orbit diagram)
these are all equal
(velocity diagram)
Thus the velocity diagram is also a regular polygon, which also becomes 
a circle when the orbit becomes a circle (after going through the ad- 
infinitum):
(circular orbit)
(circular velocity diagram)

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 1 05
The radius of the circle in the velocity diagram is v, the uniform speed 
of the planet all the way around its orbit. That speed is given by the 
distance the planet travels divided by the time it takes. The distance the 
planet travels is the circumference of the orbit—that is, 2tt7?—and the 
time that the planet takes to go around is just what we have called T, 
the period of the orbit. Therefore, v is equal to 2~RlT.
distance around is
time to make the trip is T;
speed is v = InR/T

106 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
Each time the planet makes one complete orbit, the velocity arrow also 
goes around one whole cycle:
these two are
(velocity diagram at the same instant)
(orbit diagram)
(orbit diagram later)
(velocity diagram at the same instant)

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 1 07
When the velocity arrow makes a complete circle, the tip of the arrow 
moves a distance 2ttv:
Remember that the change in velocity is given by the motion of the tip 
of the velocity arrow:
Let’s say, now, that the circle has been divided up into 30 parts, each 
representing the motion in l/30th of the orbit time T.
Av
(orbit diagram)
(velocity diagram)

10 8 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
The force, as we’ve seen, is proportional to Av/Af, where Av is the 
change in velocity, equal to l/3Oth of the perimeter of the velocity 
circle, and At is the time interval, l/3Oth of T. Obviously, l/3Oth of 
the perimeter divided by l/3Oth of the time is the same as the whole 
perimeter divided by the whole time. So Av/At is equal to the perime­
ter—that is, 2ttv—divided by the time T:
AR motion in time interval Д/
(orbit diagram)
(velocity diagram)
A/? 2ttR
At T
Av _ 2ttv 
At ” ~T~
So the force, F, is proportional to 2irv/7’; and the velocity, v, is equal 
to I'nRIT. Symbolically:
2ir
2tt 
T
2ttR 
T
Multiplying the two fractions gives
F~(2iO2^
This statement means, for example, that if there were a planet twice as 
far from the Sun (at 2R rather than R) and if it made its orbit in the 

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 1 09
same time period, then the force on it from the Sun, being proportional 
to R, would have to be twice as big. However, that’s not the way planets 
behave. We have seen that if there were a planet at 2R, its period would 
be 2.83T. This is determined by Kepler’s third law:
T — R3'2 (the period of a planet is proportional to the 3/2 power 
of its distance from the Sun)
The force, F, is proportional to the distance, R, divided by T2. But T2 
means the square of R312, and (R3/2)2 = R3. So the force is proportional 
to the distance, R, divided by the cube of the distance, R3. But R divided 
by R3 is the same as 1 over 7?2! The force is proportional to 1 over the 
square of the distance to the Sun! This is the connection we’ve been 
looking for—the R~2 force law.
Before plunging ahead, this is a good place to stop for a moment, 
to see where we’ve been and where we are going.
Kepler has given us three laws, and Newton has given us three 
laws. Kepler’s laws, however, are of a vastly different character from 
Newton’s. Kepler’s laws are generalizations of observations of the heav­
ens. They are what we would today call curve-fitting. Kepler took a 
few points in space—the observed positions of the planet Mars at known 
times—and said, “Aha! All these points fall on a curve called an 
ellipse!” That description trivializes the life’s work of one of history’s 
great geniuses, but it is nevertheless a correct approximation. That is 
the essential nature of all three of Kepler’s laws.
Newton’s laws are of a radically different kind. They are really 
assumptions about the innermost nature of physical reality: the relations 
between matter, forces, and motion. If the behavior deduced from those 
assumptions is observed in nature, then the assumptions may be correct, 
and if that is the case then we have seen into nature’s heart, or the mind 
of God, depending on your taste in metaphors. In the crucially important 
arena of planetary motions, the test of whether the Newtonian assump­
tions are correct is whether they give rise to the Keplerian laws, which 
summarize with great precision an immense amount of astronomical 
data.
The connection between Newton’s laws and Kepler’s laws is more 
complex than that, however; so far, there is a missing link. In order to 

110 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
determine the planetary motions that his laws would dictate, Newton 
had to discover the nature of a particular kind of force—the force of 
gravity. In order to do so, he made use of Kepler’s second and third 
laws. Then, having thus deduced the nature of gravity, he was able to 
demonstrate that the force of gravity, acting under the direction of his 
laws, would produce Kepler’s remaining observation, the law of ellip­
ses. That is the logical sequence of events as presented by Newton in 
his Principia. We now stand at the point in his argument where we 
have deduced the nature of gravity, making use of Newton’s laws and 
Kepler’s second and third laws. Let’s review how we did that, before 
the curtain rises on our final act—Kepler’s first law, the law of ellipses.
As applied to planetary motions, Newton’s first law, the law of inertia, 
says that if a planet has no force acting on it, it will remain at rest if 
it begins at rest, or it will move forever in a straight line at constant 
speed if it begins in motion. Why it does so is a mystery, although 
Newton sometimes refers to the mechanism as the planet’s “inner 
force.’’ However, the point with regard to Newton’s laws is not to ask 
why they are true, but to ask only whether they are true.
Newton’s second law says that if there is indeed a force F acting on 
a planet, its effect is to divert the planet from the straight line that the 
planet would have followed at constant speed under the influence of 
inertia. In particular, if a force is applied for a given time interval, Ar, 
it produces a change in velocity—that is, a departure from the inertial 
path, Av, proportional to the force and in the same direction as the 
force. That means that if twice the force (2F) is applied, then twice the 
change in velocity (2Av) is produced. It also means that 2Av can be 
obtained by applying the same force for twice the amount of time (2 Ar). 
Symbolically, we would write Av ~ FAr. It further means that if the 
force is toward the Sun, the change in velocity must be toward the Sun.
Newton’s third law says that forces which operate between different 
parts of a planet produce no net force upon the whole planet, so that, 
for purposes of analyzing planetary motions, we can ignore the fact that 
planets are large complicated bodies and treat them as if they were 
concentrated at a mathematical point at their centers.
The picture Newton then pursues is that the Sun, assumed to be 
immovable, applies on the planets a force, gravity, that diverts them 

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 111
from the inertial straight lines they would otherwise follow and into 
their actual orbits.
One property of those actual orbits, described by Kepler’s second 
law, is that a hypothetical line connecting the Sun to a planet sweeps 
out equal areas in equal times as the planet moves around in its orbit. 
Newton shows, and we have now shown, that the meaning of Kepler’s 
observation is that the force of gravity acts in the direction of the line 
connecting the planet to the Sun.
A second property of planetary motion is that the farther away a 
planet’s orbit is from the Sun, the more slowly the planet moves in that 
orbit. Specifically, the time the planet takes to make one complete circuit 
increases as the 3/2 power of the distance of its orbit from the Sun. 
Newton shows, and we have now shown, that to produce this result, 
the force deflecting the planets into their various orbits must weaken as 
1 over the square of the distance from the Sun. In other words, if a 
planet is twice as far from the Sun, the gravitational force attracting it 
toward the Sun will be four times smaller.
Notice that Kepler’s second law (equal areas) deals with the motion 
of a single planet in different parts of its orbit, while his third law 
compares the orbits of different planets. It is strange but true that the 
masses of the planets have no bearing at all on how fast they move in 
their orbits. A year (one complete orbit) of the planet Earth is shorter 
than a year of the planet Jupiter only by the ratio of the 3/2 powers of 
their distances from the Sun, though Jupiter’s mass is more than 300 
times that of the Earth.
In any case, we now know that the force of the Sun’s gravity on a 
planet is directed toward the Sun, and that its strength decreases as 1 
over the square of the distance from the Sun. We have used Kepler’s 
second and third laws to find out that much. The final, triumphant 
accomplishment will be to show that such a force of gravity, acting as 
directed by Newton’s laws, will produce elliptical orbits for the planets.
In Feynman’s lecture, this is the point at which he finds himself unable 
to follow Newton’s line of argument any further, and so sets out to 
invent one of his own. His first departure from Newton is much like 

11 2 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
some brilliant, completely unexpected move by a chess prodigy. Instead 
of dividing the orbit into imaginary segments that take equal intervals 
of time, as Newton always does, Feynman divides the orbit into seg­
ments that make equal angles at the Sun. We’ll need to sketch some 
diagrams to see what this means.
Recall the diagram in the Principia that Feynman copied into his 
lecture notes:
In a certain time interval, a planet would move from A to В if there 
were no force from the Sun. The time interval might be, for example, 
1 second, or 1 minute, or 1 month. In the next equal time interval, it 
would continue an equal distance from В to c. Instead, the force from 
the Sun produces an impulse at В that dictates a change in motion, 
directed toward the Sun, equal to BV. During the second time interval, 
the planet actually executes a combination of the path Be, dictated by 
inertia, and the path BV, dictated by the Sun’s gravity: it follows the 
diagonal of the parallelogram formed by the two motions and arrives 
at C. We proved earlier that the triangles swept out in equal times, SAB 
and SBC, have equal areas. Thus Newton approximates the orbit as a 
series of points equally spaced in time (А, В, C, . . .) at each of which 
the planet is diverted from its inertial straight line by an instantaneous 
pull from the Sun. The shorter the time intervals, the more frequent the 
pull from the Sun and the more nearly the trajectory comes to resemble 
the real orbit, which is a smooth curve with the Sun’s gravity acting 
continuously to pull the planet away from the inertial straight line it 
would otherwise have followed. The final, smooth orbit retains the 

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 113
property we (and Newton and Feynman) have demonstrated for the 
schematic one: it sweeps out equal areas in equal times, which means 
that the planet moves faster in its orbit when it is closer to the Sun.
In time Д/, moving rapidly when it is close
The two areas are equal
Feynman has used the same argument, taken directly from Newton, 
to prove this law of equal areas. Now, however, he chooses to divide 
the orbit into equal angles rather than equal areas:
The two segments of orbit shown above have equal central angles, but 
they sweep out different areas and therefore take different amounts of 

114 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
time. The law says that the planet sweeps out equal areas in equal times. 
That means that if it sweeps out half as much area, it takes half as much 
time, or
At ~ (area swept out)
Let us for the moment represent these equal-angle segments on a 
Newton-type diagram, on which the planet undergoes inertial straight­
line motions punctuated by velocity changes due to the force of gravity. 
For simplicity, we draw the velocity changes, Av, directly on the orbit 
diagram:
On the side of the orbit closer to the Sun, the planet glides from A to 
B, gets diverted by Av due to the Sun, and continues from В to C. On 
the other end of the orbit, the planet goes from D to E, suffers a pull 
producing a Av, and continues from E to F.
We know that the planet moves faster along BC than along EF. To 
see how much faster, we have to compare the areas of the triangles 
SBC and SEF, because the times are proportional to the areas swept 
out. Remember that the two triangles have the same central angle at 5. 
Reorienting SEF and laying it on top of SBC, we have:

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 115
The area of each triangle is 1/2 (the base) x (the altitude). Also, these 
are similar triangles. That means that if the base of the larger triangle 
is twice as big as the base of the smaller one, then the altitude is also 
twice as big; in that case, the area of the big triangle would exceed the 
area of the small one by 2 x 2 = 4. The general rule is that the area 
is proportional to the square of the distance from the Sun.2 So, the time 
it takes to go through any portion of the orbit is proportional to the area 
swept out, which is proportional to the square of the distance from the 
Sun. Here’s a comparison of Newton’s way and Feynman’s way of 
dividing the orbit into segments:
2In his lecture, Feynman glosses over this point in a single line. It is not so simple, however, and 
we haven’t really proved it either. Here’s a more complete proof. Consider two arbitrary orbit 
segments that have equal central angles:

116 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
(footnote continued)
Lay the triangle SWX on top of SGH like this:
It is always possible to draw a line through WX, parallel to HG, such that the two little triangles 
that result will have equal areas:
We have drawn line hg, 
parallel to HG, so that 
these two triangles 
have equal areas by 
construction
The triangle Sgh has the same area as SWX (it is bigger by one of the little triangles and an equal 
amount smaller by the other), and it is similar to SGH. Now draw a line from S to the point where 
WX crosses hg:
We will now call SZ, or Sz, the distance from the Sun to the orbit. According to the property of 
similar triangles (base and altitude each increase as the size, so the area is proportional to the 
square of the size), the similar triangles SGH and Sgh have areas in proportion to the squares of 
the lengths SZ and Sz. But .S'WX has the same area as Sgh, so the area of 5WX is also in proportion

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 117
Symbolically, Дг ~ R2 in the Feynman drawing, where R is the 
distance from the planet to the Sun. But we also know that the force 
from the Sun decreases with distance, according to the inverse-square 
law—that is, F ~ MR2. Let’s go back to the kind of diagram that shows 
the change in velocity, Av, at each discrete point of the orbit:
At each point around the orbit—А, В, C . . . D, E, F . . . , and all 
the points in between—there is a Av toward the Sun. The bigger the 
force F, the bigger the Av; also, the longer the time interval Ar, the 
greater the change in velocity Av:
Av ~ F Ar
But since F ~ I//?2 and Ar ~ R2,
Av ~ (I//?2) x R2 = 1
This means that Av does not depend on R at all! Everywhere in the 
orbit, no matter how close to the Sun or how far away, the Av produced 
in a given angle is the same. That happens, as we have now seen,
to the square of Sz. If we now imagine shrinking the central angle down smaller and smaller ad 
infinitum, the line SZz always stays inside the angle, and because the points W and X on the 
elliptical orbit get closer and closer together, the length Sz ultimately becomes equal to SW or SX, 
which is what we previously called the distance to the Sun. QED. 

11 8 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
because as the planet gets farther away from the Sun, the force acting 
on it gets weaker (as the square of the distance) but the time the force 
has to act on the planet gets longer (also as the square of the distance). 
The result is that all the Av’s, all the way around the orbit, are the 
same. That, says Feynman in his lecture, is “the central core from 
which all will be deduced—that equal changes in velocity occur when 
the orbit is moving through equal angles.”
To see exactly what this means, let us look back for a moment at 
the type of diagram sketched by Newton and copied by Feynman. Rather 
than representing positions of the planets, we will represent velocities:
In Newton’s way of doing things, the time intervals were all the same, 
and the Av’s were all pointed toward the Sun, but some Av’s were 
bigger than others (the biggest Av’s came when the planet was closest 
to the Sun). In Feynman’s scheme, the central angles are all the same, 
so that the time intervals are different. The Av’s all point toward the 
Sun (they mtist, according to Newton’s second law) and they are all 
now exactly equal in size, all the way around the orbit. This has conse­
quences that are now to be worked out.
At this point, Feynman has sketched in his lecture notes, with meticu­
lous care, the orbit diagram and the corresponding velocity diagram for 
equal-angle segments. Here is the result:

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 1 19
The orbit starts from position J, goes to К making some angle at the 
Sun, suffers a Av changing its direction, then continues through an equal 
angle from К to L, and then again from L to M:
Unlike Newton’s version of this diagram, the times of these segments 
are not necessarily equal. The velocities are in the directions JK, KL, 
and so on. They are, in general, of different magnitudes on different 
segments. The changes in velocity suffered at points J, K, L, and M 
are all directed toward the Sun and all of the same magnitude. In other

120 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
words, at J there is a Av in the direction JS; at K, the same Av occurs 
in the direction KS; and so on. Using these facts, Feynman constructs 
the velocity diagram:
(orbit diagram)
On the orbit diagram, the planet moves from J to К with velocity v7. 
On the velocity diagram, v7 has the same direction, but not the same 
length, as JK. At point K, there is a Av in the direction KS, moving 
the velocity diagram a distance Av from point j to point k, where the 
velocity becomes vK. This process continues at the next step; the second 
segment on the orbit diagram is drawn from K, parallel to vK, to a point 
L, so that KSL is the same angle as JSK\
this line is constructed 
parallel to this one
(orbit diagram)
this angle is the same as 
this one
(velocity diagram)

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 121
We now find the point 1 on the velocity diagram by adding a Av equal 
in magnitude to jk, but parallel to LS:
The same procedure can be repeated all the way around the orbit. The 
next step gives the diagram as Feynman sketched it in his notes:
As Feynman wrote in his notes, jk is parallel to KS, Ik is parallel to LS, 
Im is parallel to MS, and Ik = jk = Im.
Each of the sides of the velocity diagram (jk, kl, Im, . . .) is parallel 
to one of the lines radiating from the Sun in the orbit diagram. Because 

12 2 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
the lines from the Sun are constructed to have equal angles, the sides 
of the figure in the velocity diagram also have equal external angles:
this external angle 
equals this one
and so on around 
the figure
next segment of the figure
When the velocity diagram is complete, it will be a figure with equal 
sides and equal (external) angles:
Notice that the velocities themselves, which are the distances from the 
origin to j, k, I, and so on, are unequal but that the sides (the Av’s) are 
equal. The resulting figure is a regular polygon! The origin of the 

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 123
velocities is not at the center, but the external figure itself is a regular 
polygon.
If we now proceed as usual to divide the orbit diagram into a larger 
number of segments with equal but smaller angles, the orbit more nearly 
approaches a smooth curve—and so does the velocity diagram. Because 
the velocity diagram is a regular polygon, the smooth curve it approaches 
is a circle! But the origin of the velocities is not necessarily at the center 
of the circle.
At this point, Feynman sketches in his lecture notes the orbit and 
velocity diagrams as smooth curves. First the orbit. It starts at point J, 
and Feynman has drawn it in the conventional way, with the line from 
the Sun extending horizontally; in contrast to the segmented orbit dia­
gram, the velocity at point J is a vertical line, perpendicular to the line 
from the Sun:
After some time, the planet arrives at point P, having made an angle 6 
at the Sun:
At each point, the instantaneous velocity is tangent to the smooth curve.

1 2 4 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
Now construct the corresponding velocity diagram. It will be a circle, 
with the origin off-center. The length of the line we will draw to represent 
Vj will depend on the planet’s speed at point J of the orbit. Remember 
that on a velocity diagram, the longer the line, the faster the speed. 
Point J on Feynman’s orbit diagram is also the closest point to the Sun 
(Feynman has decided this in his head without mentioning it in the 
lecture), where the orbital speed is greatest. Therefore the line v7 must 
pass through the center of the circle, because it has to be the longest 
line on the velocity diagram:

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 125
Drawn this way, v} is vertical (parallel to v7 on the orbit diagram), and 
it is the longest distance from the origin to any point on the circle. The 
velocity at point p on the velocity diagram, corresponding to P on the 
orbit diagram , is a line from the origin parallel to vP:
(orbit diagram)
It is also true that the angle jCp on the velocity diagram is the same 
angle, 0, as JSP on the orbit diagram:

126 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
The reason for this can be seen if we go back to the complete velocity 
diagram of orbit segments—the regular polygon—and draw lines out 
from its center instead of from the origin of the velocity arrows:
The orbit has been divided up into some number of equal angles, which 
must total 360°. The polygon necessarily has the same number of equal 
sides, each occupying the same fraction of 360°. Therefore the angle 
from SJ to any point on the orbit is the same as the angle from Cj to 
the corresponding point on the velocity diagram.
The net result is shown in the pair of diagrams sketched by Feynman:
(orbit diagram)
(velocity diagram)

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 127
Now that all the correspondences between the two diagrams have 
been established, we could construct the orbit starting from the velocity 
diagram. It is an easier starting point, because we know that it is just 
a circle:
Any orbit permitted by Newton’s laws and the force of gravity will 
have this same velocity diagram. The exact shape of the orbit will 
depend on where we choose to place the origin of the velocities. Pick 
a point, any point, inside the circle, but not at C, the center (we will 
see later what happens if the point is at C, or on the circle, or even 
outside it):
(velocity diagram)

1 2 8 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
For purposes of familiarity only, turn the whole diagram until the chosen 
point lies directly below C:
The chosen point is to serve as the origin of velocities: that is, a line 
from there to any point on the circle’s perimeter will have a length 
proportional to the planet’s speed at that point on the orbit, and lie in 
the same direction as the planet’s motion at that point on the orbit. As 
noted, the line from the origin through the center to the circle’s perimeter 
is the longest line and therefore represents the point on the orbit where 
the planet is moving fastest.

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 129
According to the equal-areas law, this will be the point on the orbit 
closest to the Sun. As Feynman has done, we will draw the orbit so 
that the line from there to the Sun is horizontal and the velocity is 
vertical (that’s why we rotated the origin of the velocity diagram to be 
beneath the center):
Now draw a line from the origin to any other point on the circle, p:

1 3 0 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
This point corresponds to a point P on the orbit that has the following 
properties: the line from the origin to p on the velocity diagram is 
parallel to the tangent at the point P on the orbit diagram, and the angle 
jCp is the same as the angle JSP:
(velocity diagram)
(orbit diagram)
So at each angle 0, we know the direction of the tangent to the orbit 
we are seeking to construct. How can we construct the curve?
Later in the lecture, Feynman tells us that this was the most difficult 
step to discover. The trick is to rotate the velocity diagram clockwise 
by 90°, so that the directions on it are the same as those on the orbit 
diagram:

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 131
Now the central angle 0 is the same on both diagrams, but the line 
marked “vP,” which was parallel to the velocity at P on the orbit, is 
now perpendicular to it, since we rotated the whole velocity diagram 
by 90°. We now know, from the velocity diagram, the direction from 
the Sun to point P on the orbit, and we know the direction of the tangent 
to the orbit at that point. It is perpendicular to the line marked “v?.” 
But we don’t yet know exactly where the point is.
The easiest way to construct the curve having all the required proper­
ties is to draw it right on top of the velocity diagram. Then the size of 
the orbit will be arbitrary, but all the directions, and therefore the shape 
of the orbit, will be correct. To get the orbit, simply construct the 
perpendicular bisector of the line from the origin to p:
perpendicular 
bisector
origin
C

1 3 2 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
Because it is perpendicular to the line from the origin to p, we know 
that it is parallel to vP, the velocity at point P on the orbit. At some 
point, the perpendicular bisector crosses the line connecting p to the 
center, C:
As the point p moves around the circle, the intersection of pC and the 
perpendicular bisector moves around in a curve of its own:
As p moves around the circle to 
q, the intersection of the 
construction moves from P to Q 
and so on, creating the orbit.

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 133
We once before made exactly the same construction. Starting from two 
points in the plane called F' and F (corresponding respectively to origin 
and C), we drew a line from F' to a point G’ (p in the new diagram):
Then we connected G'F, and drew the perpendicular bisector of F'G', 
which crosses FG' at the point P:
We proved then that as the point G' executes a circle centered at F, the 
point P executes an ellipse, and at each point P the perpendicular bisector 
is tangent to the ellipse (see pages 73 to 80).

134 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
We have now made exactly the same construction again as on page 
79—only the names have been changed. Here’s how the new diagram 
looks:
Here, p is a point on a circle centered at C. There is also an eccentric 
point: the origin of the velocity diagram, which we now call O. The 
line segment Op has a perpendicular bisector at t, which intersects the 
line Cp at a point P. We will now prove again that each point P created 
in this way, as p moves around the circle, lies on an ellipse, and that 
the line tP is tangent to the ellipse at P. Since tP is parallel to the 
velocity of the planet when it is at point P on its orbit, we will have 
constructed the unique curve that has the planet going in the right 
direction at every point in its orbit.
To prove that the curve is an ellipse, we notice that the triangles OtP 
and ptP are congruent:

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 1 3 5
Therefore OP = pP. And in the full diagram,
CPp, which is the radius of the circle and is therefore the same all the 
way around, is equal to CP + PO, the length of the string from foci 
C and О that constructs the ellipse. The dashed curve (the orbit) is 
therefore an ellipse, QED. To prove that tP is the tangent line at P, go 
back to the congruent triangles:

136 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
Now let the lines Pp and tP cross each other:
The line tP is therefore the line that reflects light from C to О at point 
P. We long ago proved that the line tP that has that property is the 
tangent line. For the last time, QED.
The proof is now complete. Feynman is not quite finished yet, but 
we have accomplished in full what we set out to show. Newton’s laws, 
together with an R~2 force of gravity toward the Sun, result in elliptical 
orbits for the planets. Before we leave the subject, let us look back one 
more time at the logic of the arguments that have enabled us (with the 
help of Newton and Feynman) to accomplish that heroic feat.
Newton says something like this: From the fact that planets sweep 
out equal areas in equal times, I used my laws to deduce that the force 
of the Sun’s gravity on a planet points directly toward the Sun. Then, 
from the fact that the orbital periods of planets are proportional to the 
3/2 power of their distances from the Sun, I used my laws to deduce 

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 
13 7
that the force of gravity diminishes as R~2. Finally, my laws, together 
with these two facts about gravity, produce elliptical orbits.
Newton didn’t really think about the problem that way. We know 
from earlier versions of his work (for example, the brief treatise he sent 
to Halley in 1684) that he experimented with various forms of his axioms 
about dynamics. Only later did he reduce them to three and start to 
refer to them as “laws.” The act of reducing all of dynamics to three 
fundamental laws was supremely important, because, as Newton and 
his followers were to show over the course of the ensuing three centuries, 
those laws could be used to explain not only the motions of the planets 
but almost every other phenomenon in the physical world as well. 
Newton’s laws tell us how matter behaves when it is acted on by forces. 
The only two things we need to know about the physical world that 
Newton’s laws don’t tell us are: What is the nature of matter? What is 
the nature of the forces that act between bits of matter? These two 
questions are still the central concerns of the science of physics.
This whole powerful reorganization of our understanding of the world 
begins with the proof of elliptical orbits. In this case, we do not need 
to know very much about the nature of matter, because gravity affects 
all matter in exactly the same way. The nature of the force of gravity 
is very important, however, and that’s what Newton uses two of Kepler’s 
laws to deduce.
Finally, we have seen the proof of elliptical orbits not as Newton 
originally did it but as Richard Feynman worked it out. Feynman divides 
the orbit into equal angles. In each equal-angle segment, the change in 
velocity is directed at the Sun, and proportional to the strength of the 
force and the time over which the force acts. That is Newton’s second 
law. The time is proportional to the area swept out, which (by pure 
geometry) is proportional to the square of the distance, and the force 
is inversely proportional to the square of the distance (that’s the nature 
of the force of gravity); so no matter what the shape of the orbit is, and 
no matter how close to or far from the Sun the planet wanders, the 
planet undergoes equal changes of velocity in equal angles. It follows 
immediately that the velocity diagram is a regular polygon (equal sides 
at equal angles), which becomes a circle for smooth orbits. However, 
the origin of the velocity diagram is not at the center of the circle.

1 3 8 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
Then, with the help of a geometric construction that has been cunningly 
set up in advance, it is shown that the orbit has the shape of an ellipse, 
with the origin of the velocity diagram and the center of the velocity 
circle acting as foci.
The velocity diagram is a powerful geometric tool. Newton’s dynami­
cal laws, together with an R~2 force, always produce a circular velocity 
diagram:
velocity diagram 
due to R'2 law
The shape of the orbit depends on where O, the origin of the velocity 
diagram, is. If О coincides with C, the center of the diagram, then the 
two foci of the ellipse coincide and the planet has the same speed in 
all parts of its orbit:
In this case, the orbit is simply a circle.

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 139
If the point О is anywhere between C and the circumference of the 
diagram, then the orbit is an ellipse. The closer О is to C, the more 
nearly circular is the ellipse. The farther О is from C, the more elongated 
the ellipse:
very eccentric orbit
velocity diagram 
(turned 90° )
velocity diagram 
(turned 90°)
In our solar system, all the planetary orbits are nearly circular. In the 
Earth’s orbit, the distance between foci is about 1 percent of the diameter 
of the orbit; for Mars, it is about 9 percent; for Mercury and Pluto 
(whose orbits are the most eccentric), a little more than 20 percent. 
Halley’s comet, by contrast, has an extremely eccentric elliptical orbit. 
The distance between its foci is 97 percent of the diameter of its orbit.

1 40 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
What happens if О is outside the circle? Let’s go back to the velocity 
diagram before we turned it by 90°. We still have the largest velocity 
in the orbit at the point of closest approach:
As the angle 0 increases, the velocities proceed around the circle in the 
diagram:
о

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 141
At some value of 0, the line from О is the tangent to the velocity 
circle:
Remember, this line is also parallel to the instantaneous velocity of the 
orbit and the tangent to the velocity diagram is in the direction of the 
Av’s in the orbit diagram, which represent the changes in the velocity. 
In other words, at this angle 0, the change in velocity is in the same 
direction as the velocity itself. That means the velocity is not changing 
direction anymore. The path is no longer a curve, it is a straight line. 
The “orbit” is therefore not an ellipse, on which the path is never a 
straight line. Instead, it is a hyperbola, another of the conic sections, 
which tends to become a straight line far away from the focus:
trajectory tends to 
this line at infinity, 
parallel to this
О

14 2 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
On this trajectory, the “planet” falls toward the Sun from infinity, 
swings around, and escapes back to infinity. Its path is not an orbit at 
all. When it starts from infinity, and when it gets back there, its velocity 
is not zero; the velocity is proportional to the length of the line from О 
to the point where it is tangent to the velocity circle.
If the point О is on the circle, the “planet” also escapes to infinity, 
but it has zero velocity when it gets there; this trajectory is a parabola. 
Thus, Newton’s dynamics together with an inverse-square force give 
circular velocity diagrams. Depending on where the origin of the velocity 
diagram is, the orbit can be a circle, an ellipse, a parabola, or a hyper­
bola—the curves collectively known as the conic sections.
In the very last part of his lecture (just because he has time left over, 
he says), Feynman turns the machinery he’s developed onto a very 
different kind of problem—and again, one of vast historical significance.
In 1910, two researchers, Ernest Marsden and Hans Geiger, acting 
at the suggestion of their leader, Ernest Rutherford, found that if a beam 
of a (alpha) particles (the nuclei of helium atoms) was directed 
at a thin gold foil, a few of them would be scattered backward instead 
of passing through the foil. The experiment might be thought of as 
crudely analogous to some alien being firing a comet into the solar 
system in an attempt to determine whether the mass of the solar system 
was spread out in a uniform blob or mostly concentrated in a compact 
object (the Sun) at the center. Only a compact object could have any 
hope of turning the comet around and hurling it back. Instead of a 
comet, Rutherford’s group had the a particle, and instead of the solar 
system, atoms of gold. The question was whether the matter inside an 
atom was spread out more or less uniformly (as current theory then 
held) or was concentrated at the center. The fact that some a particles 
were scattered backward showed that the mass had to be concentrated 
at the center, and this experiment constituted the discovery of the atomic 
nucleus.
Here, the force operating between the projectile and the constituents 
of the system was not gravity but electricity. Electricity is a force that 
acts between positive and negative electric charges (terms coined by a 
self-educated Newtonian scientist of the eighteenth century, Benjamin 
Franklin). Like gravity, electricity is an R~2 force that acts along the 

Feynman’s Proof of the Law of Ellipses 143
line joining the charges; unlike gravity, it can either attract charges 
toward each other (opposite charges) or cause charges to repel each 
other (like charges). The force of gravity always attracts, never repels. 
The electric force is vastly more powerful than the gravitational force. 
In fact, it is so powerful that it is self-neutralizing. Every atom in the 
gold foil has exactly the same amount of positive and negative charge, 
so from the outside the atom is neutral, exerting no electric force if it 
is not disturbed. The question is: What happens when an electrically 
charged projectile—the a particle, which is electrically positive—is 
fired into an atom? The answer is that it is repelled by the atomic 
nucleus, which contains all the positive charge and nearly all the mass 
of the atom. Occasionally, by sheer chance, an a particle will come 
close enough to the nucleus to get kicked almost directly backward. 
That’s what Marsden and Geiger observed.
Because electricity is an R~2 force acting along the line between the 
charges, then if the particles obey Newtonian dynamics all the geometric 
arguments that Feynman used earlier are applicable to this problem. 
This problem is to find the probability that a projectile will be kicked 
back, so that the experiment can be compared to a quantitative theory. 
The starting point is the velocity-diagram circle (good for any R2 force 
along the line between the particles), with the origin outside the circle. 
The “orbits” of the a particles will not be ellipses trapped forever in 
the vicinity of the nucleus, but rather hyperbolas, which will send the 
a particles away to infinity after bending their trajectories through some 
larger or smaller angle. We will not try to follow all the steps now, 
because Feynman no longer feels constrained to stick to geometrical 
arguments. Instead he pulls out all the analytic stops in order to arrive 
at what is, as he says, a very famous formula.
It deserves its fame, because it led directly to the discovery of quantum 
mechanics, and hence to the overthrow of the Newtonian dynamics used 
to arrive at the formula! But that’s a story for another book. Now the 
time has come to put ourselves directly in the hands of the master. Enter 
Feynman.


[Note: We advise that this chapter be read while listening to the recording 
of Professor Feynman’s lecture.]
The title of this lecture is “The Motion of Planets Around the Sun.’’ 
. . . After the bad news you just heard announced, I have some good 
news for the same reason, that since the exam is coming up Tuesday, 
nobody wants to give a lecture that you have to study, so I’m giving a 
lecture that’s just for the fun of it, for your entertainment [applause]. 
All right, all right, I won’t be able to give it. Save all that for the end 
and then make up your mind.
The history of our subject of physics [arrived] at one of the most 
dramatic moments when Newton suddenly understood so much from so 
little. And the history of this discovery is of course the long story about 
Copernicus, Tycho [Brahe] making his measurements of the positions 
of the planets, and Kepler finding the laws which empirically describe 
the motion of these planets. It was then that Newton discovered that he 
could understand the motion of the planets by stating another law. And 
145

14 6 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
you know all this from the lecture on gravitation, so I continue directly 
from there with a quick summary of that material.
In the first place, Kepler observed that the planets went in ellipses 
around the Sun, with the Sun as the focus of the ellipse. He also 
observed—he had three observations to describe the [orbits]—that the 
area that’s swept out by a line drawn from the Sun to the orbit is 
proportional, this area here, is proportional to the time. Finally, to 
connect planets in different orbits, he discovered that the planets with 
different orbits have periods, or times of rotation around the complete 
orbit, which bear a 3/2 power ratio to the major axis of the ellipse. If 
there were circles (to make it easy), it would mean that the square of 
the time to go around the circle is proportional to the cube of the radius 
of the circle.
Now, Newton was able to discover two things from this. First he 
noticed that equal areas and equal times meant, from his point of view 
about inertia, that the material would continue in a straight line at a 
uniform velocity if it were not disturbed, that the deviations from the 
uniform velocity are always directed toward the Sun, and that equal 
areas and equal times is equivalent to the statement that the forces are 
toward the Sun. So he used one of Kepler’s laws already to deduce that 
the forces were toward the Sun. And then it is easy to argue—especially 
for the special case of circles from the third law—that for such circles 
the force which would be directed toward the Sun would have to go 
inversely as the square of the distance.
The reason for that is something like this. Suppose that we take a 
certain fractional part of an orbit, some fixed angle, a small angle, and 
a particle has a certain velocity in one part of the orbit and another 
velocity later on. Then the changes in velocity for a fixed angle are 
evidently proportional to the velocity. And the change in velocity during 
an interval of time—during a fixed time—which is the force, is evidently 
proportional to the velocity in the orbit times the time that it takes to 
go across this fraction of the orbit. I mean, divided by the time. So the 
velocity changes proportional to the velocity. And the time over which 
that change has taken place is proportional to the time that it takes to 
go around the whole orbit—because it is a fixed angle, like one-hun­
dredth of the orbit. Therefore the centripetal acceleration, or change per 

“The Motion of Planets Around the Sun” 1 47
second of the velocity in the direction of the center, is proportional to 
the velocity on the orbit divided by the time that it takes to go around.1
You can put that in many different ways, because of course the time 
it takes to go around is related to the velocity by this relation. That the 
speed times the time is the distance around—or, rather, that the speed 
times the time is proportional to the radius. And so you can either 
substitute for the time, obtaining your famous v2/R. Or better, I’ll substi­
tute for the velocity R/T. The velocity is evidently proportional to the 
radius divided by the time that it takes to go around, so that the centrifu­
gal acceleration goes as the radius and inversely as the square of the 
time to go around. But Kepler tells us that the time to go around squared 
is proportional to the cube of the radius. That is, the denominator is 
proportional to the cube of the radius, and therefore the acceleration 
toward the center is inversely as the square of the distance. So Newton 
was able to deduce—in fact, [Robert] Hooke deduced earlier than New­
ton in the same way—that this force would be inversely as the square 
of the distance. So from two of Kepler’s laws, we come [away] with 
only two conclusions. No one can verify anything that way. This may 
be of no particular interest, because the number of hypotheses entered 
is equal to the number of facts checked as the number of guesses used.
On the other hand, what Newton discovered—and which was the 
most dramatic of his discoveries—was that the third law [Feynman 
means the First Law] of Kepler was now a consequence of the other 
two. Given that the force is toward the Sun, and given that the force 
varies inversely as the square of the distance, to calculate that subtle 
combination of variations and velocity to determine the shape of the 
orbit and to discover that it is an ellipse is Newton’s contribution, and 
therefore he felt that the science was moving forward, because he could 
understand three things in terms of two.
As you well know, he understood ultimately many more than three 
things—that the orbits in fact are not ellipses, that they perturb each 
other, that the motion of the Jupiter satellites is also understood, the 
motion of the Moon around the Earth and so on, but let us just concen-
'Feynman is saying Av/Дг is proportional to v/T. See Chapter 3, page 108. He refers to Av/At as 
“the centripetal acceleration” above, and below he calls it “the centrifugal acceleration.” 

14 8 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
trate on this one item, in which we disregard the interactions of one 
planet with another.
I can summarize what Newton said and in this way about a planet: 
that the changes in the velocity in equal times are directed toward the 
Sun, and in size they are inversely as the square of the distance. It is 
now our problem to demonstrate—and it is the purpose of this lecture 
mainly to demonstrate—that therefore the orbit is an ellipse.
It is not difficult, when one knows the calculus, and to write the 
differential equations and to solve them, to show that it’s an ellipse. I 
believe in the lectures here—or at least in the book—[you] calculated 
the orbit by numerical methods and saw that it looked like an ellipse. 
That’s not exactly the same thing as proving that it is exactly an ellipse. 
The Mathematics Department ordinarily is left the job of proving that 
it’s an ellipse, so that they have something to do over there with their 
differential equations. [Laughter]
I prefer to give you a demonstration that it’s an ellipse in a completely 
strange, unique, [and] different way than you are used to. I am going 
to give what I will call an elementary demonstration. [But] “elemen­
tary” does not mean easy to understand. “Elementary” means that very 
little is required to know ahead of time in order to understand it, except 
to have an infinite amount of intelligence. It is not necessary to have 
knowledge but to have intelligence, in order to understand an elementary 
demonstration. There may be a large number of steps that are very hard 
to follow, but each step does not require already knowing calculus, 
already knowing Fourier transforms, and so on. So by an elementary 
demonstration I mean one that goes back as far as one can with regard 
to how much has to be learned.
Of course, an elementary demonstration in this sense could be first 
to teach [you] calculus and then to make the demonstration. This, how­
ever, is longer than a demonstration which I wish to present. Secondly, 
this demonstration is interesting for another reason—it uses completely 
geometrical methods. Perhaps some of you were delighted in geometry 
in school with the fun of trying or having the ingenuity to discover 
the right construction lines. The elegance and beauty of geometrical 
demonstration is often appreciated by lots of people. On the other hand, 
after Descartes, all geometry can be reduced to algebra, and today all 

“The Motion of Planets Around the Sun” 149
mechanics and all these things are reduced to analysis with symbols on 
pieces of paper and not by geometrical methods.
On the other hand, in the beginning of our science—that is, in the 
time of Newton—the geometrical method of analysis in the historical 
tradition of Euclid was very much the way to do things. And as a 
matter of fact, Newton’s Principia is written in a practically completely 
geometrical way—all the calculus things being done by making geomet­
ric diagrams. We do it now by writing analytic symbols on the black­
board, but for your entertainment and interest I want you to ride in a 
buggy for its elegance, instead of in a fancy automobile. So we are 
going to derive this fact by purely geometrical arguments—well, by 
essentially geometrical arguments, because I don’t know what that 
means, anything precise I don’t know what it means, like purely geomet­
rical arguments—but essentially geometrical arguments, and see how 
well we get on.
So our problem is to demonstrate that if this is true—that the changes 
in velocities are directed toward the Sun, and they are inversely as the 
square of the distance in equal times—that the orbit is an ellipse. We 
then have first to understand—we must start with something—we first 
must know what an ellipse is. If there is no available definition of an 
ellipse, it is going to be impossible to demonstrate the theory. And 
furthermore, if you cannot understand the meaning of this proposition, 
of course you also cannot demonstrate the theorem. So, many people 
have said, “Oh yeah, but you’ve got to know something about an 
ellipse.” I know—you can’t state the statement otherwise. And also 
you have to have some understanding of this idea. That’s also true. But 
beyond that, I don’t think we need much extra knowledge, but a large 
amount of attention, please, and careful thinking. That’s not easy, and 
it’s quite a job, and it’s not worthwhile. It is much easier to do it by 
the calculus, but you’re going to do it that way anyway, and you must 
remember that this is just to see how it would look.
There are several ways of defining an ellipse, and I have to choose 
one, and I will suppose that the one with which everyone is familiar is 
the fact that an ellipse can be made, or the ellipse is the curve that can 
be made, by taking one string and two tacks and putting a pencil here 
and going around. Or mathematically, it is the locus (nowadays they 

150 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
say the set of all points)—all right, the set of all points—such that the 
sum of the distance FP and the distance F'P [F and F' being] the two 
fixed points, remains constant. I suppose you know that’s the definition 
of an ellipse. You may have heard another definition of an ellipse: if 
you wish, these two points are called the foci, and this focus means 
that light emitted from F will bounce to F' from any point on the ellipse.
Let me just demonstrate the equivalence of those two propositions, 
at least. So the next step is to demonstrate that light will be reflected 
from F to F'. The light is reflected as though the surface here were a 
plane tangent to the actual curve. What I therefore have to demonstrate 
is this—and you know, of course, that the law of reflection for light 
from a plane is that the angle[s] of incidence and reflection are the same. 
Therefore, what I have to prove is this: that if I were to draw a line 
here, such that its angles made with the two lines FP and F'P are equal, 
that that line is then tangent to the ellipse.
Proof: Here’s the line drawn as described. Make the image point of 
F' in this line. That is to say, extend the perpendicular from F' to the 
line the same distance on the other side, to obtain G', the image of F'. 
Now connect the point P to G'. Notice [that] because of the equal 
angles, that this angle here is the vertical angle. Well, this angle is 
equal to this angle, because these two right triangles are exactly the 
same. It’s an image, so this side is the same as that side, and these two 
angles are equal; this is a straight line. So that PG' here is exactly equal 
to the F’P part, and incidentally, FG' is a straight line, so that the FP 
+ F'P, which is the sum of these two distances, is in fact FP + G'P, 

“The Motion of Planets Around the Sun”
151
because F'P = G'P. Now, the point is that if you take any other point 
on the tangent—say, Q—and you took the sum of these two distances 
to Q, it is easy to see that the distance F'Q is, again, the same as G'Q. 
So that the sum of these two distances, F'Q to F, is the same as the 
distance from F to Q and Q to G'. In other words, the sum of the 
distances from the two foci on any point on the line is equal to the 
distance from F to G', by going up to that point and across. Evidently 
larger, evidently always larger than going on the straight line across. 
In other words, the sum of the two distances to a point Q is greater 
than it is for the ellipse—for any point Q except for point P. For any 
point on this line, then, the sum of the distances to these two points is 
greater than it is for a point on the ellipse.

15 2 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
Now I take the following to be evident and perhaps you can devise 
a proof to satisfy you—that if the ellipse is the curve in which the sum 
of the two points is a constant, that the points outside the ellipse have 
the sum to the two points greater and the points inside the ellipse have 
the sum to the two points less; so that since these points on the line 
have a sum greater than a point on the ellipse, all this line lies outside 
the ellipse with the sole exception of the point P, whence it must be 
tangent and does not intersect at two points nor ever come inside. All 
right, so the thing is therefore tangent, and we know that the reflection 
law is right.
I have another property to describe about an ellipse, the reason for 
which will be completely obscure to you, but it’s something which I 
will need later in this demonstration.
May I say that although the methods of Newton were geometrical, 
he was writing in a time in which the knowledge of the conic sections 
was the thing that everybody knew very well, and so he perpetually 
uses (for me) completely obscure properties of the conic sections, and 
I have, of course, to demonstrate my properties as I go along. I would 
like, however, for you to take the same diagram again, which I made 
here, and draw it over again. It’s drawn exactly the same here: F' and 
F, there’s that tangent line, here’s the image point & of F'. However, 
I would like for you to imagine what happens to the image point G' as 
the point P goes around the ellipse. It is evident, as I already indicated, 
that PG' is the same as F'P, so that FP + F'P is a constant, [and that] 
means that FP + PG' is a constant. In other words, that FG' is a 
constant. In short, the image point G' runs around the point F in a circle 
of constant radius. All right. At the same time, I draw a line from F' 
to G' and I find [that] my tangent is perpendicular to it. That’s the same 
statement as all that was before. I just want to summarize that, to remind 
you of a property of an ellipse, which is this: that as a point G' goes 
around a circle, a line drawn from an eccentric point to this point G'— 
this is an off-center point to the point G'—will always be perpendicular 
to the tangent of the ellipse. Or the other way around: the tangent is 
always perpendicular to the line—or a line—drawn from an eccentric 
point. All right, that’s all, [and] we’ll come back to it and we’ll remem­
ber, and we will review it again, so don’t worry. That’s just a sum-

The Motion of Planets Around the Sun” 153
mary of some of the properties of an ellipse, starting from the facts. 
That’s the ellipse.
On the other hand, we have to learn dynamics, we have to put them 
together. So now we have to explain what dynamics is all about. I want 
this proposition, that’s the geometry; now the mechanics, what this 
proposition means. What Newton means by this is this: that if this is 
the Sun, for instance, the center of the attraction, and at a given instant 
a particle were to, say, be here, and let me suppose that it moves to 
another point, from A to В, in a certain interval of time. Then, [if] there 
were no forces acting toward the Sun, this particle would continue in 
the same direction and go exactly the same distance to a point c. But 
during this motion there’s an impulse toward the Sun, which, for the 
purposes of analysis, we will imagine all the curves at the middle 
instant—in other words, at this instant. In other words, we concentrate 
all our impulses in an approximate way of thinking to this middle 
moment. And, therefore, the impulse is in the direction of the Sun, and 
this might represent the change in motion. That means that instead of 
this moving to here, it moves to a new point, which is C, which is 
different than c, because the ultimate motion is this motion compounded 
from the original plus the additional impulse given toward the center

15 4 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
j
Л A
a
Diagram from Feynman’s lecture notes.
of the Sun. So that the ultimate motion is along the line BC, and at the 
end of the second interval of moment of time the particle will be at C. 
I emphasize that Cc is parallel to and equal to BV, let us say, the impulse 
given from the Sun. It is therefore parallel to a line from В to the center 
of the Sun. Finally, the rest of the statement is that the size of BV will 
vary inversely as the square of the distance as we go around the orbit.
I have drawn this same thing over again here—exactly the same way, 
no change at all, excepting color makes it more interesting. Here’s the 
motion that the particle would have—has in the first instant of time— 
and the motion which it would continue to have if it were to continue 
for the second interval of time with no force. May I point out to you 
that the areas that would be swept through in that case would be equal 
during those two intervals of time. For these two distances, AB and Be, 
are evidently equal, and therefore the two triangles SAB and SBc, which 
are the two areas, will be equal: for they have equal bases and a common 

“The Motion of Planets Around the Sun'
155
altitude. If you extend the base and draw the altitude, it’s the same 
altitude for both triangles; and since the bases are equal, the areas then 
swept through are equal.
On the other hand, the actual motion is not to the point c but to the 
point C, which differs from the position c by a displacement in the 
direction of the Sun at the moment B, that is, in the blue line parallel 
to the original blue line. Now I would like to point out to you that the 
area that would be most occupied—I mean, which would be swept out 
in that second interval of time even if there were a force: namely, the 
area SBC—is the same as the area that there would be if there were no 
force—namely, SBc. The reason is that we have two triangles which
Feynman does it this way instead

15 6 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
have a common base and who have an equal altitude, for they lie between 
parallel lines. Since the area[s] of the triangle SBC and the triangle SAB 
are equal—but since those points A, B, and C represented positions in 
succession at equal times in the orbit—we see that the area[s]moved 
through in equal times are equal. We can also see that the orbit remains 
a plane, that the point c being in the plane and the line Cc being in the 
plane of ABS, the remaining motion is in the plane ABS.
altitude of SBC
altitude of SBc
S
this is parallel 
to Cc
And I have drawn a succession of such impulses around this imaginary 
polygonal orbit. Of course, to find the actual orbit, we need to make 
the same analysis with a much smaller interval of time—and a much 
finer rate of impulsing—until we get the limiting case, in which we 
have a curve. And in the limiting case in which we have a curve—the 
area swept by this thing—the curve will lie in a plane, and the area 
swept will be proportional to the time. So that’s how we know that we 
have equal areas in equal times. The demonstration that you have just 
seen is an exact copy of one in the Principia Mathematica by Newton, 
and the ingenuity and delight which you may or may not have gotten 
from it is that already existing in the beginning of time.
Now the remaining demonstration is not one which comes from New­
ton, because I found I couldn’t follow it myself very well, because it 
involves so many properties of conic sections. So I cooked up another 
one.
We have equal areas and equal times. I would like now to consider 
what the orbit would look like if instead of using equal time, one were 
to think of the succession of positions which correspond to equal angles

“The Motion of Planets Around the Sun”
157
from the center of the Sun. In other words, I repicture the orbit with 
the succession of points, J, K, L, M, N, which correspond not to equal 
instants, like they did in the diagram before, but rather [to] equal angles 
of inclination from the original position. To make this a little bit simpler, 
although it is not at all essential, I have supposed that the original motion 
was perpendicular to the Sun at the first point—but that’s not essential, 
it just makes the diagrams cleaner.
Diagram from Feynman’s lecture notes.
Now we know from the proposition previously that equal [areas] 
occupy equal times to be swept through. Now listen: I would point out 
to you that. . . equal angles, which is what I’m aiming for, means that 
areas are not equal, no, but they are proportional to the square of the 
distance from the Sun; for if I have a triangle of a given angle, it is 
clear that if I make two of them that they are similar; and the propor­
tional area of similar triangles is proportional to the square of their 
dimensions.2 Equal angles therefore means—since areas are propor­
tional to time—equal angles therefore means that the times to be swept 
through these equal angles are proportional to the square of the distance. 
In other words, these points—J, K, L, and so on—do not represent
2This is the point explained in the footnote to Chapter 3, page 115. 

15 8 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
pictures of the orbit at equal times, no, but they represent pictures of 
the orbit with successions of times which are proportional to the square 
of the distance.
Now, the dynamical law is that there are equal changes in velocity, 
no—that the changes in velocity vary inversely as the square of the 
distance from the Sun—that is, the changes of velocity in equal times. 
Another way of saying the same thing is that equal changes of velocity 
will occupy times proportional to the square of the distance. It’s the 
same thing. If I take more time, I get more change in the velocity, and, 
although they are falling off for equal times inversely as the square, if 
I make my times proportional to the square of the distance, then the 
changes in velocity will be equal. Or, the dynamical law is: equal 
changes in velocity occur in times proportional to the square of the 
distance. But look, equal angles were times proportional to the square 
of the distance. And so we have the conclusion, from the law of gravita­
tion, that equal changes of velocity will occur in equal angles in the 
orbit. That’s the central core from which all will be deduced—that equal 
changes in velocity occur when the orbit is moving through equal angles. 
So I now draw on this diagram a little line to represent the velocities. 
Unlike the other diagram, those lines are not the complete line from J 
to K, for in that diagram those were proportional to the velocities, for 
the times were equal, and the length divided by equal times represented 
the velocities. But here I must use some other scale to represent how 
far the particle would have gone in a given unit of time, rather than in 
the times which are, in fact, proportional to the square of the distance. 
So these represent the velocities in succession. It is quite difficult in 
that diagram to find out what the changes are.
I therefore make another diagram over here, which I’ll call the dia­
gram of the velocities, in which I draw a picture on a magnified scale 
only for convenience. These are supposed to represent exactly these 
same lines. This would represent the motion per second of a particle at 
J or in a given interval of time, at J. This would represent the motion 
that a particle would’ve made from the beginning in a given interval of 
time. And, I put them all at a common origin, so that I can compare 
the velocities. So I have then a series of the velocities for the succession 
of these points.

“The Motion of Planets Around the Sun” 1 5 9
Now, what are the changes in the velocity? The point is that in the 
first motion, this is the velocity. However, there is an impulse toward 
the Sun, and so there is a change in velocity, indicated by the green 
line that produces the second velocity, vK. Likewise, there’s another 
impulse toward the Sun again, but this time the Sun is at a different 
angle, which produces the next change in the velocity, vL, and so on. 
Now, the proposition that the changes in the velocities were equal— 
for equal angles, which is the one that we deduced—means that the 
lengths of these succession of segments are all the same. That’s what 
it means.
And what about their mutual angles? Since this is in the direction of 
the Sun at this radius, since this is at the direction of the Sun at that 
radius, and since this is the direction of the Sun at that radius, and so 
on, and since these radii each successively have a common angle to 
one another—so it is likewise true that these little changes in the velocity 
have, mutually to one another, equal angles. In short, we are con­
structing a regular polygon. A succession of equal steps, each turn 
through an equal angle, will produce a series of points on the surface 
underlying a circle. It will produce a circle. Therefore, the end of the 
velocity vector—if they call it that, the ends of these velocity points; 
you’re not supposed to know what a vector is in this elementary descrip­
tion—will lie on a circle. I draw the circle again.

160 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
I review what we found out. I take the continuous limit, where the 
intervals of angle are very tiny indeed, to obtain a continuous curve. 
Let 0 be the angle, total angle, to some point P, and let vP represent 
the velocity of that point in the same way as before. Then the diagram 
of velocities will look like this. This is the origin of the velocity diagram, 
the same as over there, and this is the velocity vector corresponding to 
this point P. Then this lies on a circle, but always not necessarily the 
center of that circle. However, the angle that you’ve turned through in 
the circle is the same 6 as here. The reason for that is that the angle 
turned through from the beginning by this thing is proportional to the 
angle turned through by the orbit, because it’s the succession of the 
same number of small angles. And therefore, this angle in, here, is the 
same angle as in, here.
(orbit diagram)
(velocity diagram)

“The Motion of Planets Around the Sun”
161
So here is the problem, here’s what we have discovered: that if we 
draw a circle and take an off-center point, then take an angle in the 
orbit—any angle you want in the orbit—and draw the corresponding 
angle inside this constructed circle and draw a line from the eccentric 
point, then this line will be the direction of the tangent. Because the 
velocity is evidently the direction of motion at the moment and is in 
the direction of the tangent to the curve. So our problem is to find the 
curve such that if we draw a point from an eccentric center, the direction 
of the tangent of that curve will always be parallel to that when the 
angle of the curve is given by the angle in the center of that circle.
In order to make still clearer why it is going to come out in this 
thing, I’ll turn the velocity diagram 90°, so that the angles correspond 
exactly and are parallel to each other. This diagram under here, then, 
is precisely the same diagram as the one you see above, but turned 
90°—only to make it easier to think. This, then, is the velocity vector, 
except that it’s turned 90° because the whole diagram is turned 90°. 
That is, this is perpendicular evidently to that, and therefore this is 
evidently perpendicular to that. In short, we must find the curve such 
that if we put the orbit in it, I think I’ve started—yes, so I’ll just say 
it and then I’ll draw it again—if we put the orbit in it at a given point, 
here, where this line intersects the orbit (never mind the scales, they’re 
all imaginary, I mean, it’s all in proportion), where this line intersects 
the orbit, the tangent should be perpendicular to that line from an eccen­
tric point.

1 62 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
I draw it again, to show you how it is. You know now what the 
answer is. But here’s a picture again of the same velocity circle, but 
this time the orbit is drawn inside at a different scale, so that we can 
see this picture laid right over this picture, so the angles correspond. 
So since the angles correspond, I can draw the single line to represent 
both the point P on the orbit and the point p on the velocity circle. Now 
what we have discovered is that the orbit is of such a character that a 
line drawn from the eccentric point—here, from an extension of this 
point onto a circle outside—will always be perpendicular to the tangent 
to the curve. Now that curve is an ellipse, and you can find that out by 
the following construction.
Construct the following curve. The curve I’m going to construct will 
satisfy all the conditions. Construct the following curve. Always take 
the perpendicular bisector of this line and ask for its intersection with the 
other line, Cp, and call that intersection point P. This is the perpendicular 
bisector. Now I’ll prove two things. First, that the locus of this point 
that’s been generated there is an ellipse, and, second, that this line is 
a tangent there, too—that is, to the ellipse—and therefore satisfies the 
conditions, and all is well.
First, that it’s an ellipse: Since this was the perpendicular bisector, 
it is at equal distances from О and p. It is therefore clear that Pp is 
equal to PO. That means that CP + PO, which is therefore equal to 

“The Motion of Planets Around the Sun”
163
CP + Pp, is the radius of the circle, which is evidently constant. So 
the curve is an ellipse, or the sum of these two distances is a constant.
And next, this line is tangent to the ellipse because, since ... the 
two triangles are congruent, this angle here is equal to this angle here.

164 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
But if I extend this line on the other side, [then] also is that angle equal. 
So therefore the line in question makes an equal angle with the two 
lines to the foci. But we proved that that was one of the properties of an 
ellipse—the reflection property. Therefore, the solution to the problem is 
an ellipse—or the other way around, really, is what I proved: that the 
ellipse is a possible solution to the problem. And it is this solution. So 
the orbits are ellipses. Elementary, but difficult.
I have considerable more time, and so I will say a few things about 
this. In the first place, I would like to say how I got this demonstration— 
the fact that the velocities went in a circle. The demonstration [of] this 
point was due to Mr. Fano and I read it. And after that, to prove that 
it was an ellipse took me an awful long time: that is, the obvious, simple 
step—you turn it this way, and you draw that and all that. Very hard, 
and like all these elementary demonstrations they require a large 
amount—like any geometrical demonstration—of ingenuity. But once 
presented, it’s elegantly simple. I mean, it’s just finished. But the fun 
of it is that you’ve made a kind of a carefully put-together piece of 
pieces.
It is not easy to use the geometrical method to discover things. It is 
very difficult, but the elegance of the demonstrations after the discoveries 
are made is really very great. The power of the analytic method is that 
it is much easier to discover things than to prove things. But not in any 
degree of elegance. It’s a lot of dirty paper, with x’s and y’s and crossed 
out, cancellations and so on.
I would like to point out a number of interesting cases. It of course 
can happen that the point О lies on the circle, or even that the point О 
lies outside the circle. It turns out that the point О lying on the circle 
does not produce, of course, an ellipse; it produces a parabola. And the 
point О lying outside the circle, which is another possibility, produces 
a different curve, a hyperbola. I leave some of those things for you to 
play with. On the other hand, I would like now to make some application 
of this and to continue the argument that Mr. Fano originally made, for 
another purpose. He was going in a different direction, and I’d like to 
show you that.
What he [Fano] was trying to do was to make an elementary demon­
stration of a law which was very important in the history of physics in 

“The Motion of Planets Around the Sun”
165
1914. And that had to do with the so-called Rutherford’s law of scatter­
ing. If we have an infinitely heavy nucleus—which we don’t have, but 
suppose—and if we shoot a particle by that nucleus, then it will be 
repelled by an inverse-square law, because of the electrical force. If qe 
is the charge on an electron, then the charge on the nucleus is Z times 
qe when Z is the atomic number. Then the force between the two things 
is given by 47760 times the square of the distance, which for simplicity 
I will write temporarily as z/R2—the constant over R2. I don’t know 
whether you’ve done this in the class or not; but I’ll suppose, I’ll define 
another thing because, q21 4ттб0 will be written e2 for short. Then this 
thing is just Ze2 I R2. Anyway, that’s the force inversely as the square 
of the distance, but it’s a repulsion. And now the problem is the follow­
ing: If I shoot a lot of particles at these nuclei, where I can’t see the 
nuclei, how many of them will be deflected through various angles? 
What percentage will be deflected more than 30°? What percentage will 
be deflected more than 45°? And how are they distributed in angles? 
And that was the problem that Rutherford wanted solved, and when he 
had the correct solution, he then checked it against experiment.
[At this point, Feynman goes off in the wrong direction. He’ll correct 
himself in a moment.]
And he found that the ones that were supposed to be deflected through 
large angles were not there. In other words, the number of particles 
deflected through large angles was much less than you would think, 
and he therefore deduced that the force was not as strong as HR2 for 
small distances. Because it is obvious that to get the large angle, you 
need a lot of force, and it corresponds to the [particles] that hit [the 
nucleus] almost head-on. So those which come very close to the nucleus 
do not seem to come out the way they ought to, and the reason is that 
the nucleus has a size . . . I’ve got the story backwards. If the nucleus 
had a big size, then those which were supposed to come out at large 
angles wouldn’t get their full force, because they would get inside the 
charge distribution and would be deflected less. I got mixed up. Excuse 
me. I start again
Rutherford deduced how it should go if all the forces were concen­
trated at the center. In his day, it was supposed that the charge in an 
atom was distributed uniformly over the atom, and in order to discover 

166 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
this distribution, he thought that if he scattered these particles, they 
would show a weaker deflection—they would never show a very large 
deflection corresponding to a very close approach to the repulsion center 
because [in] the close approach there’s no center. He, however, did 
find the large-angle deflections, and deduced that the nucleus was small 
and that the atom had all its mass at a very small central point. I got it 
backwards. It was later that it was demonstrated, by the same thing 
again, that the nucleus has a size. But the first demonstration was that 
the atom is not as big, for this kind of electrical purposes, as the whole 
atom is known to be: that is, all the charge was concentrated at the 
center, and thus the nucleus was discovered. However, we need now 
to understand this: we need to know what the law is for the angle of 
deflection here, and that we can obtain in this way.
Suppose that we do the same thing as we did before, and we draw 
the orbit. Here is the charge, and here is the motion of a particle going 
around, only this time it’s repulsion. I start the picture at this point, for 
the fun of it, and I draw my velocity circles as before. This is the 
velocity. We know that the velocity, the initial velocity at this point— 
I should use the same colors so you know what I’m doing, this should 
be blue, this orbit is red—now the velocity changes lie on a circle. But 
the changes in the velocity this time are repulsions, and the sign is 
reversed. And after some minor thought, you can see that the deflections 
go like that, and that the center of the calculation [which] used to be 
called the origin of the velocity space O, lies on the outside of the 
circle. And the succession of small velocity changes lie on the circle, 
and the succession of velocities then in the orbit are these lines, until 
a very interesting point comes: until we get to this tangent.
At this tangent point to the curve—what does it mean? It means that 
all the changes in velocity are in the direction of the velocity. But the 
changes in the velocity are in the direction of the Sun, and that means 
that this velocity, in this part of the diagram, is in the direction of the 
Sun, because it is in the direction of the changes. That is to say, this 
point here, as we approach this point here—which I could call x, say— 
corresponds to coming from infinity toward the Sun along a line here. 
That is, very far out we are directed toward the Sun very closely (not 
the Sun, but the nucleus) and then as it comes around here—this diagram

“The Motion of Planets Around the Sun
167
("orbit" diagram)
should be the other way, the arrows should be here, I got the changes 
the wrong way in time—comes around here and goes out this way and, 
going out that way, corresponds to going with the velocity off in this 
direction.
Now, if we draw then the orbit more carefully, it will look very 
much like this. It goes around like this. If I call this point, here, Vm 
then the velocity that the particle has at the beginning is Vn. If, on the 
same scale, I call the radius of this circle V—the velocity corresponding 
to the radius of the circle—I’m going to make up some equation, I’m 

168 FFYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
not going to do it completely geometrically, but to save time and so 
on, I’ve done all the work. One should not ride in the buggy all the 
time. One has the fun of it and then gets out. Now first I want to find 
the velocity of the center, the radius of the velocity circle. In other 
words, I’m now going to come down and make some of these geometric 
things more analytic.
I will suppose that the force is some constant: the force—the accelera­
tion, rather—is some constant over R2. For gravity, this constant is GM 
and, for electricity, it is Ze2/m, over m because of the acceleration. That 
is to say, the changes in velocity are always equal to zIR2 times the 
time. Now let us suppose that we call a, which is a constant for the 
motion, the area swept by the orbit per second. That is then this way: 
that the time—if I wanted to change this to angle, I have the following— 
T?2A0 would be the area. If I divide that by the rate that area is swept 
through—this tells me how much time it takes to sweep an angle. The 
time is, then, for given angles, proportional to the square of the distance. 
All this I’m saying now analytically, where I said in words before. 
Substitute this Ar, in here, to find out how the changes in the velocity 
are with respect to angle, and one obtains /?2Д0/а, or the R2,s cancel, 
and it means that the changes in velocity are as advertised: for equal 
angles, equal.
Now then, the velocity diagram—although this isn’t the piece of the 
orbit that you can get to, never mind—these are changes in the velocity 
and these are changes in the angle in the orbit. So AV is also equal by 
the geometry of that circle to the radius of the circle, which I call VR 
x Д0. In other words, we have that the radius of the velocity circle is 
equal to z/а, where a is the rate of area swept per second and z is a 
constant having to do with the law of force. Now, the angle through 
which this planet has deflected is this one, here, and I call it, the angle 
of deflection from the planet—I mean the charged particle from the 
nucleus. It is evident from my discussion that it’s the same as this angle 
in here, ф, because these velocities are parallel to the two original 
directions. It is clear, therefore, that we can find ф if we can get the 
relation with and VR. You see, look, tangent of ф/2 = VR/VX and 
that gives us the angle. The only thing is that we need—we have to 
substitute for VR, z/aR, and we have that much.

“The Motion of Planets Around the Sun’’ 1 69
Now, it doesn’t do us much good until we know a for this orbit. An 
interesting idea is this: think of this thing as approaching this, so that 
if there were no force it would miss by a certain distance, b. This is 
called the impact parameter. We imagine that the thing comes from 
infinity aimed for the force center, but is missing—because it misses, 
it is deflected. By how much is it deflected, if it was aimed to miss by 
b? That’s the question. If it’s aimed to miss by a distance b, how much 
will it get deflected?
So I need now only determine how a is related to b. Vx is the distance 
gone in 1 second, so if I were to draw way out here a horrible-looking 
area, a triangle—a terrible-looking triangle, then the—I got a factor of 
2 somewhere, yeah, the area of a triangle is 1/2 R2. There are two 
factors, two, which you will straighten out please when the time comes. 
There is 1/2 in here and, there is 1/2 somewhere else, which I’m now 
going to make. The area of this triangle is the base Vx times the height 
b times 1/2. Now that triangle is a triangle through which a particle would 
sweep—the radius would sweep in 1 second. And this is, therefore, a. 
So, therefore, we have that this goes as z!b\'.2. That tells us that given 
the impact distance, the aiming accuracy, what angle we would find in 
the deflection in terms of the speed at which the particle approaches 
and the known law of force. So it’s completely finished.
One more thing that is rather interesting. Suppose that you would 
like to know with what probability, what chance is there of getting a 
deflection more than a certain amount. Let’s say you pick a certain ф— 
ф0, say—and you want to make sure that you get greater than ф0. That 
only means that you have to hit inside an area closer than the b which 
belongs to that ф. Any collision closer than b will produce a deflection 
bigger than ф0, where b is b0, belonging to ф0 through this equation. 
If you come further away, I have less deflection, less force. So, there­
fore, the so-called cross section of area that you have to hit for deflection, 
to be greater than ф (I’ll leave off the naught), is tt/>2, where b is z/Vj 
tan2 ф/2. In other words, it is ttzW./ tan2 ф/2. And that’s the law of 
Rutherford’s scattering. That tells you the probability of the area you 
have to hit—the effective area that you have to hit—in order to get a 
deflection more than a certain amount. This z is equal to Ze2/zn; this is 
a fourth power, and it is a very famous formula.

17 0 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
It is so famous that, as usual, it was not written in this form when 
it was first deduced, and so I, just for the famousness of it, will write 
it in a form—well, I’ll leave you to write it in a form. I’ll write just 
the answer, and I’ll let you see if you can show it. Instead of asking 
for the cross section for a deflection greater than a certain angle, we 
can ask for the piece of cross section, Jct, that corresponds to the 
deflection in the range с?ф that the angle should be between, here, and 
there. You just have to differentiate this thing, and the final result for 
that thing is given as the famous formula of Rutherford, which is 4 Z2e4 
times 2tt sin<j> t/ф divided by 4m2 Vx4 times the sine of the fourth power 
of ф/2. This I write only because it’s a famous one that comes up very 
much in physics. The combination 2тт 8тф t/ф is really the solid angle 
that you have in range t/ф. So in a unit of solid angle, the cross section 
goes inversely as the fourth power of the sine of ф/2. And it was this 
law which was discovered to be true for scattering of a particles from 
atoms, which showed that the atoms had a hard center in the middle . . . 
a nucleus. And it was by this formula that the nucleus was discovered.
Thank you very much.

Richard Feynman conjured up his own brilliant proof of the law of 
ellipses, but he was not the first to think of it. The same proof, right 
down to the crucial insight of turning the velocity diagram on its side, 
appears in a little book called Matter and Motion, written by James Clerk 
Maxwell and first published in 1877. Maxwell attributes the method of 
proof to Sir William Hamilton, a name familiar to all physicists. (The 
Hamiltonian is a crucial element of quantum mechanics.) Apparently, 
Hamilton was the first to use the velocity diagram, which he called the 
Hodograph, to study the motion of a body. In his lecture, Feynman 
generously credits a mysterious “Mr. Fano” with the idea of the circular 
velocity diagram. He is referring to a book by U. Fano and L. Fano, 
Basic Physics of Atoms and Molecules (1959), where a circular velocity 
diagram is used to derive the Rutherford scattering law presented by 
Feynman at the end of his lecture. If Fano and Fano knew about Hamilton 
and his Hodograph, they do not say so.
Hamilton was part of a centuries-long tradition of refining Newton’s 
mechanics into formulations of ever greater sophistication and elegance. 
For more than two hundred years after the publication of the Principia, 
the universe of Newton reigned supreme. Then, early in the twentieth 
171

17 2 Epilogue
century, a second scientific revolution took place in physics, almost as 
far-reaching as the first one. When it was over, Newton’s laws could 
no longer be regarded as revealing the innermost nature of physical 
reality.
The second revolution took place on two separate fronts that have 
not yet, even today, been fully reconciled. One led to the theory of 
relativity. The other led to quantum mechanics.
The seeds of the theory of relativity can be traced as far back as 
Galileo’s discovery that all bodies fall at the same rate regardless of 
mass. Newton’s explanation was that the mass of a body plays two 
separate roles in physics: one role is to resist changes in the motion of 
the body; the other is to apply gravitational force to the body. Thus, 
the greater the mass of a body, the stronger the force of gravity on it, 
but also the more difficult to get it moving. Heavier bodies—falling 
toward the Earth, for example—have greater force on them but more 
strongly resist being accelerated. Lighter bodies have smaller forces but 
are more easily accelerated. The net effect is that all bodies fall at 
exactly the same rate. This peculiar coincidence was easy to accept as 
part of the price for the vast success of Newton’s mechanics.
By the end of the nineteenth century, however, another part of New­
ton’s laws had come into question as a result of the discoveries of none 
other than James Clerk Maxwell. It had long been known that light is 
not transmitted instantaneously but rather travels at a definite speed. That 
speed is very great—roughly 186,000 miles (or 300,000 kilometers) per 
second—but it is not infinite. It was also known by Maxwell’s era (he 
lived from 1831 to 1879, the year of Einstein’s birth, and died, like 
Feynman, of stomach cancer) that while electricity is a force acting 
between electric charges, magnetism, the force that orients compass 
needles, is not a completely separate phenomenon. Instead, magnetism 
is a force between electric currents, and electric currents are simply 
electric charges that are moving. Maxwell discovered that if you com­
pared the strength of the electric force between charges at rest with the 
strength of the magnetic force between slowly moving charges, the ratio 
was equal to the square of a velocity that just happened to be the same 
as the speed of light! Maxwell knew that this was no mere coincidence, 
and he worked out an elegant mathematical theory, quickly confirmed 

Epilogue 173
by experiment, that all space is permeated by electric and magnetic 
fields of force, and that when these fields are disturbed, the disturbance 
propagates at the speed of light; in fact, the disturbance is light.
It was not immediately obvious that this discovery undermined New­
ton’s laws, but it was soon realized, by Albert Einstein, that it did just 
that. In the old Aristotelian world, the natural state of a body is rest. 
In Newton’s world, there is no such thing as a state of absolute rest. A 
body tends to stay in motion, at constant speed in a straight line. If a 
body seems to be at rest, that is only because the observer is moving 
together with it. Newton’s first law, the law of inertia, makes sense 
because there is no such thing as a state of rest. In a universe in which 
there is no state of rest—where one state of motion is as good as 
any other—the simplest assumption possible is that a body will retain 
whatever state of motion it has, which is precisely what the law of 
inertia says. However, if there is no absolute rest, there should be no 
absolute speed. The apparent speed of anything should depend on 
whether the observer is moving along with it or not. That’s where the 
crunch comes: the laws of physics should never have in them a definite 
speed, because the speed of anything should depend on the speed of 
the observer. But James Clerk Maxwell had shown that light has a 
definite speed—a speed that can be found in the fundamental forces 
between magnets and between electric charges.
To resolve this anomaly, Albert Einstein created a whole new uni­
verse. Its central axioms, from which all else is deduced, are that there 
is a single absolute speed of light, regardless of the speed of the observer, 
and that all bodies, regardless of their mass, fall at the same rate because 
the pull of gravity downward on a body is indistinguishable from an 
upward acceleration of everything but the body. To assure that the speed 
of light is the same for all observers, time and distance must lose then- 
independent, Newtonian meanings and mix together into spacetime. To 
make all bodies fall at the same rate, the very force of gravity itself is 
replaced by curved spacetime, in which all bodies move inertially—not 
on straight lines (no such thing exists anymore) but along curves called 
geodesics, which are the shortest distance between two points in the 
curved spacetime. All of this is known collectively as the theory of 
relativity (both special and general).

174 Epilogue
The other front of advancing knowledge that undermined the suprem­
acy of Newton was the nature of the atom. The existence of atoms had 
been suspected at least since the time of Lucretius, in the first century 
b.c., believed in by most scientists, including Newton, and finally given 
some empirical support at the dawn of the nineteenth century by the 
English chemist John Dalton. Dalton did experiments in which he 
claimed to show that chemical species, such as nitrogen and oxygen, 
tend to combine in ratios of simple whole numbers (one-to-one, one- 
to-two, two-to-three, and so on; the quantities were measured by volume 
in the gaseous state). These experimental results clearly implied that 
the constituents of the gases were atoms, combining into what we would 
today call simple molecules (NO, NO2, N2O3, and so on). Dalton, who 
was an inept experimenter but a firm believer in atoms, announced his 
discovery on the basis of very poor evidence (a story not uncommon 
in the history of science), but more skillful chemists went on to make 
his law of simple and multiple proportions one of the central doctrines 
of experimental chemistry. Throughout the nineteenth century, knowl­
edge of the properties of atoms was gradually refined. The 1875 edition 
of the Encyclopaedia Britannica has, under the heading “Atoms,” a 
superb review of the state of knowledge at the time, signed “JCM”— 
for James Clerk Maxwell. The next real breakthrough, however, came 
in 1896, when the English physicist J. J. Thomson was able to show 
that all atoms share a common internal constituent that came to be called 
the electron.
At this point, the issue became the architecture of the atom. The 
experiment by Emest Rutherford and his colleagues, described in Feyn­
man’s lecture, implied that the atom was a kind of miniature solar 
system, with a tiny but heavy nucleus at the center and lightweight 
electrons in orbit around it, which were held in place not by gravity but 
by the electric force between their own negative charge and the positively 
charged nucleus. However, this comforting view of a tiny Newtonian 
solar system in every atom had a number of fundamental flaws, chief 
among them an absolute prohibition due, once again, to James Clerk 
Maxwell and his theory of electromagnetism. If electrons were indeed 
in orbit around the nucleus, they would continually disturb the electro­
magnetic field. That disturbance would propagate away at the speed of 

Epilogue 1 7 5
light, draining energy out of the atom until it collapsed, the electrons 
expiring by falling into the nucleus, like tired comets falling into the 
Sun. Since common experience tells us that most atoms are stable and
James Clerk Maxwell

17 6 Epilogue
Ernest Rutherford

Epilogue 17 7
long-lived, the Newtonian solar system will not do as a description of 
the inner workings of the atom.
The solution to this dilemma was the invention of quantum mechanics. 
Newton’s laws do not describe the behavior of the very small. As the 
character Kerner (a Feynman-like physicist turned spy) says in Tom 
Stoppard’s play Hap good:
There is no such thing as an electron with a definite position and a definite 
momentum; you fix one, you lose the other, and it’s all done without 
tricks. . . . When things get very small they get truly crazy. ... So now 
make a fist, and if your fist is as big as the nucleus of one atom then the 
atom is as big as St. Paul’s, and if it happens to be a hydrogen atom then 
it has a single electron flitting about like a moth in the empty cathedral, 
now by the dome, now by the altar. . . . Every atom is a cathedral. . . . 
An electron does not go round like a planet, it is like a moth which was 
there a moment ago, it gains or loses a quantum of energy and it jumps, 
and at the moment of quantum jump it is like two moths, one to be here 
and one to stop being there; an electron is like twins, each one unique, a 
unique twin.
Thus, early in the twentieth century, Newton was overthrown in favor 
of relativity and quantum mechanics, just as a couple of centuries earlier 
he had displaced Aristotle at the center of the intellectual universe. 
Why, then, do we continue to teach Newtonian physics in school? More 
to the point, why did Richard Feynman—the same Richard Feynman 
who virtually reinvented quantum mechanics, and who lectured often 
and brilliantly on Einstein’s theory of relativity—bother to reinvent the 
proof of the law of ellipses by the outmoded Isaac Newton?
The answer is that the second revolution in physics was profoundly 
different from the first one. The first revolution overthrew Aristotelian 
doctrine and replaced it with something entirely different. The second 
revolution did not overthrow Newtonian physics in the sense of showing 
that it was wrong; instead, it affirmed Newtonian physics by showing 
why it was right. Newton’s laws are no longer believed to unmask the 
innermost nature of physical reality; moreover, they are not even correct, 
if applied to things that are very small (electrons) or very fast (near the 
speed of light) or very dense (black holes). There are even less extreme 

17 8 Epilogue
conditions wherein departures from the predictions of Newton’s laws 
can be detected, if we know exactly where to look. Nevertheless, the 
world after the second revolution is for the most part pretty much the 
same as the world we inhabited before it. The main difference is that 
we now know not only that Newton’s laws give us an accurate account 
of how the world behaves but also why his laws work so well. They 
work because they arise naturally out of even more profound laws called 
relativity and quantum mechanics. Those more profound laws are needed 
to tell the whole story (in reality, we don’t yet know the whole story), 
but for the most part Newton’s laws do just fine.
That’s the reason we still teach students how to solve problems using 
Newtonian physics but not Aristotelian physics. It is also the reason 
that Richard Feynman thought it worth his while to create his own 
geometric proof that Newton’s laws produce elliptical orbits for the 
planets around the Sun. And that, finally, is the reason for this book.

179

180 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE

Feynman’s Lecture Notes 181
Most of the lecture comes from this page. The figure in the upper left-hand 
comer is copied from Newton’s Principia. 
■
■ ■ ■>- 1 ■ :

1 8 2 FEYNMAN’S LOST LECTURE
X
S 
si
1
л,
^b
V* (•* %
- rrb
ЛОк *
Z <36
■ $ i
Above the line, notes for the final steps of the proof of the law of ellipses.
Below the line, Rutherford’s law of scattering.
I

Brecht, Bertolt. The Life of Galileo. Translated by Desmond I. Vesey. London: Meth­
uen, 1960.
Cohen, I. Bernard. The Birth of a New Physics. Revised edition. New York: W. W. 
Norton, 1985.
---------. Introduction to Newton’s “Principia.” Cambridge, England: Cambridge Uni­
versity Press, 1971.
Dijksterhuis, E. J. The Mechanization of the World Picture (1961). Translated by C. 
Dikshoom. Paperback reprint, London: Oxford University Press, 1969.
Drake, Stillman. Galileo at Work: His Scientific Biography. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1978.
Fano, U., and L. Fano. “Relation between Deflection and Impact Parameter in Ruther­
ford Scattering.’’ Appendix in in Basic Physics of Atoms and Molecules. New 
York: John Wiley, 1959.
Feynman, R. P., R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands. The Feynman Lectures on Physics. 
3 vols. Reading, Penn.: Addison-Wesley, 1963-65.
Galilei, Galileo. Two New Sciences. Translated, with introduction and notes, by Stillman 
Drake. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1974.
--------- . Il Saggiatore. Rome: Giacomo Masardi, 1623.
---------. Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems—Ptolemaic & Copernican. 
Translated by Stillman Drake. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1962.
Gingerich, Owen. The Great Copernicus Chase and Other Adventures in Astronomical 
History. Cambridge: Sky Publishing, 1992.
Kepler, Johannes. New Astronomy. Translated and edited by William H. Donahue. 
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
183

1 8 4 Bibliography
Koestler, Arthur. The Sleepwalkers (1959). Paperback reprint, New York: Grosset and 
Dunlap, 1963.
Maxwell, J. Clerk. Matter and Motion (1877). Reprint, with notes and appendices by 
Sir Joseph Larmor, London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, 1920.
Newton, Isaac Sir Isaac Newton’s Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy and 
His System of the World. Edited by Florian Cajori. Berkeley: University of Califor­
nia Press, 1934.
Santillana, Giorgio De. The Crime of Galileo. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1955.
Stoppard, Tom. Hapgood (1988). Reprint, with corrections, London: Faber and Faber, 
1994.
---------. Arcadia. London: Faber and Faber, 1993.
---------. “Playing with Science.” Engineering & Science 58 (1994):3—13.
Thoren, Victor E., with John R. Christianson. The Lord of Uraniborg: A Biography of 
Tycho Brahe. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
Westfall, Richard S. Never at Rest: A Biography of Isaac Newton. Cambridge, England: 
Cambridge University Press, 1980.

Page numbers in italics refer to photographs. Those in boldface refer to the text of the 
lost lecture.
acceleration:
centrifugal, 147
centripetal, 146
action and reaction, law of, 42-43
Addison-Wesley publishing company,
11, 12
Almagest (Ptolemy), 22
angle of deflection, 168
angle of incidence, 77, 80, 150
angle of reflection, 77, 80, 150
angular momentum, 92
Apollonius of Perga, 30
Arcadia (Stoppard), 22
Aristotelian mechanics, 21-22, 35, 36
astrology, 22, 28
Astronomia nova (Kepler), 29, 32
atomic bomb, 47
atomic physics, 142-43, 174-75, 177
Bardeen, John, 50
Basic Physics of Atoms and Molecules
(Fano and Fano), 171
Bellarmine, Robert, 34
Bethe, Hans, 47, 49
Brahe, Tycho, 23, 24-26, 25, 28, 145
Brattain, Walter, 50
calculus, differential and integral, 44
California Institute of Technology
(Caltech), 49-50
Catholic Church, 23, 34, 39
centrifugal acceleration, 147
centripetal acceleration, 146
Challenger disaster, 61
chemistry, 174
Christian IV, King of Denmark, 24
circles, 17, 30
off-center ellipses and, 78-80
in proof of Kepler’s third law, 96, 97,
102-3
185

186 Index
circles (Cont.)
regular polygons and, 103-4
as simple ellipses, 96-97
velocity diagrams as, 105, 108,
120-125, 159-60
congruent triangles, see triangles
conic sections, 17, 30-32, 140-42, 152
hyperbola, 141, 164
parabola, 142, 164
conservation of energy, 36-37
construction, geometric, 64, 77, 79, 80,
83, 149
circle, 96-97
concentric ellipses, 64
congruent triangles, 88-93, 70-72, 75
off-center ellipse, 78-80
string-and-perpendicular-bisector
method, 78-79, 162
string-and-tacks method, 63-64, 77,
79, 80, 83, 149
tangent line, 80-83
velocity diagram, 120-25, 159-60
see also diagrams; R'2 laws
Cooper, Leon, 50
Copernican system, 21, 22-23, 23,
34-35
Copernicus, Nicolaus, 21, 22-23, 145
Cornell University, 49
Crick, Francis, 56
Dalton, John, 174
deferents, 22
deflection, angle of, 168
Descartes, Rend, 39-40, 40, 44
diagrams, 120-21, 123, 125-27, 130,
160, 161, 162
orbit, 106, 107, 108, 118-19
position, 98-99, 100-102
velocity, 98-108, 118-32, 185
Dialogo (Galileo), 39
Double Helix, The (Watson and Crick),
56-57
dynamics, 83
Newton’s diagram in, 84, 85-94
Earth:
detectability of motion of, 35, 38 
orbit of, 111
eccentric orbits, 138-39, 152, 161, 162
Einstein, Albert, 47, 173 
elastic theory, 59-60 
electricity, 142-43, 168 
electromagnetism, theory of, 172-73, 
174-75, 177
electrons, 174 
ellipses, 17, 30, 32
circles and, 80 
concentric, 64 
construction of, 63-64, 77, 78-80, 83 
definition of, 149-50
foci of, see foci of ellipses 
instantaneous velocity on, 67 
Kepler’s laws and, 29, 32 
law of, 12
light ray reflected by, 65-68, 77, 80, 
83, 150, 164
Maxwell’s work on, 171
Newton’s contribution and, 44 
properties of, 64-68, 77, 80, 149-53 
semimajor axis of, 95-96, 97 
semiminor axis of, 95 
tangent line of, 65-67, 69, 80-83, 
163
see also Feynman’s proof of the law 
of ellipses; orbits
ellipses, law of (Kepler’s first law), 
63-140
Newton’s proof of, 94, 97, 98-109, 
111-36, 146-49, 153-64 
elliptical orbits, 123-36, 137, 146-47, 
148-49 
epicycles, 22 
equal areas, law of (Kepler’s second 
law), 93

Index 187
direction of force of gravity and, 111
equal angles vs., 112-14
proof of, 88-93, 113
equilateral triangles, 103
falling bodies, law of, 34, 36, 38, 172
Fano, L., 164, 171
Fano, U., 164, 171
Fermat’s principle, 83
Fermi, Enrico, 48
Fermi-Dirac statistics, 52
Feynman, Arlene Greenbaum, 47, 48
Feynman, Carl, 52
Feynman, Gweneth Howarth, 51-52
Fenman, Lucille, 46
Feynman, Mary Louise Bell, 51
Feynman, Melville, 46
Feynman, Michelle, 52
Feynman, Richard, 18-19, 51, 54, 55,
83
cancer of, 59, 60
celebrity status of, 60-61
Challenger disaster and, 61
childhood of, 46
death of, 62
Einstein and, 47
elastic theory of, 59-60
guest lectures of, 61-62
humor of, 57-59, 62
introductory physics courses of, 
52-53
least-action principle and, 47
at Los Alamos, 47-49
low-temperature physics and, 46, 
49-50
marriages of, 47, 48, 51-52
Nobel Prize of, 45
patents held by, 48
in period of dejection, 53, 56-57
public persona of, 52
quantum electrodynamics and, 45, 49, 
50
reflection of light in ellipses and, 
65-80
student years of, 46-47
theory of quarks and, 51, 57
weak interaction and, 50-51
Feynman diagrams, 49, 50
Feynman Lectures on Physics, The
(Feynman), 11, 12-13, 52, 53
Feynman’s proof of the law of ellipses, 
18, 19-20, 44
congruent triangles in, 70-72, 75, 
88-93
construction of ellipses in, 63-64, 
78-80
Feynman’s lecture notes for, 179-92 
“lost lecture” status of, 11-14
Newton’s diagram used in, 84, 85-90
Newton’s laws in, 93-94 
plane geometry used in, 18, 19 
reconstruction of, 63-143 
reflection of light in ellipses in, 65-80 
reformulation of Newton’s proof in, 
94, 97, 111-18, 137
summary of, 109, 136-39
see also “Motion of Planets Around 
the Sun, The”
foci of ellipses, 64
light reflection and, 65-80
Sun at focus, 94, 95
Fowler, Willy, 59
Franklin, Benjamin, 142
Frederick II, King of Denmark, 24
Fuchs, Klaus, 49
Galileo, 23, 34-39, 37, 172
Geiger, Hans, 142, 143
Gell-Mann, Murray, 50-51, 57, 57 
geodesics, 173 
gluons, 57
Goodstein, David L., 13-14, 45, 53, 
56-60
Graham, William, 61

188 Index
gravitational constant, 168 
gravity, 38, 44, 110, 173
direction of, 111
Newton’s deduction of, 110, 111
R'2 law of, see R‘2 laws, gravity of 
Sun, 85, 86, 87, 88, 93, 111, 
123-36
Halley, Edmund, 17-18
Halley’s comet, 97
Hamilton, Sir William, 171
Hapgood (Stoppard), 177
Harmonices mundi (Kepler), 32
Hodograph, 171
Hooke, Robert, 147
horizontal motion, 37, 38, 39-40
Hughes Aircraft, 48
Hutchings, Edward, 60 
hyperbolas, 17, 32 
hyperbolic orbits, 141, 164
Il Saggiatore (Galileo), 34 
image point, 69, 150, 152 
impact parameter, 169 
impulsive force, 85, 99, 102, 103, 153
Sun’s gravity as, 86
incidence, angles of, 77, 80, 150 
inertia, law of (Newton’s first law), 38, 
39-40, 41-42, 85, 93-94, 173
planetary motion and, 110
inertial guidance, 12
Institute for Advanced Study, 47 
inverse-square law of gravity, 18
Jupiter, 111
Kepler, Johannes, 17, 23, 26-29, 32, 34
Kepler’s laws of planetary motion, 29,
32, 93, 109-11, 146-47 
first, see ellipses, law of 
Newton’s laws vs., 109-10 
second, see equal areas, law of
third, see periods, law of
Koonin, Steven, 58-59
Landau, Lev, 49
least action, principle of, 47, 49, 83
Leibniz, Gottfried, 44
Leighton, Marge, 11
Leighton, Ralph, 18, 60, 61
Leighton, Robert, 11-12, 52, 53, 54 
light:
Fermat’s principle on, 83
law of reflection and, 67
reflection of, from foci of ellipses, 
65-80
speed of, 172-73
tangents and, 65-68 
see also reflection
Los Alamos project, 47-49
low-temperature physics, 45-46, 49-50
Lucretius, 174
Luther, Martin, 23
Mars, orbit of, 29
Marsden, Ernest, 142, 143 
mass of planets, 111
Mastlin, Michael, 26
Mathews, Jon, 58
Matter and Motion (Maxwell), 171
Maxwell, James Clerk, 49, 171,
172-73, 174, 175
Mercereau, James, 46 
mirror-reflection, see reflection 
mirrors, law of reflection and, 67 
momentum, 42
Moon, 147
“Motion of Planets Around the Sun, 
The” (Feynman), 145-70
“elementary” demonstrations of, 
148-53
historical setting in, 145-48 
impact parameter in, 169 
introductory remarks in, 145-46

Index 1 8 9
Kepler’s laws in, 146-47
Newton’s contribution and, 146-48,
149. 153, 158
properties of ellipses in, 149-53 
Rutherford’s law of scattering in,
165-66, 169
velocity diagrams in, 158, 159-60, 
161, 162
Mysterium cosmographicum (Kepler), 27
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA), 61
Neugebauer, Gerry, 11, 52, 53
Neumann, John von, 48
Newton, Isaac, 12, 13, 17-18, 39, 40,
43, 44, 174
gravity deduced by, 110, 111
Principia Mathematica of, 12, 13, 18, 
41, 44, 83, 94, 110, 112
Newton’s diagram of planetary motion, 
84, 85-94
actual planetary movement vs., 87 
congruent triangles in, 88-91 
parallelogram created in, 87, 112 
proof of equal areas in equal time in,
88-92
in proof of Kepler’s third law, 97-104
as regular polygon, 103-4
Sun in, 85
time intervals in, 88
velocity diagram and, 98-104
Newton’s laws, 17-18, 19, 38, 97, 99,
109-11, 136-37, 146-48, 171-72
continued relevance of, 177-78
corollary to, 94
description of, 41-44
first, 85, 93-94
gravity and, 97-137, 142-43,
146-47, 149, 153, 158
Kepler’s laws vs., 109-10
quantum mechanics and, 174-77 
second, 93-94, 101, 110 
theory of relativity and, 172-73 
third, 110
nuclear submarines, 48
On the New Star (Brahe), 24
On the Revolutions of the Celestial
Spheres (Copernicus), 21, 22-23 
orbit diagram, 106, 107, 108, 118-19, 
120-21, 123, 125-27, 130, 160, 
162
orbits, 67, 94, 146-64
circular, 87-88, 96, 97, 102-8
of Earth, 111
eccentric, 138-39, 152, 161, 162 
elliptical, 123-36, 137, 146, 147,
148-49, 153-54
hyperbolic, 141, 164
Kepler’s third law and, 95-96, 111
of Mars, 29
mass of planets and, 111
Newton’s diagram of, 84, 85-94, 
97-104
parabolic, 142, 164
properties of, 111
R2 and, 97, 137, 146-47 
speed of, see speed of orbit 
Sun at focus of, 94, 95
Sun’s gravity and, see Sun, gravity of 
uniform speed of, 105 
parabolas, 17, 31
Galileo’s work on, 38-39 
parabolic orbits, 17, 31, 142, 164 
parallelograms, orbits and, 86-87, 112 
“parton” theory, 57 
patents, 48
pendulum, law of the, 34
pentagon, 103
periods, law of (Kepler’s third law), 
95-96, 111
orbits and, 95-96, 111
orbit year and distance from Sun, 
107-9
proof of, 95-96 

190 Index
perturbations, 147-48
planetary motion, 17-18
angular momentum and, 92
Aristotelian view of, 21-22, 35, 36
Brahe’s work on, 26, 28
Copernican view of, 21, 22-23, 23, 
34-35
Kepler’s laws of, see Kepler’s laws of 
planetary motion
and law of action and reaction, 42-43
law of inertia and, 110
velocity diagram vs., 108-9
see also ellipses, law of; orbits
planets:
equal-area sweeps of, 88-93, 146,
147, 148
impulsive force on, 85-86, 99, 102,
103, 153
instantaneous velocity of, 67
Newton’s third law and, 110
size of, 108-9, 148
year of, 96
see also gravity; orbits
Plato, 21, 22
polygons, regular, 103-4
position diagram, 84-102
Princeton University, 47
Principia Mathematica (Newton), 12,
13, 18, 41, 44, 83, 94, 110, 112,
149
principle of least action, 83
problem solving, 12
proofs, geometric, 65-83, 93, 150-51,
154-56
equal-angle segments, 112, 113-18
equal-area sweeps in equal time, 
88-92
R2, 97-137
sum of distance between two foci, 64
tangent line, 80-83
Ptolemy, 22
quantum electrodynamics (QED), 45, 
49, 50, 83
quantum mechanics, 47, 52, 172, 177 
quarks, theory of, 51, 57
R'2 (inverse-square) laws, 147 
deduced from Kepler’s third law, 93, 
94, 97-137, 146-47
electricity, 142-43, 165-70 
gravity, 93, 94, 97-137, 149 
reflecting lines, see tangent 
reflection:
angle of, 77, 80, 150
from foci of ellipses, 65-80
law of, 67, 152
from tangents vs. ellipses, 65-69
see also light
regular polygons, 103-4 
relativity, theory of, 172-73 
resonances, 57
Rogers, William P., 61
Rudolph II, Holy Roman Emperor, 25, 
32
Rudolphine Tables (Kepler), 32, 33
Rutherford, Ernest, 142, 174, 176
scattering law of, 142, 165-66, 169
Sands, Matthew, 11, 52, 53 
saving the appearances, 22 
scattering, law of, 142, 165-66, 169 
Schrieffer, J. Robert, 50
Schwinger, Julian, 45, 49
Scientific Revolution, 21
second, 172
semimajor axis, 95, 97
semiminor axis, 95
Shockley, William, 50 
solids, perfect, 27-28 
spacetime, 173 
speed of orbit, 111, 173 
equal-angle segments and, 114-18 
mass of planets and, 111

Index 191
square, 103
Stoppard, Tom, 22, 177
Sun:
as focus of orbital ellipse, 94, 95 
gravity of, 83-85, 86, 87, 88, 93, 99, 
111, 123-36
Kepler’s third law and, 97, 101, 146 
orbit segments, making equal angles 
at, 112-14
speed of orbits and, 111 
Superconducting Quantum Interference
Device (SQUID), 46 
superconductivity, 45-46, 50 
superfluidity, 45-46, 49-50 
supernovas, 29, 62 
“Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman!’’
(Feynman), 18, 60-61
tangent, 65, 66-68, 77, 80, 83, 164 
in calculating speed of orbits, 115 
congruent triangles bisected by,
70-72, 75-78, 80 
construction of, 80-83 
direction of motion and, 67 
in Newton’s diagram of planetary
motion, 88-91
proof of, 150-52 
reflection from, 65-69
Telegdi, Vai and Lia, 56 
“Theory of the Fermi Interaction’’
(Feynman and Gell-Mann), 50-51
Thomson, J. J., 174 
timepieces, 35-36 
Tomonaga, Shinichiro, 45, 49 
transistors, 50 
triangles:
in calculating speed of orbits, 115 
congruent, construction of, 70-72, 
75, 88-93
congruent, tangent to ellipse bisected 
by, 70-72, 75-78, 80
equilateral, 103
in Newton’s diagram of planetary 
motion, 88-91
Tuck, Helen, 59
Two New Sciences (Galileo), 38
Uraniborg, 24
Urban Vin, Pope, 34
vacuums, 36
velocity:
change in, see Newton’s laws, second 
equation of, 105, 108
instantaneous, 67
velocity diagram, 98-108, 118-32, 158,
160, 161, 162
change in velocity in, 107
as circle, 102-4, 105, 108, 120-25,
159-60
construction of, 120-25, 159-60
origin of, 127-29, 160
planetary motion vs., 108-9
radius of, 105
as regular polygon, 104
size of, 101-2
velocity vector, 159, 161
Virgil, 29
Vogt, Rochus, 52, 53
water chronometer, 36
Watson, James, 56-57
weak interaction, 50-51
“What Do You Care What Other People 
Think?’’ (Feynman), 18, 48, 61
Wheeler, John Archibald, 47
Zweig, George, 51, 57




(continued from fron i fra p)
intrigued all deep thinkers since Newton’s 
time: Nature obeys mathematics.
For thirty years this brilliant and semi­
nal lecture lay dormant in the Caltech 
archives. Now, in this book, Feynman’s 
lost lecture has been reconstructed and 
explained in meticulous detail, together 
with a history of ideas of the planets’ 
motions. Anyone who remembers high­
school geometry can enjoy it and can profit 
from the compact disc that accompanies 
this book.
Dr. David Goodstein is vice provost and 
Frank J. Gilloon Distinguished Teaching 
and Service Professor at the California 
Institute of Technology. He created and 
directed twenty-six hours of the award­
winning televised physics course, The 
Mechanical Universe. Dr. Judith Goodstein, 
registrar and university archivist at 
Caltech, is the author of Milliken’s School: 
A History of the California Institute of 
Technology.
Jacket design by Steven Brower 
Jacket photograph / California Institute of 
Technology Archives

This is a fascinating book on a very important topic, a story beautifully 
told. The Goodsteins have produced an engagingly written primer on a 
fundamental problem. It will provide a very rewarding experience for all 
readers who have enough courage to tackle a little elementary mathe­
matics. Above all. they have presented an exciting chase for a lost docu­
ment and have given a very warm and interesting portrayal of the great 
physicist Richard Feynman and his method of thought."
. 
—I. Bernard Cohen
Victor S. Thomas Professor (Emeritus) of the
History of Science. Harvard University
“For most people Richard Feynman’s fame rests on his picaresque 
exploits, recounted in two anecdotal books (“Surely You're Joking. Mr. 
Feynman!” and "What Do You Care What Other People Think?"), which he 
produced late in life in collaboration with Ralph Leighton. The stories in 
these books are amusing enough, but they take on a special resonance 
because the protagonist was also a theoretical physicist of historic pro­
portions. Yet for the nonscientist reader there is no way to peer into 
Feynman’s mind and see the other side of him—the powerful intellect that 
left an indelible imprint on scientific thought. In this lecture, however. 
Feynman uses all his ingenuity, insight, and intuition, and his argument 
is not obscured by layers of mathematical sophistication that made most 
of his accomplishments in physics impenetrable to the uninitiated. This 
lecture is an opportunity for anyone who has mastered plane geometry to 
see the great Feynman at work!"
—from the Introduction

