
Google Tools Meets Middle School

To our families: Thank you for supporting us through this work.

Google Tools Meets Middle School
Michael J. Graham
Jason Borgen

FOR INFORMATION:
Corwin
A SAGE Company
2455 Teller Road
Thousand Oaks, California 91320
(800) 233-9936
www.corwin.com
SAGE Publications Ltd.
1 Oliver’s Yard
55 City Road
London EC1Y 1SP
United Kingdom
SAGE Publications India Pvt. Ltd.
B 1/I 1 Mohan Cooperative Industrial Area Mathura Road, New Delhi 110 044
India
SAGE Publications Asia-Pacific Pte. Ltd.
3 Church Street
#10-04 Samsung Hub
Singapore 049483
Copyright © 2018 by Corwin All rights reserved. When forms and sample
documents are included, their use is authorized only by educators, local school
sites, and/or noncommercial or nonprofit entities that have purchased the book.

Except for that usage, no part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,
recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publisher.
All trademarks depicted within this book, including trademarks appearing as part
of a screenshot, figure, or other image, are included solely for the purpose of
illustration and are the property of their respective holders. The use of the
trademarks in no way indicates any relationship with, or endorsement by, the
holders of said trademarks.
Printed in the United States of America ISBN: 978-1-5063-6016-4
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Acquisitions Editor: Ariel Bartlett Senior Associate Editor: Desirée A. Bartlett Editorial Assistant: Kaitlyn
Irwin Production Editor: Bennie Clark Allen Copy Editor: Lana Todorovic-Arndt Typesetter: C&M Digitals
(P) Ltd.
Proofreader: Barbara Coster Indexer: Wendy Allex
Cover Designer: Candice Harman Marketing Manager: Anna Mesick

Contents
Preface
Acknowledgments
About the Authors
1. Becoming a Master of Learning
Key Features
Future Ready Learning
Instructional Standards
Pedagogy
Features of G Suite for Education
Google User Experience
Why Google?
Summary
Resources
2. G Suite for Education: Overview
Key Features
The Apps
The Cloud
Share
The Domain Administrator: Behind the Scenes
Resources
3. Google Classroom
Key Features
Setting Up Your Class
Class Activities
Grades
Communicate With Parents
SAMR Implications—Transforming Instruction
Even More
Summary
Resources
4. Google Documents
Key Features
Google Docs Basics and State-Mandated Testing
File Menu
Edit Menu

View Menu
Living Documents
Insert Menu
Tools Menu
Table Menu
Add-ons
SAMR Implications—Transforming Instruction
Even More
Summary
Resources
5. Google Slides
Key Features
Slides and Communication
Accessing Presentations
File Menu
Insert Menu
Slide Menu
Format Menu
Example of Student Work
SAMR Implications—Transforming Instruction
Even More
Summary
Resources
6. Google Sheets
Key Features
Standards for Mathematical Practice
File Menu
Edit Menu
View Menu
Insert Menu
Format Menu
Data Menu
Tools Menu
Add-ons
Auto Fill
SAMR Implications—Transformation Instruction
Summary
Resources
7. Google Forms

Key Features
Advantages of Forms
Creating a Google Form
Editing a Google Form
Settings
Administering the Form
Responses in Google Forms
Google Forms Menu in Google Sheets
Uses for Forms
SAMR Implications—Transforming Instruction
Even More
Summary
Resources
8. Google Drawings
Key Features
Graphic Organizers
Share Versus Publish
File Menu
View Menu
Flowcharts
Drawings as Assessments
Graphical Toolbar
Insert Menu
Edit Icons
SAMR Implications—Transforming Instruction
Even More
Summary
Resources
9. Google Drive
Key Features
Accessing Drive
Managing Drive
Search
Download Google Drive
SAMR Implications—Transforming Instruction
Even More
Summary
10. Even More Google
Key Features

Search
A Google a Day
Google URL Shortener
Google Chrome
Maps
Scholar
Communication
Hangouts
Summary
Resources
Index

Preface
Every student deserves a high-quality, technology-rich learning environment.
Students who enter kindergarten today will retire sometime in the 2070s. No one
knows what education, the world economy, and jobs will look like then, but one
thing is certain—the future will be increasingly technology dependent. Educators
have a mandate to ensure that students will be ready to enter college and the
workplace with the necessary skills to perform in the technology-based
economy. That is why college- and career-readiness state standards across the
United States focus on preparing students for the unknown challenges of the 21st
century. Given this reality, the most pressing questions for educators today are
the following:
How will educators incorporate technology into their lesson plans to meet
the expectations of the various college- and career-ready standards?
To be successful, how proficient do teachers and students need to be in
using technology?
What are the technology and software products available that will help
educators meet the rigorous standards, while also offering students
experiences that will ensure their success in high school and beyond?
One of the best ways to tackle meeting standards and preparing students for the
future is to take advantage of Google’s free service built exclusively for schools,
called G Suite for Education. Google provides a robust and vigorous suite of
educational tools for schools that include everything necessary to meet and
exceed the technology integration components of the various college- and
career-ready standards. Over 40 million students and teachers around the world
are using G Suite for Education every day. If your school uses Gmail as its
email, then your school is a G Suite for Education school. If your school is not a
G Suite institution, it is easy to get started. Direct your technology department to
www.google.com/edu/products/productivity-tools/ to get signed up. Even if your
district does not sign up for G Suite for Education, individual educators may still
use most of these tools to organize, collaborate, and share content with students
and faculty.
What’s New in the Second Edition?

Middle School Focused. The second edition has a middle school focus with clear
examples of how to use G Suite with young adolescents in mind. Jason and
Michael are both middle-level educators who can share their experience about
why these tools will be useful to you and your students.
All New Screenshots. It has been 3 years since the first edition. Several buttons
have moved in the G Suite. The updated screenshots will help you see where and
why to click.
Addition of Google Classroom to G Suite. Since the publication of the first
edition, Google has added Google Classroom to the G Suite. It has made the
suite even stronger. Classroom gives students and teachers a learning
management system (LMS) to assign work, turn in assignments, communicate
with parents, and organize students’ and teachers’ digital work.
Broadened Focus to All Standards. The book has shifted from an exclusive
Common Core State Standards to a variety of standard sets including Next
Generation Science Standards to the updated International Society for
Technology in Education Standards (ISTE). The Common Core Standards are of
course also still a focus, but the book is no longer limited to just Common Core.
New Coauthor. Jason Borgen brings so much to the table. As a California
educator and former school teacher, he has a wide range of experience. Currently
working as a Curriculum and Technology Director in a small district in the
Silicon Valley, he supports Google tools across all grade levels. Jason also is a
Google Certified Innovator and Google Education Trainer. He has worked with
schools and districts across the country in training teachers and building strategic
plans focused on innovation.
Focus on Transformative Use of Technology. Teachers can integrate technology
day-in and day-out, but is it truly transforming teaching and learning? The
SAMR Model of technology integration focuses on how teachers integrate
technology from substituting a physical instructional strategy with technology,
which does not change the functionality of the lesson, to redefining how
technology is used to transform the lesson. Each chapter now has examples of
how each Google tool written about in the book can modify or completely
redefine the lesson.
New Chapters. In the new edition, new chapters include an overview of digital

learning and the SAMR Model. There is an introduction to Google Classroom,
which didn’t exist during the first edition. Also, several new features that Google
offers through G Suite are also included, such as Quizzes in Google Forms and
Add-ons with all core Google Drive applications.
Purpose
Based on our experience in the trenches of education, we have heard over and
over again how difficult teachers and administrators find it to incorporate
technology into their lessons, maximize learning, and meet the college and
career standards of their particular state. We offer this guide to the G Suite for
Education as a solution to that ongoing effort. The book offers step-by-step
tutorials that can help any teacher master G Suite. It also appeals to the needs of
tech-savvy teachers by challenging them to think of new ways of learning with
tech. For each app, the book provides lesson plan ideas for how to implement
technology with a focus on the standards. Ultimately, this book is written as a
resource and a guide for educators to use G Suite for Education to meet and
exceed standards and help students be prepared for tools that they will inevitably
work with in college and their careers. It is as if Google’s education team
reviewed the various state standards, polled teachers, and then created free
software to meet and exceed their wildest dreams. The G Suite is almost perfect.
Target Audience
All middle school stakeholders will find this book to be a valuable source of how
to implement technology into the teaching and learning environment.
Technology integration is the book’s main focus aligned with rigorous standards,
but the step-by-step tutorials are helpful for educators from any nation, state, or
educational institution. College and career readiness is a worldwide goal. It is
not restricted to the United States. Teachers, curriculum specialists,
administrators, and college instructors alike will find the information in this
book worthwhile and meaningful. Professors of education at universities are
encouraged to read and recommend this work to their students. Teachers who
come directly out of college with the skills and understanding of this book will
be ready to lead in the fight to get students college and career ready.
A note to veteran teachers: Many experienced educators we have talked to are
contemplating retirement because of the changes brought about by new

standards such as the Common Core and its mandatory technology integration. If
you are one of these educators, please consider using this book. Although it may
seem difficult to implement technology as an older teacher, we strongly
encourage you to try because your wisdom and experience as a veteran teacher is
sorely needed and plays a vital role in the school community. This book can
dispel your fears, but also challenge you to break out of your comfort level to try
something new. We’re willing to bet you’ll find renewed energy and inspiration
that will transform your teaching practice.

How This Book Is Unique
There is nothing like this book available for educators. Most books about Google
only tell educators about the wide swath of tools that Google provides. If you
plan on incorporating G Suite into your classroom, this book is essential because
it can help educators match specific state standards to the most appropriate
Google app, while also offering step-by-step tutorials for implementation that
will maximize learning. It is meant as a tool to smooth your path to successful
integration of technology into your classroom. The beauty of G Suite is that you
don’t have to scour the Internet for a hodge-podge of tools to use. At Google, the
apps are all easily accessible in one place and all follow the same basic
principles of use. Much of the work is already done for you!
Another key aspect of the book is that it is written by two educators who still
work with students and teachers every day. They practice what they preach.
Michael and Jason live over 2,000 miles apart, but they have collaborated in real
time to author this book. This book was written primarily using Google Docs
and discussed over video conference using Google Hangouts. Jason Borgen is
the Director of Learning & Innovation for Portola Valley School District in
California. Michael J. Graham is the principal at Westside High School in
Arkansas. Before becoming an administrator, he taught fifth through eighth
grade at a local middle school. One of our specialties is to provide professional
development to teachers who are scared of implementing technology because
they feel that it is too complicated or out of their skillset. We are eager to show
you that with a little guidance, the path doesn’t have to be scary at all—we hope
you’ll find it fun and exciting!
Organization of the Book
Each chapter is designed to highlight specific standards. Each standard discussed
is followed by how G Suite for Education can be used to meet or exceed it with
real classroom examples. Along the way, some authentic student work is
displayed showcasing the power of G Suite for Education. Each core chapter of
the book has a similar structure including
Key Features: Highlights that will be covered in the book
Standards Identified: Specific academic and/or technology standards that

are evident and can be related to the tool
Technology-Infused Teaching Tip: A quick example of how technology can
leverage the use of each tool
Lesson in Focus: A short objective and procedure on implementing a
relevant lesson relating to the tool being written about in the chapter
SAMR Implications—Transforming Instruction: Examples of how the tool
written about can be applied to transformative teaching and learning
Summary: A short summary of how the specific tool(s) can be used in the
middle school classroom
Step-by-Step Tutorials
Every chapter contains clear instructions illustrated by screenshots that show
exactly when and where to click. These tutorials make it easy for anyone to
access the features of G Suite no matter what level of experience they have with
technology. For an example, see the short tutorial below.
How to Use Google’s URL Shortener
Links to web addresses can often be long and complex. Google offers a tool to
shorten links to make them more accessible. For example, this is a link to a
Google Doc that I want readers to access:
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1gYavpNndG8vJtnE-Dr_hWpjSjosh-
rGEms1-cgt-I_E/edit. It would be very difficult to type all of this into a web
browser. But Google’s URL Shortener can convert the link to
http://goo.gl/Kaz6M. This shorter link can easily be typed into a web browser to
access the file. The shortened links created by Google never expire. All links are
case sensitive, meaning that capital and lowercase letters must be typed in
exactly as shown. Follow the steps below to use Google’s URL Shortener.
1. Go to http://goo.gl in a web browser.
2. Copy any web address to shorten.
3. Paste the web address in the box shown in Figure P.1.
Figure P.1

4. Click the 
 button to reveal the shortened link found in Figure
P.2.
5. Email, tweet, post on Facebook, or write the shortened link down to access
it later or share with friends.
Figure P.2
Technology-Infused Teaching Tips
Throughout the book, notice the boxed feature Technology-Infused Teaching
Tip. This feature offers readers commentary on how to explicitly use G Suite to
meet the rigors of college- and career-ready standards. These boxes often contain
lesson plan ideas and short descriptions on how to maximize learning using
technology.
Resources
Resources is a boxed feature at the end of each chapter. Resources provide the
reader with links to full lesson plans that use various G Suite tools for the
middle-level student. It will direct the reader to the appropriate part of the
Resource section that contains lesson plans found on the website. The web
content is a collection of the following:
Links to lesson plans at various grade levels and subjects found on the web
Links to videos
Links to video tutorials
Additional resources

Find the entire collection of web resources that we have gathered or created at
www.corwin.com/googlemeetsms. 
Lesson plans are included on the website because most of the lesson plans
developed use more than one G Suite app. To help the reader align the various G
Suite apps and standards of the lesson plans, the website also contains a Lesson
Plan Correlation Chart at the beginning of the Resource section. Using the chart,
readers can connect various apps they are learning about with real-world lesson
plans found in the Resource section.
Four Reasons to Buy This Book
1. Simplicity: This book is an easy-to-use guide to help you implement G
Suite for Education into your classroom with step-by-step instructions.
2. Innovation: This book will enhance your teaching practice with cutting-
edge, classroom-tested ideas that implement technology in your classroom.
3. Standards Connected: This book is organized around common college- and
career-ready standards that are applicable and adaptable to meet state
mandates.
4. Google Certified Authors: Graham and Borgen are certified by Google to
provide professional development to teachers and others who use G Suite
for Education.

Acknowledgments
Corwin wishes to acknowledge the following peer reviewers for their editorial
insight and guidance:
Lisa Graham, Program Supervisor, Special Education
Berkeley Unified School District
Berkeley, CA
Heidi Guadagni, Learning Specialist
French Prairie Middle School
Woodburn, OR
Deborah Howard
Teacher of the Deaf, Teacher ESL, Teacher EFL
Consultant with several school districts
Pownal, ME
Michelle Kocar, Curriculum Specialist
North Olmsted City Schools
North Olmsted, OH
Betty Rivinus, Special Education Teacher
Canby School District
Canby, OR
Susan Stewart, Assistant Professor
Ashland University
Ashland, OH

About the Authors
Michael J. Graham
is the principal of Westside High School in Jonesboro, Arkansas. Michael
specializes in providing professional development to teachers on his staff
and across the nation to maximize the learning experience for students
through the implementation of technology into the classroom. His strength
lies in working directly with teachers, motivating them to become 21st-
century learners so they can pass on those skills directly to students.
Michael received a BA in chemistry and MSE in educational leadership
from Arkansas State University. He has finished his EdS from Arkansas
Tech University, credentialing him to become a superintendent. His
teaching experience includes 5 years of eighth-grade mathematics and 2
years as instructional technologist at Harrisburg Middle School. In 2014,
Michael moved back home to become an administrator of his alma mater.
Michael is involved with the Arkansas Department of Education’s
Technology Information Center for Administrative Leadership Cadre and
board member on the Arkansas ASCD. Michael has a new baby, Katherine
Olivia, with his wife Jessica. In between changing diapers, Michael
continues to write and think about creating the best learning environment
possible.
Michael is a Google Certified Education Trainer, providing professional

development to teachers and others who use G Suite for Education.
Jason Borgen
is a native to using technology in education. Jason taught middle school
science and AVID from 2001 to 2007 in the Silicon Valley area. Focused in
the use of project-based learning through collaborative projects, he helped
many students succeed through 24/7 learning environments. Jason earned
his master’s degree in educational leadership from San Jose State
University. He spent 8 years with the Technology Information Center for
Administrative Leadership (TICAL), a statewide project in California,
funded by the Department of Education. TICAL’s mission is to assist
administrators across the state with technology integration and support.
TICAL also provides services to the state of Arkansas. During his tenure
working out of the Santa Cruz County Office of Education, Jason also
provided professional development workshops and credential coursework
to local teachers and administrators. Jason currently is Director of Learning
& Innovation for Portola Valley School District overseeing Curriculum,
Assessment, Professional Development, Information and Education
Technology. Jason presents at regional, statewide, and national and
international conferences, and he also leads workshops for CUE,
International Society for Technology in Education (ISTE), and CASCD.
Jason has worked with several schools and districts in technology planning
and providing professional development in integrating technology to
engage students, increase achievements, and develop higher-order, college-

and career-ready skills in the 21st century. Jason has helped design
curriculum for the nationally recognized Leading Edge Certification
program to support innovative educators. He is a Google Certified
Innovator (Mountain View, 2008) and a Google Education Trainer. Jason
serves on CUE, Inc.’s Board of Directors. To disconnect, Jason enjoys
traveling, hiking, playing drums, and spending time with his family and two
dogs.
Both Jason and Michael are cofounders of the DigitalEdAlliance, LLC, a
professional development consulting company focused on innovative
professional learning for the education community. Their flagship event, the
Midsouth Summit Featuring Google for Education, occurs every July in
Trumann, Arkansas.

1 Becoming a Master of Learning
Key Features
Identify Future Ready Learning initiative
Understand the technology-specific academic standards
Compare and contrast 20th-century and 21st-century education
Describe ISTE Standards for Students
Synthesize the SAMR Model of Technology Integration
Describe the features of G Suite for Education
Formulate an understanding of when and how to use Google Tools
“If we teach today’s students as we taught yesterday’s, we rob them of
tomorrow.”
—John Dewey
Preparing students for college and careers in the 21st century is our goal as
educators. What are these skills? How do we foster them? How do we keep
students interested? Most of all, how do we ensure relevancy and authenticity as
we approach the 20% mark of the 21st century? Middle school is a time in a
young adolescent’s life where he or she must gain skills that incorporate self-
direction, self-discovery, and self-discipline. However, this does not just include
the physical world anymore. Educators, community members, and parents must
all engage our young adolescents in respectful and appropriate interactions in the
digital world. Becoming a digital citizen involves not only respecting the global
connected world, but also participating in this still-young new world. After all,
Google has only been a company since 1998, and now more than 40 million
students use the tools to engage in content mastery, increased productivity, and
open dialogue with their teachers and peers around the globe.
Future Ready Learning
In 2015, the U.S. Department of Education launched an initiative to support
personalized digital learning called Future Ready Schools (Resource 1.1). This

initiative established a framework focused on Curriculum and Instruction,
Community Engagement, Budget and Resources, Use of Space and Time,
Infrastructure, Professional Learning, and Data and Privacy. These seven gears
are at the crux of our modern (and future) educational environment. With a new
set of content standards and a motivation to prepare for high school, college,
and/or a career, we as educators must redefine and transform our practices.
Middle school educators must be aware of national best practices to reform our
schools in order to stay competitive, focus on change, and grow our adolescent
youth. Aligning to this framework can assist teachers in becoming true masters
of learning and being privy to national directions, possible grants, and other
aspects of educational reform.
Instructional Standards
The Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and various other state standards
have been a catalyst for change in schools focused on college and career
readiness. They force educators to rethink their instruction and provide
opportunities for deeper learning by lending itself to collaboration, inquiry, and
project design. In fact, these various standards as well as the Next Generation
Science Standards (NGSS) are the first set of standards to specifically embed
references to digital learning. What follows is a set of college- and career-ready
CCSS anchor standards that explicitly references digital learning.
Reading
R.CCR.7: Integrate and evaluate content presented in diverse media and formats,
including visually and quantitatively, as well as in words.
Writing
W.CCR.6: Use technology, including the Internet, to produce and publish writing and to
interact and collaborate with others.
W.CCR.8: Gather relevant information from multiple print and digital sources, assess the
credibility and accuracy of each source, and integrate the information while avoiding
plagiarism.
Speaking & Listening
SL.CCR.2: Integrate and evaluate information presented in diverse media and formats,
including visually, quantitatively, and orally.

SL.CCR.5: Make strategic use of digital media and visual displays of data to express
information and enhance understanding of presentations.
Furthermore, the college- and career-ready standards imply cross-curricular
connections. Take for example students learning about viruses in seventh-grade
science. Students must effectively research the science behind viruses at the
microscopic level, but they also must explore how viruses have affected society.
Students can then develop a video via a third-party Google app, such as
WeVideo, to demonstrate their understanding of how viruses attack cells, and
how we can learn from our previous experiences through history about how to
protect ourselves and each other from potential harm. Students have to learn the
science, write a script, present the information, and publish a video through
collaborating with others. This powerful project involves deeper learning at all
levels, but most importantly, it shifts the role of the teacher from the distributor
of content to the facilitator of learning.
Pedagogy
Prior to the age of Internet research, the teacher was the content authority in the
room, and the library was the place to access a fixed set of content and
information. Things have changed now with primary sources, encyclopedia,
textbooks, and news being available at our fingertips. Literacy has shifted from
just being able to read, write, and communicate, to being able to comfortably do
these things with technology. Figure 1.1 provides a visual of this shift of access
to information.
Figure 1.1 20th- Versus 21st-Century Knowledge Taxonomy in Schools

So how do teachers shift their art and practice to support this new way of
accessing knowledge? There are several frameworks to align to. First, the
International Society for Technology in Education (ISTE) has developed a set of
standards shown in Figure 1.2 that focuses on elements of a new approach to
teaching. These standards can develop a foundation for practices in the
classroom. Each focus area of student standards implies relevant and timely
skills needed for success in the 21st century. By using these standards as a guide,
teachers have the ability to ensure students engage in activities that promote
student agency, innovation, and appropriate use of interactive and
communicative technologies. Furthermore, middle school students can use the
indicators ISTE provides in the standards (Resource 1.2) to begin (or continue)
their pathways toward college and career readiness.
Think about the virus project above and how you as a teacher would develop a
lesson plan. Would you provide direct instruction? Would you involve global
collaboration, such as having real doctors or historians view the videos and offer
feedback or have students in a different state or country share some connections
to viruses that are dominant near them? No matter how you would write this up,
most likely it would be a lesson design that would have been impossible to
accomplish 10+ years ago. This is where you as an instructional designer have
the power to completely transform your classroom. However, it takes time.
Dr. Ruben Puentedura, an educational researcher, developed a framework of how
we use technology and media to transform instruction and redefine learning. The
SAMR Model (Substitution, Augmentation, Modification, and Redefinition) is is
now used to design high-quality, standards-based lessons that use technology as
a catalyst for redefining the learning-integrated lessons. The acronym provides a
spectrum of how we can use technology to transform learning practices. See
Figure 1.3 for how SAMR is used to define technology integration and the stages
that lead to transformation.
Figure 1.2 ISTE Standards 2016

ISTE Standards for Students, ©2016, ISTE® (International Society for
Technology in Education), iste.org. All rights reserved.
Figure 1.3 The SAMR Model
Ruben Puentedura. The SAMR Model.
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:The_SAMR_Model.jpg. Creative
Commons Atrribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC BY-SA 4.0)

For example, creating digital flash cards with tools such as Quizlet allows you to
substitute the old-fashioned index cards for easier access to study tools. This
example lends itself to only enhancement of the activity (substitution or
augmentation). However, using the same flash card tool (Quizlet), students can
search, build, and share their own flash cards, while also including images with
their peers in class and in other countries allowing for global collaboration and
collaborative study techniques. The latter task allows redefined approaches to
instruction.
As we look to apply any technology, we must think about how it allows for tasks
that were once inconceivable, as we know our students will be in careers in the
next 10–20 years that are also inconceivable today. As we explore G Suite in
middle school, we will provide applications specific for the transformative
aspect of the SAMR Model since education today should innovate for tomorrow!
Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
Try searching for SAMR resources on Twitter (Resource 1.3 https://goo.gl/1i9qEO)! You will find a
great deal of images, examples, and methods to apply in your classroom. Twitter is also a great tool to
connect with teachers and classrooms. Whether you are looking to build your personal learning
network (PLN) or create more global opportunities for your students, Twitter will open the door for
extended learning for both you and your students.
Features of G SUITE FOR EDUCATION
Why G Suite?
Have you ever read a book and wanted to know if is based on a true story or not?
Or, perhaps you were watching a documentary about John F. Kennedy and
wanted to know what his parents did for a living. Well, if you ask 9 out of 10
people, they would use the commonly used phrase—google it! Recently, while
walking through a sixth-grade history class, students were discussing World War
II. One student wanted to know why Hawaii was the first place attacked in
America. The teacher, instead of just explaining the geographic location of
Hawaii, asked students to load Google Maps, navigate to Hawaii, and use the
measurement tools to measure the distance from Hawaii to Japan. They then
compared that distance from mainland USA. Without any explanation, students
just nodded, and one said, “This makes total sense!”

Google.com in 1997 was officially registered as a website. From then on, it
became increasingly utilized at first as a search engine and then more readily as
other relevant applications including mail, maps, news, and office productivity.
The simplicity, ease of use, and benefits of the tools became internationally
recognized as the go-to company for information. Google has provided many
benefits to education as well. They provide G Suite for Education, a free suite of
district-managed applications that are safeguarded by district IT staff and have
always been focused on student safety, privacy, and security. All users who are
logged into G Suite for Education have ad-free searching and unlimited storage
of any type of data in Google Drive, including images, videos, and documents.
Perhaps Google wants to create the next generation of Google users, but
regardless, if the tool works, if it helps with student engagement, productivity,
and creativity, it will enable student achievement! Teaching the importance of
evaluating tools and consumerism can be also embedded in the breadth of the
entire curriculum.
Hardware
G Suite for Education apps are unique because they operate on any device that is
connected to the Internet. Users may access their content in Google Drive and
create Docs, Sheets, and Slides from any laptop, tablet, or smartphone. For
example, students could work on an interdisciplinary writing project comparing
and contrasting ideas from a historical document in history class on their
classroom PC. Later when students move to English class, they will be able to
finalize the writing portion for grammar and syntax on the classroom’s Mac.
Finally, at lunch, students can share the work with a partner on their smartphones
and work collaboratively to edit the final work.
Chromebooks
Chromebooks are laptop computers that solely run Google apps and Google’s
operating system called Chrome OS. Many manufacturers make the
Chromebook, but all run Google’s free apps and other apps from the Chrome
Web Store. Chromebooks are a different kind of laptop computer. The device has
a small hard drive and is made to run in the cloud connected to the Internet. It is
perfect for students because it is inexpensive, easy to use, and does not require
updates. For example, our technology coordinator never has to update a single
Chromebook since the initiative started. Each time the computer is turned on, it

downloads in the background the newest version of Chrome OS. The devices
have a small hard drive for storing files locally, but this is not required or used
very often because of the unlimited cloud storage of G Suite for Education’s
Google Drive.

Chromebook Management Console
All Chromebooks come with the option of pre-installed software called the
Chromebook Management Console. This software allows the technology
professionals at the school to manage each Chromebook to prepare for testing,
force install certain Google apps, and block apps, websites, and other harmful
Internet content. For example, when state-mandated testing season approaches,
technology coordinators that have the Management Console installed can tell the
Chromebooks to enter testing mode remotely. This means that the technology
department does not have to physically prepare machines for security, updates,
and other system configurations. Another example is end of the year preparation.
At the end of the school year all Chromebooks will be turned into the technology
department for repairs and maintenance. The process of updating, deleting
student files, and restoring settings for the next year is a simple push of the
button. The Chromebook Management Console may be purchased from vendors
and preloaded on devices when ordered. Save headaches, man-hours, and money
by installing this much-needed application.

Choosing a Chromebook Device
As two practicing administrators, Michael and Jason are both overseeing 1:1
Chromebook initiatives for about 1,700 students K–12 and 500 students K–8,
respectively. We know choosing the best Chromebook for your students could be
daunting because of the many different models and manufacturers. Each
Chromebook model has different features. We have broken down the process and
have provided reviews to help you in your search. The information below has
pointers on the things to look for in a Chromebook for student use.
Tough power adapter: Schools with take-home initiatives seem to have a lot
of issues with weak power adapters. For example, some Chromebooks have
a thick power insert, as shown in the first image below. The power plug is
thin and can be bent, rendering it useless. The power adapter plug in the
second image is 5.5 mm thick and could not be easily bent. Accidents
happen in the middle school classroom and at home. It is better to be
prepared with a strong power adapter to keep repair costs down.

Screen hinges: The screen hinges are vulnerable to breakage. Choose a
Chromebook that has durable hinges that will last potentially 100 openings
and closings per day.

Battery life: Constant Internet surfing causes the battery life to drain on
many devices. Choose a Chromebook with at least an 8-hour battery life.
Durability: We both taught middle school for several years before becoming
administrators. We have seen our fair share of fragile technology be
destroyed by various methods of annihilation. Finding a Chromebook that
is tough, durable, and has spill-resistant keyboards is essential for students
of any grade.

Best excuse from our Technology Department for a broken Chromebook: “My cat jumped
on my Chromebook and broke it.”
—Sixth-Grade Student
Best Chromebook survival story: “I put my Chromebook on top of my mom’s car when she
was picking me up from school. . . . It fell off about 2 miles down the road. It is a little
scratched up, but it still worked when we found it.”
—Eighth-Grade Student
Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
Students and parents can come up with some real MacGyver-like ways to fix a broken Chromebook.
Look for duct tape, superglue, or mismatching screws as you generally inspect student devices.
Google User Experience
So why Google? Thousands of schools, districts, nonprofits, government
agencies, and businesses have adopted G Suite for Education as their core suite
of tools. We know Microsoft Office has been the go-to industry-standard set of
productivity tools for more than 20 years, but with the movement toward cloud
computing and Google’s jump-on easy-to-use collaborative web-based software,
we are seeing a definite paradigm shift in industry standards. Who will win, we
don’t really know, but Google is a great place to start for several reasons.
It is free, and Google said it plans to keep it free forever for education users
as a donation to education (See Figure 1.4). (Resource 1.4)
Unlimited storage
Device neutrality
Features like Hangouts and Google Voice
The Google ecosystem has the same user experience for each of their apps.
At the same time, Apple’s iPad has millions of apps that all have different
sets of user rules. The G Suite has the exact same user experience no matter
what device you access it from. Google Docs works identically on a Mac,
PC, or Chromebook.
Figure 1.4 G Suite for Education Free Statement

Copyright © 2016 Boost eLearning, Inc. All rights reserved.
Why Google?
One reason why G Suite for Education is the best solution for implementing
technology for today’s classroom is because the service is device neutral. Device
neutrality means that no matter what device the student is using, he or she will
have access to G Suite for Education. On the other hand, Apple’s word-
processing software Pages can only be accessed on an Apple device. Using the
programs available through G Suite for Education only requires access to the
Internet and a web browser. With G Suite, students can access and produce their
documents, files, and other work from any device (PC, Mac, Android tablet, or
iPad). That is a large combination of devices to prepare students to work with. G
Suite for Education helps students become ready for an ever-changing device
market and to be nimble and ready for any device that their employer or college
throws their way.
Teaching and learning in the 21st century and beyond sets high expectations for
both students and educators. One of the most challenging expectations for
educators is finding the right way to integrate technology into the learning
environment. Educators everywhere know that one thing is for sure: Technology
integration into our lives and work environments will be ever-increasing. The
kindergartner that starts school this year will retire sometime between 2070 and
2080. The iPhone was first released in 2007. Think how much the world has
changed in the past years since its debut. Fast forward to 2040, the year
kindergartners of 2016 will be in the first years of their career. What skills will
they need to thrive in the work environment of the day?
G Suite for Education provides nearly all of the tools to get educators on the path
of using technology while implementing various college- and career-readiness

standards. Google’s apps are free, easy to use, and are trusted by more than 40
million students and teachers worldwide and expected to reach 110 million users
by 2020. The services Google offers follow the company’s motto of “do no
harm.” Google is providing free software to schools that works on any device
from anywhere. This contribution of any device gives students a diverse
technology experience. They are providing the most sophisticated, easy-to-use
software experience for free, because Google feels that it is the right thing to do
for teachers and students.
Figure 1.5 Growth of G Suite for Education (Formerly Google Apps for
Education) Boost eLearning
Source: Alhadeff, V. (2015, July 1). Google Apps for Education Anticipated
to Reach 110 Million Users by 2020. Retrieved from
http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/google-apps-for-education-
anticipated-to-reach-110-million-users-by-2020-300107878.html
Note: *Includes teachers, students, and administrators.
This book is filled with exciting new ideas and processes for the middle school
educator to get started with G Suite for Education, demonstrating how it can be
used to meet and exceed the various college, career, and technology readiness
standards. Hopefully, it can excite the veteran teacher to implement new

strategies, while calming fears, and it will help the novice teacher get familiar
with the much-needed technology integration components students need for
success in high school and later in life. This book will offer step-by-step tutorials
with screenshots to explain in detail how to get your students learning and
working with these amazing 21st-century tools, as well as full lesson plans on
the companion website.
Google has a vision for their users. Their aspirations were as follows:
The Google User Experience team aims to create designs that are useful,
fast, simple, engaging, innovative, universal, profitable, beautiful,
trustworthy, and personable. Achieving a harmonious balance of these 10
principles is a constant challenge. A product that gets the balance right is
“Googley”—and will satisfy entire district deployments. G Suite is
seamless to implement across any size school or district big or small.
Furthermore, Google is committed to student safety, privacy, and data,
ensuring no data will be shared nor used for advertising purposes, much
different than traditional Google accounts. (Resource 1.5)
Summary
As you begin to think about transforming your middle school classroom experiences, how will
you set the tone for our future generations? What makes your classroom “Googley”? Whether
you see the need for applying these tools to various sets of standards such as Common Core or
ISTE, or you want to really transform your classroom using the SAMR Model as a guide, one
thing is for certain—our world is changing, and what we are preparing students for in their
careers will be something we may never have a full grasp on. Google will be a service that will
be essential for many decades to come.
Many of you are already immersing transformative practices into teaching and learning, but are
you creating a sustainable system to allow for deeper learning and content acquisition that is
relevant, rigorous, and applicable to students near and far? In order to do so, you must think of
yourself as the master of learning, not necessarily the master of content. Throughout this book,
you will immerse yourself in a set of tools to add to your toolbox to be the true facilitator of
lifelong learning for the remaining four-fifths of the 21st century.
Resources
For more information about G Suite for Education, including
lesson plans related to chapter content,
domain setup for tech administrators’ videos,

overviews and Google training materials,
the authors’ favorite websites, and
testimonials and interviews of schools currently using G Suite,
access Resources from this chapter on the companion website.
 http://resources.corwin.com/googlemeetsms

2 G Suite for Education: Overview
Key Features
G Suite is free . . . forever.
Core apps Docs, Sheets, Slides, and Classroom overview
The Cloud: Definition and why it is important
Sharing: What it means and how it has changed classrooms
Domain administrator: How schools can control access to parts of Google
Walking through a sixth-grade English Language Art class one day in Portola
Valley, CA, Jason saw students searching Google for a variety of controversial
issues in society. One student searched for dog rescues in California. Another
student searched for trash found on beaches. They were all taking notes in
Google Docs. Jason asked the teacher what the objective of the project was, and
she said students were to present the importance of a specific cause being
supported by several individuals and organizations. Some of the following tasks
were to email a representative from a nonprofit representing the cause, develop
an informational narrative that includes some research (in a blog or article), and
create a multimedia presentation or video summarizing the cause. Of course,
every tool used was a G Suite for Education app. One significant observation
was that students were engaged in relevant and collaborative products!
Computer skills such as writing documents, creating presentations, writing
email, and collecting data on spreadsheets must be commonplace in the
classroom because they are commonplace in high school, college, and in a
career. Many K–12 and higher education institutions across the country are using
G Suite for Education in their schools to help provide this vital experience.
G Suite for Education is a suite of applications offered at no cost and
advertisement-free to educational institutions. These applications provide
educators with the tools to successfully integrate technology into their teaching,
and they prepare students to be college and career ready with relevant 21st-
century skills. Standards like Common Core, ISTE Standards, and other college-
and career-readiness standards require teachers and students to be fluent in
digital technologies. The architects of the standards address the need for students
to be able to work and learn in a technologically based society. That is why

many standards demand that students be able to work in an atmosphere of
collaboration, with special emphasis on creating and sharing learning. G Suite
for Education will make these goals a reality in the classroom by providing
teachers and students with the ability to create, collaborate, and share their work.
The Apps
Google offers Search, Gmail, Google Calendar, Google Drive (which includes
Docs, Sheets, Slides, Drawings, and Forms), Google Classroom, and Google
Sites in a package that students and faculty can access from anywhere. This
virtually unlimited access of Google apps allows students and teachers to extend
learning and work beyond the school walls. This gives users vital real-world
experience with digital tools to manage their work and life.
Search
Google is the king of search. Although it is not one of the core applications, it is
the most synonymous with Google. When you have a question, what do you do?
Google it. Caution to teachers: If you are asking the majority of questions to
your students that can be answered by “google it,” then you are asking the wrong
questions. Teachers who can craft questions that elicit a thoughtful response will
be more successful at solidifying understanding. For example, middle school
students could be assigned to learn about internment camps that forced Japanese
Americans to be essentially jailed during WWII. Instead of asking students to
list three places where the internment camps were located, the teacher could ask,
“Explain the local weather conditions of the various internment camps. How
were the conditions of the prisoners different or the same from camp to camp?”
This example allows the students to use Google to point them to articles where
they can read and conceptualize understanding. The same objective was met, and
the students know not only where the camps were located, but also so much
more.
Gmail
Gmail is a web-based email service that provides students and school employees
with a school-managed email account. This is done under a school’s unique
domain that users can access from any Internet-enabled device. For example, a

student or faculty member at a G Suite for Education school will have a Gmail
address with this format: username@yourschool.org. This is different from
personal Gmail accounts that have the format username@gmail.com. Features
located within Gmail for schools keep Gmail safe, secure, and controlled by the
school’s domain administrator. Gmail can be accessed from home, school, a
smartphone, or any Internet-enabled device. Gmail is packed with features like
search, Hangouts, and even a free telephone that will ring your Google account.
These features extend the user experience. For example, when enabled by the
domain administrator in the Hangouts app, Google will allow users to send SMS
text messages to cell phones, and it allows teachers to call any phone number
directly from their Gmail account. This is great for teachers, giving them a
phone in their classrooms that provides a way for easy parent contact. With the
ability to text or call directly from their Gmail account, teachers can stay in
touch with parents regardless of the parents’ communication hurdles. To learn
how to access Google Voice and get your own telephone number associated with
your Google account, follow the steps in Chapter 10.
Google Calendar
Google Calendar is a web-based calendar that lets users make appointments,
schedule meetings, set due dates, and share that information with others in a live
online calendar. Teachers can create class calendars and share them with specific
students or with groups of contacts organized by class period, making it easy to
share material with large numbers of students. Teachers and students can also
create multiple calendars that manage their busy lives. For example, the student
council secretary could create a calendar of the meetings and events for the
organization. He could then share that calendar with the members of student
council. That calendar will appear along with each member’s basketball game
schedule, freshman English assignment calendar, and personal calendar. All of
the calendars are color-coded accordingly, making them easy to distinguish from
one another. Calendar makes it possible to see events of multiple friends,
classmates, or teachers’ schedules in one online calendar. Figure 2.1 shows how
different calendars are represented by different colors. Each event that belongs to
a particular calendar has the same color.
Figure 2.1 Calendar

Google Drive
Google Drive is the storage component of G Suite for Education. Drive has
unlimited storage for any file type. Students and teachers can store any file like
videos, PDFs, Microsoft Word Documents, and of course, Google Docs, Sheets,
and Slides. This is the user’s cloud-based storage drive that can be accessed
anywhere there is an Internet connection.
Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
Mobile Applications and Google
Download applications made by Google for the iPhone, iPad, or Android mobile OS in their
respective app stores. Follow this link to Resource 2.1 at https://goo.gl/zdM2oD for access to all of
the Google apps for iOS. Google apps are preloaded on the Android OS.
Google Drive includes a web-based software package that includes document,
presentation, spreadsheet, form, and drawing applications that can fully replace
expensive office software. In Google Docs, students have the ability to share a
document with teachers or peers, allowing for a collaborative writing experience.
Students can write on the same document at the same time, but be on different
devices. In addition, students can share the document with the teacher allowing
immediate feedback on writing assignments.
Google Docs is where the work gets done using G Suite for Education. Built into

Google Docs is the ability to share. Sharing provides a collective environment
where student work that is created in any of the Google Drive programs can be
collaboratively viewed, edited, or published to the web. Google Docs saves the
user’s work every few seconds to Google Drive. Google Docs and Google’s
cloud storage service eliminate the need for physical student data storage devices
such as USB flash drives, which reduces clutter and decreases the chances that
the dog will eat their homework.
Figure 2.2 displays how to access Google Drive. Clicking on the boxes 
 at
the top right of the screen while signed into any of the Google apps will take the
user here. Clicking on the New button will enable the user to choose what type
of Doc to create. The Google Drive homepage includes links to Docs, Slides,
Sheets, Forms, Drawings, Sites, Maps, and more programs under the 
 button.
Figure 2.2 Google Drive

Google Classroom
Have you ever taken an online class? All online classes provide an online
community space for curriculum delivery, assignment submissions, and ongoing
discussions. Google Classroom, similar to an online class community space, is a
digital version of your classroom, allowing you to create announcements, deliver
assignments, engage students in online discussions, and share curricular
resources. It provides an integrated calendar and a one-stop shop for any or all
assignments. You can ask students to review videos, websites, and/or submit
their projects with Google Classroom. Submissions are automatically organized
for the teacher so you can easily provide feedback to students anytime/anywhere.
You also have the ability to invite parents to view your Google Classroom
activity and receive notifications if and when assignments are overdue. Figure
2.3 shows the different items that you can post in a Google Classroom.
Figure 2.3 New Google Classroom Post
Google Sites
Google Sites is a free website creator that allows teachers and students to make

websites that are fully compatible with Google Calendar and Google Docs.
These are kept under the school domain, and students may share websites with
the outside world if approved by the domain administrator. Google Sites does
not require the use of complicated web design language such as HTML.
Figure 2.4 displays the Classic Google Sites main menu. The new version of
Google Sites is actually available directly in Google Drive. Sites that are created
under the school’s G Suite domain are listed here. If Sites are enabled for
students and teachers in a large district, then it is possible that a large number of
sites would be listed here. Using the search bar to narrow down sites is the most
efficient way to find the site the user is looking for. In 2016, Google introduced a
new version of Sites that saves all your sites into Google Drive.
Figure 2.4 Google Sites Main Menu
Gmail and Google Sites in This Book
Google’s mail application called Gmail and Google Sites will not be addressed
in detail in this book. Gmail and Google Sites are important and should be
considered as part of a school’s solution for delivering high-quality technology-
related instruction. The purpose of this book is to directly relate G Suite for
Education, while connecting to college- and career-readiness standards to offer
teachers lesson plan ideas and insight to make that possible. Gmail is a very
high-quality program that is ubiquitous and easy to use. Additionally, Google
Sites’ user controls are complex and would require more space than is suitable
for this work. The focus of this book is to get the most out of G Suite to help
teachers increase student achievement.

The Cloud
G Suite for Education apps are cloud based, meaning they can be accessed
anywhere from any device that has an Internet connection. Cloud computing
makes it possible for users to store, create, and share content without saving it to
a physical hard drive. For example, a student writing an essay in Google Docs on
a laptop in English class can save the file to her Google Drive and later access
that file from her home computer. With Google Drive, it doesn’t matter if the
computer gets a virus and is completely destroyed. The student’s essay can be
accessed anywhere there is an Internet connection through the user’s G Suite for
Education account. This ability allows students and teachers to create,
collaborate, and share their work across any device using any platform. It does
not matter if students are working on a Mac, PC, or smartphone. Students may
even upload other formats of student work such as Microsoft Word, Excel,
PowerPoint, Apple Pages, .PDF, or .CSV data files and share them with anyone.
If the student or teacher uploads a format other than Google Docs to his or her
Google Drive, the user may not edit the document in the Google Docs program.
In that case, Google Drive would be used just for storage. Alternatively, the user
could convert the file to Google Docs format, creating a new Google Doc that
may be edited in the corresponding Google program. During the upload process,
Google Docs will ask the user if he or she wants to convert the document to its
matching Doc format (see Figure 2.5). This allows the user to edit the document
with the corresponding Google Docs program.
1. To access upload settings, click the settings gear 
 in the upper right-
hand corner of Google Drive.
2. Then click the Convert uploaded box shown in Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5 Upload Settings
Share

Sharing is one of the unique features of Google Docs that gives it the upper hand
by offering collaboration to users. Traditional office software packages that
reside on the hard drives of computers do not offer the ability of collaboration
and sharing. Sharing in Google Docs allows users to be able to work
collaboratively in any of the programs. The user can give others the rights to
edit, view, or comment on any document that they own in real time by setting
visibility options and share settings. The default share setting is private (unless
your domain administrator changed the settings), but users can share with
anyone through a URL or use share settings to send the person an email
notification alerting them that a document is being shared. Options in sharing
allow the user to make the Google Doc searchable on the web, public for users in
your domain only, or public for anyone with the web link.
Students’ motivation for doing high-quality work will increase because they are
doing the work not only for the teacher to read, but they are also producing work
that can be shared with parents, peers, and other adults, giving them a sense of
pride and responsibility to produce excellent work.
Vannessa, a sixth-grade student at Harrisburg Middle School, was quoted saying,
“Using Google Docs is way easier than writing our essays on paper; it also gives
me a way to show off my writing. . . . I can really share it with anyone . . . plus,
we’re not killing all of the trees we used to.” Vannessa now has another purpose
for her writing. Her writing has the possibility of being read by parents, peers,
and professionals around the world, giving her pride, motivation, and validation.
Sharing work with others outside the student–teacher relationship is a possibility,
not a requirement. Students, teachers, and parents may have conversations on
what is appropriate for sharing with parents, peers, or the world.
With G Suite for Education, users can share Google Docs within their domain or,
if their domain administrator has approved out-of-domain sharing, students and
teachers may share with anyone. This includes neighboring school districts,
professionals in the field, or colleges and universities. One of the hallmarks of
the Common Core State Standards is learning through collaboration. Through
sharing and collaborating, students gain a sense of community and responsibility
for the group’s work. G Suite for Education gives students the tools to create,
collaborate, and share their understanding of the world and to find their place in
technologically rich college and career settings. Figure 2.6 is a screenshot of the
share settings in G Suite. Follow the steps to share and restrict times people may
access documents.

1. Click the 
 button to open the sharing center.
2. Click the Advanced button as shown in Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6 Advanced Sharing Access
Figure 2.7 Advanced Sharing—Limit Sharing by Time
By clicking on the arrow in Figure 2.7, the user can set the time limit a particular
user may have access to the document.
The Domain Administrator: Behind the Scenes
G Suite for Education is hosted by Google, which means all of the content
created by students and teachers is safely stored on Google’s servers. However,
the data that students and teachers create with their G Suite account are the
property of the school and the user. G Suite for Education customers benefit

from two features that will help district technology personnel allocate human
and financial resources more appropriately. There is no software to install and no
hardware to purchase: Google provides the entire apps package, services, and
support for free. The ability of the school domain administrator to manage the G
Suite for Education service adds the special security measures that are
appropriate for the school setting.
The domain administrator can control virtually all features of G Suite for
Education. For example, the domain administrator can select certain features to
become available to groups of users. He or she may allow teachers and support
staff to access Hangouts and Google Voice, but they may be turned off for
students. Your school community would benefit from a committee that is
designated to review what features of G Suite for Education are available for use
by students and teachers so that they may reflect the values of the community.
The domain administrator may add features or take them away at any time for
individual users or groups of users. For example, if a middle school student
sends an email to a fellow student that contains bullying language, then the
domain administrator may disable Gmail for the offending student, but leave on
Google Calendar and Docs so that the student may complete assignments. After
the student has been held accountable and counseled on the proper way to
communicate online and has earned the trust back, the domain administrator can
restore the privilege of Gmail to the student. All emails sent to the student during
that time will be saved and may be accessed when the student’s Gmail is
reactivated. Groups of users from an elementary setting may benefit from more
restricted access to sharing and Gmail outside the domain, while middle and
high school students may need to contact peers, parents, or professionals outside
the domain.
Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
In Michael’s first year as a middle school teacher in 2006, he had no projector and no computer, and
he had a hard copy spreadsheet for a gradebook. Michael had just come out of college working and
learning with Google and its evolving products, and when he got to the classroom, he felt stifled and
unaccustomed to the technology resources he had to work with. Beginning teachers from any year
will possibly face this scenario or something similar. If you are reading this book and your school is
not a G Suite for Education school or your principal or domain administrator does not “like” Google
or think it is unimportant, then find ways to interact and show off some of the time-saving tools
administrators can use to communicate better. In 2006, Michael’s principal and domain administrator
just did not know what was possible with technology. He had to prove it to them that it was
beneficial. If you feel like your school is in the Dark Ages, take on the responsibility to educate your
building and district leaders.

Although dangers exist, proper classroom management and student online safety
education will create a student who is ready for college and a career. Blocking
outside forms of communication may leave the student unprepared to handle the
digital world. Relaxing the content filters and share settings can educate students
about dangers such as bullying and access to inappropriate content. When a
student abuses the trust, the student can be counseled on the appropriate way to
use digital tools. If left uneducated, students may not know how to behave
properly online once out of the more secure G Suite for Education setting.
Resources
For more information about G Suite for Education, including
lesson plans related to chapter content,
domain setup for tech administrators’ videos,
overviews and Google training materials,
the authors’ favorite websites, and
testimonials and interviews of schools currently using G Suite,
access Resources from this chapter on the companion website.
 http://resources.corwin.com/googlemeetsms

3 Google Classroom
Key Features
Develop an online repository of resources
Engage an online community with your students
Engage students in online discussions
Share relevant curricular resources in diverse formats
Create and deliver assignments paperlessly
Evaluate and provide feedback on student work
Jason was helping an English language arts and history teacher (we call this two-
period class Core) recently with some lessons around Google Maps. As students
walked into class after lunch, they all picked up a Chromebook and immediately
navigated to Google Classroom. Looking over a shoulder of one student, he
noticed in Google Classroom the core teacher had several activities to be
completed. The first activity was a question, “How do you think racism affects
our country? Give at least two examples.” Jason was mesmerized by the
engagement and immediate active learning happening. The teacher did not say a
word, but students knew exactly where to go and what to do! The next task
asked students to watch a video about the rise of racism during the Civil War,
and the final task asked students to read one article about various forms of
racism and write a letter to their Congressional representative explaining ways
society should combat racism. The letter would be written in Google Docs and
submitted at exactly the same location where they started—in Google
Classroom.
When you visit most college and many high school campuses, you may notice
students accessing their materials digitally through a Learning Management
System (LMS). Think about it: curriculum, assignments, online discussions,
announcements, class calendar, gradebook, and much more all in one place.
Some elementary and middle schools are even moving toward this 24/7 access to
classrooms to meet the needs of state standards and/or Common Core Standards.
Students now have the ability to access research, prepare and evaluate
multimedia, and engage in conversations from anywhere via an LMS approach.
The foundation to any 21st-century middle school classroom should include
some type of online classroom system that provides a one-stop shop for all

classroom materials. This system should also seamlessly integrate other tools
used across the learning environment.
As we explore the most significant aspects of using G Suite for Education, a
foundational element is setting up your Google Classroom—an LMSlite, if you
will—which will provide the location where you will deliver content,
assignments, and announcements as well as engage students in ongoing
dialogue. How is this different from a class website? Well, this could definitely
replace the class website, but more significantly, Google Classroom is made to
be interactive where students can submit and engage in conversations. A class
website acts as a read-only informational site to view general class information
where Google Classroom is a one-stop shop for true active learning. You can still
deliver and link to your entire curriculum on the website, but instruction and
assignments are completed in Google Classroom. Think of the class website as
the textbook and Google Classroom as the workbook. Please note: Your district
must be a G Suite for Education (formerly known as Google Apps for
Education) customer, and Google Classroom must be turned on by your
administrator. Ask your IT administrators for details.
Figure 3.1 shows an example of your Google Classroom homepage, which will
list each class you teach. Every time you create a new Class, there is a
corresponding Google Drive folder associated with it for all assignments and
projects.
Figure 3.1 Google Classroom Homepage

Setting Up Your Class
Creating Your Class
When you first launch Google Classroom, it will ask you if you are a student or
teacher. You will need to select Teacher as this will add you to a group on the
administrative backend. You either will then be able to begin adding classes, or
you may have to communicate with your IT staff to accept you to the teachers’
group to allow you to create classes. This is dependent upon how restrictive your
district’s settings are.
Once you are set up as a teacher, follow these steps to add your class or classes:
1. Click the + sign in the upper right of the screen.
Figure 3.2 Creating a Class
2. Select Create class. (Figure 3.2)
3. Type in the name of your class (a good practice is to also add the year),
section, or period number:
Figure 3.3 Class Details
4. Type in the name of the subject (be consistent with naming conventions).
(Figure 3.3)

5. Click Create.
6. Repeat this for each period you teach.
Branding Your Class
As you begin to develop an online community for your students, it is important
to brand your classroom with your class personality and image. You can do this
several ways—use existing themes or create a logo. A great idea is to take a
landscape picture of your students and/or classroom and upload the image. The
image must be at least 800 pixels × 200 pixels. There are several online services
available to resize images, including ReSizeImage.net.
Figure 3.4 Classroom Banner Photo
To change the theme or use your own photo, simply click on Select theme or
Upload photo from the right side of your Classroom banner, as shown in Figure
3.4.
The next thing to notice in your Google Classroom are the three tabs at the top
center: Stream, Students, and About. Each tab navigates to a different area of
the classroom. Figure 3.5 summarizes each tab, which we will go into detail on.
Figure 3.5 Tabs in Google Classroom

About Tab
Before you invite students and post information to your Classroom, it is
important to post the materials that will be pertinent throughout the year (e.g.,
syllabus, class website, reading lists). Think of this section as your classroom
bulletin board where you post items that stay constant for the entire year. See
Figure 3.6.
1. Add your classroom name, description of your class, and room number.
2. Access your corresponding Google Drive folder and Google Calendar that
is automatically created for every Classroom you create. (Note: Any file
your students submit online through Google Classroom will be accessible in
this folder, and any due date will automatically be added to the Classroom
Google Calendar for both you and your students.)
3. Click on Add class materials to add resources.
4. There are four resources you can add, represented by icons:
1. Attach files from your computer, such as a class photo of the school
handbook.
2. Attach files from Google Drive, such as videos or documents you have
stored in the cloud, like a syllabus.
3. Attach a YouTube video or videos that perhaps represent your class
and/or your interests.
4. Attach links that provide students more resources for your class such
as websites related to your content areas (e.g., National Geographic,
Newsela, Library of Congress).
5. Click on Post to post the materials.
5. If you have co-teachers, mentor teachers, administrators, etc. and would
like to share the responsibility of posting and monitoring class activities
with others, you can invite others to be listed and act as teachers in the
classroom. Simply click on Invite Teacher.
Figure 3.6 About Tab

Student Tab
The Student tab allows you to view your students, invite students and
parents/guardians, and communicate with them. You also have the ability to turn
on or off student posting and commenting for the entire class.
When you first set up your classroom, you want to either invite students, or share
the unique class code with students so they can join themselves. It is much less
tedious to simply write down the invite code on the board and tell students to go
to Google Classroom at classroom.google.com and click on the + icon in the
top-right corner of the screen to join the class. They will then be able to type in
the code associated with your class and click Join. This will immediately add
them to your class. If you get new students at any point throughout the year, you
can then use the Invite Students button to send them an email invitation
individually. Or, once invited, students can navigate to Google Classroom, and
the invitation will be waiting for them on their Google Classroom homepage.
Finally, you have the ability of emailing (if Gmail is turned on in your domain)
your students. You can either check the box at the top to email all, or check
individual students. By checking one or more students, you can click on the
Actions button to email, remove them from your class, or “mute” them, which
will not allow them to post or comment. Muting can be helpful for students who
post inappropriate content.

Class Activities
Stream Tab
Once your classroom is set up and you have invited students, you will spend the
majority of your time on the Stream tab to post announcements, assignments,
discussion questions, poll questions, and to access student work. To post
anything in Google Classroom, click on the + icon in the bottom right of the
Stream tab, and you will see the options you have, as shown in Figure 3.7.
Figure 3.7 Posting Options
Announcements
Announcements are exactly what they sound like: quick items to announce that
may or may not require a response. Maybe you want to share with students an
interesting article or video about asteroids in a science class or remind students
to bring their field trip forms back to class tomorrow. You can even pose a
question where students can comment on the post. Students will receive a
notification in their email or on the Classroom mobile app once anything is
added to the stream. Announcements do not have a grade associated with them.

You have the option of adding attachments (PDFs, images, etc.), Google Drive
files, YouTube videos, and/or links to webpages to your announcement. CCSS
focuses on being able to interpret information in diverse media formats, and you
have many options of media you can add to the announcement. You can make
announcements of simple tasks for students to complete in class that you will not
grade. For example, you may want students to review a PDF of a poem, then
watch a video of the poem, and finally read a biography of the author. You can
attach as many resources as you would like to an announcement. Once you are
ready to post, click on Post, and students will immediately see this in their
stream. You can click on the drop-down arrow next to Post for more options
including scheduling the post, saving as a draft, and/or editing later.
Look at Figure 3.8. This example assignment allows students to easily access
text of a narrative, a video, and an interactive website to review Edgar Allan
Poe’s rich literary mind. Students can better understand how the medium
portrays the author and discuss the benefits of each medium correlating directly
to CCSS 7.7 RI (shown above in Table 3.1).
Figure 3.8 Example Post: Reading Informational Text Post With Poe
Assignments

Assignments are more significant tasks and/or graded work. Students have the
ability to share their work via link, attachment, or they can create Google Drive
files such as documents, spreadsheets, presentations, etc. You have the ability of
also adding attachments, YouTube videos, web links, and Google Drive files.
You can even add a Google Drive file as a type of worksheet or template and
make a copy for each student, as shown in Figure 3.9. By doing this, students
will have the templated document such as an essay format, lab report format, etc.
Google Classroom will automatically append the title of the file with each
student’s name. You can also allow all students to edit the same file via Google
Drive if you want all your students to share the work
Figure 3.9 Adding Google Drive File
Perhaps the greatest advantage of Assignments is viewing students’ completion
in real time. Every assignment on the Stream list shows real-time completion
status. If students are working on Google Files, there will be a Turn In button on
top of the file. Or, students can manually click Done on the assignment in
Google Classroom to let you know they have completed it. You can monitor this
when appropriate and intervene for students who are struggling, as seen in
Figure 3.10.
Figure 3.10 Monitoring Student Progress

Once assignments are complete, you have the option of providing a grade and
direct, private feedback to students by simply clicking on the assignment title to
see their work.
Questions
Questions are similar to assignments, but ask students to respond directly in
Google Classroom. You have the option of creating open-ended discussion-type
questions where students can respond to each other (but not before they respond
to the prompt initially). This type of interaction allows students to have
meaningful, academic conversations as your middle school students begin to
develop their voices and opinions. This could be an excellent way for students to
develop arguments as they prepare for more significant presentation. Students
have the ability to discuss main ideas from reading and other relevant topics via
Google Classroom Questions anytime/anywhere (see Figure 3.11)! Questions in
Google Classroom also allows you to create multiple-choice questions for quick
formative assessments and checks for understanding.
Figure 3.11 Online Discussion
Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
For advanced users, install the Google Classroom Chrome extension in Resource 3.1 on the
companion website. This will allow you to push any website you are on to your Google Classroom as

a resource, assignment, and/or question. Maybe you are searching YouTube for a video relating to
idioms; you can then simply click on the Extension in Chrome, and the website will automatically
populate in your Google Classroom with no need to copy and paste.
Grades
Both assignments and questions can have grades associated with them, giving
you the ability to provide students with quantitative feedback demonstrated in
Figure 3.12. Students can always resubmit assignments, and every submission is
recorded. By clicking on each assignment or question, you can modify the points
total, review each student’s work, and return their work with a private
comment/narrative feedback. Students will receive an email (if your students are
using Gmail with their school account).
Figure 3.12 Quantitative Feedback
Communicate With Parents
Creating transparency in your classroom is essential. You have the ability to send
notifications to parents so they see assignments and announcements and can
track their child’s completion. (Note: You must be a verified teacher in G Suite
for Education. Ask your IT administrators to verify you if you do not see this
option.) Inviting parents or guardians allows them to see upcoming assignments,
daily posts, and any late assignments not turned in. They can get daily or weekly
emails. Parents or guardians will receive an email invite (see Figure 3.13) and
will need to set up a Google account to receive the notifications. You will need
to type in parent or guardian emails one at a time. You will need to turn on
notifications for parents and guardians in the bottom left of the Students tab.
Figure 3.13 Parent Access

Lesson in Focus
Argumentative Writing
The teacher will
1. Create a question asking about a controversial topic (e.g., climate change, cell phones in
schools, homework)
2. Create a rubric for students to see how they will be evaluated on their responses (i.e.,
meets standard by sharing three details referencing valid/credible resources and responds
with relevant and thoughtful ideas to at least two other students)
3. Discuss effective argumentative writing strategies with students
4. Assign Google Classroom discussion
5. Debrief online discussion the following day
SAMR Implications—Transforming Instruction
Even More
Drafts and Scheduling
Sometimes you want to create a bunch of posts at once for your stream. Maybe you are working
on a unit, and you want to create one announcement, question, and assignment, but you want
them to be displayed at different times. You can either save them all as drafts and go back to the

draft when you are ready to push them out. Or, you can schedule the release of a post at a certain
date and time. Simply click the drop-down menu adjacent to the words Post, Assign, or Ask and
select Schedule or Save draft (Figure 3.14). If you select Schedule, a window will appear
where you can specify the date and time the post will become live on the stream. Michael uses
this feature as an administrator when teachers turn in lesson plans. Each week by Sunday night
his teachers are automatically assigned to turn in their lesson plans in Google Classroom. It is
set up for each week of school and it automatically posts each week. Lesson plans are then
reviewed and feedback can be given with comments on Google Docs.
All your drafts will be saved at the top of your Classroom and accessible anytime for posting
when appropriate.
Figure 3.14 Saving and Scheduling Posts
Quick Access to All Assignments and Classes
Sometimes you or your students want quick access to all assignments, due dates, or other
classes. The three lines on the top right (Quick Access menu) of the screen give you access to
toggle to all assignments, class calendars, and classes as shown in Figure 3.15. This allows you
to either go from one classroom to the next quickly or focus on accessing the work that needs
reviewing.
Figure 3.15 Quick Access Menu

Summary
Google Classroom is your one-stop shop for students to keep all their assignments and tasks in
one location. It is the foundation for any successful use of Google tools in your classroom. From
creating a 24/7 classroom community to engaging students in peer and student–teacher dialogue,
Google Classroom allows you to streamline ways you deliver content and evaluate assignments
and/or projects. As middle school students continue to develop organizational strategies, they
can become more self-directed and develop a community voice. As you become more proficient
in using Google tools, you will continue to find ways to organize your physical classroom
through the virtual Google Classroom. In the subsequent chapters, you will get a better idea of
how to assign all Google tools in Google Classroom to create a transformative learning
environment. Interested in many resources and a Google Classroom genius? Check out Alice
Keeler and her resource at Resource 3.2 on the companion website.
Resources
For more information about G Suite for Education, including
lesson plans related to chapter content,
domain setup for tech administrators’ videos,
overviews and Google training materials,
the authors’ favorite websites, and
testimonials and interviews of schools currently using G Suite,
access Resources from this chapter on the companion website.

 http://resources.corwin.com/googlemeetsms

4 Google Documents
Key Features
Create original documents
Share documents with peers, parents, and teachers
Store all documents in one cloud storage account
Work collaboratively among peers, parents, and teachers
Publish work to web and social networking sites
Integrate with Google Classroom
Explore tool
Google Documents (Google Docs) is the word-processing software offered by
Google as part of G Suite for Education. Google Docs is free and can replace
conventional word-processing programs such as Microsoft Word or Apple
Pages. An advantage of Google Docs over Word, Pages, or other word-
processing programs is the convenience of storing student and teacher work in
the cloud. Google’s cloud storage space is called Google Drive. Storing in
Google Drive helps users avoid being tethered to multiple hard drives that
students and teachers may encounter during the school day. Cloud computing
means that users may store their work on Google’s servers and have access to
that content anywhere an Internet connection exists. Google offers unlimited
storage for G Suite for Education users. Students can take advantage of this
storage capacity to start to create electronic portfolios that can showcase their
academic progress throughout their school career. With the ability to store work
in the cloud, students become mobile learners. For example, students are able to
start a writing project in the school’s computer lab on an iMac, then later add
content during English class on an iPad or Android tablet, and finally revise the
paper at home on the family’s PC.
With Google Docs, students can work on a document from home, school, or any
place where they have an Internet connection. Up to 50 people can work on the
same document at the same time from anywhere in the world or in the same
room. Google Docs differs from traditional word-processing programs because it
goes where the user goes. Students and teachers never have to worry about what
programs are installed on which computers. Anywhere there is a web browser,
your personal Google Docs are always available. In addition, sharing and

collaboration become a reality with a click of the mouse. This ability to be
anywhere and work collaboratively on a document without saving multiple
versions of the same document on multiple devices is great for students and
teachers. This is important because it can provide a method for organization to
keep up with the ever-increasing digital content that is created.
G Suite for Education is gaining popularity in a time of deep changes in our
educational system. College- and career-readiness standards have arrived in most
states, creating a paradigm shift in education. The Future Ready Schools
movement puts this in a framework for school districts. The framework defines
the resources needed to build the Future Ready School. This along with strong
leadership and a focus on this effort will make these things a reality. Attention
school leaders: Visit Resource 4.1 on the companion website to view the
framework. The shift that movements like Future Ready lay out will cut the
number of standards and push for the increased integration of technology to
prepare students to become college and career ready. This chapter will connect G
Suite for Education directly to college- and career-readiness standards standards
like ISTE Nets and the Common Core State Standards that will help the teacher
meet the needs of students to prepare them for college and beyond. It will also
connect to the SAMR Model of technology integration highlighted in detail in
Chapter 1. Look for the boxed feature at the end of the chapter.
Table 4.1 highlights three Common Core Anchor Standards for Writing and the
ISTE Standards for Students that are particularly important when using Google
Docs. Anchor Standards provide a broad understanding of writing that spans all
grade levels in the Common Core State Standards. In Anchor Standard 5,
revision, editing, and rewriting are key features. Google Docs has a feature that
will allow students and teachers to see a revision history of their work giving the
students the ability to return to a previous version. Google Docs saves the work
with every keystroke automatically. This creates a trail of revisions that can be
accessed by the teacher and the student. For example, if a student is struggling
about a particular paragraph in their writing, a student could delete or edit the
paragraph without worrying it will be deleted forever. The student then can make
a copy of the work and return to the previous version. This is helpful during the
editing process. The teacher now can give feedback to the student, guiding him
in the right direction.
Using Google Docs to meet and exceed Anchor Standard 6 is important for
student growth. This Anchor Standard aligns fully with the use of Google Docs

in the classroom. Students are able to produce writing using the Internet and
publish writing to collaborate with peers, parents, and teachers. For example,
students working on a piece of writing may create a Google Doc and then share
the document with the teacher. When sharing is complete, the teacher will be
able to comment on the writing and see its progress. Immediate feedback may be
given, steering the student in the right direction by leaving comments. For more
on giving meaningful feedback, see Resource 4.2 by John Hattie. After adjusting
the share settings learned in Chapter 2, students can publish their content to
anywhere on the web or select specific people with a click of a button.
In Anchor Standard 10, Google Docs could be used to collect research from the
web. For example, when starting a new research project, the student may create a
document titled “Research.” The student will perform the research and use the
copy-and-paste features to gather links, text, or pictures explaining the topic
from the Internet. This material is easily saved in Google Docs for review or
shared with other members of the research group. It is important to realize that
research takes time. Google Docs is a nice way to write over extended time
periods because it allows the user to save the work and access it from anywhere.
Students are no longer tied to the computer in which they started their work.
Let the Common Core State Standards in Table 4.1 guide you through the
chapter. G Suite for Education, in particular Google Docs, will be used to focus
on these standards and more Common Core State Standards in teaching. These
provide a road map so you can refer to key standards and see how G Suite for
Education can make a connection to the Common Core in your teaching.

ISTE Standards for Students, ©2016, ISTE® (International Society for Technology in Education),
iste.org. All rights reserved.
Google Classroom Connection
Google Classroom integrates fully with any of the programs in the G Suite. When teachers make
an assignment, Google Classroom makes a copy of the document and places it into a folder in
the student’s and teacher’s drive. Google Classroom is the perfect command center for the
teacher and student to keep up with assignments and due dates. This learning management
system is cloud based and accessible anywhere there is an Internet connection, even on a
smartphone. For example, Reilee Jones, a former middle school teacher, uses her Android
smartphone to grade writing assignments on the go. Google Classroom’s mobile application for
Android and iOS gives teachers the ability to comment on assignments, leaving feedback that
can help students get back on track with their work. For a more detailed explanation of Google
Classroom, read Chapter 3.
Google Docs Basics and State-Mandated Testing

The Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) mandates that states assess their
students toward proficiency in college and career readiness. States must test each
Grades 3 through 10. The majority of states that have adopted Common Core
State Standards or their own college- and career-readiness standards will employ
an online computer-based, next-generation assessment. Smarter Balanced,
PARCC (Partnership for Assessment of Readiness for College and Careers),
ACT Aspire, and other testing vendors have contracts with nearly each state to
develop assessments. These next-generation assessments are tied to the same
various college and career standards mandated by ESSA. These assessments will
be used to measure student achievement in English language arts, science,
reading, and mathematics. Access to some of these sample assessment pieces
offered by the various testing companies (Resource 4.3) may be found at
www.discoveractaspire.org/assessments/test-items/. These items provide a piece
of informational text and ask the students to read the passage, research a
particular part of the passage on the Internet, answer questions regarding the
passage, and create a product of student work describing the passage and
research. After the product is complete, the students are asked to upload the
document to the testing center’s website for scoring.
To perform successfully on these types of questions, students in the middle
grades must be familiar with the general use of word-processing programs over a
wide platform, and they must practice those skills frequently, because nearly all
students will be taking the state-mandated writing exam on an electronic device.
That means they must know the conventions of writing a formal paper on an
electronic device. They must be able to navigate simple toolbars like the ones in
Google Docs to shape the piece they are writing—for example, center, justified,
margins, bullets, numbering, and so on, as shown in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1 Google Documents Toolbar
Note: Each anchor standard is a guide for the entire K–12 levels. Each
anchor is broken down into grade bands that will specify what the students
will do in a particular grade.

Spell Check
Google Documents offers an automatic spell checker that works the same in all
of the G Suite for Education programs. It does not have a specific button like
Microsoft Word that checks the spelling of the document at once. Instead,
Google places the familiar red line underneath words that are spelled incorrectly
as they are typed on the page.
This type of spelling check has its advantages when addressing the college and
career standards. The CCSS Anchor Standards for Production and Distribution
of Writing indicate that students must produce writing using digital tools starting
in kindergarten and continuing throughout the grade levels. Correcting mistakes
during the writing process makes for more efficient writing and lets the students
practice producing writing on the device. The procedures for writing are
evolving with the integration of technology into the classroom. In the past,
students wrote the content using a pencil and then transferred the writing to a
word-processing program. With technical advances and the way the world now
communicates, students must produce writing on the electronic device, then use
the device to edit and revise the work. Google Docs makes this task a reality in
the classroom, practicing for the next generation assessments and writing beyond
middle and high school.
Figure 4.2 Correcting Misspelled Words
1. Right-click on the red underlined misspelled word as shown in Figure 4.2
(Mac users Command+Click).
2. Click on the appropriate word to replace the misspelled word.

Always correct to automatically corrects chronically misspelled
words. This feature is nice because whatever device is used to type a
document, Google Docs remembers the user’s list of trouble words if
she is signed in to her Google account.
Add to dictionary lets the user add words to his own personal spell-
check dictionary to avoid placing the red underline. Popular items to
place in the dictionary include proper nouns such as people’s names or
places. Students will automatically recognize their own names being
underlined if their name has an uncommon spelling. Instruct them to
add their name to their personal spell-check dictionary.
Keyboarding and Technology in the Middle Grades
Beginning in kindergarten, many college- and career-readiness standards will
mandate the use of technology in an effort to help our students have a wealth of
21st-century skills. The use of technology rapidly increases throughout the years
in CCSS Anchor Standard 6, Production and Distribution of Writing, and in
Standard 6 of the ISTE Nets. This standard wants students to be Creative
Communicators where “students communicate clearly and express themselves
creatively for a variety of purposes using the platforms, tools, styles, formats and
digital media appropriate to their goals” (ISTE Standards 2016) located in
Resource 4.4 on the companion website. The kindergarten portion of this
standard indicates that students will explore various technologically enhanced
tools to create writing. The wording only differs slightly for students in the first
and second grades; the standard says use digital tools, suggesting that students
actually get their hands on devices to input their content. Table 4.2 provides
information about technology and writing, especially the use of the keyboard in
the middle school Grades 4–8.
Since Google Docs can be accessed through any Internet-enabled device, it does
not require a traditional keyboard like other word-processing software. Students
in the early grades could benefit greatly by writing on devices such as the iPod
Touch, iPad, Android tablet, or another similar device without a physical
keyboard. By the fourth grade, students will be expected to have a sufficient
grasp of keyboarding skills so they are able to type one page in a single writing
event as well as collaborate with peers and adults using technology. One page
per grade year is added through the sixth grade. By the time they reach middle
school, students should be given experience using the traditional keyboard for

input.
Table 4.2 provides grade-level standards for Common Core Anchor Standards 3,
6, and 8. This table offers guidance about how Google Docs can drive student
learning within these Anchor Standards. It is important for the reader to realize
that Google Docs is an Internet-based word-processing program much like what
students will be exposed to during online next-generation assessments. The more
experience students get using technology to publish, produce, interact, and
collaborate while using the Internet, the better students will do on the high-
stakes tests.
Anchor Standard 6 of the Common Core State Standards refers to using the
Internet to produce, publish, and collaborate on writing throughout every grade
level. Google Docs makes this standard a reality. Anchor Standard 6 can be
linked to most of the other writing standards. For example, Standard W.12.1
wants students to write arguments and support claims in reference to complex
text. To produce this type of writing, the student must use skills taken from
Anchor Standard 6, Production and Distribution of Writing. To compete globally
in a 21st-century economy, students must have relevant skills to produce and
distribute quality writing using high-tech tools such as Google Docs. Most of the
Common Core State Standards for Writing involve production and distribution
of writing; therefore, most standards of writing could be exceeded with the use
of Google Docs.

Collaborative Note-Taking Example
Table 4.3 highlights an eighth-grade mathematics standard from the ISTE Nets

and the Common Core State Standards. This standard is represented in Figure
4.3 and Figure 4.4, where students are taking collaborative notes while writing
on the same document at the same time. The students are instructed to type only
in their assigned box; if they did not follow these instructions, students would be
trying to type on the same line from different computers creating confusion. As
the class discussion proceeds, the students are typing what they believe is
important about the subject. Later the teacher will help the students revise their
notes concentrating on the key parts of the lesson. When they are finished, this
document is automatically saved into every student’s Google Drive for later
review from any location with Internet access.
ISTE Standards for Students, ©2016, ISTE® (International Society for Technology in Education),
iste.org. All rights reserved
In Figure 4.4, students are in the act of typing on the same document. Notice as
they type their username appears highlighted in a color to help differentiate who
is typing where. If Connor is typing in Gavin’s box, the whole class will know,
decreasing the chance for disruption from a discipline problem.
Figure 4.3 Collective Note-Taking Part I
Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
Middle school students are children. They have a unique desire to test limits and break boundaries.
Let them know the rules for new technologies early in the process. At the school where Michael is
principal, breaking a rule with technology is no different than a student breaking a rule with pencil
and paper. Bad behavior is bad behavior. It may be the educator’s first impulse to take away the

technology if a student acts inappropriately with it. Would a teacher take away a student’s pencil for
the rest of the school year because he or she wrote a dirty note? No, there are discipline policies
written to redirect, counsel, and admonish the bad behavior. My school takes the same approach to
bad behavior perpetrated using technology. Wrong is wrong, no matter how the behavior is displayed.
Be consistent, and technology integration will be smooth for your students.
Figure 4.4 displays the final product. The teacher has facilitated discussion, and
with the help of other students and the teacher, each student has refined his or
her notes. The teacher, Mrs. Strawn, reported a pleasant surprise during the
activity. Katie and Madlyn spontaneously performed a Google Image Search to
find examples of distance-versus-time graphs and inserted them into their
explanation. This happened live on everyone’s screen, and the discussion quickly
became more in-depth because the student was explaining why it was important
not only to have notes about distance versus time, but also to see a picture.
Figure 4.4 Collective Note-Taking Part II
Opening Google Docs
To access Google Docs, follow these steps:
1. Sign in to your Google account as described in Chapter 3 in Figures 3.2 and
3.3.
2. Click on 
 located at the top right hand of the screen as shown in Figure
4.5 of any G Suite application.
3. Click the button to reveal a drop-down menu shown in Figure 4.6.
4. Click Google Docs as shown in Figure 4.7 to create a new document.
Figure 4.5 G Suite Icon

Figure 4.6 Opening Google Documents
Figure 4.7 Accessing the Documents Program
Upload
Uploading files and folders to be stored in the user’s Google Drive makes mobile

learning a reality. Google allows the uploading of any file type to its servers for
access anywhere there is an Internet connection. For example, if a student uses
Microsoft Word to produce writing on a home computer, then the student can
upload that work to her Google cloud from home. During the upload process,
Google asks if the document should be converted to Google Docs version or
uploaded in Microsoft Word format. If the user chooses Microsoft Word format,
then the document can be downloaded to any device and opened if Microsoft
Word is installed. To upload files to Google Drive, follow the steps outlined in
Chapter 9: “Google Drive.”
File Menu
After the user completes the steps associated with Figures 4.5, 4.6, and 4.7, the
Google Docs program will open. The following describes the contents of the
File command located in the Google Docs toolbar section. These commands are
similar to other word-processing programs, but they contain cutting-edge
features that take them a step above for classroom use.
Share
Sharing allows the user to give access to a Google Doc to as many or as few
people as they prefer. Users may share the document in the following ways:
Email as an attachment
Anyone with the Shareable Link
Public—on the web
Private—allowing only specific people to access the document
Set Expiration 
 by hovering over the user’s name reveals the clock
icon, and this option can set time limits on the share settings
Sharing is one of the hallmark features in Google Docs. It is used in every part
of Google Docs to work collaboratively and publish content. To share documents
from Google Docs, follow these steps. Sharing is discussed at length in Chapter
2.
1. Select Share from the File menu in the toolbar in Google Docs or click on
the blue button in the upper right-hand corner of any Google Doc program

to reveal the share settings as shown in Figure 4.8.
2. Click Get shareable link in Arrow #1 in Figure 4.8 to share the document
via link sharing.
1. Paste it into one of these places to link share:
1. Email
2. Social media (Facebook, Twitter, other social media)
3. Another web browser’s address bar
3. Type in the names, email, or groups of people that you would like to
directly share the Google Doc with in the bar near Arrow #2.
1. Click the Can edit drop-down menu to select the type of access you
would like others to have.
4. Click to Done.
5. Click Advanced to show all of the people the document is shared with and
to make changes to share settings as well as time limits on sharing. This is
shown in Figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8 Share With Others
Figure 4.9 Share Settings
Figure 4.10 Who Has Access

Figure 4.11 New Google Doc
New
Click New in the File menu to open a new Google Doc as shown in Figure 4.11.
This option opens the new Google Doc in another tab or browser window.
Open
Click Open in the File menu to return to the documents view, also called Google
Drive. This is the equivalent of a My Documents folder on a PC. This is where
folders are created and files are managed, allowing for management of your
cloud storage.

Make a Copy
This option lets the user make a copy of the work. This will be helpful when
sharing documents with students. For example, the teacher could share a writing
prompt document with a class and assign the students to answer questions on the
page; the students make a copy of the work, answer the questions, and re-share
the document by email or share settings to be graded. If the students did not
make a copy, all of the students would be typing on the same document at the
same time unless the document is made view-only by the teacher. There is an
option in Google Classroom explored in Chapter 3 (see Figure 3.9) that will
allow the teacher to force the document to make a copy automatically.
Revision History
Revision history will allow the user to go back to any point in time to see how
the work is progressing. This tool allows you to see all edits made to the
document. In the Common Core Writing Standards, Anchor Standard 5,
Production and Distribution of Writing, wants students to “develop and
strengthen writing as needed by planning, revising, editing, rewriting, or trying a
new approach.” This standard is clearly met with the use of this feature in
Google Docs. For example, students learning to write informative pieces that
examine complex concepts may need to revisit a previous idea. Seeing a revision
history will allow the student to look back in time at the writing examining how
the progression was made. This allows students to return to a previous version
down to a specific keystroke. If two or more people are working on the
document collaboratively, then each person could see their revisions and who
made the changes. Figures 4.12a, b, and c show multiple revisions. This is great
when sharing a document with several people to edit. To see the revision history
of a document, follow these steps:
1. Select See Revision History from the File menu in the Document’s
Toolbar.
2. Click on a revision timestamp in Figures 4.12a and b to roll back the
changes to that particular time.
3. Click to see wider time intervals.
Figures 4.12a and 4.12b Revisions Menu

Figure 4.12c More Revisions in Menu
Figure 4.13 In-Text Revisions
Language
The use of the Language feature allows the user to change the language of the
dictionary Google Docs uses to spell-check words. For example, if a student is

writing a translation of several words in a foreign language, the student may
choose to use spell check in that language. It is also useful when students need
special characters when writing. For example, the word niña in Spanish has the
tilde over the second n, denoting a different sound associated with that letter
when spoken in Spanish. If the student chose the Spanish dictionary to spell-
check the document, he or she could right-click (Command+Click for Mac
users) the word to reveal suggested spellings and choose appropriately from
words that appear in the Spanish dictionary.
Download As
Choose this option to save the work to your computer’s hard drive in various
formats. Google doesn’t discriminate. It even lets the work be saved in Microsoft
Word format for sharing with others who do not use Google Docs. Plus, Google
offers a variety of formats, including PDF, TXT, and HTML.
Publish to the Web
Publish to the web is a sharing option that is similar to the Anyone with the link
option shown in Figure 4.10. It gives instant access to publish work directly to
the web from the document to anyone, not just collaborators. Publish to the web
if you want others to view the document and see changes through the unique
web address but without inviting them to become a collaborator. Stop publishing
any time by selecting the option in Figure 4.14 (toggle between Start
Publishing and Stop Publishing). In addition to publishing the document’s link,
there is also an option that gives the document the HTML Embed code shown in
Figure 4.14. This code may be placed into websites and modified to fit the user’s
needs.
Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
Use the publishing features to share student work through social media websites. For example,
Westside School District has an official Facebook page. We use this page to communicate with our
school community on the web. Often, we publish examples of award-winning student work or links to
student projects that were made with Google Docs. Since each Doc is given a web address, it is easy
to post the link of the work to the page for our community to view.

Email Collaborators
Click Email Collaborators to send an email message to all who are working on
the document. In-document chat is also available for instant feedback of student
work. Teachers may assign a writing exercise and be online while the students
are creating. This allows the teacher to give immediate feedback during the
writing process. Common Core Anchor Standard 6 in Grades 11 and 12 wants
students to receive ongoing feedback from writing that is collaborative. The
screenshot in Figure 4.15 shows the message feature, which allows teachers to
send feedback directly to students.
Figure 4.14 Publish to the Web
Figure 4.15 Email Collaborators

Email as Attachment
All of the core G Suite applications let the user email documents as attachments
in a variety of formats as shown in the drop-down menu featured in the circle in
Figure 4.16. Use the email as attachment feature to bypass the old and time-
consuming way of attaching documents to emails. In the past, people were
forced to save the document, open an email, click attach file, find the document
on the computer’s hard drive, then email it. With Google Docs, click Email as
attachment under the File menu to send the doc directly from Google Docs.
Figure 4.16 Email as Attachment
Figure 4.17 Email as Attachment File Types
Page Setup

Use the tools in Figure 4.18 to switch to landscape or portrait views as well as
manage the margins and paper size. As students start to share their work, this
will allow them to use tools that are more creative. Anchor Standard 5 in
Speaking and Listening stresses that students use digital tools to express their
understanding by enhancing presentations. Adjusting paper sizes, orientation,
and page color can make printed or web-shared documents more visually
appealing.
Figure 4.18 Page Setup
Print
To print a Google Doc, follow these steps:
1. Click Print from the File menu or press Command+P for Mac or
CTRL+P for PC to bring up the Print menu.
2. Click as shown in Figure 4.19.
3. Click to switch printers.
Figure 4.19 Print

Edit Menu
The Edit menu is very similar to other word-processing programs. See the
Google Docs Edit menu in Figure 4.20. Be aware that some Internet browsers
do not allow right-clicking to copy and paste in the G Suite. If this is the case,
PC users press CTRL+C for copy, CTRL+V for paste, and CTRL+X for cut.
Macintosh users press Command+C for copy, Command+V for paste, and
Command+X for cut.
Other options in this menu include Paste without formatting. This option will
allow the user to copy text from anywhere on the Internet (from another Google
Doc or a webpage) and paste the text without any of the original text’s
formatting. This is great for students and teachers who want a particular style or
formatting on their Google Doc.
Figure 4.20 Edit Menu
View Menu
The View menu displays commands to control the way the users visualize the
document they are editing. These options are common in various word-
processing programs and are easy to understand. Figure 4.21 shows the View
menu.
Figure 4.21 View Menu

Mode: Editing, Suggesting, Viewing
Mode is a command that lets the user set how they interact with the document.
The owner of the document sets the permission to others such as edit, view,
and/or comment. When the user gives permission to edit, the other person
editing the document could choose Suggesting to track the changes of the
document. See Figure 4.22 for an example.
Figure 4.22 Mode
The figure shows that when clicked, the suggestion will be made part of the
document. It is similar to the Track Changes feature in Microsoft Word. Just like
Word, the other user must accept the changes for them to become part of the
document without the edit flags and strikethroughs.
Show Ruler
The show ruler option allows the user to control the margins of the document.
Encourage students to bend the rules when displaying informal documents to
others in a presentation or when linking to social media. Using innovative ways
to display information might spark an artistic flair, making the difference in the
document’s impact. Instruct students to know when documents should be

presented in formal and informal formats to become aware of the audience and
to be appropriate to task.
Show Equation Toolbar
With the equation toolbar, teachers and students have the ability to use symbols
and other math characters not normally found on the keyboard. Teachers can use
this to create assessments, or students can make their own math problems and
share with the class. Create shareable math help that can be continually updated
and shared with a class or classes anywhere in the world. When the Show
equation toolbar is enabled, the user will see the options in Figure 4.23.
Figure 4.23 Equation Toolbar
Show Spelling Suggestions
Placing a checkmark beside this option will toggle on the red line under words,
denoting spelling errors. Students need to be aware of this to take advantage of
the spell check feature of the G Suite.
Compact Controls
Compact controls are used to hide the G Suite’s toolbars and the title of the
document. This is useful when a user is presenting a document with a projector.
More of the document can be seen on the screen without having to scroll.
Full Screen
Full screen allows the user to hide all toolbars and the control panel to maximize
space on the screen for the text. Press the Escape key to return to normal view.
This may be useful when presenting ideas or taking notes collectively to
emphasize the importance of the text. Google Docs lets users take collective

notes or brainstorm ideas to a shared document. Follow these steps for an
example of a quick lesson idea using full screen.
Lesson in Focus
The teacher will
1. Create a document
2. Insert a table with the number of cells matching the number of students in the class
3. Place a number in each cell
4. Assign a number to students, and instruct them to type notes only in their assigned cells
Fifty students may type at once on this document, creating collective notes or ideas for a
brainstorming session. Use a projector to show the class the document in real time. The student
responses will automatically appear with each keystroke on each student’s screen and the
projector. Use the full-screen mode to make the presentation visually appealing.
Living Documents
The G Suite provides a way for students to create documents that are adaptable
with the rapid influx of relevant information concerning a topic. In the 21st
century and beyond, most material that students read will be on a screen, giving
the authors the ability to constantly update information as it presents itself (see
CCSS English Language Arts Standards 11–12.W.6–10). Reading interactive
text that contains links to other information will change the way students relate
with the written word. Students need to learn how to read informational text that
comes from webpages and other online materials to extract meaning and
purpose. In addition, students in their careers will be writing in these mediums,
creating living documents like blogs, wikis, online news articles, and Twitter
posts. Most printed material will rapidly become outdated with the use of cloud-
based tools, web-based writing, and mobile devices that can interact with this
content. One could imagine that as soon as the document is printed on paper,
new and useful information may become available. Students need to develop
skills of writing digitally, and Google Docs provides ways to acquire these skills.
Living documents allow the students to be interactive authors with the ability to
change their work with new knowledge learned or the ability to insert links to
other ways of thinking about the text they are composing. Students getting ready
for college and career need to be exposed to writing ideas that are changing
rapidly. Table 4.2 presents standards of writing that embody living documents.
Google Docs provides the platform for which students can achieve these
standards. For example, when writing, link keywords or phrases to a web

address to offer more information that may deepen students’ understanding. This
differentiation will help students interact with content in multiple ways. The web
address can link to other Google Docs created by the student or link to webpages
with more information. Adding hyperlinks to text leads the reader to new or
supporting ideas. Follow these steps in the Technology-Infused Teaching Tip to
add hyperlinks.
Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
Use links in documents to share other information to students within the document. When creating a
link in a document, it will turn blue and become a live clickable link. When you click on the blue
word, the web browser will open a new tab, opening the webpage to be viewed. Instead of having
https://youtu.be/N7ng1AcEFv0 in the document, create a link that packages the entire URL into a
descriptive title, such as Westside High School EAST Program Reviews Space Ice Cream (the blue
line under text indicates a live URL link). In all college- and career-readiness standards, students are
expected to be familiar with the Internet and how to navigate the wealth of information it connects the
user to.
1. Highlight any word in a Google Doc that you want to link to.
2. Press Command+K (Mac) or CTRL+K (PC) to show the menu in Figure 4.24.
3. Enter text into the text box to hide the URL.
4. Enter the URL for the link as shown in Arrow #1
1. Arrow #1—Paste a link into the box to correspond with the title in the text box.
2. Arrow #2—Google will search the Internet for you for websites that might match your
highlighted term. In this case it suggested the site www.westsideschools.org, which
matches my text to link. Click the blue Apply button to accept the suggestion.
3. Arrow #3—This feature searches the user’s Google Drive and looks for documents to
link to that may match the highlighted text. This is great for students to connect notes
from other work to their current document.
Figure 4.24 Link
Here are some ideas for linking:
Link other documents, spreadsheets, presentations, forms, or drawings that

the user created. Linking data collected from experiments in math or
science into a document is a great way to publish results.
Link supporting information from websites taken from reputable sources.
Use Google Forms to collect survey results and add commentary about the
study.
Table 4.4 describes Anchor Standard 6 for Writing taken from the Common Core
State Standards for Grades 9–12, which directs students to write with “response
to ongoing feedback.” Google Docs can make this anchor standard come alive
with the use of links and living documents.
© Copyright 2010. National Governors Association Center for Best Practices and Council of Chief
State School Officers. All rights reserved.
Many college- and career-readiness standards want students to be able to create,
collaborate, and share their work as well as be able to update accordingly to
accommodate new information. Teaching students to read dynamic information
like online newspapers, blogs, Facebook, and Twitter feeds to extract important
information, while discarding the unimportant, will be a significant skill for the
digital citizen. Learning to write in these elements and produce high-quality
work will be equally important.
Notice that the seventh-grade standards for writing include “linking to and citing
sources.” Programs in the G Suite make this task easy for the student. See the
Technology-Infused Teaching Tips and Figure 4.24 to get familiar with the
process in the G Suite.
Technology-Infused Teaching Tip

Facebook, Twitter, and blogs are other important sources of information as well as traditional media.
For example, a student researching the Syrian Civil War may follow prominent figures of the
rebellion on Twitter, gaining very important information in real time directly from the source. Having
the courage to explore the benefits and problems new media brings to school settings will have
lasting impact on students. Be open-minded to new media.
Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
Use equation editor to write math quizzes and share with the students. Students make a copy of the
document in the File menu and work the problems on the computer using the editor. Then have the
students share them back with the teacher. This creates an electronic database to collect homework.
The shared files will appear in the user’s Google Drive folder. Make sure the naming convention is
properly followed, making for easy searching. An alternative method is for the student to share the
document as an attachment through Gmail. Use the Comment option in the File menu to give
feedback immediately or at your convenience. See Chapter 3 to learn how to create filters and labels
that help collect assignments automatically skipping the inbox, allowing them to be graded when you
are ready.
Insert Menu
The Insert menu in the Google Docs toolbar is packed with features. Google
makes it easy to insert graphics, pictures, links, and other important document
style options. Many of these same features are offered in the other G Suite
programs.
Image
Insert images from your hard drive, a URL, Google Image Search, or Google
Photos albums into any Google Doc. The URL import feature is significant
because many images that the user would want to use may be housed on the
web. For example, a student may want to drive home his point with a picture
from a website taken on a battlefield in Afghanistan. The student may browse
websites and copy and paste the URL of the photo, and it will appear in the
document. Be particularly mindful of copyright. If the user chooses Google
Image Search, he or she can search Google Images directly in the Google Docs
program without having to go to another window. The user’s Google Photos are
also available to insert. For example, a middle school writing assignment may
ask the students to create a narrative story describing details of a family
vacation. The student may use photos taken during the trip and insert these
images into the document. This is seamlessly accessed from any computer with

an Internet connection. As long as the user is signed into her Google account,
Google Photos will link personal photos to any document. When the picture is
captured with a GPS enabled smartphone, a geotag of where the photo was taken
is embedded into the file. Users of Google Photos may even search for photos
where the picture was taken making it easy to find photos from a trip. To insert
an image, follow these steps:
1. Select Image from the Insert menu in Google Docs to reveal the menu
shown in Figure 4.25.
2. Click the desired method to insert the image.
3. Click to insert.
Figure 4.25 Insert Image
Methods to Insert Image. Use the methods here to insert an image into Google
Docs.
Upload: Click this option to upload an image from your computer’s hard
drive.
Take a snapshot: Click this option to take a picture from your computer’s
built-in webcam.
By URL: Click this option to copy and paste an image URL to
automatically insert it without saving the image to the hard drive.
Your albums: Click this option to upload an image from your Google
Photos Web Albums.
Google Drive: Click this option to insert an image from the user’s Google
Drive.
Search: Click this option to search photos from Google Image Search, Life
magazine, and stock photos. All of these images are labeled for reuse by the
owner of the picture. That means that they can be used without permission.
Investigate further if you plan to sell work with images from this service in

it. Look at Figure 4.26 for more information and how-to steps for inserting
Google Images Search.
Drag Image: Drag the image into the box to insert into the document. This
is denoted by the circle in Figure 4.25.
Figure 4.26 Search Images to Insert
Google Image Search is embedded in Google Docs to insert photos with ease.
Type into the search bar any search term (Figure 4.26). After searching, Google
displays images according to the query. Students may choose what color is in
their photo by selecting the colored boxes underneath the search bar. Look at
Figure 4.27, for example; a student searched for frogs, then the student may
choose what color of frog to display. Also, notice that you can choose what type
of picture the results will display. Choose from Any type, Face, Photo, Clip
Art, or Line drawing. This can insert some excitement into any boring
document with a picture. Students will be able to craft and express their
understanding visually. For example, students may be studying the Bay of Pigs
in history class. While writing their review of the incident and its repercussions,
students may search for a photo of Castro and Kennedy and insert it directly into
the document. Students aware of these tools can start to become digitally fluent,
honing much needed skills for college and career.
“They need to be able to use technology strategically when creating,
refining, and collaborating on writing. They have to become adept at
gathering information.”
—Taken from “Commentary of Standards,” Common Core State Standards
English Language Arts (p. 63)
Figure 4.27 Google Image Search Color

Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
Be aware of licensing. Some images and videos may need permission to be used. Follow all copyright
laws. If you need help searching for more items that may be used without restriction, go to Resource
4.5 on the companion website for more information on Google Advanced Image Search. All photos
searched in the manner above have permission to be reused.
Drawing
Insert Google Drawings into Docs. For example, students may create flowcharts
or graphic organizers explaining what they understand graphically and insert
them into any Google Doc. Common Core State Standards for Speaking and
Listening Anchor Standard 5 says, “Make strategic use of digital media and
visual displays of data to express information and enhance understanding of
presentations.” Insertion of Drawings to documents published to the web or
shared through print or email will meet this standard. See Chapter 8, “Google
Drawings,” for more details on how to create a drawing. To insert a drawing,
click Drawing from the Insert menu.
Chart
Students may insert charts into Google Docs directly from the Insert menu.
Figure 4.28 shows the available chart types that may be inserted. For example, a
student may want to insert a pie chart into the Google Doc. When the student
chooses the Pie chart option a generic, editable pie chart appears in the

document. Click on the 
 icon to open the associated Google Sheets
(spreadsheet application in the G Suite) to edit the chart. When the spreadsheet is
edited with the data the student wants to display, it will automatically change in
the document. All changes in the spreadsheet data will automatically be changed
in the Google Doc. There is no need to save the document again.
Figure 4.28 Insert Chart
Figure 4.29 Edit Data in Google Sheets
In Tables 4.5 and 4.6, the Common Core State Standards call for students to
enhance meaning through the use and creation of graphic organizers, graphs,
tables, and charts. Using Google tools will help the classroom teacher meet this
standard.
Consider the standards in Tables 4.5 and 4.6. Inserting Drawings into Documents
and other programs such as Presentations is a great way to meet these standards.
The main idea is to get students to analyze and synthesize information in a way
that they can graphically represent the idea. Students must have experience using
these tools to be successful on the next-generation assessments and in college
and a career.

© Copyright 2010. National Governors Association Center for Best Practices and Council of Chief
State School Officers. All rights reserved.
ISTE Standards for Students, ©2016, ISTE® (International Society for Technology in Education),
iste.org. All rights reserved.
Comments
Inserting comments is a great way to interact with the content of student writing.
As student papers are shared with the teacher, the teacher can give immediate
feedback in a comment. Comments are great for revising work and offering
suggestions for rough draft corrections. For example, when a student is writing a
paper for English class, the student will produce the writing on the computer or
via the Google Docs app on a smartphone. During the formation of the paper, the
student will share the paper with the teacher, giving the teacher access to the
document in real time as the student is typing. The teacher could work with
groups of students, providing immediate feedback in the form of comments and
in-document chat. Parents, peers, and other adults could share the document to
help revise the work, guiding the student’s writing. An example of what this
looks like is located in Figure 4.33. To insert comments, follow these steps:
1. Highlight the portion of text that you wish to leave a comment on.
2. Right-click the text and choose Comment.
1. Or click Comment from the Insert menu.
3. Type the comment in the space provided as shown in Figure 4.33.

Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
Comments are powerful ways to give students the ability to get feedback on their work. Sometimes a
teacher may assign a large assignment to several students at once and particular students are
responsible for certain parts of the work. There is a feature in comments that allows the teacher to
assign to a student a selection of work to be done in the document. Another example is when using
Google Docs for a leadership team meeting there are several jobs that must be completed and
assigned to team members. Our leadership team takes notes and minutes for each meeting shared with
everyone in a Google Doc. The team members that are given access to comment or edit the document
can assign certain tasks to members of the team. Follow the steps below to assign tasks.
1. Highlight a task in the document to be completed.
2. Right click on the highlighted portion or look for the comment bubble on the right side margin 
.
3. In the Comment box shown in Figure 4.31, type a plus sign followed by the email address of
the person you want to assign the task to. For example,
+katherine.graham@westsideschools.org. The first time you do this, the graphic in Figure 4.30
will appear.
Figure 4.30 Assign an Action Item Help Box
4. Click the Assign box as shown in Figure 4.31 to assign the task.
Figure 4.31 Assign to Collaborator
Figure 4.32 Follow-ups

The arrow in Figure 4.32 shows what the other collaborator will see when they are assigned a task by
adding the plus sign in front of an email in the Comment box (for example, +k.o.graham@mit.edu).
If the circle with a number is shown, as shown in the arrow, then you have been assigned a follow-up.
Figure 4.33 is an actual piece of student writing from a sixth-grade student. The
teacher, Mrs. Betsy Davis, is a veteran educator with more than 28 years of
experience teaching writing. She says that using Google Docs has helped her
students with organization and revising more than any other method she has seen
in her vast experience. This assignment is a part of an interdisciplinary unit
between Mr. Steven Cazort’s sixth-grade social studies class and Mrs. Davis’s
sixth-grade English class. The letter to the president was written in Mr. Cazort’s
class on Google Docs. Later, the document was accessed in Mrs. Davis’s English
class to edit and revise. Since this was the first time Mrs. Davis and the students
were using Google Docs for the production of writing and editing, she focused
on pointing out three revisions at a time. Yellow highlights bring attention to the
part needing review. Notice timestamps to denote when the revisions were made
and the discussion. This is a fun and exciting way to talk about writing and the
writing process.
Also, feedback can be given in the form of the teacher writing directly on the
paper with the student. A teacher may choose a different text color than the
student and make comments and corrections live in the text.
The other options in the Insert menu are easy to understand. So, for the sake of
brevity, these will be left for the reader to discover.

© Copyright 2010. National Governors Association Center for Best Practices and Council of Chief
State School Officers. All rights reserved.
Figure 4.33 Student Writing With Comments
Tools Menu
Figure 4.34 shows the Tools menu. This menu option has many features that will
be helpful to students and teachers. All are discussed in detail in the following
section except word count, which is self-explanatory.
Figure 4.34 Tools Menu
Explore
The explore tool in the G Suite is great for student research during a writing
event. This feature allows the user to search Google directly from the document
and add information from the Internet directly into any of the G Suite programs.
Explore creates a tailored search based on the things that you write in documents

and other files in your Google Drive. The explore tool attempts to predict
suggestions that you may need in the writing. Users can search with the text box
and find three sections of search results listed under Topics, Images and Related
Research. The explore tool is also accessible in the bottom right-hand corner of
any program in the G Suite, 
. The explore tool will appear on the right-hand
side of the document as shown in Figure 4.35. To learn how to use the explore
tool, follow these steps:
Figure 4.35 Explore
1. Select Explore from the Tools menu as shown in Figure 4.34, or right-click
on a word in the document to Explore the word you clicked on.
2. Type into the search box a search query.
3. Results will appear in the Explore window.
Lesson in Focus
The teacher will
1. Share a document with the class through Google Classroom that contains boxes for
students to organize their research in and notes for each main idea of their writing
2. When shared through Google Classroom, select the feature that makes a copy of the
document. This allows the students to take ownership of the doc and title it accordingly
3. Instruct the students to use the Explore tool to research their topics and make notes in the
boxes

4. Monitor their progress by viewing their shared documents and offer comments and
feedback
Define
The define tool will allow the user to define any word in the document.
Highlight the word in the document to be defined and the Explore tool will give
the user the definition. Additionally, the define tool will display synonyms and
antonyms for the word as well as offer the word in a sentence. Basically the
define tool acts as a thesaurus, pronunciation guide, and defining resource.
Document Outline
The document outline feature displays headings and subheadings on the left-
hand side of the document. The headings and subheadings are linked to their
respective sections in the text. Clicking on a heading or subheading takes the
user’s cursor directly to the location of the appropriate level of the heading.
Figure 4.36 shows what this looks like in the Google Doc.
Figure 4.36 Document Outline Tool

Voice Typing
Voice typing is exactly as it sounds. When enabled, users can dictate speech to
text directly in the document. This feature is great for special needs students. For
example, a dyslexic student may suffer from severe and chronic misspellings.
When using voice typing, a student does not have to worry about trying to spell a
difficult word. If the student is trying to type a difficult word, they may try to
spell it as close as they can. Sometimes the student will not be able to get close
enough to the correct spelling for the spell check feature to correct it. When the
student enables voice typing, the student can simply say the word and Google
Docs will type it for them. Use the define tool to make sure the student is
applying the correct meaning to the word. Follow the steps below to use voice
typing:
1. From the Tools menu select Voice Typing (or use the keyboard shortcut
Command+Shift+S for Mac or CTLR+Shift+S for PC).
2. This will open the voice typing floating icon as seen in Figure 4.37.
Floating icons may be moved about the screen by clicking and dragging to

a convenient location on the document.
Figure 4.37 Voice Typing
3. Click the microphone to enable the microphone on your computer to
record words. When the microphone is clicked and ready to record, the
microphone icon turns red and has a red circle denoting it is listening as
shown in Figure 4.38.
Figure 4.38 Voice Typing Red
4. Start speaking to dictate speech to text. If the user wants to voice type an
entire sentence, say “period” or “new line” as shown in Figure 4.39 to
automatically add a period or start a new line of text.
Figure 4.39 Voice Typing Features
5. Click the X in the upper right-hand corner of the icon to close voice typing.
Translate

Translate can be used in foreign language classes or with English language
learners. Being able to write in their native language and then to translate key
sentences or phrases back to English will give the students connection to the
meaning and improve their writing skills. The translate tool should benefit the
English language learner and help the teacher understand the English language
learner. This allows the student to go deeper with meaning by exploring writing
in his or her native tongue. Often English language learners receive failing
grades because of the language barrier. They may be fantastic writers but
struggle with English. Using Translate in Google Docs provides a way for
teachers to understand what the student is trying to say other than how well they
understand English. This tool will help the students learn English by letting the
student translate any document that is shared by the teacher or other students to
their native language. Follow these steps to translate Google Docs:
1. Open the document to translate.
2. If a non-Google Doc, convert it to the Google Docs format.
3. Select Translate from the Tools menu as shown in Figure 4.34.
4. Name the new translated document as shown in Figure 4.40.
5. Choose a language from the drop-down menu.
6. Click.
The document is now translated to the language chosen. Be aware that the
original document is still in the user’s Google Drive and was not altered. A new
translated document was created and will appear next to the original in the
documents list in Google Drive.
Figure 4.40 Translate Document

Table Menu
Tables are a great way to quickly collect data for mathematics. For example,
students studying theoretical versus experimental probability may create a 2 × 10
table to record the results of a coin being flipped. Below the results, students can
write about their findings explaining their observations. Share the results of the
study with all class periods. Discuss what happens to the percentages of heads
and tails as the sample size increases. Follow these steps to insert a table:
1. Select Table from the toolbar.
2. Hover and click the mouse over the dimensions of the table to insert as
shown in Figure 4.41.
1. Figure 4.41 only shows a 5 × 8 table, but hover the mouse outside the
limits to create a larger table. The largest table in Google Docs is 20 ×
20.
Figure 4.41 Insert Table
Add-ons
Add-ons are enhancements that can be added to any of the G Suite programs.
These enhancements or extra features allow the user to do anything from
inserting graphic organizers to creating rubrics to grading student work. To
explore add-ons click the Add-ons menu bar and select Get add-ons to view the
list and descriptions of the available add-ons. Add-ons are in all of the G Suite
programs and are specific to the type of document. For example, add-ons for
Google Docs will be specifically for word processing documents, while add-ons
for Google Sheets will be entirely different and specific to extra features that

would be appropriate for spreadsheets. The arrow in Figure 4.42 shows where to
search for add-ons. Scroll through the list of add-ons or use a keyword for a
particular feature that you think may have an add-on. When I do professional
development for teachers across the nation I am often told “the reason I do not
use Google Docs over Microsoft Word is that Google Docs just does not have all
of the features like Word.” After I show the participants how to use add-ons,
many people in my trainings immediately see how Google Docs is a much better
user experience. For example, a teacher told me she does not use Google Docs
because there is not a way to print labels. Obviously she was unaware of the add-
on displayed in Figure 4.43 called “Avery Label Add-on.”
Figure 4.42 Add-ons Search
Figure 4.43 Avery Label Add-on
SAMR Implications—Transforming Instruction

Even More
Orange Slice Rubric
Orange Slice has teacher and student versions of rubrics. This add-on has great functionality to
give student feedback and peer feedback. The teacher version allows the teacher to create a
rubric and push it out via Google Classroom. The student version can be attached to the student
work allowing the student to self-assess.
Google Books Ngram Viewer
Google outdoes itself once in awhile. This is an example of its nerdiness gone wild. Google has
scanned millions of books totaling over 450 million words and has used an algorithm to turn
printed books into digital text. For example, Google has scanned thousands of books from the
year 1500 to present day, as well as other papers and publications. Google is still scanning more
books every day. Something that has been produced by this is called ngram. Ngrams can gauge
the popularity of words that have been written over time. Google took the metadata from the
books along with the words revealing the author, date of publication, and frequency of words
used. In the example in Figure 4.44, the graph compares the popularity of Frankenstein, Albert
Einstein, and Sherlock Holmes over the last 200 years. This could be an excellent tool to help
students grasp word usage and popularity over time. In a sense, it gives the user a cultural look
into the past. Students can see when certain words appear and then disappear from the common
language of these books. Visit the ngram viewer, Resource 4.6, at
https://books.google.com/ngrams.

Figure 4.44 Ngram
Summary
Google Docs gives the teacher and students a dynamic word-processing program attached to the
Google account. School districts that use G Suite for Education for their student and faculty
have all of these capabilities built in. Google Docs seamlessly integrates with Google Classroom
to provide an organized student and teacher workflow in an easy-to-use, cloud-based learning
management system. With the ubiquitous next generation often technology dependent, college-
and career-readiness standards, school leaders, technology specialists, teachers, and students
need to be ready for the coming changes in curriculum and technology. Google offers these
services and support for free. Documents are just the beginning. The upcoming chapters are full
of interesting, engaging ideas and procedures to motivate students to create, collaborate, and
share.
Resources
For more information about G Suite for Education, including
lesson plans related to chapter content,
domain setup for tech administrators’ videos,
overviews and Google training materials,
the authors’ favorite websites, and
testimonials and interviews of schools currently using G Suite,
access Resources from this chapter on the companion website.
Lesson Plans

 http://resources.corwin.com/googlemeetsms

5 Google Slides
Key Features
Collaborative presentations
Cloud storage
Share presentations with teachers, students, and parents
Insert images and videos
Publish presentations to the world
Slide transitions and animations
Q&A Audience Tools
Google Slides is a powerful presentation maker that is part of G Suite for
Education. Slides has all of the features users have come to expect with
traditional presentation software such as Microsoft PowerPoint and Apple’s
Keynote. Slide transitions, animations, inserting images, and videos are all part
of Google Slides. The difference is in sharing, collaboration, and price.
Many of the same tools that are used in Google Docs will be used in Slides.
Sharing, cloud-based storage, and download as other formats are available in the
same manner as they were in Docs. For example, each presentation made in
Google Slides is given a unique web address that when typed into a web browser
can be viewed or edited depending on the share settings. This is great for sharing
student presentations. For an example of a collaborative presentation made by
students, visit Resource 5.1 or snap the quick-response (QR) code in Figure 5.1
to view the presentation on your smartphone or tablet.
Figure 5.1 is a QR code. Using a smartphone or tablet QR code-reader
application, follow the link to view the presentation on a mobile device.
Accessing information with increased mobility will be a necessary skill. Read
more about QR codes in Chapter 10.
Slides and Communication
Presentations are key in communication. College- and career-ready students will
present information to classmates and coworkers routinely, allowing for
Innovative Design and Creative Communication (both ISTE Student Standards).

Preparing students to make high-quality presentations in the middle grades will
hone their skills as they progress in school. In the Common Core State Standards
(CCSS), presenting information in clear, concise ways will prepare students for
the rigors of communicating to specific audiences. The many college- and
career-readiness standards for Speaking and Listening demand that students have
an extensive set of skills in presenting information. The standards included in the
CCSS English Language Arts Standards are as follows:
Figure 5.1 QR Code Student Presentation
Students must learn to work together, express and listen carefully to ideas,
integrate information from oral, visual, quantitative, and media sources,
evaluate what they hear, use media and visual displays strategically to help
achieve communicative purposes, and adapt speech to context and task.
Google Slides meets this requirement by allowing collaborative work and the
ability to easily share that information with peers, parents, and teachers. The
standards say that it is the responsibility of all teachers to make sure students are
able to speak and listen with clarity in their particular content areas.
Anchor Standard 5 for Speaking and Listening found in Table 5.1 embodies
Google Slides. For example, students may make visually stunning displays that
capture the attention of the audience. Animations and video may be added to
presentations as well as representations of data such as graphs, tables, or charts.
All of this can be done in collaboration and can be shared with the world through
share settings. Google Slides offer a unique opportunity for students to create,
collaborate, and share their work. Presenting about concepts studied is one of the
best learning strategies. It provides a forum for students to research the content,
summarize the information, display data in the form of charts, tables, or graphs,
and create visual representations of content with video and images. Making
presentations can teach the student how to organize information, letting it flow

seamlessly to the viewer. The educators everywhere believe that it is an
important skill to become ready for life after high school. The Anchor Standard
in Table 5.1 addresses digital media and displays of data when making
presentations.
© Copyright 2010. National Governors Association Center for Best Practices and Council of Chief
State School Officers. All rights reserved.
In Table 5.2, the sixth-grade example, multimedia and visual displays are
explicitly mentioned; sixth-grade teachers not only must teach their subject, but
also must embed technology by using presentations to meet the standards.
© Copyright 2010. National Governors Association Center for Best Practices and Council of Chief
State School Officers. All rights reserved.
Table 5.3 explores the writing standards for history, social studies, science, and
technical subjects for Grades 6–12. These standards increase with complexity
over the years. Creating authentic presentations requires students not only to use
the Internet to produce and publish writing, but also to update individual or
shared projects with feedback from teachers, peers, and professionals in the
field. Students are no longer expected to turn in a dead assignment that is meant
for only the teacher’s eyes. These skills prepare students to create work that
matters and that can contribute to the knowledge base of the topic. Graduating
seniors who are college and career ready can use collaborative writing and
presenting tools like G Suite for Education to meet the needs they face in the
21st century and beyond. Middle school is the grade band that students are first
introduced to these types of skills. It is important that teachers mindfully
implement them in their lessons. Consider having students develop their own
TED Talk-type presentation (see more about that in Resource 5.2 at
https://goo.gl/dPIhtA).

© Copyright 2010. National Governors Association Center for Best Practices and Council of Chief
State School Officers. All rights reserved.
© Copyright 2010. National Governors Association Center for Best Practices and Council of Chief
State School Officers. All rights reserved.
Table 5.4 displays writing standards for other subjects. The college- and career-
readiness standards hold all accountable for reading and writing. It is clear that
using G Suite for Education can meet the challenges set forth in the new learning
standards.
Same Great Features
All of the programs in the G Suite (Docs, Sheets, Slides, Drawings, and Forms)
have the same great features. This chapter will focus on these programs plus
Slides-specific features that make this software ideal for implementing college-
and career-readiness standards:
Sharing
Collaboration
Publish to the Web
Embed
Every Doc has a unique URL.
All Docs are stored in Google Drive cloud-based storage.
Accessing Presentations
All of the G Suite apps share a common pathway to be accessed. Follow the
steps here to start working with Slides. When the user is logged into his or her G

Suite account, Figure 5.2 will be at the top left of the page. Alternatively, the
user may type in any web browser’s address bar drive.google.com to access the
Documents List. To access Slides, follow these steps:
1. Click on the 9-square icon on the top right of the screen of your G Suite
account.
2. Click on the Drive icon (alternatively, you can also click on the Slides icon
to access templates).
Figure 5.2 Accessing Drive
3. Click the blue New button on the left-hand side of the page as shown in
Figure 5.3 to reveal the drop-down menu displaying all of the G Suite apps.
Figure 5.3 Accessing Presentation Editor
4. Click Google Slides to access the editor.

Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
Why not just click on the Slides app in Figure 5.2? It is a good practice to always navigate to the
same location to create a Google Drive folder so habits are formed on where files are created and
stored.
After clicking on Google Slides, the Themes window will appear in the right-
hand side to choose a theme for the background of the slides. When working
collaboratively on presentations, take note that when a theme is chosen, it is
applied to all slides. For example, if a group of students is working on a
collaborative presentation, and each student is responsible for a particular set of
slides, then if any of the group members change or choose a theme on the shared
presentation, it is applied to all slides. Look at Figure 5.4 to see an example of
theme choices.
Figure 5.4 Themes
Name the Presentation
The next step in creating a Google Slides presentation is to give the presentation
a name. Students need to be aware that naming G Suite files they create ensures
that they can easily retrieve the file. To give a Slides presentation or any other G
Suite app names, follow these steps:
1. Click on the words Untitled presentation as shown in Figure 5.5.
Figure 5.5 Giving the Presentation a Title

2. Type your new title of the presentation in the box in Figure 5.6
Figure 5.6 Rename the Document
3. Click the OK box when finished.
After clicking OK, the file will appear in the user’s Drive folder with the
appropriate name given to it in the Documents List. Notice the star in Figure 5.5
next to the file name. If the user clicks the star, the document is given special
significance and will appear in the starred list in Google Drive. The user could
star documents that are important or frequently worked on, making them easier
to access.
Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
Instruct students to give names to their work based on a predefined formula. Students will create a
massive amount of digital content over their lifetimes, and it will most likely be saved in a cloud
storage space like in Google Drive. It is important for students to learn how to manage the content
they create. Managing students’ quality of work over time could be a valuable part of a student’s
electronic portfolio. It is imperative that the information be easy for the student to recall years later.
Giving the documents searchable names that follow a formula will make it easy. For example, student
Marcy Tolbert will name documents she creates by defining what type of assignment and adding her
name (e.g., “Marcy Tolbert History of NASA Presentation”). Teachers should require this or a similar
naming convention to be able to search for Marcy’s documents for grading, and later in her school
career, she can access these documents to see her progress over time. Students need to be aware that

organizing their digital life is an important task. Students who are college and career ready realize
that digital organization will be a skill that is in demand in the professional world. A recent Time
magazine article on learning reports that when students are asked questions, they tend not to think of
a particular class. Instead, they think of where the nearest device is located to search for the
information. Students and adults alike are thinking in terms of search rather than being able to
instantly recall the fact. Learning to search the massive amount of digital content that the user
produces or others produce is more important than the futile attempt to memorize it.
Previously Detailed Features
In Chapter 4, many of the same commands were discussed. Please refer back to
Chapter 4 to learn how to perform the actions in the following list. This section
will focus only on presentation-specific commands, and some may overlap.
Share
New
Rename
Make a Copy
Revision History
Language
Email Collaborators
Email as Attachment
Print Options
File Menu
The File menu is usually the first menu that computer users come into contact
with. Most word-processing programs have similar features, but Google Slides
provides some pleasant surprises that other programs can’t compete with. Read
this section to become familiar with Google’s presentation maker.
Import Slides
Import slides is a command that will let the user import slides from any Google
Presentation and/or Microsoft PowerPoint files that are located on the user’s
Google Drive or on the computer’s hard drive. Google recognizes the ubiquity of
Microsoft Office and wants to make using Google Docs an easy and compatible
experience. Teachers will find this helpful with the transition to Google Slides
because, just like with Google Docs, users can upload any file type to store in

their cloud storage space, Google Drive. Teachers may have created many
PowerPoint presentations in the past that are useful for their classes. To use
them, teachers can convert them to Google Slides or insert specific slides from
Google Slides or Microsoft PowerPoint into Google Slides. Remember, working
with Google Docs allows the user to store and edit work from any computer with
Internet access. Students in the new economy of the 21st century will most likely
not be required to learn only one piece of software. The Common Core State
Standards or the Next Generation Assessment consortia have not endorsed any
software as of yet, and there is doubt that they will. It is key for the college- and
career-ready student to be able to use any software to do the job. That is why
Google Docs is so important. It has all of the basic features of the mainstream
office packages, but it has the ability to use the Internet to create, collaborate,
and share, plus it is free. If a student can be comfortable with Google Docs
toolbars, then he or she can master any program the testing companies or their
future bosses can throw at them.
Follow the steps below to import slides from other presentations, including
Microsoft PowerPoint, from the user’s Google Drive.
1. Click Import slides from the File menu in the upper right-hand corner of
Slides to reveal the window in Figure 5.7.
2. Double click the Google Slides presentation or the Microsoft PowerPoint
presentation that the user wants to import as shown in Figure 5.7.
Figure 5.7 Importing Slides
3. Click on which slides to import as shown in Figure 5.8.
1. Slides selected will appear highlighted like in Figure 5.8.

Figure 5.8 Selecting Slides to Import
4. Select Keep original theme to import backdrop, colors, and other features.
5. Click at the bottom of Figure 5.8.
To upload slides from a presentation that is not in the user’s Google Drive, but
located on the user’s computer, follow these steps:
1. Click Upload under Presentations as seen in Figure 5.7.
2. Drag Google Presentation or Microsoft PowerPoint files only from your
computer into the box to upload them, or press the button to select files
manually from your hard drive to import.
Figure 5.9 Upload Slides From Computer
More Reasons Google Slides Works
The G Suite is device neutral. It doesn’t matter if the computer lab has iMacs

and the mathematics teachers have PCs—no software has to be purchased, and
no programs have to be downloaded. Students can move from device to device
without the worry of losing information or not having the right program.
Teachers who want to avoid creating “dead” presentations can convert their
existing PowerPoint presentations to Google Slides or at least start making
presentations exclusively in the G Suite. A dead presentation refers to the
information being locked into one saved file on one storage device like
Microsoft PowerPoint. Revive presentations by converting them into a Google
Slides presentation. This gives life to the work because the information is stored
in the cloud: the user can edit the information from any computer or share it with
anyone in the world. No longer do teachers and students have to be chained to a
physical hard drive.
If users don’t want to convert documents but still want to share them the Google
Docs way, they can upload the file and click Share just like sharing a Google
Doc. This is another way that Google strives to make it easy on users.
Download As
Download as is the command that lets the user download the Google
Presentations as any of the supported file formats. Presentations supports the
following file types for download.
PNG
JPEG
SVG
PPTX
PDF
TXT
Students who want to submit presentations as part of a science fair or other
public events may be required to have specific formats other than the G Suite
format. Some formats such as PDF are very difficult to edit, unless you have
expensive software. This would be ideal for teachers and students who do not
want their information changed on the presentation when they share a digital
copy with the public.

Publish to the Web
Publish to the Web allows the user to publish the presentation directly to the
web, giving it a unique URL. This option will make the presentation easy to
share with anyone with Internet access. Teachers may use this option when
presenting to a class; they need only to get the presentation’s unique URL and
copy and paste it into an email to share the presentation with students. When
publishing a presentation, the user has the option to auto-advance the slides and
create his or her own animated slideshow! When the user clicks on the link, the
presentation will appear in the browser. The URL is long and confusing. Use
Google’s URL Shortener, http://goo.gl, to shorten the link. This makes it easy for
the user to share the presentation. This is helpful when the presenter does not
have the email of the participants but wants to share the presentation with a
group. The participants will type the shortened URL into a browser’s address bar
to view the presentation.
Another dazzling way to access Google Slides or any documents created in G
Suite on the web is through the use of QR codes. QR codes allow the user to
access the information on smartphones or tablets without typing in the URL. By
using the Google URL shortener, you can access the QR code directly from the
shortened URL.
Insert Menu
The Insert menu gives users many options to make their presentations come
alive. Read the next section to become familiar with inserting graphic design
elements to make your presentations stand out.
Video
Videos can be uploaded from YouTube into Google Slides. There is not an
upload from hard drive option for videos. Teachers and students could create a
YouTube account to upload videos. Some domain administrators allow students
and teachers to link their YouTube and G Suite accounts, allowing them to fully
use this feature in presentations. Some districts may not feel that it is in the best
interest of their students and faculty to have this option because of inappropriate
content. Google owns YouTube, making integration with G Suite easy. The only

problem is that the district domain administrator must allow YouTube for
Schools to be turned on in the G Suite domain. Contact your domain
administrator and ask him or her to allow YouTube for Schools. It is
understandable that some schools may opt out of giving students access to the
YouTube site. We do not recommend limiting access to YouTube.
Option I: Insert YouTube Video From Search
1. Select Video from the Insert menu in the upper left side of Presentations.
2. Click Video search as indicated in Figure 5.10.
3. Enter a search term into the search box.
4. Press the play icon in the middle of the video thumbnail to preview.
5. Click Select to choose that video to be inserted in the presentation.
Figure 5.10 Insert YouTube From Search
Option II: Insert YouTube Video From URL
Each YouTube video has its own unique URL, exactly like every Google Doc
and Google Calendar. To place specific videos into presentations, follow these
steps:
1. Select Video from the Insert menu in the upper left of presentations.
2. Click on the initials URL as shown in Figure 5.11.
3. Copy the URL from the YouTube website.
4. Paste the URL into the space provided.
5. Press to insert the video.

Figure 5.11 Insert YouTube Video From URL
Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
If you or your students have a video that is not on YouTube, you can always take a screenshot of the
video of where it is hosted, embed the screenshot image on the slide, and link the image to the video’s
URL. This will allow the presenter to click on the image while presenting, and the video site will load
in a new tab automatically!
Word Art
Word art is a way for students and teachers to add creativity to their
presentations. To insert Word Art into Presentations, follow these steps:
1. Select Word Art from the Insert menu in Presentations.
2. Enter text into the Word Art text box as shown in Figure 5.12.
Figure 5.12 Inserting Word Art
3. Enter multiple lines by holding Shift+Enter.
4. Press Enter when finished to insert the Word Art.
Word Art can be edited for the following designs by selecting the drop-down
menu when the Word Art is highlighted on the slide.
Fill color
Line color
Line weight
Line dash
Font

Bold, italic, underline
These options allow users to express their unique style. View Google’s Demo
Slam video in Resource 5.3 to see what is possible with presentations with
respect to Word Art, lines, shapes, and other media.
Animations
Animations are a great way to give life to a presentation. The new standards
encourage the use of multimedia as detailed in the sixth-grade standard
mentioned in Table 5.2. This Common Core standard pushes students to use
multimedia components to enrich the concepts being presented. Teaching an
appropriate style is essential for college and career success. Students must
recognize their audience and present in a style appropriate to the task.
Follow the steps below to add slide transitions in Google Slides.
1. Select Animations from the Insert menu in the toolbar of Google Slides.
2. Select the drop-down arrow next to the word Slide as shown in Figure 5.13
to add slide transition to the current slide.
3. Choose from the list of animations in Figure 5.13.
Figure 5.13 Adding Slide Animations/Transitions
To animate a particular object on the slide, follow these steps:
1. Select Animate from the Insert menu in the toolbar of Google Slides.
2. Select an object to animate on the slide.

Graphics
Images
Word Art
Text boxes
3. Click +Add Animation to reveal the options located in the drop-down
menu in Figure 5.14.
4. Choose which animation style and command to place on the object shown
in Figure 5.14.
5. Repeat Steps 2–4 to select additional objects for animation.
6. Select underneath +Add Animation to preview animations you have
selected.
Figure 5.14 Animate an Object
Line
Inserting lines into presentations is a great way for students to express
themselves artistically while exploring geometry concepts. For example, the type
of line called Polyline is great for learning shapes and their names in early
grades math classes. Polylines are used to make polygons. Common Core State
Standards for geometry in the middle grades directs students to analyze and
create shapes. For example, students could draw polygons on their slides, name
them accordingly, and share them with other students. One idea is to create
databases of study materials organized in folders stored on the teacher’s Google
Drive. An example of a database would be slides with explanations and
drawings of polygons. These databases (or study guides) could be shared with

students when studying a particular shape and its properties. This is a great way
to review for a test or send home as a study guide. Once the slideshow is shared
with the class, students can access it anywhere they have connection to the
Internet. In a perfect world, students would study their materials from their
smartphone as they ride home on the school bus. Take this idea one step further
by collaborating with other classes or other schools.
To insert lines into Slides, follow these steps:
1. Select Line from the Insert menu at the top of Presentations to reveal the
drop-down menu containing the types of lines that may be inserted as
shown in Figure 5.15.
Figure 5.15 Types of Lines
2. Click on which type of line to insert.
3. Edit the line.
4. Highlight the line by clicking on it to reveal the toolbar and drop-down
menus that can change:
Fill color
Line color
Line weight
Line dash
Arrowheads: These are placed at the beginning and end of the line to give it
direction.
Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
Students who are college and career ready will be prepared to write in many different mediums.
Documents such as Microsoft Word, Apple’s Pages, or Google Docs are not the only way to present

formal writing. Websites, blogs, wikis, Twitter, Facebook, and countless other not-yet-invented
formats in which people consume information will be important. Promote other formats; students
who are versatile will be college and career ready. The standard in Table 5.5 seeks to expand students’
ability to read and write in diverse media.
© Copyright 2010. National Governors Association Center for Best Practices and Council of Chief
State School Officers. All rights reserved.
New Slide
To insert a new slide, follow these steps:
1. Click the icon in the left side of Slides.
2. Click the drop-down arrow next to the 
 to select from the slide
layouts shown in Figure 5.16.
The slide layouts shown in Figure 5.16 pertain to what type of text and object
boxes will appear on the slide for the particular layout. For example, the Title
and Body slide will have a text box for the title of the slide and a separate text
box for the body of the slide. If the user wants to create his or her own text and
object boxes, select the Blank layout.
Figure 5.16 New Slide Layouts

Concerns With Collaborative Work in Presentations
When working collaboratively, students need to be aware of which slides they
have permission in which to work. Many times in collaborative presentations,
students will be assigned a specific slide number for their contribution. For
example, if a student added a slide to the middle of the group’s presentation, and
every student was assigned a slide number in which to work, then the slide
numbers would be changed, causing confusion. If the teacher predefines the
slides and does not allow adding slides to the middle of the presentation, then the
confusion can be averted. To help avoid the bewilderment, use the chat feature
built into every G Suite app. This helps if a small group is working on a
presentation project. Users can chat about whatever they need to on the side.
This helps collaborators stay organized when unexpected changes occur in the
making of the presentation. Google chat is automatically turned on even if chat
in Gmail is disabled. This is great because the domain administrator would have
to disable all of the G Suite features to keep students from collaborating. Learn
how to chat in Slides by reading the next section.
Chat in G Suite

Chat in the G Suite is located in the upper right-hand corner of any G Suite app.
When others are viewing, the users can chat with each other. This is helpful
when working collaboratively. They are able to talk with each other, discussing
the presentation and ideas that they have to make it better. Collaboration is one
of the key features of many state standards. Whether the student is working on a
math proof in Slides or using the space to create online notecards to study with a
friend, collaboration is at the heart of G Suite for Education. The chat feature can
make this collaboration a reality. To access chat in G Suite, follow these steps:
1. Click the drop-down arrow denoting how many viewers are collaborating
on the document located next to the comments and share buttons as shown
in Figure 5.17.
Figure 5.17 Chat in G Suite
1. The names of the viewers are located here with a colored box or
profile picture.
2. The colored box represents their cursor color on the document.
2. Type text in the chat box, then press Enter.
1. Chat will automatically pop up in the other viewers’ windows.
Google Slides for Research Notecards
Consider this Common Core State Standard in Table 5.6 when planning long-
term or short-term writing projects with students.
Slides can be used in more ways than a simple performance of conveying
knowledge to a formal group of spectators. For example, a student researching
information about certain historical figures for a history/social studies research
paper would find presentations a useful tool for organization. The student will
undoubtedly find many resources in print and digital formats as the many state
college and career standards express routinely. Taking notes on traditional note
cards does not pave the way into the 21st century. Using Google Slides as

research notecards is both efficient and convenient. The content created in Slides
is always stored in the cloud and accessed anywhere there is an Internet
connection. Students are able to modify their research with their smartphone or
home computer. The research will be shared with the teacher so the teacher can
give feedback in the form of comments. Comments are used in Docs, Sheets,
Slides, and Drawings as a way for teachers to grade or leave feedback on
assignments. Slides allow the teacher to guide the student in the writing process
from research to final draft.
Other Uses for Presentations
Flash cards
Note-taking
Writing projects for elementary students
Teacher presentations for content
Student presentations for content
Game show study guide (follow instructions in Resource 5.4 at
http://flippity.net/QuizShow.asp)
Shapes
In Slides, users may insert various shapes, arrows, callouts, and equation
elements that enhance the presentation. Look at Figure 5.18 for the full
collection of shapes that may be inserted into a presentation. Encourage students
to use these transitional elements to make eye-catching flowcharts and graphics.
To insert shapes, follow these steps:
1. Select Shapes from the Insert menu located in the toolbar in Presentations.
2. Hover the mouse over the arrow pointing to the right beside Shape to
reveal the objects available for insert as shown in Figure 5.18.
3. Click the object to insert and edit it accordingly.

Figure 5.18 Insert Shapes
Slide Menu
Many of the features in the Slide menu are offered in other presentation makers
and are self-explanatory. We will learn only about the background option in
depth.
Background
Under the Slide menu in the toolbar is Background. Background is different
than theme. The background refers to the color or image on the background of
the slide, and it can be applied to all slides or a particular slide. Theme refers to
the arrangement of text boxes, titles, and body of the slide. When students are
working on collaborative projects, they may change the background color or
image to their preference without changing the group’s background as a whole.

Teach the students to be aware of the Apply All button. To change the
background, follow these steps:
1. Select Background under the Slide menu in the toolbar to reveal Figure
5.19.
2. Click the drop-down arrow next to the box to change the color.
3. Click to select an image from your Google Drive, search the web, or upload
from your hard drive.
4. Click to reset the theme to default.
5. Click Done or Apply to all.
Figure 5.19 Change Background
Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
Changing the layout and theme will affect the entire presentation. When working on collaborative
presentations, make sure to seek the advice of the group before applying a new motif to the
presentation. Use the convenient chat or comment features to consult group members.
Format Menu
Format refers to the style of text, paragraphs, line spacing, and options like bold,
italic, and underline. These are common in most office software. One exception
in the G Suite that makes it stand out from other presentation- or document-
creating software is the Alt Text utility. This feature will help students with

special needs who have difficulty seeing or reading the text on the presentation.
Alt Text works with third-party screen-reader software to deliver text to speech
for individuals with text deficiencies. Some of these third-party software
programs will work with G Suite to print in Braille. Google Slides can help
everyone learn regardless of their learning or physical disability. If you have
access to the screen-reader technology, try it for your students. To access Alt
Text, follow these steps:
1. Select a piece of text on the slide.
2. Select Alt Text from the Format menu in the toolbar.
3. Title and describe the Alt Text as shown in Figure 5.20.
Figure 5.20 Alt Text
Example of Student Work
In this example, students are using presentations to create collaborative
slideshows about soil in eighth-grade science class. The teacher, Ms. Jacquie
Dubrava, prepared ahead of time a presentation titled “Soil.” The presentation
she shared had one title page and one individual slide for each student in the
class. She shared the presentation with the entire class period easily by using
Google Classroom. In the first slide, Ms. Dubrava gave directions and slide
assignments to the students. Students were assigned to create a slide covering an
aspect of what they have learned about soil within the unit of study. Students
were assigned which topics to cover in their slide. Each student was given a
particular slide number in which to work. All students in the class were working

on the presentation at the same time. By the end of the class period, the students
had created a full collaborative presentation covering every aspect of soil that
they have learned about. Access Resource 5.5 at http://goo.gl/NJwQ1 to see an
example from her seventh-period class.
Lesson in Focus
Classroom Activity With Lines
Students in middle grades must “reason with shapes and their attributes.” This mathematics
standard wants students to understand that shapes have similarities and differences. For
example, a student learning this standard could make a presentation. The teacher may prepare
slides in advance that have the names of shapes on them. Follow the steps laid out here to make
the lesson a reality in your classroom.
The teacher will
1. Create a Google Slides presentation with each slide containing names of various shapes
students are studying
2. Share the premade presentation with the students
Students will
1. Make a copy of the presentation by selecting File, then Make a copy
This step lets the student take ownership of the shared document. Any further edits that
the student makes to the document will not appear on the original.
2. Rename the presentation using the naming convention selected by the teacher
3. Research on the Internet properties of the shapes and their appearance
4. Use Polyline to draw the shapes, then name them appropriately
5. Use the Internet to give research information about the shapes to summarize on the slide
6. Re-share the new presentation with the teacher for scoring
Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
Writing on slides in the middle grades is important. It may be difficult for a middle school student to
convey their message with brevity on a single slide or sets of slides with limited text area. Working
with slides gives the students a smaller space with a defined area to work in. This is a great way to
build presentation skills and assist students in using the slides to enhance their oral presentation
instead of just a replica of it.
SAMR Implications—Transforming Instruction

Even More
Q&A—Audience Tools and Interactive Presentations
While presenting slides, you or your students can allow for an engaging backchannel of Q&A.
Imagine if students are presenting their slideshow, and you want the audience to ask questions
during the presentation without interrupting the flow of the presentation. Google Slides is
equipped with what they call Audience Tools. These can be used when you are using the
extended desktop on the presentation computer (the projected screen acts as one monitor and the
computer screen acts as another). You can turn on and off the extended desktop in your display
setting on your computer. This is the opposite of mirroring your computer! Figure 5.21 shows
how to turn Presenter View on. Simply click the drop-down arrow adjacent to Present and
select Presenter view.
Figure 5.21 Turning On Presenter View
This view also allows you to view your notes and next slides. In Figure 5.22, you can show how
you can turn on the question options under Audience Tools. Once turned on, the slideshow will
add a header to every slide displaying the URL where the audience can navigate to ask the
questions. All questions will be displayed on your Audience Tools screen. The presenter then
can present and display the question on the screen when they are ready to address it in their
presentation.
Figure 5.22 Turning On Question Option

The audience also has the ability to vote on questions and see all the questions being submitted
(Figure 5.23) if they want to answer them themselves, allowing for a truly interactive
presentation!
Figure 5.23 Submitted Questions
You can get detailed directions in Resource 5.6 on the companion website.
Summary
Slides are one more component of G Suite for Education that will help students and teachers
meet the rigors of the various college- and career-readiness standards. The standards addressed
in this chapter undoubtedly can be met with the use of presentations. Moving forward, each part
of the G Suite will become increasingly familiar. Start to think how you can use these great tools
for collaboration in your classroom to exceed the expectations of the 21st century and beyond
workplace.
Resources
For more information about G Suite for Education, including
lesson plans related to chapter content,
domain setup for tech administrators’ videos,
overviews and Google training materials,

the authors’ favorite websites, and
testimonials and interviews of schools currently using G Suite,
access Resources from this chapter on the companion website.
Lesson Plans
 http://resources.corwin.com/googlemeetsms

6 Google Sheets
Key Features
Collaborative spreadsheets
Auto fill
Spreadsheet specific add-ons
Insert charts, images, and more
Google Classroom connected
Google Sheets is a fully integrated spreadsheet program that brings data alive in
the G Suite of educational apps. Students and teachers can use it for a range of
tasks, from kindergarteners making simple T-charts to master’s level statistics.
This chapter will cover the basic functions of Google Sheets and how they can
be used in the classroom to exceed various college- and career-readiness
standards, particularly math. Keep in mind that any spreadsheet program is
difficult to learn at first. Because Google Sheets is complex, it is best to keep
trying new features, and over time, users will gain skills that will help them
organize and manipulate data. Google Sheets is the most robust program in the G
Suite. The key feature is the collaboration that Google has pioneered. Data
collected by Google Sheets users can instantly be shared, modified, and
presented in graphically stunning ways with charts and the help of add-ons.
Math is the primary focus, but other subjects could use it as well. For example,
understanding the 2008 global economic crisis from a history perspective cannot
be fully understood if the student has trouble reading graphs, tables, and charts.
Furthermore, students need to be able to work with data to convey the
information to back up their claims with evidence. A key to learning and
working in our data-rich society will be how to collect, analyze, and display data
to help us conceptualize complex problems. This is key in the Common Core
State Standard for Mathematical Practice 3: “Construct viable arguments and
critique the reasoning of others.”
Using Google Sheets to integrate mathematics into other classes is important for
learning about decision making. Mathematics examples can explain the most
complicated parts of history, science, and behavior by disaggregating and
displaying data. With Google Sheets, students can unlock the power of

information, giving them a way to compute statistical data, present them in the
form of graphs, and share and collaborate with the world or class, making real
contributions to the understanding of the subject.
All of the G Suite programs operate on the premise of sharing. Many of the same
great features are included in Google Sheets that are in the other G Suite
programs. This chapter will only cover basic Google Sheet-specific commands
that will help the student and teacher begin to understand how to work with and
manipulate data.
Standards for Mathematical Practice
The Standards for Mathematical Practice from the Common Core Mathematics
Standards are much like the Anchor Standards in the English Language Arts
section. They guide the teacher throughout all grade levels to instill into the
student certain behaviors and ideas that make them develop critical thinking with
mathematics. They are meant to capture the “processes and proficiencies” of
mathematics, in other words, how the student uses the mathematics and not just
what they acquire as far as knowledge and skill. Students must be aware of these
ideas to fully become college and career ready for a world full of data analysis
and decision making. That is why Standard for Mathematical Practice 5 is
perfect for Google Sheets. Google Sheets will allow the student to collect data in
cells and manipulate the data to make charts and graphs that the student can use
to explain his or her findings with evidence. The software is not doing the
“math” for the student; instead, it is a tool that helps the students explore
mathematical concepts and models. Students who can choose the appropriate
mathematical tool to help interpret results and critical thinking will become
college and career ready. Solving problems in college and career will be messy
and most likely not look like the problems in many classrooms today. The boss
will most likely not say to the employee, “Sally, if two trains are leaving the
station, and one is going 50 miles per hour . . .” Instead of this, bosses will have
employees working on complex problems that require deep understanding.
Teachers must focus on questions and learning experiences that provide a rich
and complex set of problems for students to solve. Students must be able to
identify their own problems as well as solve the ones that their professors and
bosses identify for them. Students who are college and career ready will have
sufficient grasp of mathematical concepts and be able to choose the appropriate
tool to conceptualize, share, and present their mathematical understanding.

Google Sheets does this by giving the students a full cloud-based statistical
package that can help students share, manipulate, and present data.
File Menu
The File menu gives you access to important commands that will help you create
a high-quality spreadsheet. Read the next section to find out some time-savers
that will make collecting and sharing data a great learning experience for you
and your students.
Import
Import datasets into spreadsheets from any of the compatible formats.
The user can import all or part of the types of datasets displayed in Table 6.1 into
Google Sheets. Students and teachers working in other formats can import them
into Google Sheets for easy sharing of data. To import data into Google Sheets,
follow the steps below Table 6.1.

1. Select Import from the File menu in the Google Sheets toolbar. This will
open the import window as shown in Figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1 Import Window

2. Select from My Drive, Shared with me, Recent, and Upload to upload
data from various locations.
3. Choose the appropriate Import action as shown in Figure 6.2.
4. Click Import.
Figure 6.2 Import Data
Spreadsheet Settings
Figure 6.3 shows the Google Sheets spreadsheet settings window. Manipulate
defaults for currency, time zone, and more with these settings for the particular
file only. Spreadsheet settings will affect formatting defaults such as currency,
date, and time settings and other country-specific settings. Selecting the time
zone will allow the user to have the revision history displayed in their time zone
as well as “affect all time-related functions.” There are some time-related
functions (formulas) that can be inserted into the cells of a spreadsheet. See
Resource 6.1 for a full list of functions at http://goo.gl/LBN7R.

Figure 6.3 Spreadsheet Settings
See Revision History
It is important to go over revision history once again because of its usefulness in
the classroom and particularly Google Sheets. The G Suite programs Docs,
Slides, Sheets, and Drawings all have revision history. This is especially
important when working with data. Sharing data with other students and teachers
presents the possibility of someone in the group making an error that will affect
the rest of the dataset. Revision history can alleviate the possibility that a
member of the group will make a grievous and permanent error. For example, if
a group of students is working on a science fair project, and they are collecting
large amounts of data, then that data need to be accurate and secure. Each time
an entry is made into a spreadsheet, it is saved along with the time and a note on
what was revised. At any point in the project, the students can go back in time
and see a previous version of the data to find and correct the errors. For a step-
by-step process about how to see the revision history, look in Chapter 4.
Importance of Data and Technology
In the new world economy and because of the college- and career-readiness
standards, students will be expected to work with data to help them make
decisions and infer possible solutions to problems that they face. Data-driven
decision making is an important skill to acquire. It helps students rely on
statistics and data to make informed choices. Much like educators must take data
into consideration to make decisions about learning and student growth, students
need this skill for college and career. Using technology such as Google Sheets
can help students and teachers make sense of data and learn how tweaking

certain aspects can change the outcomes. Google Sheets is a tool that can quickly
generate models for sound decision making. According to the Common Core
State Standards, “Technology plays an important role in statistics and probability
by making it possible to generate plots, regression functions, and correlation
coefficients, and to simulate many possible outcomes in a short amount of time.”
Tools like this should be used in every class to analyze, predict, and share data
that can help mold the understanding of the subject.
Many ideas in mathematics, science, history, and almost every subject taught in
school can be explained by observing data and using the data to tell why the
event is true. For example, the Common Core State Standards for Mathematics
starting in middle school directs students to start to make sense of data and its
role in decision making. Consider Table 6.2 for a sixth-grade Statistics and
Probability standard.
After the data are collected, students can have rich discussions about the
variance and recognize clusters of data points by analyzing the data. Going
further the students can make a chart explaining their findings and describing the
distribution of the curve. Learn how to make charts from simple datasets later in
this chapter.
Lesson in Focus
Collecting Data: Heights of Students
The teacher will
1. Create a Google Sheet in advance, naming a column: Height in Centimeters
2. Share the spreadsheet with the class via Google Classroom (Sharing via Google
Classroom will automatically make a copy for each student giving them rights to edit the
spreadsheet.)
3. Instruct students to make a copy of the spreadsheet, taking ownership and renaming the
file, or do this automatically when making an assignment in Google Classroom
4. Assign the students a cell number to enter their data
5. Instruct students to take measurements of group members and place their heights in
centimeters into the appropriate cell

PDF document (.pdf) Download As
Download as is a common command in the G Suite. It lets the user download
the file being created as a format other than the G Suite format. The G Suite
programs (Docs, Slides, Sheets, and Drawings) have this feature. The only
difference among the programs is what type of file is available for downloading.
For example, in Google Sheets, only some of the compatible spreadsheet file
types are supported. If a teacher were making a Google Sheet that he or she
wanted to share with another person that did not use the G Suite, the teacher may
download as any of the available formats to share with them through an email
attachment or other storage device. Being able to download as these file formats
makes G Suite easy to share with others that do not use Google as their primary
document-creating software. Download as PDF is an important feature because
sometimes users need to share data without the fear of the data being changed.
Downloading a Google Sheet as a PDF creates a file that is difficult to edit.
Expensive software is required to tamper with the data. See the list below for
available download as formats for Google Sheets.
Microsoft Excel (.xlsx)
Comma-separated values (.csv)
Webpage (.html, zipped)
OpenOffice (.opd)
Publish to the Web
Publish your spreadsheets to the web as shown in Chapter 4 of the Google Docs
section. It may be necessary for the data you collect to be published to a website.
This would be great for data collection involving charts and graphs that may
change over time. For example, Westside High School has published our school
newspaper to an online version using blogger.com (tribaltribune.net). Students
often collect data for interesting stories for the publication such as lunch menu
likes or dislikes. The data are collected each day by a Google Form that
automatically updates a Google Sheet. Each time the form is filled out, the sheet
updates, causing a chart to change with the new data. The result is a constantly
changing graph that updates automatically to the website.

Email as Attachment
The email as attachment feature enables the user to choose the file type directly
from the email as attachment window. In other office software, the user must do
the lengthy process of downloading the file to the hard drive, remembering in
which folder it was saved, opening an email application, drafting the email, and
attaching the document to the email. These steps are cumbersome and time
consuming. Within any of the office apps in G Suite, click File, then Email as
attachment to instantly send the file to a recipient. The user can even choose
what file type of attachment to send by clicking the drop-down menu denoted by
the arrow in Figure 6.4. Notice in Figure 6.4 that any of the Google Suite
formats are not listed as a file type in which to email; this is because Google uses
a different approach to distributing files, called sharing. Sharing allows the user
of G Suite to send an invite to another’s email to edit, comment, or view a
particular file in the G Suite. There is no need to email as an attachment a G
Suite file because the files may be shared. To refresh yourself on how to share
files, review previous chapters.
Figure 6.4 Email as Attachment
Email Collaborators
In the File menu, the command Email collaborators will send an email to the
appropriate team members that are currently assigned to collaborate on the

document. This feature works in all G Suite programs. Figure 6.5 will show you
the email template and allow you to choose the collaborators to communicate
with. The title of the Google Sheet will become the subject line of the email, as
shown in Figure 6.5.
Figure 6.5 Email Collaborators
Print
Printing from Google Sheets involves a slightly different procedure than printing
from other G Suite programs. Google Sheets has different print settings. For
example, the user can have multiple sheets open in one spreadsheet document
and print only from the selected one. Also, there are options for printing
gridlines, landscape, portrait, and so on. See Figure 6.6 for detailed printing
information.
Figure 6.6 Print Settings

Edit Menu
Edit buttons are available such as copy, paste, undo, and redo. Chapter 4,
“Google Documents,” covers these in detail. This chapter will cover the Google
Sheets-specific edit commands.
List View and Mobile Devices.
List view is also the default view when editing a Google Spreadsheet on
mobile devices. This is useful for students who need to collect data on the
go. For example, a fifth-grade class studying data collection and
measurement has an assignment that requires them to make 1-square-meter
sampling grids on the school’s lawn to collect data about plants found there.
Students are able to use spreadsheets to collect their data while outside (as
long as the Wi-Fi signal is present) on a mobile device such as an iPod
Touch, iPad, or Android tablet. Follow these steps to use this lesson idea:
Lesson in Focus
What Grows Where We Play
The teacher will
1. Prepare the spreadsheet ahead of time, making headings for the columns of plants that
they may encounter in their class’s square
2. Instruct the students to log in to their G Suite account on the mobile device and make a
copy of the spreadsheet
Students will
1. Log in to their G Suite account on their mobile device
2. Make a copy of the spreadsheet and rename it or the teacher will share it via Google
Classroom
3. Collect data about the plants found in their sampling square
Paste Special
Copying and pasting from cells in a spreadsheet will copy everything in the cell,

including text, color, and formulas. Sometimes teachers and students need to
copy and paste only particular attributes of cells in a spreadsheet. For example, a
student may want to replicate only the cell’s background color. To paste special,
follow these steps:
1. Copy the cell that has a special attribute you want to replicate.
2. Select Paste special from the Edit menu in the toolbar.
3. Choose the Paste special command from the list in Figure 6.7 and Table
6.3.
Figure 6.7 Paste Special
Delete Rows and Columns

To delete a row or column, highlight the row or column to delete, select Edit,
then select Delete row or column.
View Menu
The View menu helps the user control aspects of the spreadsheet, making it easy
to navigate. Choose from show gridlines, formula, and toggle between compact
and full-screen views. Read the following section for ways to improve the user
experience.
Middle Grades Data Collection
Collecting data using spreadsheets can be a great activity for middle school
students. The Common Core State Standards focus in Grades 4–8 on the
collection and representation of data on line plots and bar graph and on
collecting data with the use of a measurement device. Starting in the sixth grade,
students will be asked to “develop understanding of statistical variability” and
“summarize and describe distributions.” The progression for sixth graders is to
analyze the data that they learned to collect in K–5, while grappling with
measures of center and how different datasets can have different distributions.
This leads to students using data to answer a statistical question. For an example
highlighted in the Common Core State Standards, the question “How old am I?”
is not a statistical question because the students are not asked about variability of
the population. If the question is, “How old are the students in my school?” then
students must mathematically reason that some are older and some are younger.
This reasoning helps students understand statistics because they are “anticipating
the variability” of the ages of the students based on the collected sample. Using
spreadsheets to collect and analyze data in the middle grades will help students
become familiar with entering data into cells and help them learn how to draw
inference from it. Starting in third grade, students will be asked to draw a bar
graph representing data that they have collected. Using Google Sheets can help
students represent data with tools as mentioned in the Mathematical Practice
Standard 5. It will be good practice to have a mix of bar graphs drawn by hand
and made with programs like Google Sheets. The good thing about using Google
Sheets is that the students will be able to correct errors or change their data and
see the bar graph change as a result without having to draw it again. For
example, a student in the fourth grade is measuring insects collected on a recent
science activity and makes a spreadsheet. Students can use Google Sheets for

data collection for data that are easily saved into their Google Drive, and they
can use the data to draw their bar graphs and line plots by hand or place the data
into charts (see Table 6.4).
Freeze Rows/Freeze Columns
Users can freeze columns and rows while sorting in the spreadsheet. Freezing a
column or row will hold some of the data in place as the user scrolls down the
page. For example, headings in a spreadsheet that contains hundreds of rows
could be held in place, making it easier for users to input information into the
correct column. Select Freeze from the View menu.
Protected Ranges
To protect ranges from being edited or manipulated by editors, choose a range of
columns and/or rows by highlighting them. Click View, then Protected ranges
to prevent editing.
Insert Menu
Choose Insert to place a row, column, a new sheet, comments, or notes about
particular cells into a spreadsheet. Comments are an important part of the G
Suite. They can be used by collaborating groups to make notes or suggestions to
other people managing the spreadsheet and can be used by teachers to give
feedback for grading. Teachers that take advantage of comments when giving
feedback for grading will decrease the amount of papers to take home. For
example, teachers can make comments grading certain aspects of the Google
Sheet from anywhere there is an Internet connection. Open the shared
spreadsheet, and begin giving feedback and record the score in the grade book. If
your school does not have an electronic grade-book application, create your own
in spreadsheets. Using Google Sheets as grade-book software provides powerful

sharing capabilities. Parents and teachers can stay in constant contact concerning
the students’ progress through shared spreadsheets. Domain administrators may
benefit from giving parents the school’s G Suite for Education accounts so
teachers, students, and parents can collaborate on students’ progress.
Function
Functions allow for the user to perform calculations of the data in a selected cell
or block of cells. For example, if a teacher were using Google Sheets as a grade
book and wanted to quickly find the average of a particular set of grades, then
the teacher could highlight the cells and choose the function called AVE.
Another example for the use of functions is performing fast calculations of data
that will allow the student to quickly adjust their ideas based on new or updated
information. To calculate the datasets, follow these steps:
1. Highlight the block of cells in the sheet in which to perform a function.
2. Select Insert, then one of the functions listed in Figure 6.8.
Figure 6.8 Function List
1. Sum, Average, Count, Max, and Min are listed in the Insert drop-
down menu. However, this is not near the end of the function list.
Click on More . . . as seen in Figure 6.9 to see descriptions of the
hundreds of functions available.
An alternative way to insert functions is to place an equals sign in the cell
followed by the first few letters of the function’s name as shown in Figure 6.9
Figure 6.9 Inserting a Function Directly in a Cell

Chart
Inserting charts is one of the most used parts of any spreadsheet program. Taking
the data and displaying them graphically can help the students and their
audiences conceptualize the data. The Common Core State Standards have a lot
to say about data representations. For example, according to the Standards for
Mathematical Practice 5 concerning modeling and data, “When making
mathematical models, they know that technology can enable them to visualize
the results of varying assumptions, explore consequences, and compare
predictions with data.” Teaching students how to use spreadsheets can help them
organize and model their datasets.
To insert a chart, there must be data in the spreadsheet. To create charts, follow
these steps:
1. Collect data to display in a chart in a Google Sheet (example data found in
Resource 6.2). Lesson plan Paper Airplane Throw #STEM.
2. Highlight the data to be displayed in a chart.
3. Select Chart from the Inset menu to reveal Figure 6.10.
4. Click on the recommended charts Google provides based on the type of
data, or click the Charts tab to reveal more types of charts.
1. Sheets automatically recognizes the data in the sheet and gives the user
suggestions for what type of chart may be most appropriate for the
data.
5. Click the Customize tab to give the chart a title, name the x and y axes, and
changes color options.
The box in Figure 6.10 displays the chart preview. The editor will automatically
select all cells that contain data and make a preview of the graph. There are
currently 26 chart types, but more are added periodically. Chart types range from
bar graphs to maps. If cities or addresses are in the spreadsheet, they can be
mapped along with the data accompanying them in the adjacent cell. For

example, a middle school class studying weather in science can understand the
tendency of temperatures to be cooler in the northern latitudes. Students can
create these datasets and make the graph themselves, and overlay that into a map
directly in Google Sheets. The student now has an interactive map that contains
data about temperature. This map could be exported as a picture file or be
embedded live in a website. When embedded, the information is updated or
added to the graph or map and will change accordingly. See an example of this
interactive map in Resource 6.3.
Figure 6.10 Insert a Chart
The box in Figure 6.10 draws attention to the chart types and recommendations.
When using charts, Google Sheets will automatically create a chart type based
on the type of data collected. It will make a fairly reliable guess about how the
data should be displayed in the chart. The recommended charts appear as default.
To change the chart type, click on the other types listed. For more types, click on
Chart types as shown in the box. Click Customization to edit the chart title, x
and y axes, and color of the lines or bars. It is important for students to label
each of the parts of the chart to make it clear to the reader.
When the chart is finished, it is inserted on the sheet containing the data it was
made from. After the chart is inserted, it can be manipulated further by right-
clicking on the chart and choosing the options shown in Figure 6.12
Figure 6.11 The Inserted Chart

Figure 6.12 Chart Options
The arrow in Figure 6.11 points to a drop-down menu that is accessed by
clicking anywhere on the chart. This will reveal options shown in Figure 6.12.
The commands in the drop-down list in Figure 6.12 are common and need little
explanation, except Publish chart. Publishing a chart is a great way to share the
information collected by the students.
Figure 6.13 gives the option to publish the chart as an interactive chart or an
image. Interactive charts will change depending on the data entered in the
spreadsheet in which it is attached, and the user can hover over data points and
see more information. Embed code looks complicated, but all the user has to do
is copy and paste it into a webpage’s HTML box. Users may choose to publish
an interactive version of the chart. This option will automatically update when
new data are placed in the corresponding spreadsheet. Also, users may choose to
publish the chart as an image as shown in Figure 6.13. That image may be
inserted into Google Slides and Google Docs, but this option will not
automatically update.

Figure 6.13 Publishing a Chart
Users may also insert images, links, Google Forms, or Google Drawings into
their spreadsheets.
Forms
Insert a Google Form directly into the spreadsheet to ask students questions
about their data for later assessment. In the example we have provided, the Form
asks students to write an explanation of how their design changes affected their
distance for each new paper airplane. The Form responses are automatically
added to the Form in a new sheet. The responses are conveniently placed in the
same spreadsheet so they are easily graded. See Figure 6.14 to find the responses
location.
Figure 6.14 Responses Location
Drawings
Google Drawings may be inserted into a spreadsheet. Drawings can be used to
create flowcharts and other graphic organizers to help explain the data on the
spreadsheet. Drawings are virtually unlimited in their creative capacity.
Encourage students to draw or create graphical representations of the data that
are not part of ready-made charts. Students can benefit from expressing the data
in their own creative ways.

Consider this excerpt from the Common Core State Standards: “When reading
scientific and technical texts, students need to be able to gain knowledge from
challenging texts that often make extensive use of elaborate diagrams and data to
convey information and illustrate concepts.” Use spreadsheets in conjunction
with Drawings to create and share data collection information in creative ways.
Format Menu
The Format tab in Google Sheets has many of the same commands as the other
G Suite programs. The exceptions are Number, Conditional formatting,
Alternating colors, and Clear formatting. Number relates to how the numbers
are displayed in the cells. Look at the box in Figure 6.15 to see the different
ways numbers can be recorded in cells. For example, users can choose to have
their data be reported in scientific notation using options in the number
command. Upon typing in 93,000,000 miles (the distance from Earth to the Sun),
the cell would automatically display 9.3E + 7 if the number command were
invoked. Look at the eighth-grade standard in Table 6.5 to gain insight about
scientific notation and technology.
Figure 6.15 Displaying Numbers
Pay close attention to the last sentence in Table 6.5 about scientific notation that
is generated with technology. Students in the digital age will be increasingly
reliant on computer technology to display and help interpret data. Students must

realize that writing scientific notation with the “E” representing the phrase
“times ten to the” is equivalent to the written form of 9.3 × 107. Google Sheets
uses the form 9.3E + 7 to report scientific notation.
© Copyright 2010. National Governors Association Center for Best Practices and Council of Chief
State School Officers. All rights reserved.
Conditional Formatting
Conditional formatting lets the user apply background and text color rules to
cells. If the cell contains a particular text or number, the cell background or text
will change color among other options.
For example, a math teacher who has assigned homework to be entered into a
spreadsheet can look for certain answers in the sheet by applying conditional
formatting. Highlight the cells that the user wishes to check with conditional
formatting and put in the parameters. Choose a background or text color to make
the answers stand out. For example, a math teacher can create self-checking
homework assignments by creating a spreadsheet where the students will place
their answers to their homework problems. The conditional formatting will be
set ahead of time for the correct answer. If the cell matches exactly as the
predetermined formatting set by the teacher, the cell will turn a particular color,
denoting the answer is correct. If the cell does not turn color, the answer is
wrong, and the student needs to try again. Assignments like these could be used
as guided practice for homework. Students are using this as a self-check only. In
this example, students will be required to turn in their written work along with
their shared spreadsheet.
It is important to set the master sheet made by the teacher as a view-only file in
share settings; this will force the students to make a copy of the file so their
answers do not appear on the master sheet. This way, students can’t edit it until
they make a copy and name the file accordingly. Use Google Classroom to
assign this self-checking sheet to students. Teachers of other subjects can use this

feature to create self-grading quizzes. To explore conditional formatting, follow
these steps:
1. Select Conditional formatting from the Format menu in the toolbar to
reveal Figure 6.16.
2. The Conditional formatting options menu will appear on the right-hand
side of the screen.
3. Apple range: Highlight a particular range of cells that will respond to the
conditional formatting commands or input the range by hand.
4. Format cells if . . . is a drop-down menu that will reveal the conditional
formatting options shown in Figure 6.16.
Figure 6.16 Formatting Options
5. Choose from the options in Figure 6.17 and click Add another rule to
conditionally format more cell ranges.
Figure 6.17 Conditional Formatting

Alternating Colors
Alternating colors is an option to make any boring spreadsheet add some
differentiation to the rows by automatically adding alternating colors. This is
great to keep students and others organized when reading the data in the
spreadsheet.
Clear Formatting
Clearing the formatting is a way to get rid of the fonts, text size, and cell
background colors when copying and pasting from cells. When copying a cell
from any spreadsheet program or tables on the web, all of the formatting is
copied along with the text. To keep the text but remove the formatting, use the
clear formatting tool from the Format menu. The same feature is available in
Docs, Sheets, and Slides. Alternatively look for the 
 symbol in the toolbars
or highlight the cell or text, then use the keyboard shortcut Command+/ (Mac)
or CTRL+/ (PC).
Data Menu
The Data menu holds commands that let the user manipulate data. Sort, Pivot
tables, and data validation are discussed here. Use the Data menu to make sense

of data.
Sort A to Z and Sort Z to A
Sorting by alphabet and reverse alphabet is available. Remember that the cells
must be highlighted to sort or filter the data. To sort the data, click Data from the
toolbar, then click Sort as shown in Figure 6.18.
Figure 6.18 Data Sort
The options in Figure 6.18 not talked about in this book such as Named ranges,
Protected sheets and ranges, Filter, and Filter views are complex and require
more time and attention than this book will give. For more information on these
options, visit http://support.google.com.
Pivot Tables
Pivot tables allow the user to pull a quick summary from a huge dataset. They
are ideal for dealing with large amounts of data and picking out certain aspects
to focus on. Teachers and administrators could use pivot tables to disaggregate
testing data. See more about pivot tables in Resource 6.4 at http://goo.gl/A5Mqy
and in the companion website.

Validation
Validation controls what data are entered into spreadsheets by the collaborators
and the user. Validation can help users avoid entering text or numbers into cells
that do not match the predefined criteria. Using this tool can allow for a
comment to pop up when entering data, reminding the user what type of data are
appropriate for the cell. For example, teachers can set validation on cells when
assigning students to make spreadsheets that will not allow letters of text to be
written in the cell. In this example, numbers are the only valid entry. This can
give hints to students about what data type to enter and can help them feel more
comfortable with spreadsheets because they will be cued on what type of
validation is permitted.
Tools Menu
Spelling, Notification rules, and Protect sheet are the most used Tools
commands by educators. Notification rules may be enabled to alert the user
when changes are made to a spreadsheet. For example, in large districts, a
spreadsheet for technology inventory may be maintained by the building
instructional facilitators. The district technology coordinator will need to be
made aware of changes to the inventory and manage users’ rights to edit.
Collaborative spreadsheets are a great way to keep everyone informed. Follow
these steps to activate notifications:
1. Select Notification rules from the Tools menu in the toolbar to reveal
Figure 6.19.
2. Choose the parameters that will notify the owner and collaborators of
changes to the sheet.
Figure 6.19 Set Notification Rules

Use Protect sheet to determine who can edit the data (Figure 6.20). Follow these
steps to protect the sheet:
1. Select Protect sheet from the Tools menu to reveal Figure 6.20.
2. Select who is allowed to edit the sheet.
3. Type email or names in the box to allow only those people to edit.
4. Click Save to set the rules.
Figure 6.20 Protect Sheet
The protect sheet feature will allow you to protect from editing a range of cells
or entire sheets. Use a range of protected cells to not allow users to modify
important information. For example, oftentimes in data collection in math or
science class, the teacher may want to give the first few cells of information to
the students as an example, but may want the subsequent cells to be modified by
the students as they collect data. Use protect cell ranges to achieve this level of
data protection.
Student Excuses Thwarted By Technology

Student: “The dog ate my homework . . . right after I finished my data collection in my Google
Spreadsheet, Snoopy, my dog, ate my Chromebook. Sorry teacher . . . I will get it to you
tomorrow.”
Teacher: “Really? I don’t think so, Johnny. I see on the revision history that you started to do
your work at 5:51pm, then you stopped at 5:54 pm. When I checked the revision history before I
went to sleep last night, I saw that you had only worked 3 minutes. I then called your mom to
check on you because I was worried that you may have fallen ill. She said that you started
playing video games at 6:00 pm and reported to her that you had no homework.”
Student: Utter disbelief.
Add-ons
Add-ons were explained in Chapter 4, but we will highlight a few relevant add-
ons specifically used in Google Sheets that will help teachers and students
automate their spreadsheets. To insert add-ons into your spreadsheets, follow
these steps:
1. Click the Add-ons menu located in the toolbar.
2. Click Get add-ons to open the Add-ons search menu as shown in Figure
6.21.
Figure 6.21 Keyword Search
3. The box in Figure 6.21 will allow you to search by keyword for add-ons.
Note that available add-ons for Docs are different than the ones for Sheets.
4. Click on the add-on and install it to the spreadsheet.
5. Click the 
 to get the add-on. This will reveal a permissions
request that must be approved by the user before the add-on will operate.
This is shown in Figure 6.22
6. Click Allow to install the add-on.
7. After the add-on is given permission, click on the Add-ons menu item
again to reveal the installed add-ons.

8. Choose the add-on to start its feature.
Flubaroo is a popular add-on that will automatically grade a teacher-assigned
Google Form. Flubaroo will ask a series of questions to get information and
generate an answer key to compare student answers for grading. When
completed, the add-on may send students automatically generated feedback (or
more detailed personalized feedback) directly to students’ email. Forward the
scores to parents to keep them informed about student grades.
Figure 6.22 Add-on Permission
Auto Fill
Auto fill lets the user repeat the contents of a cell and can complete a pattern in
the subsequent cells highlighted. This feature uses Google Search to find
patterns in the cells highlighted and will automatically fill in the cells with the
pattern. For example, a teacher in fifth-grade social studies class may be
studying states and their characteristics. Teachers and students can quickly make
lists of common information. Follow these steps to see the magic of auto fill:
1. Type at least three similar items such as states in a column of separate cells
like in Figure 6.23.
2. Highlight the text and then click the small blue square in the bottom right-
hand corner while holding down Option for Mac and Alt for PC.
3. Select the cells that you would like to populate and then release the buttons.
The result is that the list is automatically populated within the cells that were
highlighted. If the user does not hold down Option or Alt, the contents of the
cell are repeated for the selection, and then the pattern will not appear.

Figure 6.23 Auto Fill
SAMR Implications—Transforming Instruction
Summary
Google Sheets is the most complex program in the G Suite. It houses a powerful spreadsheet
program that can rival any statistical package with user-friendly tools that people have come to
expect from traditional office software. The difference is in the collaboration. Google Sheets can
share and collaborate on data projects from within the room or around the world. Use tables,
charts, and add-ons to publish real-time data to websites and other spreadsheets to make student
findings real and authentic in purpose. The many college- and career-readiness standards push
students to use appropriate tools when thinking mathematically. When students take the time to
collect, analyze, and report findings with data, they become better decision makers. Google

Sheets gives the student one more tool to become college and career ready. Keep reading to
explore another data collection and student assessment device: Google Forms.
Resources
For more information about G Suite for Education, including
lesson plans related to chapter content,
domain setup for tech administrators’ videos,
overviews and Google training materials,
the authors’ favorite websites, and
testimonials and interviews of schools currently using G Suite,
access Resources from this chapter on the companion website.
Lesson Plans
 http://resources.corwin.com/googlemeetsms

7 Google Forms
Key Features
Collect data from community and students
Students collect data for projects
Data can be sent to a Google Sheet
Administer quizzes and provide immediate feedback
Share with anyone through email, URL, or social media
Mrs. Martinez asked students in her eighth-grade science class to log in to their
Chromebooks and navigate to Google Classroom. Awaiting there was an
assignment that said “Newton Quiz.” Students clicked the link and were taken
directly to a five-question quiz. One of the questions was, “Inertia of an object is
directly related to what?” Mrs. Martinez could tell students were struggling with
this free-response question. Mrs. Martinez was able to look at Google Classroom
to see who completed the quiz in real time. Students were able to receive their
results and knew questions they got wrong immediately. Mrs. Martinez spent
about 25 minutes building the quiz, setting the answer key, and posting to
Google Classroom. Google Forms provides streamlined formative assessment,
allowing Mrs. Martinez to give students immediate feedback.
Google Forms is a G Suite app that can deliver data for decision making. This
tool is ideal for gathering data from students and the community, as well as
delivering online assessments to students. To collect data using Google Forms,
share the form’s (questionnaire’s) unique URL in Google Classroom on a
handout, email, embedded in a website, on Learning Management System
(LMS), or on social media. The data collected from Google Forms goes directly
into a Google Sheet, where it can be analyzed, organized, and displayed in
charts. There are two main parts to a form: the front-end (what you send to
students/respondents) and the back-end (the area in which the data are stored that
is only available to the form creator). You can choose from many themes to
create a professional-looking front-end form with nine question types:
Text
Paragraph Text
Choose From a List

Checkboxes
Multiple Choice
Scale
Grid
Date
Time
In this chapter, we will discuss Google Forms and its ability to gather
information efficiently. The information collected can be anything that the user
needs to know. For example, you might use forms for the following purposes:
Self-grading student quiz
Student survey for use in data collection
Beginning of the year student information form
Collect interests, phone numbers, addresses, and other information that may
help the teacher
Faculty meeting sign-in form
Discipline form that automatically emails parents, team teacher, and
principal
Parent contact log
Parent information collection from a beginning of the year open house or
through email.
Creating a role-playing, Choose Your Own Adventure, game
Advantages of Forms
Google Forms offers an easy way to connect with the public’s concerns by
gathering relevant data from the community. School administrators can create
questionnaires and surveys to obtain information about the community to inform
decisions made by school officials. For example, many schools send home a
parent survey to gather information from the parents about certain aspects of
school life. A Google Form could be created and posted on the school’s website,
Facebook page, Twitter feed, and other communication channels. Posting these
forms on public virtual spaces allows for easy data gathering. If the parents do
not have access to a computer, provide it at school or suggest that they access the
Google Form from their mobile device or direct them to the local public library.
Alternatively, at public events such as fine arts performances or sporting events,
students or a group of volunteer parents and/or teachers could man a table with

laptops or tablets. The workers would cue up the Form’s link on the device, hand
it to the patron, and gather information from the community.
Teachers also need to gather data, but in different ways. Educators in the
classroom are bombarded with collecting data concerning student performance.
For example, teachers are responsible for managing parent contact logs,
students’ grades, and teacher documentation about discipline and good behavior.
This information can be emailed directly to the parents and shared with other
teachers. The data collected in Google Forms give teachers and parents powerful
insight about how their student is performing. Start by focusing on struggling
students. Create forms that can track concerns raised by parents, teachers, and
other school professionals, and share the information with other teachers on the
team to craft a better educational experience for the child.
Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
For advanced users, research Google Forms Add-ons to find out how to automatically email the
parent the information gathered by the teacher. Every time the form is submitted, the program will
automatically email parents or anyone who might find the information useful from the user’s school
Gmail.
Managing Forms
Every Google Form is given a unique URL. When the URL is typed into any
web browser, the live form is ready to be taken. Save the URL as a bookmark or
a favorite in your web browser to get access to forms that are frequently used.
Another option is to create a desktop icon linked to the form that automatically
opens the form when clicked. For example, at my school, teachers have icons on
their computers, smartphones, or tablets that are linked to the discipline referral
Google Form. Another example is Mrs. Casey Kocher, a special education
teacher. She uses Forms to track her students’ progress. She has eight special
education students that she teaches all day. She is very busy throughout the day
with her teaching duties, and she wants to collect data on her students’ progress
on certain skills. She has created a personalized Google Form for each of her
students so she can track their progress daily. Instead of filling out the form on a
laptop or desktop computer, she uses her iPhone. She has made a folder on her
home screen that contains an app icon with the students’ names that, when
tapped, opens the particular student’s form using the web browser on the iPhone.

She is able to quickly collect students’ progress with the mobile smartphone
because all Google Forms can be taken anywhere there is an Internet connection.
Android phones have the same shortcut feature. The data are automatically
populating a Google Sheet, where they are kept safe and ready for review.
Use Form Data in PLCs
Monitoring students’ progress and collecting data with Google Forms is ideal for
professional learning community (PLC) meetings. PLCs need this information to
accurately assess problems and successes students are facing. Use the time to
accurately discuss student’s strengths and weaknesses and to formulate a path for
success with other teachers on the team. A PLC without data is less effective.
Use data from forms like in the example of Mrs. Kocher to talk about the student
objectively, based on the data, and to make better decisions to improve the
child’s educational experience.
Students and Forms
The Common Core State Standards provided in Table 7.1 and Table 7.2 are good
examples of why forms are important to get students college and career ready.
According to the standards, students will “present information, findings and
supporting evidence.” They can authentically gather real information from peers,
parents, and the community using Google Forms and use that information to
make decisions and form conclusions about a given topic.
Gathering the information about real events and attitudes and presenting it,
making “strategic use of digital media and visual displays of data,” is vital for
college and a career. For example, eighth-grade student Mark is working on a
joint research project for English and mathematics classes. Mark wants to
research school safety. In addition to using appropriate print and digital sources
such as primary sources of informational text, Mark needs information from his
peers and teachers to compare with his research. He wants to investigate how
local attitudes of school safety compare with the nation as a whole. Mark should
use Google Forms to create an attitudes survey to collect real data from his
school community. After the information is collected, Mark can draw inferences
with his knowledge of statistics and spreadsheets learned in mathematics class.
This is done without printing one sheet of paper or counting tally marks of
responses from paper forms. After the form was created, Mark emailed his

participant sample the link to the form. After the participants took the survey, all
of the responses were collected in the attached spreadsheet. Giving students
assignments that use technology will prepare them for life after high school.
College and career professionals are asked to perform analyses like this in their
work or place of higher learning. Society asks these skills of the citizen. For
example, choosing political candidates to support requires analysis of primary
sources and the ability to make sense of peers’ opinions to help form their own.
The technology in G Suite for Education connects information and people in a
way that allows for deeper understanding of what is learned. That is one of the
most important challenges the Common Core State Standards pose to educators.
Teachers must have the courage to slow down, delve deeper into understanding,
and explore concepts thoroughly.
Table 7.1 displays two Anchor Standards for Speaking and Listening.
In addition to the Anchor Standards in Table 7.1, consider Table 7.2 standards
for middle school writing in Ryan’s scenario. To become college and career
ready as defined by the Common Core State Standards, Ryan will need to focus
on data gained from others to aid in making assertions in writing. In addition,
data management that he will learn through the use of Google Forms and Google
Sheets can help him with his writing. Citing relevant data in writing only
improves the work. The standards push students to take lessons from all
disciplines in the completion of a project. The standard in Table 7.2 will also be
tackled in mathematics, science, as well as English language arts. Seek out ways
to bring in other disciplines when planning projects.

© Copyright 2010. National Governors Association Center for Best Practices and Council of Chief
State School Officers. All rights reserved.
Creating a Google Form
The previous sections contained some ideas about how to start thinking about
forms and how they could be used with students, faculty, and the community.
The next sections are devoted to learning the processes to create forms and
distribute them. To create a Google Form, follow these steps after opening
Google Drive:
1. Click the New button to reveal the list of Google Docs.
2. Click More.
3. Choose Google Forms as shown in Figure 7.1.
Figure 7.1 Create a Google Form
Editing a Google Form

Start creating questions immediately using the steps in the following section.
This is where the user can create the form and customize it to meet the needs of
the project.
To edit a Google Form, follow these steps:
1. Title the form by clicking on Untitled form like in the box in Figure 7.2.
Underneath the title box, include any directions or help statements that will
guide users to provide relevant information.
2. Type a question into the Untitled Question box.
3. Select an appropriate Question type from the drop-down menu. (Note: you
can add images as answer choices for multiple choice and checkbox
answers.)
4. Click Required to force the user to answer the question. When this is
checked, the user will not be able to submit his or her answers to be
collected if he or she has not marked an answer.
5. Click Done to finalize the question.
6. Click the + icon to add another question or you can add text, images,
videos, and/or page breaks depending upon your need (e.g., you may want
students to watch a video about Abraham Lincoln prior to answering the
next question).
Figure 7.2 Edit Form Window
Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
Copy long lists of multiple rows of text or answers to a form question, and paste them into the first
box of the possible answers. This will automatically make each line of text a possible answer to a
form question. Teachers use this when converting old quizzes to Google Forms. Watch the video
found at this link to see it in action in Resource 7.1 at http://goo.gl/Eoa1s.

Settings
Prior to administering any form, you will want to verify and customize any
specific settings including the ability to automatically collect users’ email
addresses, limit responses to only one response, shuffle the question order,
customize the confirmation message after they complete the form, and/or enable
the quiz functions. Use the gear in the top right of the form to access the three
areas of the settings: General, Presentation, and Quizzes, as shown in Figure 7.3.
Figure 7.3 Settings—General
General
There may be times when you are administering a quiz and you want to be sure
the student who completes it does not type someone else’s name in the Name
question. Or, if you are using Add-ons to send emails to the user completing the
form, you can save the user time by automatically collecting their email address
so they do not need to type it in. Select the checkbox for Collect email
address.If you check the next checkbox, you can also send the user’s responses
an email with the data they submitted. You can also invite users to edit their
results after they submitted their responses. If the Edit after submit checkbox is
selected, users will see a link on the final confirmation page to edit their
responses. They can save this link and edit at any time! For instance, middle
school students can easily track their progress on assessments throughout the
year on a Google Sheet. They can submit each assessment score to a Google
Form you create. If they bookmark the link to edit their response, they can
continue to add new scores to the form and you as a teacher will have one

spreadsheet that continues to update the students’ scores. This will help build
student agency.
Presentation
The presentation section of settings allows you to change the display for the
students. You can show a progress bar if you have multiple pages. You can
shuffle the questions if you don’t want students to see the same order of
questions for quizzes. You can also update the confirmation page they see when
they complete. For example, once students complete the form, you can give
them instructions on the task you want them to complete, add links to relevant
articles to read, or simply remind students to read quietly.
Quizzes
This is a fabulous feature of Forms. You can simply turn this on and allow
students to view their results immediately and allow or disallow students to see
correct answers. If you have constructive response questions, you have the
option to wait to send grades as well. This may be beneficial if you have or
administer the quiz in multiple classes so students do not share correct answers.
(See Figure 7.4.) Once you turn this on, you can go back to the form, and each
question will now have an answer key link. Once you click on it, you can set the
point value and select the correct answer(s). You can learn more about quizzes in
Forms in Resource 7.2.
Figure 7.4 Answer Key
Administering the Form

Once you have updated the look and feel of the form, you are ready to send the
form to your respondents. There are several ways to administer the form. (See
Figure 7.5.) If you are using Google Classroom, you would simply create a post
and click on the Drive icon to share the form. If you do this as an assignment,
once students click Submit, the assignment will automatically be marked as
done for that student. If you want to administer to others or you do want to use
Classroom, you can click on the Send button on the top of the form editor. You
have the options of sending via email and accessing a link. If emailing, you can
embed the form in an email by checking the box or just email your respondents a
link to complete. The latter is recommended as different email clients will
display the form differently, so all users would not have the same experience.
Figure 7.5 Send Form
Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
Quick-response (QR) codes work well with Google Forms. Create the form and shorten the URL with
http://goo.gl. Click on Details after it is shortened to reveal the QR code for the link to the form. The
uses are limitless with the QR code. The code is an image file that can be copied, emailed, faxed, or
printed on anything. When the code is read by a smartphone or tablet, the user will be taken directly
to the live form. Print the code on T-shirts, coffee mugs, or letters to parents. Get the word out with
QR codes!
Responses in Google Forms
After administering a form, you may be ready to view responses. There are
several ways to review response as shown in Figure 7.6. You can view the data

in the form file itself, which will display charts and graphs. You can also review
each respondent’s result, but probably the most useful view will be in a
spreadsheet that can be created with all the data. To access the results, simply
click on Responses in the form file. The Responses tab allows you to review the
data and will automatically create charts and display quiz results if you enabled
the quizzing functions. You can also delete data and access other options by
clicking on the three vertical dots.
Figure 7.6 Responses
Accepting Responses
If Accepting responses is turned on under the Responses tab, then the form will
allow respondents to submit data. If this is toggled off, the respondent will get a
message saying that the form is no longer accepting data.
Doing More With Responses
You have the option to clear the form responses from the summary-of-response
report. This is great because when teachers are giving the same test or quiz to
multiple class periods, the teacher can make a copy of the accompanying
spreadsheet, saving those answers as first period’s, then clear the form for
second period’s answers. Simply click the three vertical dots on the Responses
tab and select Delete all responses. (See Figure 7.7.) You also have the option of
getting an email notification when forms are submitted, downloading the data,
and printing the data!
Figure 7.7 Delete Responses

There may be times where you want to pre-fill an answer response for students
if, say, you want to give them the correct answer, or you would like for them to
view the answer and either correct it or verify its correctness. You can also create
a study guide for students using this method! You can create a pre-filled form,
add collaborators on forms, and make copies of forms by clicking on the three
vertical dots on the very top of the form as seen in Figure 7.8. Alice Keeler, a
Google Forms guru, discusses how to create custom pre-filled links for
individual students. See more in Resource 7.3 on the companion website.
Figure 7.8 Send Command
Google Forms Menu in Google SHEETS
If you elected to create a spreadsheet to view, access, and manipulate the data,
you can always access any of the Form features within the spreadsheet directly.
If a Google Sheet is connected to a form, you will see a Form menu (as in
Figure 7.9) to be able to access many features of the form, including a link to
edit the form, send the form, go to the actual form, access embed code to embed

in a website, show a summary of responses that will display graphs and charts,
and unlink the form to the spreadsheet if you no longer want the spreadsheet to
record responses.
Figure 7.9 Responses in Sheets
Summary of Responses
Responses from participants who completed the form are continuously being
collected into the form in real time. Click Show summary of responses to view
the responses to the form—you can even publish the summary document to
share with students to engage them in data interpretation. Summary view
automatically creates simple charts and graphs that describe the data in the
spreadsheet. Students and teachers do not have to learn how to create charts and
graphs in spreadsheets to see the data graphically. This is great for students who
need immediate results without having to learn complicated spreadsheet
commands. To see the data in the spreadsheet, open Google Drive and search for
a spreadsheet that has the same file name as the form. Use the commands
learned in Chapter 6 to create visually stunning charts. The Common Core State
Standards Mathematical Practice Standard 5 calls for students to use appropriate
tools wisely. Also, Anchor Standard 7 for Reading states that students should
“integrate and evaluate content presented in diverse media and formats,
including visually and quantitatively, as well as in words.” Using forms and
spreadsheets is good practice with relevant meaningful data.
Uses for Forms
Forms are especially useful in the day-to-day management of school
information. Once the user is comfortable with the creation and deployment of

Google Forms, it becomes easy to collect and sort data. Use the next section as a
starting point for form creation, but remember Google Forms can collect any
information you need.
Special Education
Collecting data and making them work for the teacher is one of the best
strategies that special education educators can employ to identify weaknesses
and find solutions. Knowing the difference between incremental changes in
ability to comprehend is a great indicator of successes. Teachers have a hard
time objectively knowing without measurable data. Forms could be created to
include certain skill sets desired by the successful special education student. It
may be hard to define goals for the students with special needs, but it is
imperative to actively assess where they are and where they are going skillwise.
Forms can make tracking students’ progress a reality. For example, a teacher
could create a form that is designed with the particular student in mind. Review
individualized education plans, accommodations, and other learning goals before
creating the form. Begin with the end in mind. Ask these questions when making
forms for student skill data:
What benchmarks should this individual student strive for?
What is appropriate developmentally for this particular student?
What skills are coming soon in the teaching plan that will help students
reach their specific goals?
Create a form that assesses this information so that it is easily discussed in
meetings and that has the validity of data to back up the assertions made by the
educators. An example form is located in Resource 7.4.
Parent/Student Communication Log
Regular communication with parents and students is key to a successful
partnership in learning—especially in the middle school years. Sometimes you
communicate with the same parents on a weekly, or even daily basis. It is always
important to log these calls/emails/texts so you have a record of the
conversations. You never know when a parent may come back to say, “You
never did tell me that!” or, “Why didn’t I know?” You probably have had many
of these experiences already and have a method for logging your

communication. Google Forms makes it easy and simple as it will timestamp
when you submitted the log and organize everything in a sortable spreadsheet!
Use this template in Resource 7.5 at https://goo.gl/eUZsWX (click on Form
menu and Edit Form to add/modify questions) or make your own.
Dean/Disciplinarian/Assistant Principal
Discipline forms are perfect for Google Forms because they reduce cost of
paper, time, and clutter. Create teacher-friendly discipline forms that can
expedite the process. All data are secure and are immediately incorporated into a
spreadsheet for easy data analysis by the person who created the form. The
spreadsheet is safe and data are secure because, unless told otherwise, Forms
does not let participants see the results. Depending on the contents of the form,
disciplinarians can filter or sort offenses by time, class period, teacher, and
student. Use your knowledge of spreadsheets to make data color-coded for easy
viewing. Take a look at Form 7.5 Lunch Detention Form on the companion
website. Encourage teachers to make shortcuts to forms for discipline and other
types. You can even make shortcuts on mobile devices like those that Mrs.
Kocher did earlier in the chapter.
Counselor
Counselors need to be contacted by students for a variety of reasons. Counselors
could create forms that are accessible by students. For example, the counselor
will create a form in Google Docs, copy the link, and shorten it using
http://goo.gl. Students need easy access to important forms that they are required
to use. The principal or their designee should be “keeper of the forms.” In this
role, the keeper of the forms will create a Google document that has the links
displayed under a heading for the purpose of the form. Share the document with
every student, keeping it in his or her documents list. When students need a
form, they are able to log in to their account, find the forms list, and fill out the
form. For examples of forms, go to Resource 7.6 at http://goo.gl/8NyVq. This
link provides a sample of what a Student Form Bank would look like. Feel free
to take and modify the forms to make them appropriate for your school. Find the
forms and more at the book’s companion website,
http://resources.corwin.com/googlemeetsms.

Response-to-Intervention Progress Monitoring
Monitoring student progress is an important part of a teacher’s role in
differentiating instruction for the individual student. Forms are an easy way to
collect such data that could make a difference in the way a student is taught. For
example, students identified as performing below expectations should be
monitored. PLCs that meet during or after school could look at the data and help
teachers make better decisions about instruction or remediation. Data should
drive decision making, and Google Forms can provide a modality for collecting
and sharing that data.
Tests or Quizzes
Google Forms is perfect for assessment. Ask questions pertaining to the subject
in a form and wait for the responses to fill into the spreadsheet for grading.
Students will be engaged while taking the quiz because of the use of technology.
Teachers will be happy because the responses do not have to be printed. No more
carrying home stacks of papers to grade. To grade the assessments, log on to
Google Drive and grade from anywhere there is an Internet connection.
Self-grading quizzes are also a possibility using the free script Flubaroo. To learn
more about Flubaroo, go to www.flubaroo.com to see a short demonstration.
Choose Your Own Adventure
Forms do not have to be limited to teacher or staff creations. Students can also
create forms such as sample quizzes, data gathering in science, progress
monitoring, and the creative Choose Your Own Adventure stories. According to
Wikipedia,
Choose Your Own Adventure is a series of children’s gamebooks where
each story is written from a second-person point of view, with the reader
assuming the role of the protagonist and making choices that determine the
main character’s actions and the plot’s outcome.
Students can use Google Forms with branching pages that will go to a different

page based upon a multiple-choice selection. Students can retell literature
stories, create their own narratives based upon historic events, and/or tie into any
content to these. Again, this allows students to write with meaning by using
diverse media including text, video, and/or images.
Other Ways to Use Google Forms
Getting-to-know-you first day of school icebreaker
Maintenance request forms
Computer technician request
Teacher evaluation
Principal can gather data about classroom during a class visit
Lesson in Focus
Student Collaborative Study Guide
The teacher will
1. Create a Google Forms quiz with three simple questions related to content that students
have been studying
Students will
1. Review and then make their own quiz relating to more questions that may be on the test
2. Create at least 20 questions of varying forms of questions (e.g., multiple choice, free
response)
3. Share the front-end of the quiz with a partner and grade their partners
4. Discuss the incorrect answers with the partner and what they should look at to improve
5. Regive the quiz to see if improvement was made
Students can repeat with different partners if time is available.
SAMR Implications—Transforming Instruction

Even More
Add-ons—Automate Your Form
Google Forms offers some advanced features. You can use Add-ons in Forms to add math-based
equations, automatically remove answer choices once selected, and send email notifications to
respondents with the data they submitted. To browse the Add-ons, simply click on the three
vertical dots on the top right of the form shown in Figure 7.10 to access and install.
Figure 7.10 Add-ons
Data Validation
When collecting data, sometimes you want to limit the response to a three-digit number. Or,
maybe you want to limit students to only selecting two answer choices on a multiple-answer
type question. Or, maybe you want to limit a narrative response to 500 characters. You can
validate the submission to be sure you get the results you intend. To view and set up validation
for the different question types, click on the three vertical dots while editing the question and
select Data validation shown in Figure 7.11. Depending on the type of questions, there are

different types of validation. To learn more about data validation, access Resource 7.7 at
https://goo.gl/jOca8R.
Figure 7.11 Data Validation
Summary
Forms are great at gathering and organizing data into spreadsheets. These can help students be
more responsible and self-directed, especially in the middle grades. Students can create surveys
gaining authentic data they can use in research, math class, or for organizing a club event.
Teachers can create self-grading quizzes and monitor student progress with ease, making real
impacts on students during PLC meetings. Google Forms supports the effectiveness of the
Common Core State Standards by getting technology into the hands of students, allowing them
to analyze their world and help them make better decisions. In the next chapter, find out how
Google Drawings can help students be creative to explain what they are learning in the form of
art. Also, students can organize information in show-stopping drawings that can be inserted into
any of the Google Docs or simply shared online.
Resources
For more information about G Suite for Education, including
lesson plans related to chapter content,
domain setup for tech administrators’ videos,
overviews and Google training materials,
the authors’ favorite websites, and
testimonials and interviews of schools currently using G Suite,
access Resources from this chapter on the companion website.
Lesson Plans

 http://resources.corwin.com/googlemeetsms

8 Google Drawings
Key Features
Design organizational charts, flowcharts, and graphic organizers
Publish work directly to the web or insert into other Google Docs
Work collaboratively on drawings
Create charts, diagrams, and graphic organizers
Chat in the margin to guide collaborators
Express what is learned visually
Seventh-grade students Mike and Sam had to develop a diagram of a
microscope. They learned about the various functions of each of the components
in class and wanted to find a way they both could work on a diagram at home.
Mr. Powers recommended they use Google Drawings. Mike and Sam went home
that night, went online, and Mike created a Google Drawing. He shared this with
Sam, and they worked collaboratively over the next hour to build their diagram.
Figure 8.1 on the next page represents the finished product.
Google Drawings offers something other office productivity suites cannot
compete with. Google Drawings is the only drawing program that allows users
to share their work with colleagues in real time. Users can share creations that
connect meaning in real time by drawing flowcharts, custom graphs,
informational posters, and graphic designs. These can be published online using
the document’s unique URL. Insert these creations into presentations,
spreadsheets, or documents to make visual connections to text. Add images to
drawings from your hard drive or the web, or add text and other annotations.
Google Drawings has “snap-to” alignment guides and auto distribution to keep
objects on the drawing canvas precisely spaced. These features make it easy to
create professional-looking graphic designs with this free Google app.
Google Drawings can help students with writing by helping them organize their
ideas. Students can make their own graphic organizers, use templates found
online or in a book, or use a specific teacher’s template. For example, a teacher
could create a custom graphic organizer designed for organizing ideas obtained
from text. The Common Core State Standards Anchor Standard 1 for Writing
wants students to “read closely” to understand the text and make analytical

conclusions from it, as shown in Table 8.1. This type of close reading should be
taught throughout the reading standards, as well as reading in the content areas.
Teachers who create graphic organizers give students a chance to organize their
thoughts and facts gathered from text to prepare for writing. The teacher may
create the graphic organizer using Google Drawings and share it with the class.
The class will make a copy of the organizer and use it to prepare for their writing
about the text.
Figure 8.1 A Google Drawing Diagram
Graphic Organizers
Use the graphic organizer in Figure 8.2 made for organizing complex text. The
reader can have full access to this graphic organizer by going to Resource 8.1 at
https://goo.gl/H0gI1S.
Creating graphic organizers that are saved in the user’s Google Drive account
will help the students and teachers transition to a paperless classroom. The
standards are clear that college- and career-ready students will need to be
organized when writing. Take advantage of Google Drawings to provide digital
organization that can be accessed by any Internet-ready device. Access Figure

8.2 Graphic Organizer for Writing by visiting the companion website. Then
follow the directions in Figure 8.2 to make a copy of it. Once a copy is made,
rename it to become the owner and then edit or share the document with anyone.
Readers can have full access to this graphic organizer for use with their students
by going to Resource 8.2 at https://goo.gl/H0gI1S.
Figure 8.2 Graphic Organizer for Writing
Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
Notice in Figure 8.2 that the drawing has objects (directions) outside the canvas area. Use the whole
area to create the drawing. When publishing the drawing, only the objects on the canvas will be seen.
However, objects outside the canvas will be seen during sharing. Teachers can create objects off-
screen for students to use while making a drawing; sometimes limiting their options increases their
creativity.
Share Versus Publish
Sharing a Google Drawing allows it to be viewed, edited, or commented on by
the person it is shared with. Collaborative drawings shared with students allow
them to create the work together in real time like any of the other document
programs. They can work on it at the same time, or they can contribute at any
time they choose and the work will be saved along with the revision history.
Publishing the drawing, conversely, will publish the work that is on the canvas
only. That means if the user has placed directions or other objects off the canvas,
then that content will not show up in the published version. When publishing

drawings, the URL given to the drawing will automatically download the
drawing as a .PNG picture file. This downloaded file will not change with
subsequent versions of the work. However, if the user clicks on the published
link again, this will download the new and most current version of the drawing.
Using Google Drawings for Exploration of Math
Concepts
Look at Table 8.2 to see an appropriate Common Core State Standard for using
Google Drawings to explore geometry. For example, teachers who want students
to investigate shapes could create a drawing that has the shapes placed outside
the canvas region. The students would click on the shapes to manipulate them on
the canvas. Shapes can be edited by clicking and dragging, rotating 90 degrees,
and flipping horizontally and vertically (also great exposure to mathematics
vocabulary words). Have them add color and text to liven up the drawings. Share
them with the teacher and class and have the students explain their
understanding of their drawing. For an example of this lesson, find Resource 8.3,
Exploring Shapes, on the companion website and make a copy of this drawing to
use it in your own class.
In addition to exploring shapes, the Drawings app can be used to create puzzles.
For example, teachers can create a set of digital tangram shapes to be
manipulated in the drawing. Instruct students to explore the shapes using flips,
slides, and turns in a variety of activities. Freely use the premade tangram set,
Resource 8.4 on the companion website.
Exploring shapes and using lines to make triangles with technology can help
students understand how graphic design could be used as a career.
File Menu
The File menu in Google Drawings contains commands that will help the user

with the creation of the drawing. The following section only describes Drawing-
specific commands. For more on the other File commands, see previous
chapters.
Download As
Download as will download the file that the user has created in another format
other than a Google Docs format. Each document type has its own set of
Download as options (see Figure 8.3). The least common of the file types in this
figure is .SVG. That extension is used in high-end graphics and can easily be
imported into graphic design programs such as Adobe Illustrator for further
design. PDF, PNG, and JPEG are very common image file types and will work
on any platform (PC, Mac, iOS, or Android).
Figure 8.3 Download As
Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
The default canvas size can be changed to form any rectangle. Click and drag the lower right-hand
corner of the canvas to make it a different size and shape. For example, to make a square canvas,
click on the sizing handle and shrink it to its smallest size, then hold down Shift and enlarge it to
make a square. Holding down Shift while resizing objects keeps the proportions of the sides the
same. For example, if the default canvas ratio is 4:3, then holding down Shift while resizing will keep
the 4:3 proportion no matter how large or small the canvas is resized.
View Menu
The View menu is pictured in Figure 8.4. It has some of the same features as
other View menus in previous chapters. Read the next section to see Drawing-
specific commands.
Figure 8.4 View Menu

Fit Zoom
Fit zoom fits the drawing to the size of the screen. While editing a drawing, the
user may zoom in many times to get a detail just right. Click Fit zoom to go
back to show the entire drawing. For example, a student making a flowchart for
chemistry class explaining how to balance a chemical equation may need to add
specific detail in certain parts of the drawing. Use the zoom feature to zoom in
on a particular part of the equation, then click Fit zoom to go back to see the
whole drawing.
Snap To
This feature helps align objects to the canvas of the drawing. Choose from Snap
to grids or Snap to guides. Snapping to grids aligns the objects to the
coordinate plane. For example, objects such as squares will appear straight,
forming 90-degree angles with the borders of the canvas. The downside to this is
that having to align two shapes in similar size proportional distances from the
vertical and horizontal will be difficult because it will have to be done by sight.
Snap to guides aligns objects to guide lines that keep objects equidistant from
each other and from the canvas borders.

Flowcharts
Creating flowcharts in science and math is a great way to take the information of
processes and make it graphically appealing. This is a great differentiation tool
for students. Have students use Google Drawings to take a complex set of steps
and make a flowchart. For example, students studying the scientific method
could create a custom graphic organizer outlining the steps. For an example of a
flowchart illustrating the scientific method, view Resource 8.5 at
http://goo.gl/qkCMb. In Table 8.3, the Common Core State Standard describes
the importance of using various forms of visuals and media to explain writing.
Students can use drawings to make timelines or animations to explain text or
gain information from these informational objects. Using technology can
improve the access of these visual displays because they can be shared with the
class or the world using share settings.
Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
While making drawings, especially flowcharts, use copy and paste to make copies of the shapes. In
some flowcharts, it is great to have the same size shape for each of the objects in the flowchart. Use
copy and paste instead of inserting a new shape and trying to draw the shape the exact size.
Drawings as Assessments
Teachers can use Drawings as an assessment tool. For example, use Drawings to
assess what the student knows about the scientific method. Assign students to
create a flowchart of the scientific method and then share it with the teacher for
grading. Another way Google Drawings can be used as an assessment tool is by
creating posters. Common Core State Standards for Mathematics Eighth Grade
address the Pythagorean Theorem. Students should be able to “Explain a proof
of the Pythagorean Theorem and its converse.” Use drawings to create an
informational poster describing the proof of the theorem and its converse.
Students should be graded on presentation of the poster for speaking and

listening standards as well as the mathematics content. Insert drawings into
presentations to give students the valuable experience of presenting to groups.
Raise the ante by inviting mathematics experts to grade the posters and the
presentation along with the teacher’s rubrics. Use Gmail’s video chat feature to
let experts chat with students from far distances. Exposing students to
professional science, technology, engineering, and mathematics careers and
having them interact will have a positive impact on them.
Graphical Toolbar
The graphical toolbar featured in Figure 8.5 is located at the top of the screen in
Google Drawings. The commands listed here are also available in the Insert
menu. Google places them at the top with graphics to make them easier to
access.
Figure 8.5 Insert Menu
Undo and redo.
Undo and redo are familiar commands. Keyboard shortcuts for these commands
are CTRL/CMD+Z and CTRL/CMD+Y, respectively (CMD for Mac, CTRL
for PC).
Copy to web clipboard.
Web clipboard is an innovative feature Google has developed. Instead of using
the computer’s clipboard that allows users to copy and paste only on the physical
computer, Google Docs can copy and paste from computer A to computer B.
This is done by using Google’s cloud technology. With Google Docs web
clipboard, students are becoming device neutral even with copy and paste.
Paint format.
This feature is much like conditional formatting used in spreadsheets. The
command will copy the formatting rules for the selected region and paste them

in a particular area on the drawing. The word paint is used figuratively to
describe pasting the formatting. For example, select a region that has a particular
style or font and paint format that style or font into another region of the drawing
without pasting the content.
Fit zoom and zoom.
This is detailed in the View section.
Select.
This icon is important because it allows the user to grab and move objects on the
drawing. The icon must be selected before the user clicks on the drawing to
perform a task. If this is not done, then whatever command is selected, such as
insert a line, will be performed. Avoid making unnecessary errors by being
aware of the select tool. Students new to drawings will be inclined to not pay
attention to which icon is selected and will most likely become frustrated not
knowing why there is a problem.
Select line.
This icon is a shortcut to inserting lines. Click the drop-down arrow to choose
from six line types to give the drawing a unique presence. Look at Figure 8.6 to
see what line types are available.
Figure 8.6 Line Type Drop-Down Menu
Shapes, Arrows, Callouts, and Equations

Click the drop-down menu to insert a shape, arrow, callout, or equation symbol.
Add text to any of these by double-clicking inside the object. Students can create
graphic designs that aid in their understanding of the concept. Creatively
exploring concepts is an important differentiation tool and should be used with
students of all ages. For example, when using shapes, students learning early-
grade geometry lessons could practice manipulating shapes in the drawing
program. To manipulate shapes, follow these steps:
1. Insert a shape by clicking on the drop-down menu in the toolbar.
2. Resize the shape by clicking and dragging one of the white, square resizing
handles.
1. To maintain proportion, hold down Shift while resizing.
3. Rotate the object about its axis by clicking on the shape’s white, circular
handle above the object as shown in Figure 8.7.
Figure 8.7 Rotate an Image
Callouts.
Make it possible for students to construct comics with their drawings by
inserting callouts. Use callouts to give inanimate objects a voice. For example,
when explaining the layers of rock in a photograph, insert callouts to make the
rock “say” something clever about its composition. Create comic strips by
inserting comics made in drawings into presentations; set the timing of slide
transitions to create animation.
Equations.
Equations are perfect for math. Create easy-to-read equations that can help

students understand a particularly hard concept. For example, create a flowchart
on how to use the distributive property. In each object, insert equation symbols
showing the steps in order.
Insert Menu
The Insert menu has many of the same commands as other programs as seen in
Figure 8.8. Insert will be the most used feature, but also remember to use many
of these same commands from the graphical insert menu located in Figure 8.5.
Figure 8.8 Insert Menu
Text Box
Insert text boxes into drawings by following these steps:
1. Click Insert, then Text box or select the icon in the toolbar menu.
2. Size the text box accordingly by clicking and dragging the white resize
boxes.
3. Fill the text box with color or change the color of the font using the edit
buttons shown in Figure 8.8.
Image
Insert images exactly like previous chapters by clicking on the icon in the

toolbar menu. Inserting images into the Drawings apps gives the user more
creativity. For example, students can insert images that they have taken
themselves or have permission to use to explain a set of ideas. Students can edit
the photo by annotating with text, adding arrows, shapes, callouts, and equation
symbols to add meaning. Creativity is up to the student. Insert these modified
images into presentations, embed in a website, or publish them with the unique
URL. Students can tell a story about what they are learning with their artwork,
meeting vital speaking and listening standards.
Link
Insert live links into drawings by following these steps:
1. Select a portion of text to be linked with a web address.
2. Click on the icon to reveal Figure 8.9.
3. Type the URL for the link into the box.
4. Click OK to link the object.
When a user clicks on the link, a web browser will open, directing the user to
more information about the object. For example, a flowchart describing the
scientific method could have links directed to more information on the
hypothesis step. Students can create Google Docs that are linked to the drawing,
detailing the concepts within the flowchart for further study. Create living
drawings.
Figure 8.9 Linking Objects in Drawings to Web Addresses

Word Art
Inserting word art gives an artistic feel to text in drawings. Inserting text boxes
alone is limiting because the font is somewhat standardized. With word art, users
can select edit options, including color fill, line color, border weight, and border
type. Insert word art by following these steps:
1. 1. Click Insert, then Word art to reveal Figure 8.10.
2. Type text in the box.
3. Use Shift+Enter to insert multiple lines of text.
4. Press Enter.
Figure 8.10 Insert Word Art
Comments
Comment on certain aspects of the drawing by right-clicking on the object you
want to comment on. This is great for grading students’ work. Insert comments
that will be constructive and make the students’ project better. Grade for content
and style from any Internet-connected computer. Comments will be seen on the
drawing, but will be off of the canvas region and will not be published. Click the
object that the drawing is attached to resolve. Use the comment stream to review
conversations about aspects of the drawing. Also, use the chat feature to
collaborate on drawings. To insert comments, see that section in Chapter 4,
“Google Documents.”
Edit Icons
Edit icons become visible when the user clicks on an object. If the object can
hold text like shapes, callouts, arrows, and equation symbols, then the text edit
buttons will appear. If the objects cannot contain text, only the fill color, line
weight, and so on will appear. Look at Figure 8.11 to see the edit icons as they
appear in the graphical toolbar in Google Drawings.

Figure 8.11 Edit Icons
Adding Text
To add text to any drawing, use text box, word art, or double-click a shape,
callout, arrow, or equation symbol. Click the object, and the following edit
buttons will appear:
Color fill and color lines of any object in the gallery.
Choose font size for any object.
Choose font style for word art only.
Change the color of text, underline, make bold, or italicize.
For an example of actual student work from sixth-grade student Fallan Harper,
look at Figure 8.12. In this example, Fallan has used all elements of adding text
to a Google Drawing to create an infographic to help younger students learn how
to open their lockers. Fallan shared this drawing with the entire middle school as
part of a school community service project. Students now have this information
in their Google Drive.
Figure 8.12 How to Open Your Locker
Lesson in Focus
Pre-writing Strategies

The teacher will
1. Create or use a template to be used for planning students’ narrative writing; use the
template referenced in Figure 8.2 or use Resource 8.6 at https://goo.gl/2BiKnJ for more
advanced students
2. Share the drawing so everyone gets a copy in Google Classroom as an assignment—Pre-
writing
3. Ask students to identify key components of their narrative with words or phrases along
with supporting details
4. Provide students feedback on their drawings by using the commenting feature
5. Ask students to revise and share their ideas with another student
SAMR Implications—Transforming Instruction
Even More
Students have the ability to not only build their own images in Google Drawings, but they can
design headers and footers for their websites (teachers can do this too) using Google Drawings.
Simply have students resize the canvas to the header of their websites (typically 990 pixels wide
by 180 pixels high) by clicking on the File menu and selecting Page setup. They can then select
the Custom option from the drop down and then change the point size to pixels. See Figure 8.13
for more details. Students can then design their custom website header.
Figure 8.13 Customizing Image Size: Website Header

Summary
Google Drawings is a dynamic graphic design program that uses G Suite for Education
signature collaborative features. Students and teachers can create collaborative drawings that
explain meaning in visually stunning ways. Students are able to express their learning in
creative ways using art, while learning an important skill of graphic design. Insert drawings into
other Google Docs to add creativity to presentations or documents. Teachers are able to assess
Common Core State Standards of speaking and listening by allowing students to present their
ideas depicted in their work. Students are able to create informational posters, flowcharts, and
custom graphs that can be published to the web and contribute to the world’s understanding of
the topic in new ways.
Google Drawings is a great differentiation tool that can urge students to create, collaborate, and
share their work with parents, peers, or the world. It is the final app in the Google Docs suite,
but the collaboration is not over.
Resources
For more information about G Suite for Education, including
lesson plans related to chapter content,
domain setup for tech administrators’ videos,
overviews and Google training materials,
the authors’ favorite websites, and
testimonials and interviews of schools currently using G Suite,
access Resources from this chapter on the companion website.
Lesson Plans

 http://resources.corwin.com/googlemeetsms

9 Google Drive
Key Features
Unlimited storage space
Access your files from any Internet-enabled device
Access with easy-to-use mobile apps for iOS and Android
Share any file type with anyone
Connect with collaborators to edit and view G Suite programs
Create, upload, and share folders and files
Manage Google Classroom folders in Drive
Work with third-party applications
The G Suite for Education have collaborative power to help students become
ready for college and careers. Google Classroom organizes all content, and
Google Docs, Sheets, and Slides provide a world-class office suite for users to
create, collaborate, and share. The last piece of the puzzle is storage. Google
Drive is a cloud-based storage solution that gives access to all of the user’s files
in an online cloud-based drive that can be accessed from anywhere there is an
Internet connection. This means that students and teachers can store unlimited
files of any type in Google Drive. Google Drive lets users upload files or whole
folders and gives the option to share any file type with others. Access Google
Drive on tablets or smartphones, including Android, iPhone, and iPad, with
easy-to-use mobile apps. Google Drive is not necessarily an instructional tool,
but a management and organizational tool.
Google Drive is important to the use of technology in the classroom because it
moves students into the cloud for working, learning, and organizing their digital
learning profile. These traits are evident in the ISTE Standards for Students in
Table 9.1.
It is imperative that students have access to their files and creations across many
devices from anywhere in the world. Device-neutral learning and working
environments are the gold standard for 21st-century educational systems.
Students and teachers today must have quick and easy access to their content
from any device. It is the norm. Many schools and businesses rely on a wide
variety of devices to access the Internet and their work. For example, my school

has a mix of Apple, Microsoft, and mobile devices that are all compatible with
the G Suite of educational applications. Google works on any device. When
students are exposed to the tools that are used in college and in a career, they
will be better prepared when they are thrown into that world. In this chapter, we
will learn how Google Drive supports the college- and career-readiness
standards, unifies the G Suite, and can increase digital literacy across the middle
grades to help the early adolescent face the challenges brought upon them by the
ever-increasing digital working and learning life.
STE Standards for Students, ©2016, ISTE® (International Society for Technology in Education),
iste.org. All rights reserved.
Accessing Drive
Google Drive simplifies storage. For example, a student no longer has to be on
the same computer that he or she started working on to access a file. Storage
becomes easy because files are stored in the cloud on Google’s Drive servers and
can be accessed, edited, or shared with anyone in the world from any device. For
example, as soon as a student creates a Google Doc, the Doc is saved every 2
seconds in the user’s Google Drive. A deadly computer virus could completely
kill the student’s computer, and nothing would be lost. The information does not
save to the computer, but it saves to the cloud-based storage application. There
are several ways to access your Google Drive:
1. Go to www.google.com in any web browser (preferably Google Chrome
Web Browser).
1. Sign into your G Suite account (if not signed in already)
2. Click on the 
 apps icon as shown in the arrow in Figure 9.1
2. Go to http://drive.google.com in any web browser

3. When already signed into your G Suite account, you can open the 
 apps
icon from Docs, Sheets, Slides, and Gmail.
4. In the File menu of Docs, Sheets, Slides, and Drawings, you may access
Drive files by clicking on File, then New.
1. Use the Search bar, then Shared with me, Starred, Recent, or
Upload a file from your computer’s hard drive.
Figure 9.1 Accessing Google Drive
Managing Drive
Google Drive gives users access to all of the G Suite and any other file types
they have uploaded to Drive. It is like the documents folder that is stored on a
computer, but it can be accessed from anywhere. Files can be stored, shared, and
organized in the cloud, giving the users the ability to have their files on demand
no matter where they are. Students and teachers will find that managing their
files in the cloud-based storage platform will greatly increase their productivity.
For example, students may create folders for each class and place documents,
research, or other classroom materials into the specified folder for easy retrieval
and sharing. When a teacher uses Google Classroom, student work assigned
through the learning management system (Google Classroom) is automatically
saved in that class’s Drive folder.
Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
Students live in a mobile computing world. It is natural for digital natives to share photos and ideas
using other cloud-based social media platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, and Snapchat.
Look for ways to incorporate sharing and communicating ideas about classroom topics on social
media. Teachers can use Facebook and Twitter as discussion forums connecting content from their
subject areas to learning experiences online. Google Drive makes it easy to supplement the

conversation with class materials such as links to documents and videos because it allows the user to
share files easily. Share a file about a classroom topic, copying and pasting the unique URL that
Google Drive gives every uploaded file. This is the new lifelong learning. Give them opportunities to
engage in conversations that will inspire learning in online spaces that they already are involved in.
Click on the blue New icon to reveal a drop-down menu that the user will select
to create a new Google Sheet, Slide, Drawing, Form, or More, as shown by the
arrow in Figure 9.2.
1. Click on Folder 
 to create a new folder in Drive.
2. Click on File upload 
 to upload a file from your computer’s hard drive.
3. Click on Folder upload 
 to upload an entire folder from your
computer’s hard drive. Note that Drive works from any device. For
example, you may upload a file or folder from your work computer, then go
home and upload a file or folder from your personal computer to Google
Drive. All of the files end up in the same place.
4. Click any of the G Suite file types to create a new file.
1. Click More as shown by the arrow in Figure 9.2 to reveal more file
types.
2. Click Connect more apps to open the file types shown in the box in
Figure 9.2. (Note: The file types in the box may be third-party apps
that will save their files to your Google Drive for online cloud-based
access.)
Figure 9.2 Drive Menu

Drive Menu Options
Under the My Drive section in Figure 9.3, the arrow points to a drop-down
arrow to show folder structure that the user has created. The My Drive parent
folder stores all of the files that the user owns, has created, or uploaded in
addition to the subfolders. See how the folders are displayed in Figure 9.1. Files
are displayed in a similar fashion, but icons represent documents, sheets, forms,
slides, drawings, etc.
When clicked, the Shared with me option in Figure 9.3 displays the documents
list items that are shared with the user. These files are not part of My Drive
because the user does not own them. Sometimes it is possible to accidentally
search My Drive when one is actually looking for a file that someone has shared.
In that case, any keyword that matches the document would not find any results.
Make sure to also search the Shared with me tab as well. You just might have
forgot if you created the document, or you are collaborating with a student or
colleague.
Figure 9.3 Drive Menu Expanded
The Recent menu shows a chronological order of documents that the user has
accessed or edited. This is the first place we look to start working on a file,
because it gives us a list of our most recent projects.
The Google Photos menu opens the photos that you have uploaded to Google

Drive. In your G Suite for Education, you have unlimited storage for photos and
all types of files. There is even an iOS and Android app called Google Photos
that can upload your photos taken from your smartphone camera automatically
to your Google Drive. Please remember that your Google Drive on your school
G Suite for Education account is not your personal storage. Anything in the
school’s account may be discoverable in a freedom of information request. Open
another personal Google account to store your photos and docs that have nothing
to do with school.
The Starred menu automatically lists the important documents and files that you
have given a star. This is a feature to mark certain files as important. To give a
document a star and to have it appear in the starred list, follow the steps.
1. In any document type, next to the filename of the document as shown by
the arrow in Figure 9.4, is an outline of a star.
2. Click on the star to “star” the document, and it will be added to the
important list under the Starred menu.
Figure 9.4 Star a Document
Trash shows the files that the user has deleted. Google never deletes files unless
the user empties the trash. It is like the old school recycling bin found in
Microsoft operating systems.
Figure 9.5 Documents List Sorting

Figure 9.5 shows the documents list in Drive. You may sort by the categories in
the boxes by clicking on the word. The File size in Figure 9.5 does not register
because Google does not measure the size of the folders compared to each other,
just file types. All of the things listed in the figure are folders.
Search
Google’s search power does not stop with www.google.com. It is incorporated
into everything it does. This includes Google Drive. Use the search bar at the top
of the page in Drive to search for any file type that you own or is shared with
you. There are three main types of searches. The first, Keyword search, is the
simplest and most efficient. Google reads each word of the document and the
title, and when you search for something that Google’s search algorithm thinks it
is what you are looking for, it gives you Instant search suggestions. The instant
searches are shown in Figure 9.6. If your item appears in the instant search, you
are done searching. For a slightly more detailed search, click the magnifying
glass icon to reveal more files and file types that the algorithm suggests. The
search suggests files before you are done typing.
Figure 9.6 Google Drive Search
The second search type is accessed by clicking Search Drive in Google Drive.

This reveals the list of file types shown in Figure 9.7 that the user may search.
When you click on a file type, the keyword that you use will only search the
chosen file type. This is great because you may have related spreadsheets and
text documents with the same or similar names. Students and teachers can
differentiate with their searching.
Figure 9.7 Types of Searches
The most advanced way to search Google Drive is with the More search tools
option, shown in the bottom of the menu in Figure 9.7. This is also accessed by
clicking on the down arrow in the search bar in Google Drive, as shown in
Figure 9.8. Advanced search will allow the user to pinpoint specifically what
they are looking for in Drive. If your Drive is set up like ours, this will become
invaluable. We do not treat our Drive like a clone of My Documents (PC) or
Finder (Mac). With their file systems, it resembles a physical filing cabinet
where a file is placed in a drawer (like the C: Drive, F: Drive) and that drawer
contains certain folders (documents, photos, downloads) and the file is
somewhere located in the folder. Once you go through this maze of cabinets,
drawers, and folders, time is lost and you might not actually find what you are
looking for. In Michael’s drive, there is just too much content to place into a
system of folders. In fact Michael has been storing every piece of content he has
created since 1995 in his Google Drive. Google Drive’s search feature will
search everything you have ever created or uploaded to the Google Drive
simultaneously with its best in the universe search algorithm. No need to create a

system of drawers and folders. Just search it with the three tools to maximize the
chances you will find what you are looking for. In Michael’s case, he is a digital
hoarder. He went to his mother’s house and got his hands on all of his old 3.5in
disks that his middle school and high school work was saved on. In 2005, just
before 3.5in drives were eliminated, he uploaded everything to his Google Drive.
He literally has everything he has ever created digitally stored on his Google
Drive. He can find anything with these great searching tools.
Figure 9.8 Advanced Search in Drive
The arrow in Figure 9.8 denotes searching inside the school’s domain. For
example, the central office may have official documents shared with the entire
staff to access such as personnel leave forms or lesson plan templates. The
owner of the document may give access to view or comment to the entire school
domain. This is great for templates and district documents that are uniform for
the entire system. Technology professionals love this feature because it does not
take up space on district servers, and it can be accessed from anywhere without
complicated virtual private networks.
Clicking in Drive and Mouse Maneuvers
Getting around in Google Drive is very similar to regular computer commands in
Mac and PC systems. The following rules apply:
Right-click on any file or folder: This will open a menu of options, as

shown in Figure 9.9. Many of these are self-explanatory. We will highlight
the important notes about the menu items.
Figure 9.9 Right-Click Menu
Open with: When you right-click on a file that is not a G Suite file, you
may open it with your associated G Suite application. For example, if you
have uploaded an Excel spreadsheet to your Google Drive, then you may
upgrade the file to a Google Sheet that will be collaborative and stored in
the cloud.
Get shareable link: This option will give you a shareable link. The link
may be copied and pasted into any social media application or emailed.
This is great for sharing projects with parents.
Add to My Drive: Remember that if something is shared with you, it is not
in your Drive. You have access to it with the Shared with me menu, but it
is not located in your My Drive folders. Click on this menu item to put it in
your Drive so you can organize it anyhow you wish.
Add star: Star important files that can be accessed with the Starred
Google Drive menu on the Drive homepage.
View details: This option will open a small window on the right-hand side
of the Drive to show Details and Activity. This will allow you to see who
last edited the document, and the type, size, and owner of the work. Look at

the bottom of Figure 9.10 for the Add a description button to make notes.
Figure 9.10 View Details and Activity
Download: This is like the Download as feature in the File menu in Docs.
This will download the file to your computer in the corresponding
Microsoft format.
Remove: This is the delete option. It moves the file to the trash.
Shift+Arrow keys and Command/CTRL+Click are just like Microsoft
programs and Mac computers commands when in any file window such as
Downloads, My documents, or Finder. Shift+Arrow keys will allow you to
highlight consecutive files together to perform some action. The
Command/CTRL+Click option will allow you to click a list of non-consecutive
files and perform some action.
Icons of Drive
Google Drive houses files and folders and offers ways to organize the huge
amount of digital content that is encountered from day to day. Drive has many
organizational options to choose from that can benefit teacher and student.
Students in college and career will be exposed to a large amount of digital
information that they create, consume, and share. Look at the following steps
and lists to learn more about how to retrieve and organize files in Google Drive.
Figure 9.11 shows a list of icons that can be used to organize and search for files.
To Get shareable link, Share, Preview, Delete, Add to my drive, Organize, or

perform more actions, click on the three dots in Figure 9.11.
Figure 9.11 Organization Icons
Click the Get shareable link icon to copy the link and share.
Click the Share icon to share the clicked/highlighted file or files with
others using the share settings.
Click the Preview icon (the eye) to reveal a detailed overview about the file
including (see Figure 9.11):
Image of the file
Who it is shared with
Description
What folder it is in
Click the Remove icon to move the checked file or files to the trash.
Click the Add to my Drive icon to manage files and folders.
Click the Sort files icon 
 to create list views or thumbnail views of
documents in your drive.
Click the Details icon to see the details and activity of certain documents.
Click the three-dots icon to manage additional options to the checked file,
such as changing the color of a folder, as shown in Figure 9.12.
Figure 9.12 Three Dots Managing Files
Settings

Figure 9.13 Settings
Clicking any one of these options will display the files in the documents list with
the particular format. For example, the Storage view will show the user how
much space is taken up in their Google Drive. Do not worry—G Suite for
Education accounts have no storage limits. Unlimited storage!!! Clicking the
Convert uploads checkbox will automatically convert files to their
corresponding file type in the Google Suite.
Convert uploads settings will set how the user wants to upload files into Google
Drive (Figure 9.13). These options are important to consider because if the user
is uploading a file from another format such as Microsoft Word, the user cannot
edit it with the Google Documents program. The file must be converted to a
Google Docs format before editing can occur using the online collaborative
tools. Alternatively, do not convert the file and leave it as a .doc format to simply
store the information and download it to a device where Microsoft Word is
available to edit the document.
Keyboard shortcuts are quick commands that are ideal for experienced users.
Some examples include Command+C for copy and Command+V for paste.
Click Keyboard shortcuts for a list.
Download Google Drive
Mac and PC users may download the Google Drive folder to their computer.
This installs a folder on the computer similar to other folders like the My
Documents folder on a PC. When a file is saved into the folder called Google

Drive, the file is synced into the user’s My Drive folder in the cloud. This allows
the file to be accessed from anywhere with an Internet connection and syncs any
changes automatically to Google Drive. The user can drag and drop files into the
drive for instant access across all of the users’ devices. Files that are too big to
email can easily be saved in the My Drive folder for sharing. Share them in
Drive instead of using attachments. Sharing creates a unique URL that allows
users to download the file to their computer or start editing right away if it is a G
Suite file. To share a non-G Suite file with the Google Drive app, follow these
steps:
1. Install the Google Drive folder onto your computer by clicking on the
Download Google Drive link from the settings gear in Google Drive.
2. Save any file type into the folder called Google Drive on your computer.
1. This will automatically upload the file to the My Drive folder in the
cloud. For example, when working on a Microsoft Word document,
you could save the file into the Google Drive folder on your computer
and later download the file again to a different device. When editing
from another device, save the file to Google Drive again, and the most
recent version of the file will be saved in the cloud. This reduces
multiple versions of files that were saved on many different devices.
3. Click on the My Drive folder in Google Drive to see the documents list.
Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
In Google Chrome Web Browser, you may open the last tab that was closed by using the keyboard
shortcut Command+Shift+T (Mac) or CTRL+Shift+T (PC). This is great when you accidentally
close a tab that you were working with.
Lesson in Focus
The teacher will
1. Ask students to create an organization system to their Google Drive that includes creating
a folder for each course and color code them appropriately
Students will
1. Create folders named Notes, Assignments, Projects in each course folder
2. Begin to add their files to the appropriate folder
3. Share these folders with their teachers so teachers can monitor the organization

SAMR Implications—Transforming Instruction
Even More
Google Drive does not just support Google file editing, but many other well-known Google
applications and third-party programs can be worked on and organized directly in Google Drive!
From photo-editing apps and whiteboard creation to Google Maps and graphic organizing tools,
Google Drive is truly your one-stop shop for organizing and accessing tools for learning. To
access and add these applications to Google Drive, simply do the following as shown in Figure
9.14:
1. Click on New in Google Drive.
2. Select More
3. Access the defaults applications such as MyMaps allowing you and your students to
create their own maps and Google Sites, which will also allow your students to create
their own websites and digital portfolios (more of which will be discussed in the high
school book).
Some other Google Drive apps that work well with middle school students are LucidChart and
VideoNot.es.
Figure 9.14 More in Google Drive

LucidChart
LucidChart is a graphic organizing tool that provides templates such as Venn diagrams and other
relevant tools to assist students in visualizing and organizing content. It is extremely intuitive,
collaborative, and efficient. All files are available in Google Drive. Consider having students
plan their writing sequence with this tool or build timelines and other visual representations of
content. As of early 2017, students and educators can sign up for a free upgrade by accessing
Resource 9.1 at www.lucidchart.com/pages/usecase/education.
VideoNot.es
VideoNot.es is a great note-taking tool that works directly with YouTube videos. Students use
this tool to take notes as they watch a video. Every single note is time-stamped aligned to the
video. Students can at any time click on any note, and the video will play at the time that
specific note was taken. See Figure 9.15 to see how it is laid out. Especially in middle school,
students sometimes need to review what the context of a specific note references. This makes it
simple for students to better understand the content and become more self-directed. All these
notes are saved in Google Drive in a VideoNot.es folder that is automatically created.
Figure 9.15 VideoNot.es
Summary
Google Drive is the storage solution for G Suite for Education that provides unlimited storage
for users to store any file type. Students and teachers can share, manage, and upload files and
folders easily to their online hard drive, which gives them flexibility to work anywhere. With
Google Drive, students can create folders and organize their digital content creating student
progress portfolios that can track their academic record. For example, students entering college
may be required to submit a writing sample from their high school work. With Google Drive,
students can access all of their work from any grade level and not worry about where they saved
it. Similarly, teachers can create their professional learning folders where they can store
information found online and share it with coworkers through share settings.
Wherever the users go, so do their files. Google Drive is the final piece of the puzzle for storage
for the G Suite, giving the user mobility. College and career will increasingly rely on mobility of
its students and employees to get work done on the go. Although this chapter highlights the last

of the official G Suite for Education, the next chapter will explore an array of supportive tools
produced by Google to make G Suite for Education even better.

10 Even More Google
Key Features
Search secrets
A Google a Day trivia search game
http://goo.gl RL Shortener
Quick-response (QR) codes
Chrome Apps and Extensions
Google Maps
Google Scholar
Throughout the previous chapters, we have been learning about the G Suite. In
the G Suite of applications, students and teachers have access to world-class
cloud-based applications. These apps are not the end of the story when learning
and working with Google, but they are just the ones nicely packaged and
controlled by the school’s domain administrator. Other apps exist that are not
part of the G Suite for Education service, and they can be accessed with ease and
have high educational value linking to the college and career standards. This
chapter explores other free Google products that can supplement the G Suite for
Education package to help students and teachers thrive in a technology-based
learning environment.
Search
Search is Google’s most popular product. It is so popular that it is now part of
the English language. USAToday.com reported as early as June 2006 that the
word google was added to the Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary as a
verb (Resource 10.1). To google means to do a web search for something.
Google frowns on this use of the word because it may take away from its brand
if people start to use it generically as any web search and not specifically a
Google web search. Xerox faced this problem.
Search is Google’s first priority. Google’s familiar search bar is in every part of
the G Suite, where it can help users find what they have created in Google Drive,
emailed in Gmail, or can help users search for appointment details in Google

Calendar. Most people’s first experience with Google is using the search engine
www.google.com. Google has a clean look with no advertisements on its front
page. The crisp, clean backdrop clears the mind and reminds the user to think
simply when searching. Simple search terms are often the best. For example,
when a user wants to find websites that contain information about how to cite
using American Psychological Association (APA) style, type the search term
APA citation example in the search box and press Enter to reveal websites that
Google has ranked based on its search algorithm. The simple approach using the
fewest words possible will reveal the most relevant results. The most relevant
websites are found near the top of the search results. This directs the user to a
webpage that may contain the information the user seeks.
Search is difficult to teach. It requires trial and error and attention to precision.
The user should learn from the first few searches and tailor subsequent searches
to acquire information that is useful. Students who do not find what they are
looking for in the first few results that Google provides tend to give up and
report their findings with incomplete or inaccurate information. Google provides
online courses for anyone to learn how to search better. Sign up for Google’s
Power Searching Course by clicking on the link in Resource 10.2 on the
companion website. It is student friendly, and it is a required part of our middle
school technology classes. Use the following tips to help students avoid
misinformation in searches.
Use quotes.
Placing quotes around a specific word or phrase will signal Google to only
provide search results that contain the exact spelling and order of the words in
quotes. For example, when searching for education technology, the search results
will give the user content that has the words education and technology. By
placing quotes around the two words “education technology,” Google will
provide search results that have the words education technology exactly as it
appears in the quotes. This will narrow down search results and save the user
time.
Search a specific site.
Search a specific website by typing the word site followed by a colon. For
example, site:www.nytimes.com education technology would return results that
only come from www.nytimes.com that have to do with education technology.

Use the minus sign.
Use the minus (−) or the dash sign to eliminate terms from the search results. For
example, a student wants to know about King Tut, but the teacher explicitly does
not want the information to come from www.wikipedia.org. To exclude search
results that originate from www.wikipedia.org, place a minus sign in front of the
website like in the following example: King Tut −site:www.wikipedia.org.
Use the calculator.
Every Google search bar is a calculator. Place common or complex math in the
search bar, and Google will give you the answer. For example, students are able
to type into the Google bar 2 * 8 + (sqrt 64)^ 3 and Google will calculate the
expression and display the result. It even recognizes functions such as y = 2x + 4
or y = x^2. Google will graph the function as the first search result (see Figure
10.1). For an example of higher level math, watch the YouTube videos on the
companion website to see amazing three-dimensional graphs and explanations of
their −functions. It is a must see for any math teacher!
Resource 10.3
Resource 10.4
Resource 10.5
The box in Figure 10.1 below the search query, y = x^2, notes that there are more
search results than just the graph. Google ranks the graph of the function above
the other search results because it thinks that the graph is the most useful for the
query. In case the user was looking for more information about the function, he
or she can scroll down below the graph, and Google will provide webpages
associated with that search.
Figure 10.1 Calculator in Search Bar

Search public data.
Users may search the public data provided by the United States, World Bank,
United Nations Economic Forum, and others. The data are searchable through
Resource 10.6. Search through several databases and take advantage of the
charts generated by Google for stunning visualizations. For example, popular
data are displayed in the form of graphs and charts that are interactive. Students
can interact with the information by changing variables based on different views.
Motion charts are a great example of this. In these charts, the data are shown on
the graph with a Play button in the bottom left-hand corner. Clicking Play shows
how the data move in response to time. One of the best examples of this is the
public data of births per woman versus life expectancy of the nation in which
they live. Clicking Play will show how the data have changed over time. Find
this example at Resource 10.7 on the companion website. An example of a
simpler use of public data is U.S. population. Search from the Google bar
population of United States, and it will yield a graph of the nation’s population
over time. In addition to this information, the user can select specific states to
compare (see Figure 10.2).
Figure 10.2 State-by-State Comparison of Population

Convert units.
Users can convert any comparable units of measure, including but not limited to
length, volume, weight, and time. For example, students can easily convert
fathoms into feet by searching for 20,000 leagues to miles. This query will yield
the answer as shown in Figure 10.3. The graphic in the box in Figure 10.3 next
to the answer lets the user know that the answer came from the Google
Calculator rather than regular search results. For instance, you would cite
Google itself with the information, not a website Google brought you to. We are
not sure what planet Captain Nemo is on, but over 69,000 miles is a pretty deep
part of the ocean.
Figure 10.3 Fathoms to Miles Conversion
Knowledge Graph
Google has developed the Knowledge Graph to make it easier to find important
information about a topic being searched. Simple and clear searches with few
words, like names of places, people, or things, yield the Knowledge Graph
located on the right side of the regular search results. The Knowledge Graph

contains facts, pictures, maps, and informational highlights about the query.
Look at Figure 10.4 for an example of a search for Memphis, TN.
The Knowledge Graph will be different depending on the search term. Memphis,
TN, is a place, so located in its Knowledge Graph is the population, area, and
current weather conditions, among other items. If searching for a person, then
the graph will contain different information such as birthplace, age, contributions
to society, etc. Students and teachers can use the Knowledge Graph as a starting
point for research. It is fantastic for middle school searchers because of the quick
facts that it provides the users without having to wade through webpages for
information.
Figure 10.4 Knowledge Graph
Special Search

Google provides many ways to get information. The most common way is to
type a query in the search bar, and Google will provide the user with webpages
that contain the information. Sometimes, the information given is too broad.
Google will perform specialized searches that can narrow down the results to the
user’s specific needs. For example, students in science class may be researching
current science news for a project. But, every time the student searches for the
Large Hadron Collider, news results are buried deep in the search results that
may contain off-topic content. The student would then perform the search and
click on News search shown in the circle in Figure 10.5 to access only news
articles about the topic. This list is located on the left side of the search results.
Specifically search the Internet using the filters in Figure 10.5 to maximize
searching efficiency.
Figure 10.5 Special Search
All searches everything on the web and does not exclude any of the other
specific searches on the list in Figure 10.5.
Images will search any image file from the web, even search for a
particular color in the images.
Maps searches Google Maps and provides driving directions if the search
query follows this example: Portland, OR, to Little Rock, AR.
Videos searches videos related to the query from across the web.
News searches news-related websites and provides results accordingly.
Shopping searches various web and brick-and-mortar stores, including
amazon.com and Wal-Mart, to provide pricing and ordering of products.
Books searches the books.google.com database providing samples or in
some cases full copies of books.
Flight information can be searched using this filter. Flight search includes:
Departure/Arrival times
Prices
Map of flight
A Google a Day
Being good at search takes experience and knowledge of how the search engine

operates. Googling something without giving it thought may lead to results that
do not yield the best information; experience is necessary. Google’s algorithm
that ranks pages and web content based on the search query is constantly
evolving, and staying up-to-date can be challenging. To gain experience,
teachers and students can play the game A Google a Day. This trivia game asks
players to use their search skills to find the answers to questions posed by
Google. The game is a great way for teachers to implement a little fun in the
classroom, while teaching the students a lot about search skills. The many
college and career standards do not specifically address using computerized
search algorithms like Google’s to find digital information. Although search is
not a skill demanded by the some standards, it will be an imperative skill for the
college- and career-ready student. Practicing search skills and becoming
competent in finding information will be one of the most important skills for life
after high school. The Internet has given us valuable information, but using
search skills and developing them will help you become an expert searcher of
information. If the teacher is asking questions that Google can answer with a
quick search, then she is asking the wrong questions. It is important that we can
search and conceptualize the information to be a better decision maker. Have
students try it at www.agoogleaday.com. This will make excellent bell work or a
class starter to get students warmed up for learning. See Figure 10.6 for a
screenshot of the game.
Follow these steps to play:
1. Enter Resource 10.8, www.agoogleaday.com, into a web browser’s address
bar.
2. Click on the Start playing link as shown in Figure 10.6 to reveal the page
in Figure 10.7.
3. Read the question in the box as shown in Figure 10.7.
4. Use the Google search bar above the question to search for the answer.
1. Answers may take longer than one query; be diligent and remind
students of Standard for Mathematical Practice 1: Make sense of
problems and persevere in solving them.
5. Click the box to answer the question.
6. Press to check the answer. If correct, points will be awarded based on
speed.
Figure 10.6 A Google a Day

Figure 10.7 Search Game
Google URL Shortener
Long, complicated URLs are cumbersome to students and teachers. Long URLs
can make it very difficult for students or teachers to type the original URL into
the address bar to be directed to a website. Google provides a service that
shortens the URL and gives it a new manageable link. For example, the URL for
a document a teacher wants to share with students is
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1TNd9xj4hVWiiz7VHTfmSX7JZVnYd_tOJ
oYcBRrDRs/edit. Imagine typing this entire URL in the address bar; it is
difficult to get it right because every character in the URL must exactly match
for the web browser to find the page. The teacher can use the Google URL
Shortener to shorten the URL. For example, the URL above now turns into
http://goo.gl/mZP6T. This new URL will direct the user to the exact same
document or webpage as the long URL but without the confusion. Follow these
steps to create a shortened URL:
1. Enter Resource 10.9, http://goo.gl, into a web browser’s address bar.

2. Copy the long link to the computer’s clipboard (right-click, then copy).
3. Paste the long link into the box shown in Figure 10.8 (right-click, then
paste).
4. Click the icon.
A new shortened link is now created. The user is limited only by his or her
imagination of how to use the shortened link. If the shortened link is a Google
Doc or a file from the user’s Google Drive, then the user can share the file by
providing the shortened URL. Share the URL through Twitter, Facebook, email,
or print it out on a flier or parent newsletter. If it is a document that is used by
the class regularly, have the students memorize the shortened link, or have them
write it down in their notebooks.
Figure 10.8 Shorten the Links
QR Codes and goo.gl
In addition to shortening URLs, http://goo.gl automatically creates QR codes.
QR codes are like traditional barcodes found on library books or at the
supermarket, but they can hold many times the information a regular barcode
can hold. The most frequent use of QR codes in education is to make accessing
URLs easy on mobile devices. With the QR code, the user does not have to type
long URL into his mobile device’s address bar. Instead, he can snap the QR code
with his QR code reader application and have instant access to the link that is
encoded into the image. Figure 10.9 depicts an example of what a QR code looks
like. Snap this QR code with your reader to see a lesson where middle school
students learned about watermelons.
Figure 10.9 QR Code Watermelon

Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
Use your phone’s QR code reader application to snap the QR code in Figure 10.9 or go to this link if
you do not have a QR Reader (Resource 10.10, http://goo.gl/YbSN6). This code is attached to a link
of a Google Document. The Google Doc is an informational sheet made by a student to inform
readers about items in our school garden. The codes were printed and laminated, then placed on
stakes next to the plants. The codes serve as extra information to the people who visit our garden and
for our classes that go to the garden to research the produce grown there.
Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
Visit the links below for a list of free QR Readers for iOS and Android.
Android: Resource 10.11, http://goo.gl/yCA3D
iOS: Resource 10.12, http://goo.gl/xccVu
To create a QR code from http://goo.gl,
1. Follow the steps to shorten a link located near Figure 10.8.
2. Click on the three dots as shown by the arrow to reveal the QR Code option.
3. Copy or save the QR code image
1. This allows the user to print on paper, post to social media, or print on a t-shirt the QR
code that was created. This may be read by any tablet or smartphone to directly take the
user to the link encoded in the image.
Figure 10.10 Access QR Code

In Figure 10.11, valuable statistics and information about the link are recorded.
Access the Analytics data page by clicking on the three dots as shown on Figure
10.10.
Figure 10.11 Google URL Shortener QR Code
Technology-Infused Teaching Tip
You may have seen QR codes in magazines, advertisements, or on product packaging in a store. Take
the time to practice with your device’s QR code reader to gain experience. One activity teachers can
do with QR codes is to create a scavenger hunt. Students are given a mobile device such as an iPad or
Android tablet to read the codes. The codes are linked to Google Documents that contain questions or
clues to find the next code leading the user to another clue. See the companion website for more
amazing uses for QR codes in the classroom.
Google Chrome

Mashable, an online tech magazine, reported in May 2012 that Google Chrome
is the number-one portal to the web in the world, outranking all other browsers,
including Microsoft Internet Explorer, Mozilla Firefox, and Apple Safari in
number of users (Resource 10.13). It is a web browser developed by Google that
offers users a complete Google experience when interacting with Google’s apps
and features. Other browsers like Microsoft Internet Explorer, Apple Safari, and
Mozilla Firefox are designed to access the web differently than Google. It stands
to reason that using Google Chrome will work better with Google tools. The
other browsers do work with Google tools, but they may not have all the features
that are available in Google Chrome. These tools that the Chrome browser
provides are scaffolds to assist students (and all individuals) in productive
sharing, organizing, creating, and prioritizing their web-based content. For
example, Ben is a seventh-grade special needs student. He was asked to read a
CNN article discussing climate change. Ben already has some attention issues.
When he navigates to an article on CNN, there are advertisements, suggested
news stories, and other content that does not directly relate to the article—of
course, he is considering clicking around to view the other pieces of content
surrounded by the article. His teacher has him install the Mercury Chrome
Extension (Resource 10.14) and now he can read the online article without all
the overstimulation! See Figure 10.12 to see the transformation.
Figure 10.12 Mercury Extension—Article Comparison
Chrome Web Store
The Google Chrome Web Store is the application, extension, and theme store for
Google Chrome. Here users can install specific applications and extensions that
make the Google Chrome experience better and more efficient. Many

educational apps and extensions are available free to help students learn and
teachers be more productive. Visit https://chrome.google.com/webstore/ to
search the database.
To search and download apps from the Chrome Web Store, follow these steps:
1. Download the Google Chrome Web Browser at www.google.com/chrome.
2. Install the program on your computer.
3. Click the Google Chrome icon to access the browser from your desktop or
programs list.
4. Click on the link located in the bottom right-hand corner of Chrome to
access the store.
5. Search for apps, themes, extensions, and/or games by using the search bar
located in the upper left-hand corner of the webpage as shown in Figure
10.13.
Figure 10.13 Searching the Chrome Web Store
Chrome Apps and Extensions
So how are Apps and Extensions different?

View a curated list of some articles and resources that share some effective
Chrome apps and extensions for middle school and beyond at Resource 10.15 on
the companion website.
Google Photos
Many college and career standards want students to be college and career ready
by the time they leave high school. Google Suite for Education provides
experience with the tools they need to enter the workforce or college. Tools like
Google Photos and My Google Maps are different and more specialized and are
ideal to offer students experiences with enrichment. When students have time to
discover places and photos, they will have a better understanding of the culture
or features that make a location unique. A picture is worth a thousand words, and
there are thousands of photos from different points of view concerning the same
topic in these apps. For example, students who have taken photos of the White
House can upload their own photos to their My Google Maps and describe their
feelings and political motivations in a caption. When students get to contribute
to the existing knowledge of the topic, it is our experience that the quality of
work improves. Each time a photo is taken with a smartphone, a geotag is placed
in the data file. When uploaded to Google Photos, you may add that tag to a
map. For students, this would be a great start of the year project to upload their

photos from summer break on the same map, and students could present where
they have been and tell about the locations they visited.
To upload photos to a map follow these directions:
1. Open Google Drive.
2. Select New.
3. Select Google My Maps as shown in Figure 10.14.
4. Once opened, the My Google Map will have the menu bar shown in Figure
10.15.
5. Name the untitled map as shown with the arrow in Figure 10.15.
6. Add a marker, draw lines, add directions, and measure distance and areas
with the toolbars shown in the box in Figure 10.15.
Figure 10.14 Open My Google Maps
Figure 10.15 Toolbar for Creating Maps

When the add a marker 
 icon is clicked on a place on the map, a menu
pops up as shown in Figure 10.15. This menu allows you to add uploaded photos
and describe places on your map. Ask your students to be creative with this
feature and create literature walks about their favorite book and show it
graphically on the map. Use photos and videos from the places searchable from
the web to illustrate the points of their presentation.
Maps
Google Maps are not My Google Maps. My Google Maps are customizable. A
plain old Google Map is just a very awesome mapping software that will allow
you to find anything anywhere. Google Maps is a first-class map program that
uses Google’s search power to help users find anything in any place. Google
Maps allows users to search for directions to and from places by car, walking, or
public transportation. The search results for directions overlays routes onto the
map and provides driving mileage and time of travel, including the current traffic
conditions. Google Maps allows the user to view satellite images of locations
and zoom in for detail. Users can also use the hybrid view to overlay roads and
streets on satellite images. To search directions or locations on Google Maps,
follow these steps:
1. Go to http://maps.google.com.
2. Enter a search term into the search bar as show by the arrow in Figure
10.16. Use the following search examples to get started using Google Maps.
1. ZIP code
2. City, state
3. Physical address
4. Landmarks example: Grand Canyon
5. Places example: Cuban restaurants, Orlando, FL
3. Click the Search icon to reveal pins that are dropped onto the map,
pinpointing the location on the map of your search (see Figure 10.16).
Figure 10.16 Dropped Pins and Information

4. The dropped pin will indicate where the place is on the map. Use the
Directions button to get turn by turn.
1. Address
2. Phone number
3. Menu (if a restaurant)
4. Picture of the location
To share the map, as in Figure 10.17
1. Click on the Share icon
2. Copy the link in the box
3. Paste the link in an email, instant message, Facebook, or Twitter post
Figure 10.17 Share Link to Map
Street View and Pegman
Street View is a feature in Google Maps that lets the user see street-level
imagery of a location in Google Maps. Google has a fleet of cars that have
driven many of the roads in the world, and they have taken a 360-degree picture
every few feet. The image captures buildings, passersby, and interesting
landmarks. The purpose of this for the regular Google user is to be able to see
what the location looks like from the street before they travel there. This gives

them a way to know exactly what they are looking for when they arrive. In
education, Street View could be used in a variety of contexts. Students can
research places where Street View is enabled to see what the places look like as
if they were standing there. For example, a search for Rome, Italy, places a pin
next to the Colosseum. Activate Street View to see the Colosseum from the
street. Sometimes Google has gone off the street with Street View. This means
that they have taken their cameras inside buildings like the White House, the
Roman Colosseum, and in a boat on the Amazon River. For a full list of Street
View places, go to the Street View Gallery located at Resource 10.16. To use
Pegman to activate Street View from any map, follow these steps:
1. Follow the steps to search for locations on Google Maps described earlier.
2. Click and drag Pegman (circled in Figure 10.16) onto the map where the
user wants to see street-level imagery (if the street turns blue, Pegman has
taken a photo from that location).
3. Use the arrows that are overlaid on the image to navigate the street.
1. Using the arrows allows the student to virtually walk the streets of the
location to explore the area.
4. Exit Street View by clicking on the in the upper right-hand corner of the
map.
Scholar
Google Scholar is an easy way to search for scholarly literature. Searching
through Google Scholar will yield search results only from journals, scholarly
books, articles, university libraries, and other trusted sources. Google ranks its
search results in the same manner as publishers do. Google carefully measures
the work’s contribution to the field as well as the number of citations in other
works. Google Scholar is a great place to start a research project. For example,
senior research papers will require that the information be from trusted sources
that are scholarly in nature. The students get a chance to read some of the
abstracts and articles to gain a starting point of information. Often, students
believe that information is true or trustworthy because it was published on the
Internet. It will be valuable for students to know the difference between a plain
Google search and a Google Scholar search as they become college and career
ready. Reading evidence-based text and writing about its impact is an important
skill. To access Google Scholar, follow these steps:

1. Go to http://scholar.google.com.
2. Type a search query into the search bar shown in Figure 10.18.
3. Review the results.
4. Narrow the results by selecting the parameters located in Figure 10.19.
The box labeled A indicates Articles/Legal documents: Click on one or the other
to filter search results accordingly. In the box labeled B, click on a time interval.
In box C, check to include or exclude patents or citations.
Figure 10.18 Search Photos by Location
Figure 10.19 Scholar Search Parameters
Communication
Everything is built on communication. It is the foundation of every relationship,
and great educators know that proper communication with all stakeholders
builds the best relationships. Teachers often see communication with students as
their primary goal. Helping them understand concepts and knowledge is the core
job of a teacher. But we know that being a teacher is much more about
communicating with students. Coworkers, parents, and community members all

play a role in the school system. Google can help you build a communication
system that will save you time and organize your coworker, student, and parent
relationships with ease. The G Suite is full of Even More communication tools
that will foster the best relationships. “It’s relationships, stupid!”
Google Voice
Google offers a free telephone number that is tied to your school or personal G
Suite account. This feature is inadvertently turned off by the domain
administrator in the admin console. It is a part of Gmail and Google Chat, and
some school personnel see this as not good for student use. Westside High
School allows the students and teachers to access the Google Voice number with
their account. We want our students to be able to communicate with
professionals in the workforce or another source that will help them in their
scholastic journey. Teachers use it for parent communication. Follow the steps
below to get Google Voice and examples of how to use it with your school
community. Refer also to Figure 10.20.
1. Go to voice.google.com
1. Log into your school G Suite account
2. Click 
3. Click I want a new number
1. You want a new number because this is a way to communicate with
parents that would not allow parents or students to view your personal
phone number. When you create a new number, you get a 10-digit
telephone number for free that only rings your Gmail account. Follow
the rest of the steps to configure your new phone number.
4. Click 
 for Google to call your current real phone number.
This signals to Google that you are who you say you are. Malicious
software programs could ask Google for countless phone numbers. This is a
way they can prove that you are a human and not a robot. After you have
verified your phone, go to Step 5.
5. Find a phone number:
1. This step in the process allows the user to pick a phone number from a
list that Google has secured. There are many numbers in this list and
this will allow you to choose a number you want. For example,
Michael’s Google number is 901-466-MATH (6410). He lives in
Northeast Arkansas, but at the time he got his number, there were no

local area codes on the list of phone numbers Google controls. So, he
picked a nearby area code of 901.
1. Circle 1: Search by area code or zip code
1. This will show a list of numbers with a particular area code
or location.
2. Circle 2: Search by phrase or number
1. This will show a list of available numbers that match a
phrase. He got lucky and got the MATH phrase for his
number. That is when he taught math at a nearby middle
school.
3. Circle 3: Click to search. You do not have to have both boxes
filled with search terms. You may either choose by area code or
phrase. Caution: If you narrow down your search by area code
and phrase, you will most likely not find the number you are
wanting. Each area code only has one of each seven digit number.
After you pick your number, it is yours associated with your G Suite account.
The number is free and can call any United States domestic phone number for
free. A teacher at Michael’s school uses it for office hours. After a really difficult
math lesson, the teacher will schedule office hours from 6 pm to 7:30 pm.
During this time, students or parents may call the teacher on her school Google
Voice number and ask questions. When the 7:30 pm time comes, the teacher will
sign out of her G Suite account. This will force all other incoming calls to be
sent directly to her Gmail account as a notification. As an administrator, Michael
gives this phone number out to all his students and parents. It only rings when he
wants it to and he can call from it anywhere he is connected to the Internet. It is
great when Michael is away from his office phone to connect with parents and
community members.
Figure 10.20 Google Voice

Hangouts
Google allows several communication tools. Some are easy to understand such
as Gmail. Gmail has been around the longest and has some great features of
communication. To take communication one step further from Google Voice and
Gmail, Google introduced Hangouts. Hangouts are video chat, text chat, and
collaboration tools built into the G Suite for Education. For example, on a recent
snow day, Michael held a professional development class via Google Hangout
video chat for his teachers. The task was simple and fun. When the weather
started to look like snow or ice, he started talking to his teachers about a
professional development activity they could do from home. Michael made it
exciting and fun and put in a little competition. He emailed a premade link to the
Hangout with instructions on how to win. First prize went to the teacher with the
best pajamas, and second place went to the best bed hair. After the fun, Michael
led a technology training on how to use Hangouts for communication with guest
speakers. It went very well. Up to 15 participants can be live in the video chat at
one time. If you want more than that you may broadcast your Hangout live to

YouTube where an unlimited number of participants can access it; they just
cannot participate in two-way dialogue. To access Hangouts do the following.
1. Go to hangouts.google.com or access the G Suite apps by clicking on the
boxes as shown in Figure 10.21.
Figure 10.21 Access Google Hangouts
2. This will reveal the Hangouts landing page. From here you may start any
type of G Suite communication with any of your contacts. You may also
type an email address in the box where the arrow is pointing in Figure
10.22.
3. Select Video Call, Text Chat (Message), or Phone Call to a phone
number.
Figure 10.22 Create a New Conversation in Hangouts

G Suite offers these communication tools to teachers and students for free.
Teachers at Michael’s school use the phone call feature to call parents and make
a parent call log. Communication is the key to building all relationships in a
school community. Use these features to connect to your stakeholders.
Summary
Throughout this book, we have been learning how the G Suite for Education can be a great
resource in implementing the various college and career standards. It is the goal of the standards
to get every student college or career ready to face the challenges of life after high school. It is
apparent that the Common Core State Standards and others like it want educators to infuse more
technology into the learning environment. Standards like Anchor Standard 6 for Writing want
students to “produce and publish writing using the Internet.” G Suite for Education makes that a
reality with the use of Google Docs. It seems like the team of Google employees that built G
Suite for Education must have read the Common Core State Standards and then wrote software
to improve the learning experiences of students.
Although the G Suite for Education package includes many apps that are perfect for school and
learning, it does not contain all of the products Google offers. Search, A Google a Day, Google
URL Shortener, QR code generator, Chromebooks, Chrome Web Store, Google Maps, and
Google Scholar support the G Suite for Education package and give even more learning tools to
students. Educators who are well versed in these tools can make an impact on the proper use of
the Internet for learning. Students who have access to learn and work with tools like the ones
found at Google will be well-prepped for success in college or a career. Look for lesson plans
linked to specific Common Core State Standards in the next part of the book. The Lesson Plan
Correlation Chart (found in the Resource section on the companion website.) will direct you to
the appropriate lesson for your grade level. These lessons will refer to the use of G Suite for
Education and the supporting tools learned about in this chapter.
We hope you have enjoyed this resource. But, remember, the learning is not over. Visit our
website digitaledalliance.com to get even more lesson plans, content, and links to national and
local conferences that we host.
Resources
For more information about G Suite for Education, including

lesson plans related to chapter content,
domain setup for tech administrators’ videos,
overviews and Google training materials,
the authors’ favorite websites, and
testimonials and interviews of schools currently using G Suite,
access Resources from this chapter on the companion website.
Lesson Plans
 http://resources.corwin.com/googlemeetsms

Index
Accepting responses, 135
Action items, assigning, 65–66, 65 (figure), 66 (figure)
Add-ons:
Google Documents, 73, 74
Google Drive, 170–171, 171 (figure)
Google Forms, 128, 140, 140 (figure)
Google Sheets, 123–124, 124 (figure)
Advanced searches, 164, 164 (figure)
Anchor Standards for Writing. See Common Core State Standards for
writing
Animations, 89–90, 89 (figure), 90 (figure)
Announcements, 29, 29 (figure)
Assessments, 138–139, 148–149
See also Quizzes
Assignments, 30–31, 30 (figure)
Audience tools, 99–100, 99 (figure), 100 (figure)
Auto fill, 125
Background option, 95–96, 96 (figure)
Battery life, 9
Behavior, bad, 44
Books, searching, 178
Branding class, 25–26, 26 (figure)
Calculator, 174, 175 (figure)
Calendar, 14–15, 15 (figure)
Callouts, 151
Canvas size, changing, 147
CCSS. See Common Core State Standards headings
Charts:
Google Documents, 63–64, 63 (figure)
Google Sheets, 115–117, 115 (figure), 116 (figure), 117 (figure)
publishing, 117, 117 (figure)
Chat feature, 93, 93 (figure)
Choose Your Own Adventure stories, 139

Chrome, 183–185, 183 (figure), 184 (figure)
Chrome Apps and Extensions, 184–185
Chromebook Management Console, 6
Chromebooks, 6–9
Chrome Web Store, 184, 184 (figure)
Class activities:
about, 28, 28 (figure)
announcements, 29, 29 (figure)
assignments, 30–31, 30 (figure)
questions, 31, 31 (figure)
Classroom. See Google Classroom
Clearing formatting, 121
Cloud-based computing, 18–21, 19 (figure), 20 (figure)
Cloud-based storage. See Google Drive
Collaborative note-taking, 43–44, 43 (table), 44 (figure)
Collaborative study guide, 139
Collaborative work concerns, 93
Collaborators, emailing, 51, 52 (figure), 109, 110 (figure)
Colors, alternating, 121
Columns:
deleting, 112
freezing, 113
Comments:
Google Documents, 64–66, 65 (figure), 66 (figure), 66 (table), 67
(figure)
Google Drawings, 153
Google Sheets, 113
Common Core State Standards for math:
Google Drawings, 148
Google Forms, 137
Google Sheets, 103, 104, 107 (table), 112–113, 113 (table), 115, 119,
119 (table)
Common Core State Standards for presentations, 77–78
Common Core State Standards for reading:
about, 2
Google Drawings, 143, 144
Google Forms, 137
Google Slides, 92 (table)
Common Core State Standards for speaking and listening:

about, 2
Google Forms, 129–130, 130 (table)
Google Slides, 78–79, 78 (table), 79 (table)
Common Core State Standards for writing:
about, 2
Google Documents, 38, 39 (table), 42–43 (table), 59 (table), 64 (table),
66 (table)
Google Drawings, 148, 148 (table)
Google Forms, 130, 130 (table)
Google Slides, 79, 79 (table), 94 (table)
Communication:
Google Hangouts, 74, 192–193, 192 (figure), 193 (figure)
Google Slides, 77–79, 78 (table), 79 (table)
Google Voice, 190–191, 191 (figure)
with parents, 32, 128, 137–138
Compact controls, 57
Conditional formatting, 119–120, 120 (figure)
Converting:
files, 19, 19 (figure)
presentations, 84, 86
units of measure, 176, 176 (figure)
uploads, 168
Copy, making, 49
Copying to web clipboard, 149
Copyright laws, 62
Counselors, 138
Creating class, 24–25, 25 (figure)
Data:
collecting, 112–113, 113 (table)
formats, supported, 104–105 (table)
importance of, 107, 107 (table)
public, 175, 175 (figure)
validating, 141, 141 (figure)
Data menu, 121–122, 121 (figure)
Datasets, importing, 104–105 (table), 104–106, 105 (figure), 106 (figure)
Define tool, 69
Deleting:
responses, 135, 135 (figure)

rows/columns, 112
Dictionary, adding words to, 41
Discipline, 44, 138
Docs. See Google Documents
Document outline tool, 69, 69 (figure)
Documents. See Google Documents
Documents list, 162, 162 (figure)
Domain administrators, 21–22
Downloading:
Google Documents, 51
Google Drawings, 146, 146 (figure)
Google Drive, 166, 168–169
Google Sheets, 108
Google Slides, 86
Drafts, 33, 34 (figure)
Drawings. See Google Drawings
Drive. See Google Drive
Editing:
Google Documents, 55, 55 (figure)
Google Drawings, 153–154, 153 (figure)
Google Forms, 131, 132 (figure)
Google Sheets, 110–112, 111 (figure), 112 (table)
Emailing:
as attachment, 52–53, 53 (figure), 109, 109 (figure)
collaborators, 51, 52 (figure), 109, 110 (figure)
Gmail, 14, 18
parents, 128
Empowered Learner standard, 158 (table)
English language learners, 71, 72 (figure)
Equations, 56, 56 (figure), 60, 151
Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), 40
Explore tool, 67–68, 68 (figure)
File menu (Google Documents):
copy, making, 49
downloading option, 51
emailing as attachment, 52–53, 53 (figure)
emailing collaborators, 51, 52 (figure)

language feature, 50–51
new document, 48
open, 48
page setup, 54, 54 (figure)
printing, 54, 54 (figure)
publishing to the web, 51, 52 (figure)
revision history, 49, 49 (figure), 50 (figure)
sharing, 46–47, 47 (figure), 48 (figure)
File menu (Google Drawings), 146, 146 (figure)
File menu (Google Sheets):
data and technology, importance of, 107, 107 (table)
data formats, supported, 104–105 (table)
downloading, 108
emailing as attachment feature, 109, 109 (figure)
emailing collaborators, 109, 110 (figure)
importing datasets, 104–105 (table), 104–106, 105 (figure), 106
(figure)
printing, 110, 110 (figure)
publishing to the web, 108–109
revision history, 107, 123
spreadsheet settings, 106–107, 106 (figure)
File menu (Google Slides):
about, 83
converting presentations, 84, 86
downloading, 86
importing slides, 84–85, 84 (figure), 85 (figure)
publishing to the web, 86–87
uploading slides, 85, 85 (figure)
Files:
converting, 19, 19 (figure)
sharing, 19–21, 20 (figure)
uploading, 46
Fit zoom feature, 147
Flights, searching, 178
Flowcharts, 148, 148 (table)
Flubaroo, 124
Footers for websites, 155, 155 (figure)
Format menu (Google Sheets):
about, 118–119, 118 (figure), 119 (table)

clearing formatting, 121
colors, alternating, 121
conditional formatting, 119–120, 120 (figure)
numbers, 118, 118 (figure)
Format menu (Google Slides), 96–97, 97 (figure)
Formatting:
clearing, 121
conditional, 119–120, 120 (figure)
pasting without, 55
Forms. See Google Forms
Free statement, 10, 10 (figure)
Freezing rows/columns, 113
Full screen, 57
Future Ready Schools, 1–2, 38
Game, 178–179, 179 (figure), 180 (figure)
Gmail, 14, 18
Google, 5
Google a Day, A, 178–179, 179 (figure), 180 (figure)
Google Books Ngram Viewer, 74–75, 75 (figure)
Google Calendar, 14–15, 15 (figure)
Google Chrome, 183–185, 183 (figure), 184 (figure)
Google Chrome Apps and Extensions, 184–185
Google Chrome Web Store, 184, 184 (figure)
Google Classroom:
about, 17, 17 (figure), 23–24
About tab, 26–27, 27 (figure)
announcements, 29, 29 (figure)
assignments, 30–31, 30 (figure)
branding class, 25–26, 26 (figure)
class activities, 28–31, 28 (figure), 29 (figure), 30 (figure), 31 (figure)
creating class, 24–25, 25 (figure)
drafts and scheduling, 33, 34 (figure)
features, key, 23
Google Documents and, 39
grades, 32
homepage, 24, 24 (figure)
lesson, sample, 33
parents, communicating with, 32

questions, 31, 31 (figure)
Quick Access menu, 33, 34 (figure)
SAMR implications, 33
setting up your class, 24–28, 25 (figure), 26 (figure), 27 (figure)
Stream tab, 28–31, 28 (figure), 29 (figure), 30 (figure), 31 (figure)
Student tab, 27–28
Google Documents:
about, 16, 37–38
add-ons, 73, 74
charts, 63–64, 63 (figure)
comments, 64–66, 65 (figure), 66 (figure), 66 (table), 67 (figure)
compact controls, 57
converting files to, 19, 19 (figure)
copy, making, 49
define tool, 69
document outline tool, 69, 69 (figure)
downloading option, 51
drawings, 63
Edit menu, 55, 55 (figure)
emailing as attachment, 52–53, 53 (figure)
emailing collaborators, 51, 52 (figure)
equation editor, 60
equation toolbar, 56, 56 (figure)
explore tool, 67–68, 68 (figure)
features, key, 37
File menu, 46–54
full screen, 57
Google Classroom and, 39
Google Drawings and, 63
Google Drive, saving to, 18–19, 19 (figure), 37
images, 60–62, 61 (figure), 62 (figure)
Insert menu, 60–67
keyboarding and technology, 41–42
language feature, 50–51
living documents, 57–59, 58 (figure), 59 (table)
mode command, 56, 56 (figure)
new document, 48
note-taking, collaborative, 43–44, 43 (table), 44 (figure)
opening, 45, 45 (figure), 46 (figure), 48

page setup, 54, 54 (figure)
printing, 54, 54 (figure)
publishing to the web, 51, 52 (figure)
revision history, 49, 49 (figure), 50 (figure)
ruler, 56
SAMR implications, 74
sharing, 46–47, 47 (figure), 48 (figure)
sharing files, 19–21, 20 (figure)
spell check, 40–41, 41 (figure)
spelling suggestions, 57
Table menu, 72
testing, state-mandated, and, 40
toolbar, 40 (figure)
Tools menu, 67–72, 67 (figure)
translate tool, 71, 72 (figure)
uploading, 46
View menu, 55–57, 55 (figure), 56 (figure)
voice typing, 69–71, 70 (figure), 71 (figure)
writing standards and, 38, 39 (table), 41–42, 42–43 (table), 64 (table)
Google Drawings:
about, 143–144, 144 (figure)
adding text, 153–154, 154 (figure)
as assessments, 148–149
callouts, 151
canvas size, changing, 147
comments, 153
copying to web clipboard, 149
downloading as, 146, 146 (figure)
edit icons, 153–154, 153 (figure)
equations, 151
features, key, 143
File menu, 146, 146 (figure)
fit zoom feature, 147
flowcharts, 148, 148 (table)
Google Documents and, 63
Google Sheets and, 118
graphical toolbar, 149–151, 149 (figure), 150 (figure)
graphic organizers, 144–145, 145 (figure)
headers/footers for websites, 155, 155 (figure)

images, inserting, 152
Insert menu, 151–153, 151 (figure), 152 (figure), 153 (figure)
lesson, sample, 154
line types, 150, 150 (figure)
links, 152, 152 (figure)
math concepts, exploring, 146, 146 (table)
paint format, 149
rotating images, 150, 150 (figure)
SAMR implications, 155
select icon, 149
select line icon, 149
sharing versus publishing, 145
snap to feature, 148
text boxes, 151
undo and redo, 149
View menu, 147–148, 147 (figure)
word art, 152–153, 153 (figure)
Google Drive:
about, 15–16, 16 (figure), 157–158
accessing, 80, 80 (figure), 158, 159 (figure)
adding to, 165, 167
add-ons, 170–171, 171 (figure)
clicking in and mouse maneuvers, 165–166, 165 (figure), 166 (figure)
converting uploads, 168
details, viewing, 166, 166 (figure), 167
documents list, 162, 162 (figure)
downloading, 166, 168–169
Drive menu options, 160–162, 160 (figure), 161 (figure), 162 (figure)
features, key, 157
Google Photos, 161
icons, 166–167, 167 (figure)
keyboard shortcuts, 168
lesson, sample, 169
links, shareable, 165, 167
managing, 159–162, 160 (figure), 161 (figure), 162 (figure)
My Drive, 160
Recent, 161
removing, 166, 167
SAMR implications, 169

saving to, 18–19, 19 (figure), 37
searching, 162–164, 163 (figure), 164 (figure)
settings, 168, 168 (figure)
Shared with me, 160–161
star, adding, 166
Starred, 161, 162 (figure)
trash, 162
Google Forms:
about, 127–128
accepting responses, 135
add-ons, 128, 140, 140 (figure)
administering, 134, 134 (figure)
advantages of, 128–130
creating, 130, 131 (figure)
data validation, 141, 141 (figure)
deleting responses, 135, 135 (figure)
editing, 131, 132 (figure)
emailing parents automatically, 128
features, key, 127
Google Sheets and, 117, 117 (figure), 136–137, 136 (figure)
grading, automatic, 124
lesson, sample, 139
managing, 129
pre-filling responses, 136, 136 (figure)
presentation settings, 133
professional learning communities, 129
quiz settings, 133, 133 (figure)
responses, summary of, 137
responses in, 134–136, 135 (figure), 136 (figure)
SAMR implications, 140
settings, 132–133, 132 (figure), 133 (figure)
students and, 129–138, 130 (table)
uses for, 137–139
Google Hangouts, 74, 192–193, 192 (figure), 193 (figure)
Google Image Search, 60, 61, 61 (figure), 62, 62 (figure)
Google Maps, 178, 187–188, 187 (figure), 188 (figure)
Google Photos, 60, 161, 185–186, 186 (figure)
Google Scholar, 188–189, 189 (figure)
Google Sheets:

about, 103
add-ons, 123–124, 124 (figure)
auto fill, 125
charts, 115–117, 115 (figure), 116 (figure), 117 (figure)
clearing formatting, 121
colors, alternating, 121
comments, 113
conditional formatting, 119–120, 120 (figure)
data and technology, importance of, 107, 107 (table)
data collection for middle grades, 112–113, 113 (table)
data formats, supported, 104–105 (table)
Data menu, 121–122, 121 (figure)
deleting rows and columns, 112
downloading, 108
Edit menu, 110–112, 111 (figure), 112 (table)
emailing as attachment feature, 109, 109 (figure)
emailing collaborators, 109, 110 (figure)
features, key, 103
File menu, 104–110
Format menu, 118–121, 118 (figure), 119 (table), 120 (figure)
freezing rows or columns, 113
functions, 114, 114 (figure)
Google Drawings and, 118
Google Forms and, 117, 117 (figure), 136–137, 136 (figure)
importing datasets, 104–105 (table), 104–106, 105 (figure), 106
(figure)
Insert menu, 113–118
lessons, sample, 108, 111
list view and mobile devices, 111
math standards and, 103, 104, 107 (table), 112–113, 113 (table), 115,
119, 119 (table)
notification rules, 122, 122 (figure)
numbers, 118, 118 (figure)
Paste special command, 111, 111 (figure), 112 (table)
pivoting tables, 122
printing, 110, 110 (figure)
protecting ranges, 113
protecting sheet, 123, 123 (figure)
publishing charts, 117, 117 (figure)

publishing to the web, 108–109
revision history, 107, 123
SAMR implications, 126
sorting, 121–122, 121 (figure)
spreadsheet settings, 106–107, 106 (figure)
Tools menu, 122–123, 122 (figure), 123 (figure)
validation, 122
View menu, 112–113, 113 (table)
Google Sites, 17–18, 18 (figure)
Google Slides:
about, 77
accessing, 80–82, 80 (figure), 81 (figure)
animations, 89–90, 89 (figure), 90 (figure)
audience tools, 99–100, 99 (figure), 100 (figure)
background option, 95–96, 96 (figure)
chat in G Suite, 93, 93 (figure)
collaborative work concerns, 93
communication, 77–79, 78 (table), 79 (table)
converting presentations, 84, 86
downloading, 86
features, key, 77
File menu, 83–87, 84 (figure), 85 (figure)
Format menu, 96–97, 97 (figure)
importing slides, 84–85, 84 (figure), 85 (figure)
Insert menu, 87–95
interactive presentations, 99–100, 99 (figure), 100 (figure)
lesson, sample, 98
lines, 90–91, 91 (figure)
naming presentations, 82–83, 82 (figure)
new slides, 92, 92 (figure)
presentation editor, accessing, 80–81, 81 (figure)
Presenter View, 99, 99 (figure)
publishing to the web, 86–87
Q&A, 99–100, 99 (figure), 100 (figure)
question option, 100, 100 (figure)
research notecards, 94
SAMR implications, 98–99
shapes, 94, 95 (figure)
Slide menu, 95–96, 96 (figure)

student work example, 97
Themes window, 81, 81 (figure)
uploading slides, 85, 85 (figure)
video, 87–88, 87 (figure), 88 (figure)
word art, 88–89, 88 (figure)
Google URL Shortener, 180–183, 180 (figure), 181 (figure), 182 (figure)
Google Voice, 190–191, 191 (figure)
Grades and grading, 32, 124
Graphical toolbar:
about, 149 (figure)
callouts, 151
copying to web clipboard, 149
equations, 151
line types, 150, 150 (figure)
paint format, 149
rotating image, 150, 150 (figure)
select icon, 149
select line icon, 149
undo and redo, 149
Graphic organizers, 144–145, 145 (figure)
G Suite for Education:
about, 5, 13–14
chat feature, 93, 93 (figure)
Chromebook Management Console, 6
Chromebooks, 6–9
as cloud-based, 18–21, 19 (figure), 20 (figure)
domain administrators, 21–22
features, 13, 80
free statement, 10, 10 (figure)
hardware, 6–9
reasons for using, 10–12, 10 (figure)
users, number of, 11, 11 (figure)
vision for users, 12
See also specific apps
Hangouts, 74, 192–193, 192 (figure), 193 (figure)
Hardware, 6–9
Headers/footers for websites, 155, 155 (figure)

Icons:
edit, 153–154, 153 (figure)
Google Drawings, 153–154, 153 (figure)
Google Drive, 166–167, 167 (figure)
select, 149
select line, 149
Images:
Google Documents, 60–62, 61 (figure), 62 (figure)
Google Drawings, 152
inserting, 60, 61, 61 (figure), 62, 62 (figure)
rotating, 150, 150 (figure)
searching, 60, 61, 61 (figure), 62, 62 (figure), 178
Importing:
datasets, 104–105 (table), 104–106, 105 (figure), 106 (figure)
slides, 84–85, 84 (figure), 85 (figure)
Insert menu (Google Documents):
charts, 63–64, 63 (figure)
comments, 64–66, 65 (figure), 66 (figure), 66 (table), 67 (figure)
drawings, 63
images, 60–62, 61 (figure), 62 (figure)
Insert menu (Google Drawings):
about, 151 (figure)
comments, 153
images, 152
links, 152, 152 (figure)
text boxes, 151
word art, 152–153, 153 (figure)
Insert menu (Google Sheets):
about, 113
charts, 115–117, 115 (figure), 116 (figure), 117 (figure)
comments, 113
drawings, 118
forms, 117, 117 (figure)
functions, 114, 114 (figure)
Insert menu (Google Slides):
animations, 89–90, 89 (figure), 90 (figure)
chat in G Suite, 93, 93 (figure)
collaborative work concerns, 93
lines, 90–91, 91 (figure)

new slides, 92, 92 (figure)
research notecards, 94
shapes, 94, 95 (figure)
video, 87–88, 87 (figure), 88 (figure)
word art, 88–89, 88 (figure)
Instant search suggestions, 162–163, 163 (figure)
Instructional standards. See Common Core State Standards headings
Interactive presentations, 99–100, 99 (figure), 100 (figure)
International Society for Technology in Education (ISTE) standards:
about, 3, 4 (figure)
Empowered Learner, 158 (table)
math, 43 (table)
writing, 39 (table), 41–42, 64 (table)
Keyboarding, 41–42
Keyboard shortcuts, 168
Keyword searches, 162–163, 163 (figure)
Knowledge Graph, 176, 177 (figure)
Labels, printing, 73, 73 (figure)
Language feature, 50–51
Lessons, sample:
Google Drawings, 154
Google Drive, 169
Google Forms, 139
Google Sheets, 108, 111
Google Slides, 98
Licensing laws, 62
Lines:
Google Drawings, 150, 150 (figure)
Google Slides, 90–91, 91 (figure)
Links:
Google Drawings, 152, 152 (figure)
Google Drive, 165, 167
in living documents, 57–59, 58 (figure)
map, 188, 188 (figure)
shareable, 47, 47 (figure), 165, 167
Listening. See Common Core State Standards for speaking and listening
List view, 111

Living documents, 57–59, 58 (figure), 59 (table)
LucidChart, 170–171
Maps:
Google Maps, 178, 187–188, 187 (figure), 188 (figure)
My Google Maps, 185–186, 186 (figure)
searching, 178
sharing, 188, 188 (figure)
Math:
equation editor, 60
Google Documents, 60
Google Drawings, 146, 146 (table)
Google Sheets, 103, 104
ISTE standards, 43 (table)
See also Common Core State Standards for math
Measure, converting units of, 176, 176 (figure)
Minus sign, in searching, 174
Mobile devices, 111
Mode command, 56, 56 (figure)
Motion charts, 175
Mouse maneuvers, 165–166, 165 (figure), 166 (figure)
My Drive, 160
My Google Maps, 185–186, 186 (figure)
Naming presentations, 82–83, 82 (figure)
News, searching, 178
Ngrams, 74–75, 75 (figure)
Note-taking, collaborative, 43–44, 43 (table), 44 (figure)
Notification rules, 122, 122 (figure)
Number formats, 118, 118 (figure)
Orange Slice rubrics, 74
Page setup, 54, 54 (figure)
Paint format, 149
Parents, communicating with, 32, 128, 137–138
Paste special command, 111, 111 (figure), 112 (table)
Pasting without formatting, 55
Pedagogy, 3, 3 (figure), 4 (figure), 5

Pegman, 188
Photos, 60, 161, 185–186, 186 (figure)
Pivoting tables, 122
Polylines, 90
Power adapters, 6–7
Pre-filling responses, 136, 136 (figure)
Presentation editor, accessing, 80–81, 81 (figure)
Presentation maker. See Google Slides
Presentations, Common Core State Standards for, 77–78
Presentation settings in Google Forms, 133
Presenter View, 99, 99 (figure)
Printing:
Google Documents, 54, 54 (figure)
Google Sheets, 110, 110 (figure)
Professional learning communities, 129
Protecting:
ranges, 113
sheets, 123, 123 (figure)
Public data, searching, 175, 175 (figure)
Publishing:
charts, 117, 117 (figure)
Google Drawings, 145
Publishing to the web:
Google Documents, 51, 52 (figure)
Google Sheets, 108–109
Google Slides, 86–87
Puentedura, Ruben, 3, 4 (figure)
Q&A, 99–100, 99 (figure), 100 (figure)
QR codes. See Quick-response codes
Question option, 100, 100 (figure)
Questions, 31, 31 (figure)
Quick Access menu, 33, 34 (figure)
Quick-response codes (QR codes):
about, 181–183, 181 (figure), 182 (figure)
Google Forms, 134
Google Slides, 77, 78 (figure), 86–87
Quizzes:
Google Documents, 60

Google Forms, 133, 133 (figure), 138–139
See also Assessments
Quotes, in searching, 174
Ranges, protecting, 113
Reading. See Common Core State Standards for reading
Recent option, 161
Redo, 149
Research notecards, 94
Responses, summary of, 137
Responses in Google Forms:
about, 134–135, 135 (figure)
accepting, 135
deleting, 135, 135 (figure)
pre-filling, 136, 136 (figure)
Response-to-intervention progress monitoring, 138
Revision history:
Google Documents, 49, 49 (figure), 50 (figure)
Google Sheets, 107, 123
Rotating images, 150, 150 (figure)
Rows:
deleting, 112
freezing, 113
Rubrics, 74
Ruler, 56
SAMR model (Substitution, Augmentation, Modification, and
Redefinition):
about, 3, 4 (figure), 5
Google Classroom, 33
Google Documents, 74
Google Drawings, 155
Google Drive, 169
Google Forms, 140
Google Sheets, 126
Google Slides, 98–99
Scheduling, 33, 34 (figure)
Scholar, 188–189, 189 (figure)
Screen hinges, 8

Searching:
about, 14, 173–176
advanced, 164, 164 (figure)
books, 178
flights, 178
Google Drive, 162–164, 163 (figure), 164 (figure)
images, 60, 61, 61 (figure), 62, 62 (figure)
keyword, 162–163, 163 (figure)
Knowledge Graph, 176, 177 (figure)
maps, 178
minus sign in, 174
news, 178
public data, 175, 175 (figure)
quotes in, 174
shopping, 178
sites, specific, 174
special searches, 177–178, 178 (figure)
videos, 178
Select icon, 149
Select line icon, 149
Setting up your class:
About tab, 26–27, 27 (figure)
branding class, 25–26, 26 (figure)
creating class, 24–25, 25 (figure)
Student tab, 27–28
Shapes:
Google Drawings, 150, 150 (figure)
Google Slides, 94, 95 (figure)
Shared with me option, 160–161
Sharing:
files, 19–21, 20 (figure)
Google Documents, 19–21, 20 (figure), 46–47, 47 (figure), 48 (figure)
Google Drawings, 145
maps, 188, 188 (figure)
publishing versus, 145
Sheets. See Google Sheets
Shopping searches, 178
Sites:
creating, 17–18, 18 (figure)

headers/footers for, 155, 155 (figure)
searching specific, 174
Slide menu, 95–96, 96 (figure)
Slides. See Google Slides
Snap to feature, 148
Social media, 51, 59, 159
Sorting, 121–122, 121 (figure)
Speaking. See Common Core State Standards for speaking and listening
Special education, 137
Special searches, 177–178, 178 (figure)
Spell check, 40–41, 41 (figure)
Spelling suggestions, 57
Spreadsheet program. See Google Sheets
Standards. See Common Core State Standards headings; International
Society for Technology in Education standards
Standards for Mathematical Practice. See Common Core State Standards for
math
Stars, 161, 162 (figure), 166
Storage. See Google Drive
Stream tab:
about, 28, 28 (figure)
announcements, 29, 29 (figure)
assignments, 30–31, 30 (figure)
questions, 31, 31 (figure)
Street View, 188
Student tab, 27–28
Study guide, 139
Substitution, Augmentation, Modification, and Redefinition model. See
SAMR model
Suggesting, 56
Table menu, 72
Tables, pivoting, 122
Technology, importance of, 107, 107 (table)
Testing, state-mandated, 40
Tests. See Assessments; Quizzes
Text, adding, 153–154, 154 (figure)
Text boxes, 151
Themes window, 81, 81 (figure)

Tools menu (Google Documents):
about, 67 (figure)
define tool, 69
document outline tool, 69, 69 (figure)
explore tool, 67–68, 68 (figure)
translate tool, 71, 72 (figure)
voice typing, 69–71, 70 (figure), 71 (figure)
Tools menu (Google Sheets):
notification rules, 122, 122 (figure)
protecting sheet, 123, 123 (figure)
Translate tool, 71, 72 (figure)
Trash, 162
Undo, 149
Uploads:
converting, 168
files and folders, 46
slides, 85, 85 (figure)
URL Shortener, 180–183, 180 (figure), 181 (figure), 182 (figure)
U.S. Department of Education, 1–2
Validating, 122, 141, 141 (figure)
VideoNot.es, 171, 171 (figure)
Videos:
inserting, 87–88, 87 (figure), 88 (figure)
searching, 178
View menu (Google Documents):
about, 55 (figure)
compact controls, 57
equation toolbar, 56, 56 (figure)
full screen, 57
mode, 56, 56 (figure)
ruler, 56
spelling suggestions, 57
View menu (Google Drawings):
about, 147 (figure)
fit zoom feature, 147
snap to feature, 148
View menu (Google Sheets):

data collection, 112–113, 113 (table)
freezing rows or columns, 113
protecting ranges, 113
Voice, 190–191, 191 (figure)
Voice typing, 69–71, 70 (figure), 71 (figure)
Websites:
creating, 17–18, 18 (figure)
headers/footers for, 155, 155 (figure)
searching specific, 174
Word art:
Google Drawings, 152–153, 153 (figure)
Google Slides, 88–89, 88 (figure)
Word processing. See Google Documents
Words, popularity of specific, 74–75, 75 (figure)
Writing:
ISTE standards, 39 (table), 41–42, 64 (table)
pre-writing strategies, 154
See also Common Core State Standards for writing
YouTube videos, 87–88, 87 (figure), 88 (figure)



