33
19
42
Google+ 
for Photographers
Colby Brown

Google+
for Photographers
Colby Brown
Peachpit Press

Google+ for Photographers
Colby Brown
Peachpit Press
1249 Eighth Street
Berkeley, CA 94710
510/524-2178
510/524-2221 (fax)
Find us on the Web at www.peachpit.com
To report errors, please send a note to errata@peachpit.com
Peachpit Press is a division of Pearson Education
Copyright © 2012 by Colby Brown
Acquisitions Editor: Cliff Colby
Project Editor: Valerie Witte
Production Editor: Katerina Malone
Developmental Editor: Anne Marie Walker
Copyeditor: Anne Marie Walker 
Proofreader: Scout Festa
Composition: Kim Scott, Bumpy Design
Indexer: Joy Dean Lee
Cover Photos: Colby Brown
Cover Design: Mimi Heft
Interior Design: Mimi Heft
Notice of Rights
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of 
the publisher. For information on getting permission for reprints and excerpts, contact permissions@
peachpit.com.
Notice of Liability
The information in this book is distributed on an “As Is” basis, without warranty. While every precau-
tion has been taken in the preparation of the book, neither the author nor Peachpit shall have any 
liability to any person or entity with respect to any loss or damage caused or alleged to be caused 
directly or indirectly by the instructions contained in this book or by the computer software and hard-
ware products described in it.
Trademarks
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed 
as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book, and Peachpit was aware of a trademark 
claim, the designations appear as requested by the owner of the trademark. All other product names 
and services identified throughout this book are used in editorial fashion only and for the benefit of 
such companies with no intention of infringement of the trademark. No such use, or the use of any 
trade name, is intended to convey endorsement or other affiliation with this book.
ISBN-13: 978-0-321-82040-2
ISBN–10:  
0-321-82040-1
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Printed and bound in the United States of America

To my supporting and loving wife, Sarah; my adorable son, Jack; and all  
those who choose to follow their passion for the art of photography.

iv
Google+ for Photographers
Acknowledgments
As a photographer first and a writer second, I found that it is often easy to 
overlook the logistical and creative challenges that are part of the process 
of writing and publishing a book—let alone a book that people enjoy. The 
reality is that although I spent countless days researching and writing the 
content for this book, I was certainly not without support from many indi-
viduals who helped to put together what you see before your eyes. With-
out them, this book would not be what it is.
Throughout all my travels, the late nights, and the weekends I spend work-
ing on countless projects, my family has always been there to support me. 
Their love, compassion, and understanding help to drive me to follow my 
heart with everything I do. Sarah and Jack, my heart is forever yours.
To all of the contributors to this book, I want to thank you for your time, 
energy, and creativity. Thank you to Dave Cohen, Brian Matiash, Jay and 
Varina Patel, Scott Jarvie, Catherine Hall, Patrick di Fruscia, Alex Koloskov, 
Trey Ratcliff, and Elia Locardi for sharing your wisdom and thoughts on 
Google+ and photography in general. Thank you to Mark Waslick, Melaine 
Schweighardt, Jacob James, and Grayson Hartman for being selected to 
be a part of this book by opening up and sharing your moving experiences 
about your time on Google+ as aspiring photographers.
To Google and your employees, thank you for patiently answering my end-
less questions. It was truly a pleasure to work with you to make sure this 
book was as accurate as possible.
To the Peachpit team and all those who worked on this book, thank you! 
Without your help, creativity, expertise, and most important, patience, this 
book would not have been possible. To Anne Marie and Valerie, especially, 
thank you for the guidance and time you spent working with me. It cer-
tainly was not easy to write and publish a book as quickly as we did, and 
without your help I would have been lost.
And lastly I want to thank the photography community on Google+. Every 
day I am inspired and moved by your willingness to share not only your 
photography work, but pieces of yourselves as well. The close connections 
and relationships I’ve formed on Google+ are unlike any I’ve developed 
on an online network before. It has truly been a pleasure getting to know 
many of you over the last few months, and I look forward to meeting more 
people every day.

v
Contents
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
	
3
What Is Google+? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4
Aesthetics Matter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .10
Photographers’ Rights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .13
Google’s Hands-on Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Chapter 2 Building an Online Presence 
25
Creating a Photography Brand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .26
Principles of Social Marketing for Photographers. . . . . . . . . . . .33
Chapter 3 Getting Started with Google+ 
39
Signing Up with Google+ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .40
Understanding Your Google+ Profile. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .45
Core Features of Google+. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .62
Changing Your Google+ Settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .69
	
75
What Are Circles?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .76
Circle Organization. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Public vs. Extended Circles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .89

Google+ for Photographers
vi
	
93
Understanding Your Google+ Stream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .94
Interacting with Google+ Posts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
The Power of Search with Google+. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .105
How Does Google+ Deal with Spam?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .110
	
119
Publishing Content to Google+. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .120
Uploading and Sharing Photos to Google+ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .128
Ways to Increase Interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .135
Chapter 7 Photo Management on Google+ 
147
Photo Organization and Maintenance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .148
Photo Album Organization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .155
	
165
The Importance of Google+ Hangouts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .166
Types of Google+ Hangouts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .170
Getting Involved in Google+ Hangouts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .182
	
187
Google+ Mobile App. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .188
The Value of Staying Connected . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .205
Index. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 211

vii
Introduction
Introduction
When I first started my career as a photographer, online networks for 
photo graphers were still in their infancy. Yahoo’s Flickr was easily the most 
prominent, but even then it was only a fraction of what it is today. At the 
time, I saw no point in utilizing these resources because in reality I did 
not know they were viable resources. Instead of having the ability to eas-
ily share my work with the world, I relied on the support of friends and 
family. Instead of increasing my knowledge of postprocessing my images 
by watching a YouTube video or stumbling across a blog article, I read 
every book I could find on the subject. Instead of finding a wide variety of 
potential customers and clients in a single location, I marketed myself the 
old-fashioned way, by word of mouth. Although I am certainly grateful for 
these experiences because they have helped shape my various photogra-
phy businesses and me into what we are today, I can’t help but look at how 
much online networks have helped change the photo industry.
One of the most exciting aspects of being a photographer today is not 
only the access to affordable camera gear, but also the ability to engage 
and interact with other individuals who share in your passions and interests. 
It doesn’t matter if you are a seasoned professional or a novice with your 
first digital camera, the opportunity to connect with others to increase your 
knowledge, share your experiences, and even market to new customers 
and clients is just a mouse click away. Between message boards, photo 
sharing websites, and online social networks, photographers have more 
than their fair share of choices. However, for many, it has been confusing to 
figure out where to spend their time and energy. But once Google entered 
the online networking world with Google+, that all changed.
A Photographer’s Perspective
Although Google+ has one of the most active and engaging communities 
of photographers on the Internet, finding your footing in a new network 
can be challenging. This book originally started out as a guide on my blog 
titled “Google+: A Survival Guide to a Photographer’s Paradise,” which 
was read by over 500,000 people. Although the guide focused purely on 
step-by-step instructions on how the features of the network worked, my 

Google+ for Photographers
viii
goal with this book was to expand upon just the feature set and show 
you how to best utilize the network to help you build a following and 
establish an online presence as a photographer. Each chapter features 
an  interview—“A Photographer’s Perspective”—with some of the most 
influential photographers in the photo industry, giving you an inside look 
at how these professionals utilize Google+ on a daily basis. By working 
directly with the Google+ team of engineers and employees, I was able to 
make sure the information in this book is accurate and relevant. 
What Google+ Means to You
In the end it is the photo community that makes any network a great 
resource for photographers. In December 2011, I held an open contest on 
Google+ that gave four aspiring photographers the opportunity not only 
to be featured in this book, but to tell their personal stories of why they 
have made Google+ their home. Spread throughout this book you’ll find 
the winners of this “What Google+ Means to You” contest. These essays 
reflect the growing and supportive nature of the network and will hope-
fully give you some insight to the endless potential that can be found with 
Google+.
With this I want to welcome you to join Google+, get your feet wet, and 
utilize the content of this book to help guide you along the way. If you still 
have questions, do not hesitate to engage with the photography commu-
nity on the network or ask me directly. Needless to say, a simple Google 
search will point you in the right direction.

ix
Credits
Credits
Pages 18 and 19, photos © Dave Cohen
Pages 36 and 37, photos © Brian Matiash
Pages 208 and 209, photos © 2011–2012 Elia Locardi, all rights reserved,  
www.blamethemonkey.com
Pages 60 and 61, photos © Jay Patel, www.jaypatelphotography.com
Pages 60 and 61, photos © Varina Patel, www.photographybyvarina.com
Pages 82 and 83, photos © Scott Jarvie
Page 91, photos © Melaine Schweighardt
Pages 100 and 101, photos © Catherine Hall
Page 139, photos by Grayson Hartman, profile photo by Mary Beth Norum
Pages 144 and 145, © Patrick Di Fruscia, 2012, DiFrusciaPhotography.com
Pages 162 and 163, photos © Alex Koloskov
Pages 174 and 175, photos © Trey Ratcliff
Page 202, photos © Jacob James
Page 210, photos © Mark Waslick

9
9
9
9
9
+1

3
9
9
59
1
Why Google+ 
Works for 
Photographers
As a photographer, there is certainly no shortage of online ven-
ues to showcase your images, interact with other artists, market 
to potential clients, and learn to improve your craft. From Face-
book to Twitter, Flickr to 500px, photographers have constantly 
been forced to utilize the tools that were available rather than 
focus on what was missing. Although each of the networks can 
be beneficial to a photography business in its own way, most 
networks are typically structured in a way that makes it difficult 
to build a following or interact with people in meaningful ways. 
In the past, you had to use a mix of all of the major networks 
and image-sharing websites to fulfill your photographic needs. 
That was then. This is now.

Google+ for Photographers
4
At its core, Google+ is based on three concepts: search, social interaction, 
and control. The foundation of the network utilizes these concepts in a 
way that makes you feel as though it was designed with photographers in 
mind from the start. Never before have you had the opportunity to con-
nect and interact with some of the top photographic professionals in real 
time or find so many photographers with similar interests in a thriving and 
engaging online community. And never before have you been able to con-
trol nearly every aspect of your experience in a social network. When you 
combine these core concepts with a simple yet sleek user interface and 
a layout that displays your photographs better than any other online net-
work, it is no wonder that the photography industry has jumped head first 
into using Google+. 
In this chapter I’ll focus on explaining what Google+ truly is. I’ll talk in 
detail about the core concepts that separate Google+ from the rest, the 
truth about controlling the rights to your images online, and Google’s 
hands-on approach to social networking.
What Is Google+?
Google+ (Figure 1.1) is unlike any other network on the Web. It is an infor-
mation and media-streaming powerhouse. It is a system that is not only 
structured to promote interaction, but it thrives on it. However, to fully 
understand Google+, you can’t compare it to Facebook, Twitter, Flickr, or 
500px. It is something new, something unique, and something many of us 
in the photo industry have been waiting for.
Social Networks vs. Interest Networks
A common misconception of Google+ is that it should be used like Face-
book. For this reason, many individuals feel lost when they sign up because 
they try to interact on the two networks in the same way. I’ll let you in on 
a little secret: They are not the same. To better understand the distinction, 
let’s look at the difference between social and interest networks.
Defining social networks
In a social network such as Facebook, most users spend their time inter-
acting with those they have a close relationship with. For example, Face-
book initially started out on a single college campus, Harvard University. 
The idea was to connect and interact with other students from the same 
school in ways that were not possible before its inception. Over the years, 

5
+1  •  Why Google+ Works for Photographers
Facebook has certainly expanded and evolved, but at its core it continues 
to maintain its closed group mentality. Although the addition of Facebook 
Pages and Groups has attempted to fix this issue, the very nature of what 
made Facebook so popular conflicts with this expansion. This is one of the 
reasons that it is difficult to create a Facebook page for your business and 
gain a following as a new photographer. Shared interests and a sense of 
community are present, but they always take a back seat to the true reason 
the average Facebook user is on the network, which is to connect with 
those they already know.
Defining interest networks
In contrast, interest networks focus on connecting individuals that have 
similar interests. Flickr and 500px are perfect examples. If you are passion-
ate about photography, you are more likely to join these networks because 
there is a common bond present. However, you are less likely to find your 
Figure 1.1 The 
Welcome page 
for Google+ just 
before you initially 
sign up.

Google+ for Photographers
6
grandmother and best friend on Flickr unless they too share that same pas-
sion. The benefit of these networks is that you can surround yourself with 
other individuals who share your pursuits and interests. As a photographer, 
you can connect, engage, and collaborate with other artists who you might 
never have met in real life.
The obvious drawbacks to an interest network are typically the limited 
nature of the focus of the community and the lack of personable interac-
tion that you otherwise find on social networks like Facebook. Although 
Flickr and 500px are two of the best online sites to find beautiful photo-
graphs, you probably won’t get much out of them if your passion is music 
or you want to stay in touch with family members.
How does Google+ fit in?
When it comes to trying to define Google+, it is much more challenging 
than you might think. Just as relationships organically develop in your lives, 
the interactivity on Google+ is as dynamic, diverse, and complex as you 
want to make it. Google+ takes the meaningful interactions of a social net-
work and the sense of community development of an interest network and 
creates something new and exciting. Photographers, artists, and potential 
clients interact, support each other, and connect unlike ever before. 
Although the photography community is one of the largest on the network, 
thousands of small communities thrive on the network as well. In a sense, 
Google+ is about discovery, learning, and engaging with others who you 
might not have known about otherwise.
Core Concepts of Google+
As mentioned earlier, at the core of Google+ are three concepts that help 
shape the network and separate it from the rest: search, social interaction, 
and control.
Focusing on search
One of the most ignored benefits Google+ has over other online networks 
is Google’s role on the Internet. As a company, Google is the king of 
search on the Web. In what started out as a research project back in March 
of 1998, Google now controls close to 66 percent of all online searches, 
according to a study by Hitwise on October 13, 2011 (Figure 1.2). There-
fore, it is only natural that Google implements its complex and sophisti-
cated search algorithms into Google+. 
One of the main benefits of utilizing Google+ is the fact that your interac-
tion on the network has the potential to influence search results. Currently, 

7
+1  •  Why Google+ Works for Photographers
Internet search results are dictated by a number of factors, most important 
of which is SEO (Search Engine Optimization) for content found online. 
SEO is basically the use of methods or techniques to improve the vis-
ibility of a website on the Internet. For example, as a photographer, it is 
important to make sure you have important keywords listed on the home 
page of your website because it is the first page that is indexed (searched). 
On the home page of my photography website is an introductory para-
graph that not only describes who I am, but also contains many important, 
searchable keywords, such as “Colorado,” “landscape,” “humanitarian,” 
“workshops,” and “author.” These keywords can play an important role 
when clients or customers are performing broad online searches. You’d be 
surprised at how many contracts I have landed because a client searched 
for “Denver Landscape Photographer.” Because Google allows all content 
you choose to publish publicly on Google+ to be 
searchable, this begins to change the value of SEO on 
the Internet.
So how are SEO and Internet search results influenced 
by Google+? Google’s “Search Plus Your World” ini-
tiative is the answer. At the start of 2012, Google 
announced that it would favor and begin to integrate 
Google+ content into the search results it provides 
to users who are signed into a Google account 
(Gmail, YouTube, Google+, etc.). Which Google+ 
Colby’s Quick Tips
The more you engage with your fol-
lowers on Google+, the more they will 
interact with the content you publish. 
You must stay active and be willing to 
put in the time, but in the end it will be 
well worth it as your business begins 
to grow and your search results begin 
to climb.
Figure 1.2 Inter-
net search totals 
for October 2011. 
Source: Experian 
Hitwise.
Google
65.38%
Bing Power Search
28.62%
Yahoo
15.39%
Bing
13.23%
Note: Data is based on four-week rolling periods (ending Oct. 1, 2011, and Oct 29, 2011)
from the Hitwise sample of 10 million U.S. Internet users. Figures are for Web searches
only. Data does not include mobile search.
Source: Experian Hitwise
Google
65.38%
Bing Power Search
28.62%
Yahoo
15.39%
13.23%
Note: Data is based on four-week rolling periods (ending Oct. 1, 2011, and Oct 29, 2011)
from the Hitwise sample of 10 million U.S. Internet users. Figures are for Web searches
only. Data does not include mobile search.
Source: Experian Hitwise

Google+ for Photographers
8
content appears in a user’s search results are influenced by the +1 button 
( Figure 1.3) and who you are connected with on Google+. When you con-
nect with someone on the network and add them to your circles, content 
that those individuals publish will begin to show up in your search results 
if it is relevant to your initial search. When you click on the +1 button that 
is found throughout Google+ and on most websites, you are in essence 
recommending that content to those who follow you on the network. If 
enough people have clicked on the +1 button for one of your posts, there 
is a much higher chance it will be showcased in another user’s search 
results, because it has been recommended by a number of people. While 
this feature is optional and can be turned off easily, one can imagine the 
impact this has on more individuals finding the content you publish online 
if you are active in Google+.
In addition, you can always use Google’s search algorithms within Google+. 
Have you ever posted a photo on Flickr or seen an interesting post on 
Facebook but couldn’t remember where you saw it? Have you ever wanted 
to find a post you published six months ago but didn’t want to wade 
through all of your content to find it? Have you ever wanted to connect 
with other local photographers but didn’t know where to start? As a pro-
fessional photographer, I’ve personally experienced all of these challenges 
many times and have always been amazed at how many networks work 
against you rather than for you. With the Google+ search bar (Figure 1.4), 
finding content, an individual, or a community has never been easier.
Going beyond social interaction
At its heart, Google+ is about social interaction, connecting, engag-
ing, and discovering with others who share your interests in ways that 
go beyond your standard online social networks. 
Although Google+ is still in its infancy, it is already 
the fastest growing online network in history. In just 
16 days from its launch, it had 16 million users, a feat 
that took Twitter 780 days and Facebook 852 days. 
Now, it has pushed past 100 million users. These num-
bers are a testament to the changing tide of social 
engagement online. People understand the complexi-
ties of these human relationships and are looking for 
something more than just the superficial interactions 
of the past.
Figure 1.3 The 
Google +1 button 
helps to influence 
search results.
Colby’s Quick Tips 
Google+ Hangouts are one of the 
most exciting features of the network. 
They allow you to easily engage with 
individuals from all over the world. In 
Chapter 8 I discuss the advantages of 
using Google+ for your photography 
business and also as a learning and 
instructional tool for professionals and 
nonprofessional photographers alike.
Figure 1.4 The Google+ search bar is found at the top of every page on Google+. It 
can help you find a variety of information.

9
+1  •  Why Google+ Works for Photographers
The popularity of Google+ Hangouts (Figure 1.5) is a great example of this 
change in thought. Hangouts are basically group videoconferences that 
allow you to connect in real time with nine other individuals (ten in total) 
from anywhere in the world. Using webcams and microphones, you can 
interact, watch videos, and even share your computer screen with others. 
Not only does this open the door for some very creative ways to engage 
with colleagues, clients, and customers, but it offers endless ways to teach 
and learn from others within the photographic community.
Controlling your interactions
As we have moved further and further into the digital age, the importance 
of control, or choice, is becoming more apparent. Although every online 
network gives you tools for connecting with other individuals, they don’t 
always make it easy for you to fine-tune how you interact. In the real world, 
life is not always a two-way street but instead is a complex mix of inter-
personal relationships that sometimes overlap. On a given day, you might 
interact with 15 different individuals, but that doesn’t mean you treat those 
relationships the same or share the same information with each of those 
people.
Enter Google+ Circles (Figure 1.6). Circles are Google’s answer to the 
beautiful complexities of human interaction. They not only function as a 
means of grouping individuals together that you want to share specific 
Figure 1.5  
Google+ hang-
outs allow you to 
directly connect 
with individuals 
worldwide via 
webcam and micro-
phone through 
video conferencing 
technology.

Google+ for Photographers
10
information and content with, but they also act as filters to sort through 
the content you see and interact with on a daily basis. As with all things 
on Google+, you can utilize this feature as you see fit. Do you just want to 
have one big circle and throw everyone in there? Not a problem. Do you 
want to create separate circles for clients, customers, local photographers, 
friends, and graphic designers? You can do that too. In the end, you have 
control over what you publish, whom you publish to, and how you choose 
to interact with those you are connected with.
Aesthetics Matter
As artists, it should be no secret that aesthetics matter. As photographers, 
we are constantly looking for new and creative ways to capture the beauty 
of life on this planet. From beautiful sunsets to family portraits and even 
graveyards, each of us is subjectively looking to capture something beauti-
ful (Figure 1.7). So why does it seem as though so many websites on the 
Internet never got this memo?
Figure 1.7  
“A Beautiful Return 
Home” taken in 
Thailand. ©Colby 
Brown.
Figure 1.6  
Google+ circles 
allow you to easily 
control who you 
connect with.

11
+1  •  Why Google+ Works for Photographers
For the most part, I believe it comes down to cost. At one point early in 
my career I had to build my own website because I couldn’t afford to have 
one professionally built for me that had a creative layout and sleek design. 
If an aspiring photographer has a problem affording a fairly simple website, 
how much do you think it costs to design and code an entire social net-
work? Thousands? Well, it’s more like millions! It is no wonder that massive 
online networks like Facebook and Flickr will then implement advanced 
compression algorithms to shrink the file size of your images once you’ve 
uploaded them to their servers. Not only does it save on space, it saves 
money too.
Google seems to have recognized the need for aesthetics. Google+ is 
simple yet sleek, beautiful yet refined, and most important, it displays your 
photographs beautifully.
The Seamless Layout and Design of Google+
From the moment you sign up with Google+, you’ll notice the beautiful 
yet simple white background, the seamless navigation bar floating at the 
top of the screen, and the lack of harsh contrasting lines that separate the 
different sections of the website on any given page (Figure 1.8). Unlike 
Facebook or Flickr—where you sometimes have to jump through hoops to 
take advantage of a specific feature or change a setting—nearly everything 
you need in Google+ can easily be found on whichever page you are on.
Figure 1.8 Your 
Google+ profile 
is sleek and clean. 
It allows you to 
creatively display 
your photography 
without that com-
plex look and feel 
you find on other 
services.

Google+ for Photographers
12
The user interface has “polish” as well. When you begin to organize 
your Google+ circles on the Circles page, you’ll find some very elegant 
animations that, even though they are small, add to the overall experience. 
When you navigate from profile to profile or from post to post, the 
action doesn’t feel clunky or antiquated. All of these details may seem 
unimportant, but after you sit down for your first hour-long session with 
Google+, you will begin to appreciate these little nuances that make your 
experience more enjoyable.
How Google+ Displays Your Images
As photographers, we have enough to deal with as it is when it comes to 
having our images displayed accurately online. Because of the different 
types of computer monitors, various types of color profiles for images, and 
the multitude of different web browser options, the last thing we need is 
to have to worry about how our images display on the online networks 
we utilize.
With Google+, you have nothing to worry about. 
Clicking the Photos page (Figure 1.9) gives you a 
never-ending stream of beautiful image thumbnails 
from those in your circles in their original image 
ratios—no cropping and no distortion.
Colby’s Quick Tips
In Chapter 6 I cover the best practices 
for uploading your images to ensure 
that they look as good as possible.
Figure 1.9 The 
Photos page on 
Google+ offers an 
endless stream of 
beautiful photos 
from those you 
have connected 
with.

13
+1  •  Why Google+ Works for Photographers
To check out an image in more detail, simply click a thumbnail and a 
beautiful black lightbox opens (Figure 1.10), allowing you to view a much 
larger version of the selected image and see all of the comments and +1s 
that the photo has received. As with the rest of Google+, here too you 
will find all the necessary tools to interact with the artist, tag people in the 
image, share the image with others, and much more. Did I mention that 
Google+ even offers a fairly advanced set of photo editing tools to do 
quick corrections to your images on the fly? It does, and I’ll cover that in 
Chapter 7.
Google+ takes all of the worry out of displaying your beautiful images so 
you can concentrate on interacting with other users.
Photographers’ Rights
When it comes to uploading your photography work to any website on 
the Internet, you should be aware of the benefits and potential pitfalls that 
might lie ahead for you. Although there is great benefit to having an online 
presence and sharing your photography work and skills with the world, you 
Figure 1.10  
The lightbox in 
Google+ has a 
black background, 
allowing your 
images to jump off 
the page. 

Google+ for Photographers
14
also open yourself up to theft, copyright infringement, and occasionally, a 
complete loss of the rights to your images. People rarely pay attention to 
the fine print when entering a photography contest or joining an online 
network, but it is better late than never!
Clarifying Google’s TOS Agreement 
Before you decide to sign up for any online network or service, you should 
first read the fine print. This is found in the TOS (Terms of Service) Agree-
ment (Figure 1.11). It is within this typically lengthy, mundane, and boring 
document that you will find all the juicy details that you absolutely should 
know before you do anything else.
When Google+ was launched on June 28, 2011, a very well-known pro-
fessional photographer pulled specific lines of the Google+ TOS out of 
context and wrote a blog post warning the world about image rights and 
Google+, which was later picked up by the Washington Post. However, in 
standard fashion, it wasn’t so much the specific lines he pulled from the 
agreement that were important, it was what he omitted.
Figure 1.11  
Google’s TOS 
agreement can be 
read in its entirety 
at www.google.
com/accounts/b/0/
TOS.

15
+1  •  Why Google+ Works for Photographers
Stated in his blog post were the following lines of the Google+ TOS:
• “By submitting, posting or displaying the content you give Google 
a perpetual, irrevocable, worldwide, royalty-free, and non-exclusive 
license to reproduce, adapt, modify, translate, publish, publicly perform, 
publicly display and distribute any Content which you submit, post or 
display on or through, the Services.”
• “You agree that this license includes a right for Google to make such 
Content available to other companies, organizations or individuals with 
whom Google has relationships for the provision of syndicated services, 
and to use such Content in connection with the provision of those 
services.”
• “You understand that Google, in performing the  
required technical steps to provide the Services to 
our users, may (a) transmit or distribute your Con-
tent over various public networks and in various 
media; and (b) make such changes to your Content 
as are necessary to conform and adapt that Con-
tent to the technical requirements of connecting 
networks, devices, services or media. You agree 
that this license shall permit Google to take these 
actions.”
Now, if you read only those lines of the agreement, it 
might at first glance look like Google was taking the rights to your images, 
selling them to other companies, and laughing all the way to the bank. 
However, when you add these other two lines of the TOS agreement, the 
story changes:
• “11.1 You retain copyright and any other rights you already hold in Con-
tent which you submit, post or display on or through, the Services (for 
remainder see #3 below).”
• “This license is for the sole purpose of enabling Google to display, dis-
tribute and promote the Services and may be revoked for certain Ser-
vices as defined in the Additional Terms of those Services.”
To accurately display your images, share your content, and generally con-
nect with others on Google+, Google must first be given permission. 
When it comes to photographs or graphic art specifically, Google resizes 
your images so that they display correctly on every type and size of com-
puter monitor worldwide. It is comforting to know that my photography 
work will display accurately no matter if someone is using a smart phone or 
a $2000 professional IPS computer monitor.
Colby’s Quick Tips
As a photographer, you should pay 
close attention to the TOS agreement 
of any network or service you sign up 
for online. You would be surprised 
at how many companies try to take 
advantage of you utilizing their ser-
vices. Photography contests are no 
different. Make sure you read the fine 
print before submitting any images.

Google+ for Photographers
16
Retaining Metadata with Your Images
As a photographer, it is important to protect your images from theft and 
copyright infringement. Although some photographers take this to the 
extreme and hide all of their work from the world, others are more sensible. 
The United States has pretty strict rules about copyright infringement but 
arguably even stricter guidelines for proving copyright ownership. Even 
though registering your images with the U.S. Copyright Office is single-
handedly the best way to protect your images, embedding your copyright 
information into the image metadata is important as well (Figure 1.12).
So what is metadata you ask? By definition it is “Data 
that provides information about other data,” accord-
ing to the Merriam-Webster Dictionary. As it relates to 
photographs, metadata is data about the image, the 
artist, and any pertinent copyright information that is 
actually embedded on the image itself. Although your 
camera will automatically store information about your 
photograph (camera model, exposure settings, time 
the image was taken), you have to manually add all 
artist and copyright information during the importing 
or post-processing phase of your workflow. Many of 
the more popular image-editing and organizing appli-
cations can do this for you automatically every time you import an image 
from your camera to your computer. Adobe Lightroom, Adobe Bridge, and 
Apple Aperture are three of the most common applications.
Figure 1.12 Your metadata 
is preserved in Google+, 
allowing you to showcase 
your copyright for an image, 
as well as all of the data 
about how you captured the 
image.
Colby’s Quick Tips
Registering your photography work 
with the U.S. Copyright Office (for U.S. 
residents) is not only a very important 
step in protecting your images, but it 
is a rather painless process. Currently, 
you can register as many images as 
you can upload in an hour for less than 
$35. Visit www.copyright.gov for more 
information.

17
+1  •  Why Google+ Works for Photographers
By maintaining accurate information in your metadata,  
specifically artist and copyright information, you are 
providing a legitimate way to showcase that you own 
the rights to your images. This is important in a situa-
tion of copyright infringement because it not only 
proves that you are the original copyright holder, but 
that you provided all the necessary copyright informa-
tion. How does this pertain to Google+? Google+ 
maintains all metadata, whereas many websites on 
the Internet will strip the metadata from images once 
they are uploaded into their systems. Chapter 6 cov-
ers more on this subject.
Google’s Hands-on Approach
For a company as large as Google, it is amazing how involved it is with 
its products. Last time I checked, Flickr employees weren’t providing real-
time customer support or interacting with its members proactively. I can’t 
remember ever seeing a Facebook employee comment on a user’s post 
or show users how to correctly utilize a function of the Facebook network. 
And I certainly don’t recall ever seeing employees from any other online 
network showing up for local photography events or helping to organize 
them for their local communities. Do you ever wish the feedback you 
sent to a company actually held some weight? Google has you covered. 
That’s right; not only are Google+ employees incredibly active and help-
ful on Google+, but many of them are photographers as well. So how 
does Google+ truly separate itself from the fold? Google hires full-time 
customer service representatives called community managers, promotes 
employee interaction across all of its products, and truly listens to cus-
tomer feedback.
Google+ Community Managers
Google+ offers its users access to community  
managers. Think of Google+ community managers as 
full-time, hands-on, interactive product or service rep-
resentatives. Why? Because that is what they are. The 
role of a community manager is to respond to ques-
tions, listen to feedback, engage with users, share 
interesting content, and provide weekly Google+ 
Colby’s Quick Tips
The most important fields in your 
metadata for copyright are in a sec-
tion called IPTC (International Press 
Telecommunications Council). Be sure 
to fill out all of your contact informa-
tion, as well as the Copyright Status, 
Copyright, Rights Usage Terms, and 
Copyright Info URL tabs.
Colby’s Quick Tips
Tagging community managers in your 
posts or sending them private mes-
sages (see Chapter 3) are the best 
ways to bring attention to an issue you 
are having with Google+.

Google+ for Photographers
18
87
Dave Cohen:  
A Photographer’s Perspective
I grew up on the east coast and graduated with 
a degree in computer science from the University 
of Maryland. In 2005 I moved out to California 
after accepting an offer from Google and worked 
on Gmail for a number of years before helping 
to start the Google+ Photos team. When I’m not 
working, I’m usually out mountain biking, snow-
boarding, or taking photos.
Google+: https://plus.google.com/ 
116040565882702717981.
Q What is your job title at Google? What 
exactly do you do?
I’m a technical lead on Google+ Photos, which 
means I do a little bit of everything—from techni-
cal design to writing code, product management, 
and interacting with our users. I’m also an avid 
photographer, and I bring that perspective to the 
table when we design new features.
Q In a nutshell, what is Google+?
Google+ is a project that aims to make sharing on 
the Web more like sharing in the real world.
Q Why does it feel as though Google+ was 
built for photographers?
Making sure Google+ had a great photos experi-
ence was one of our goals from the very begin-
ning. From the stream to the lightbox to the 
album pages, we’ve worked hard to create a 
product where big, beautiful photos take a star-
ring role. There’s so much power in photographs; 
they convey emotions, tell stories, and, ultimately, 
connect people, which is what Google+ is all 
about. We work hard every day to continue 
improving this experience to make sharing photos 
in Google+ easier, faster, and more fun.
Q You are into photography, correct? Why do 
so many Google employees seem to love this 
art form?
I love photography because it gives me the 
freedom to reimagine the world around me. The 
more I get into it, the more I begin to notice all 
the little details in my surroundings that I might 
have otherwise rushed right past. The camera 
gives you so much freedom to take these details 

19
+1  •  Why Google+ Works for Photographers
45
72
60
53
39
and compose them in an infinite number of pos-
sibilities: For instance, the camera allows you to 
decide on the focal length you want, the depth 
of field, and what your focus will be. Even when I 
don’t have my camera with me, I find myself fram-
ing shots in my mind.
I think many Googlers love photography for the 
same reasons. Google is full of incredibly smart, 
creative, detail-oriented people. Photography 
gives you an outlet where you can really put in 
as much or as little time as you’d like to get that 
shot just right. Plus, we’re happy just to get out 
from behind our computers every once in a while!
Q What would your number one piece of 
advice be to a new photographer signing up for 
Google+?
One of the unique aspects of Google+ is that 
it has an amazing photographer community. A 
phenomenal number of hobbyists and pros post 
photos, share tips, and answer questions. If you’re 
a photographer who’s just getting into Google+, 
one of the first things you should do is create a 
Photographers circle and start following all the 
great photographers you come across. You might 
also be able to find a “shared circle” where some-
one else has already done the hard work for you! 
It’s inspiring to see my stream full of gorgeous 
photos every day.

Google+ for Photographers
20
The Constant Evolution of Google+
Google+ was established on June 28, 2011. Within the first six months of its 
existence, well over 100 updates and improvements were made to the network, 
many of which were significant. As Google continues to listen to customer 
feedback while expanding Google+ according to its own plans for the network, 
potential users and current users can’t help but get excited about the possibili-
ties for the future. One thing is for certain: Google is investing its heart and soul 
into Google+ and has plans to bring all of its products and services into the net-
work (Figure 1.13). Through this expansion is an amazing opportunity to build 
your photography business, get more eyes on your photography work, and con-
nect with other photographers in ways you never could before. It is an exciting 
time to be a photographer in the digital age.
Figure 1.13 An extensive list of all of the Google products that will eventually 
find their way into Google+.

21
+1  •  Why Google+ Works for Photographers
community reports to the product and engineering teams that reflect the 
most up-to-date information about the network as possible. You can send 
them private messages, engage with them in posts, and even talk with 
them in person during a Google+ hangout.
Although Google as a whole has multiple community managers for a wide 
variety of its different products, you will find four directly affiliated with 
Google+ (Figure 1.14):
•
Natalie Villalobos. Community manager for Google+
•
Toby Stein. Community manager for Google+ Mobile
•
Katherine Gramann. Community manager for Google+ Hangouts  
and Chat
•
Brian Rose. Community manager for Google+ Photos
By connecting with these Google employees on Google+, you will have 
a direct line of communication with the teams that built and continue to 
update Google+ on a daily basis.
Employee Interaction
Even though Google has multiple full-time community managers dedicated 
to different facets of Google+, it still encourages its employees to be as 
active as possible on the network. And I am not talking about just low-
level employees. At any given time you can talk with someone working on 
Google Maps, connect to an engineer working on Android, or even have 
Google’s Senior Vice President Vic Gundotra jump in a hangout with you. 
This truly gives you what feels like behind-the-scenes access to all things 
Google, which is something no other company of this size seems willing 
to do.
As mentioned earlier, many of Google’s employees, including those work-
ing on the Google+ Photos team, are actually photographers. They share 
their own images, talk about the camera gear they love, and are happy to 
help promote other photographers (Figure 1.15). But in customary Google 
fashion, their interaction doesn’t stop there.
Figure 1.14 The 
four Google+ com-
munity managers.

Google+ for Photographers
22
Over the past few years, the idea of photo walks, a 
casual gathering of photography enthusiasts of all lev-
els, has become incredibly popular. The general idea 
is that you get together a group of individuals inter-
ested in photography to meet in a specified location 
and walk around taking photos. This past year I’ve 
seen them pop up in San Francisco, Denver, Seattle, 
New York, London, Sydney, and even Death Valley 
National Park ( Figure 1.16). Since the launch of 
Google+, not only have Google employees shown up 
at these events, but they’ve promoted and often 
helped organize them as well. These events offer 
great opportunities to network with fellow local photographers, work with 
full-time working professionals, and occasionally get to meet some of the 
very people who help design, build, and code many of the Google prod-
ucts you use.
Figure 1.15 Brian 
Rose, the com-
munity manager 
for the Google+ 
Photos team is 
always promoting 
photo walks hosted 
by other Google+ 
members.
Colby’s Quick Tips
Photo walks are great networking 
events, allowing you to interact with 
other local photographers and learn 
from those who have more experience 
than you. Networking is an essential 
aspect of running a photography 
business, and you should not pass up 
an opportunity to get to know your 
colleagues.

23
+1  •  Why Google+ Works for Photographers
The Power of User Feedback
Most companies ask for feedback on the products they offer or the ser-
vices they provide, but it typically feels like a disconnected process. You 
fill out an online form, click Send, and then patiently wait for something, 
anything, to happen. Google+ offers a slightly different experience. In fact, 
Google+ updates and even adds new features often based on user feed-
back. If enough people send in a feedback request for a specific problem 
or desired feature (Figure 1.17), Google gives it a high priority on its to-do 
list. It is quite different to actually see some of the features you personally 
asked for appear on the network. The entire process gives you the feeling 
that you are part of this network and that your voice matters, which are the 
reasons that make Google+ users feel right at home.
Figure 1.17 The feedback button is 
located at the bottom left of every 
page on Google+. The box that opens 
allows you to highlight problems as 
well as black out any personal informa-
tion you do not want to share.
Figure 1.16  
A Google+ spon-
sored photo walk 
that I hosted in 
Denver, Colorado. 
Over 80 photogra-
phers showed up 
for the event.

9
9
9
9
9
+1

25
84
2
Building an 
Online Presence
In this digital age, it is impossible to ignore the benefits of 
the Internet. As family members, you share photos and keep 
in touch over long distances. As consumers, you research and 
purchase products that fit your needs. And whether you are just 
getting into photography or you are a seasoned professional, 
there is no doubt that the role of the Internet in your lives has 
changed not only the way you approach photography, but the 
way you interact with others as well.
With the increasing popularity of online networks over the last 
12 years, photographers and other artists alike have the ability 
to share their passions and creations with the world unlike ever 
before. However, when people first sign up with any of these 
online networks, they have no idea how to start building a fol-
lowing or establishing a name for themselves. 
In this chapter I’ll walk you through a few fundamental aspects 
of building a brand, such as the value of consistency and being 
yourself. I’ll also talk about social marketing and the importance 
of having the right mind-set as you plan and carry out your own 
networking strategy.

Google+ for Photographers
26
Creating a Photography Brand
With the advances of technology from within the photo industry, which has 
motivated more and more individuals to take photographs, and the grow-
ing popularity of using online networks to expand businesses, you must 
work hard to separate yourself from the fold. Google+ has a very large and 
growing photography community calling the network home. This means 
that many photographers are vying to have their voices heard and their 
images viewed (Figure 2.1).
Although producing phenomenal photography work is part of the answer, 
it is really just the beginning. You can visit websites like www.500px.com 
and www.1x.com to look at amazing images from artists you’ve never 
heard of and possibly never will again. To take your business to the next 
level, you need to create a photography brand. By definition, a brand is  
a trademark or distinctive name identifying a product or a manufacturer.  
Figure 2.1 In the 
first five months 
of Google+’s 
existence, people 
shared over 3.4 bil-
lion images on the 
network.

27
+2  •  Building an Online Presence
The idea is to make your photography work, your company, and who you 
are memorable. Trey Ratcliff is a perfect example of someone who has 
successfully developed his brand. It is difficult to look at any HDR (High 
Dynamic Range) photograph and not think of www.StuckinCustoms.com 
( Figure 2.2), which is Trey’s website and blog. It doesn’t matter if you pre-
fer HDR photo graphy or not, because you have already made the connec-
tion between his business and a genre of photography in your mind. This is 
exactly what nearly all those who want to make a living as a photographer 
should strive for.
Content Is King
When it comes to building your own photography brand, the content you 
publish and share online is the first building block. One of the biggest mis-
takes photographers of all different calibers make is not realizing that they 
are doing the same thing as everyone else. Most photographers jump into 
an online network or start a new website, share a couple of photographs, 
and then get upset when no one engages with them (Figure 2.3). Because 
of the sheer size of a network like Google+, or the Internet for that matter, 
one of the most difficult challenges to overcome is being lost in the noise 
of content already being shared.
Figure 2.2 Stuck in 
Customs is profes-
sional photogra-
pher Trey Ratcliff’s 
website and blog. 
It is one of the 
most trafficked 
travel and photog-
raphy blogs on the 
Internet.
Figure 2.3 The lack of interaction with something you 
post online is very often because people don’t even 
know you published it. With so much information flowing 
through the Internet at any given moment, you must go 
the extra mile to encourage engagement.

Google+ for Photographers
28
Creative and original content
Although your first and best instinct is to start sharing images that you 
feel best represent you as a photographer, you have to do more than that. 
Instead of just sharing one of your images, also share the story behind 
what it took to capture your photograph (Figure 2.4). If there is a topic 
that you have a fresh opinion on, write out a well-thought-out piece and 
share it with your followers (Figure 2.5). Discuss photography-related news 
and announcements based on your experiences as a photographer. Your 
average viewer has a very short attention span, and no matter how beauti-
ful a single image is on its own, often it is not enough to get a viewer to 
constantly come back to you looking for more.
Consistency in your message
Another difficult challenge of maintaining an online presence for any indi-
vidual or business is consistency. Building a following takes time, energy, 
and effort to stay on cue. It is important to maintain a level of consistency 
throughout your presence online. This doesn’t mean that you should only 
Figure 2.4 Brian Matiash is a photographer from Portland, 
Oregon, who is known for his in-depth and detailed stories of his 
photographs and passion for the art form. He experiences high 
levels of interaction on the content he publishes because he has a 
unique perspective that allows his followers to be engaged by his 
images as well as his stories.
Figure 2.5 This post by Trey Ratcliff was 
shared throughout the Internet thou-
sands of times, not only because he has 
built up a large following through vari-
ous online social networks, but because 
the topic of his post was interesting and 
he brought with it a fresh perspective 
that works for him.

29
+2  •  Building an Online Presence
share your genre of photography, such as black and white photographs. 
If your followers are used to you providing the story behind your images 
when you publish them, that is something you’ll need to keep up with.
Maintaining a consistent tone and feeling about your work, your level of 
engagement with other users, or the content you share or publish allows 
your followers to feel comfortable, and they’ll depend on you for the 
things you are known for.
Ever since Google+ launched, I’ve made myself as accessible as possible 
to other Google+ users so they could ask me questions regarding the net-
work, photo gear, my photography workshops, or anything else that is on 
their mind. Although it is very time-consuming to respond to hundreds of 
emails and tags on Google+ each week, it has allowed me to build up a 
reputation as a very approachable professional photographer and power 
user on the network (Figure 2.6).
Focusing on Others
As we venture further and further into the Internet/digital age, people 
are becoming savvier when it comes to recognizing marketing pitches or 
individuals and businesses that focus only on themselves. This is exempli-
fied when these practices emerge in a network such as Google+, which 
contains many different communities that focus on interests, such as pho-
tography. I constantly come across incredibly talented professional pho-
tographers who are struggling to build a following because they are purely 
focusing on themselves and the products or services they offer. Why? 
Because people can read through the lines.
If you look at many of the most followed photographers on Google+, they 
have a few common threads. Although they do share quality images with 
their followers, they also freely share their knowledge of photography, 
are willing to answer questions and engage with their followers, and are 
constantly helping other photographers get some recognition by sharing 
Figure 2.6 My 
accessibility to 
others allows me to 
maintain high levels 
of interaction and 
engagement with 
nearly everything I 
publish to Google+.

Google+ for Photographers
30
Sharing More About You
In the past it has been common practice for individuals to separate their busi-
nesses and personal lives. To this day, I see photographers creating separate 
online accounts for their businesses rather than consolidating everything into 
one. This is potentially an understandable strategy in many business markets, 
but for photographers, this misses the point of letting your followers actually 
get to know you.
As a photographer, my passion is to document life on this planet. I am also, how-
ever, a firm believer in the idea that my experiences have a direct effect on the 
way I view the world. This means that external factors, such as my family and 
my other interests outside of the photo industry, do play a role in the images 
I capture around the globe. By sharing information about me (Figure 2.7) or 
content that I find interesting that is not related to my photography businesses, 
I give my followers a deeper understanding of who I am as a person and what 
drives me to be the kind of photographer I am. People love the story behind the 
story, and contrary to what you might have learned in Business 101 classes in 
college, allowing your followers, clients, and customers to have the opportunity 
to understand you a little bit better will pay off in spades for your business and 
online presence.
Note that I do still refrain from engaging in or bringing up discussions on civil, 
religious, or political matters to anyone outside of my close friends and family 
because of the polarizing nature of the topics.
Figure 2.7 Much like many other well-established photographers, Catherine Hall 
makes a point of sharing more than just her images with her followers. By letting 
people get to know her as a person as well as an artist, she helps to break down 
the walls and distance commonly found when connecting with individuals over 
the Internet.

31
+2  •  Building an Online Presence
the content they publish or including them in circles they share with their 
massive followings (Chapter 4). One of my favorite practices on Google+ is 
publishing my Photographer of the Day selection (Figure 2.8). A few times 
a week I’ll search Google+ to find talented photographers who have either 
just joined or are having a hard time building a following. By sharing one 
of their images that I admire, I help their work reach a much broader and 
larger audience. I’m certainly not the only photographer on Google+ to do 
this and in fact have found and followed many great artists through other 
users’ selections.
Engage, Engage, Engage
As mentioned previously, a common misconception of many photog-
raphers on any online network is that the quality of their work alone is 
enough to magically garner a following. Those who follow this train of 
thought forget the “social” aspect of social networking. Keep in mind that 
when you publish anything online, you are in effect competing for viewer 
attention with everyone else. Users can only view so much content com-
ing at them and often miss content they would have interacted with if they 
Figure 2.8 This image by 
photographer Chip Phillips of 
Washington caught my eye as I 
was browsing through Google+. 
My following is nearly 200 times 
larger than Chip’s, so by sharing 
his beautiful image with my 
followers, he has the ability to 
reach a much wider audience 
and gain more of a following on 
the network.

Google+ for Photographers
32
knew it existed in the first place. For example, if users do not see the con-
tent you publish because they are away from their computer, how can you 
expect them to interact with it?
One of the best ways for you to begin to build an online presence and 
let people know you exist is to engage with other users. Commenting on 
posts or photos and engaging in conversations with other users gets you 
noticed on the network. In fact, you could use Google+ Hangouts (Chap-
ter 8) to easily videoconference with up to nine other Google+ users from 
all over the world, which brings a whole new personal level of engagement 
to an online network.
After you have uploaded one of your images or made a post to Google+, 
don’t forget to stick around and engage with those who interact with you 
(Figure 2.9). A common response I receive from the emails or private mes-
sages sent to me is surprise that I responded at all. Many photographers 
are not willing to take the time to engage with others, even though the 
rewards speak for themselves. My personal networking philosophy is that 
you never know what opportunities can present themselves through con-
necting with another individual, so treat everyone like gold.
Figure 2.9 Varina 
Patel and her 
husband, Jay, 
both professional 
photographers, are 
known for their 
willingness to 
engage with their 
followers. Not only 
do they share tips 
and tricks when it 
comes to helping 
others improve 
their photography 
skills, but they 
respond to and 
engage with those 
who comment on 
their photos and 
posts.

33
+2  •  Building an Online Presence
Principles of Social Marketing 
for Photographers
It is not entirely surprising that many photographers have a difficult time 
understanding various principles of social marketing. After all, the creative 
right side of the brain typically doesn’t handle concepts tied to business 
practices, which are usually very analytical in nature. Regardless, social mar-
keting is a fundamental aspect of running a photography business, building 
a brand, and establishing yourself in the photo industry.
Quality over Quantity of Followers
It is very easy to get sucked into the notion that a social network is in a 
sense a popularity contest. On Google+ alone, there are hundreds of thou-
sands of photographers, ranging from those just joining the network to 
those who have over 700,000 followers (Figure 2.10). Too often I see indi-
viduals more worried about how many followers they or the person next to 
them have rather than concentrating on building relationships with those 
who have chosen to connect with them. 
A common practice on every online network is to offer a product giveaway 
to get more users to follow you, sign up for your blog, or connect with 
you in some way. The problem with this approach is that the users you are 
attracting are not necessarily connecting with you because they enjoy your 
photography work or the content you publish, but instead are most likely 
looking for a free handout. These contests certainly have the potential to 
pad your numbers but not much else.
Figure 2.10 This is a list of the seven most 
followed photographers on Google+ accord-
ing to the Group/As website (www.group.as). 
Although these numbers might look impres-
sive at first glance, the reality is that only a 
portion of the followers are actively engaging 
with these photographers. Numbers can be 
deceptive.

Google+ for Photographers
34
When developing your own social marketing strategy, you want to focus 
on gaining quality followers, not obsess about quantity. This is not to say 
that numbers cannot have an effect on your business, but simply that you 
get much less benefit from a user who does not engage with the content 
you publish than from a user who does. If you concentrate on building 
relationships, publishing original content, and expanding your own body of 
photography work, the people will come, and more important, they will be 
the users you want to connect with.
Planning Ahead
As a landscape and travel photographer, I’m meticulous when it comes to 
researching and planning for my photography trips. When visiting a coun-
try like Nepal, I’ll spend months studying the locations I’ll be documenting, 
reading books that discuss Nepalese culture, and researching transporta-
tion, lodging, and local customs. When it comes to developing a social 
marketing strategy, you should put the same amount of thought into plan-
ning ahead.
With the content I publish on my blog or through the various online net-
works that I frequent, such as Google+, I am constantly thinking five steps 
ahead. I’m constantly thinking about choosing what articles to write, which 
images to share, and the best time to publish all of this content. Because 
social networks consist of various types of individuals from all over the 
world, it is important to take your audience into account when you are 
developing your social marketing strategy. Do most of your followers live 
in Europe? The East Coast of the United States? Australia? Are they profes-
sional photographers? Amateurs? Do you want to only reach your past cli-
ents or attempt to sell your prints to new customers? The answers to these 
questions should help you formulate a plan for deciding when to publish 
the content you want to share so that your followers actually see the post 
and how to word your posts to reach the right audience (Figure 2.11).
The bottom line is that there is no one right answer or magical equation 
when it comes to developing a solid social marketing or business strategy. 
Every photographer is different, and everyone’s clients are different (for 
the most part). You have to find out what works for you, your clients, and 
your followers, and then plan accordingly.
Sticking to Your Business Strategy
Another common mistake made on online networks is caring way too much 
about what other photographers think of your work. Most online networks 
for photographers are relatively focused on the art of photography, which 
means you’ll mostly be surrounded by other photographers. Instead of 

35
+2  •  Building an Online Presence
focusing on building a portfolio and advancing your photographic skills, 
you choose to concern yourself with how many comments a photo you 
posted received or if a certain photographer liked your work. However, 
unless you are a photo educator or instructor, your customers or clients 
are rarely other photographers. Because art is so subjective, requiring the 
admiration of other photographers is not required in order for you to grow 
as an artist and for your business to flourish.
A perfect example is HDR photography (Figure 2.12). Within the photo 
industry, it is a very polarizing topic. Although some photographers enjoy 
expanding the dynamic range of their images, many have strong dislikes 
for HDR photography. Clients and customers who purchase prints, however, 
tend to love it. Ultimately, you need to follow your own business strategy 
when it comes to marketing to your clients and not focus on whether your 
colleagues appreciate everything you publish.
There is a difference between focusing on how many people +1 your 
images on Google+ and networking or learning from other photographers. 
One is built to serve your ego and the other to better you as a photogra-
pher and help build your business. The challenge is to identify the reasons 
you are on an online network in the first place, and then develop and stick 
to a strategy to achieve your goals.
Figure 2.11 Scott Jarvie is one of the top wedding 
photographers in the United States and is based in Utah. 
Because many of his clients live in Europe, Scott is known 
for posting at all hours of the day to make sure his work 
and the content he publishes is seen by those in other 
time zones.
Figure 2.12 Elia Locardi produces some of 
the most detailed and amazing HDR images in 
the photo industry. Although not all photogra-
phers might appreciate his style, his clients and 
customers who license his images for magazines, 
billboards, and various ads around the world are 
beyond happy with his work.

Google+ for Photographers
36
56
32
Brian Matiash:  
A Photographer’s Perspective
Brian Matiash is a published photographer, writer, 
and lover of all things social media. He is the 
curriculum and education manager at onOne 
Software, makers of the award-winning Perfect 
Photo Suite line of photography editing software. 
Originally from Brooklyn, New York, and now liv-
ing in Portland, Oregon, Brian has made a name 
for himself as an authority on HDR photography 
and is known for his grungy Urban Exploration and 
ethereal long-exposure black and white landscape 
images.
Website: http://brianmatiash.com/
Google+: http://brianmatiash.com/+
Q In the digital age, how important is it to 
have an online presence as a photographer?
Having an online presence these days is a criti-
cal component to the success of a photographer, 
especially the emerging ones. There are a lot of 
moving parts that need to be considered in terms 
of what your brand should be and which images 
should be shared, but photographers have an 
unprecedented opportunity to broadcast their 
work and their brand to millions and millions of 
people. By being diligent and keeping up with the 
rigors of consistently maintaining your online pres-
ence, you can certainly open up doors in many 
unforeseen places.
Q In the business world, the word “branding” 
is commonly used. What does it mean, and why 
is it important for a photographer?
If you couple the words “branding” and “photog-
rapher,” your brand would be the type of pho-
tography you excel in and that showcases your 
strengths in artistic vision and consistency. How-
ever, if you throw “online presence” into the mix, 
branding starts to take on a more complex flavor. 
Now, you have to consider how you present your-
self in the online stratosphere. Are you jockeying 
to be an authority in a certain field? An inspiration 
provider? Or maybe you’re just out to promote 
your business? Whatever it is, you need to be 
cognizant of being consistent in tone, in online 
presence, and most important, in being able to 
produce and share high-caliber images.
Q What are the common mistakes photogra­
phers make when entering a social network?
If I had to choose one pit that so many pho-
tographers fall into, it would be that they care 
too much about what other photographers in 
the online stratosphere think about their work. 
Instead of focusing on building and maintaining 
their brand, they are more concerned about the 
performance of an image (i.e., how many +1’s, 
likes, comments, and so on it garners). Instead of 
spending time and mental energy on what other 
people think of your work, spend it going out and 

37
+2  •  Building an Online Presence
49
71
getting new shots; building your body of work to 
share with the masses; and continuing to maintain, 
hone, and refine your brand online along with try-
ing to establish new contacts in this industry.
Q What is the best piece of advice you could 
give someone who wants to build an online 
presence?
There are two pieces of advice that I have found 
to be key in my own success as a photographer 
with an online presence:
1. Share often and consistently. This can come to 
mean many things. Share your images—your 
best images. You have one shot at a first 
impression, so start off with what you consider 
to be your best work. If you need help prun-
ing that down, reach out to a photographer 
who you admire and ask for help. Most pho-
tographers are happy to lend a helping hand. 
2. Establish a posting frequency and stick to it. 
The public is very fickle. If you get people to 
a point where they expect to see a new offer-
ing from you every day or every other day, 
or once a week, STICK TO IT! You don’t want 
to get in the habit of breaking expectations, 
especially if they are favorable ones.
3. Be yourself… the best of yourself. When 
you’re posting online and trying to build your 
brand and identity, the best way you can do 
so is to simply be yourself. Sincerity flows so 
nicely when it is truly there. With that said, 
I also think that it doesn’t hurt to treat your 
brand like a corporation. Whenever I post 
online, I always refrain from ‘soapbox’ opin-
ions. I never opine about politics, religion, or 
rant about any particular person, group, or 
social issue. I also keep my language clean 
and do my best to put out educated and well-
versed posts. I want people to feel comfort-
able and like they know me when they read 
my words, so consistency of tone within my 
posts is critical.

9
+1

39
9
9
47
3
Getting Started 
with Google+
Now that you have an understanding of why the photography 
industry has quickly adopted the use of Google+, as well as a 
grasp on the challenges and benefits of having an online pres-
ence as a photographer, it’s time to dive in and get started with 
Google+. As discussed in Chapter 2, it’s important to develop 
an effective strategy when utilizing Google+ for your photog-
raphy needs. Several choices are available to you to help you 
represent yourself and your photography work on Google+, and 
those choices begin as soon as you sign up.
In this chapter, I’ll walk you through the sign-up process, help 
you fill out your user information and set up your profile, and 
clarify the differences between creating a user profile and a 
Google+ business page. After signing up, I’ll explain the core 
features of Google+ and make sure you know how to adjust 
your Google+ settings to suit your needs.

Google+ for Photographers
40
Signing Up with Google+
As with any online network, the first order of business is to actually sign up. 
Throughout this process, Google walks you through a series of web pages 
to help you get your Google+ account up and running. When you visit the 
Google+ home page (http://plus.google.com), you will be greeted with a 
web page similar to the one shown in Figure 3.1.
To sign up for Google+, you must first have a Google account. With a 
Google account, you have access to Gmail, YouTube, Google Reader, 
Google Docs, Google Calendar, saved bookmarks with the Google 
Chrome browser, Google Books, and the Android Market. 
To create a new Google account, click the “Create an account” link located 
just below the “Sign in” button on the Google+ home screen (Figure 3.2).
Figure 3.1 This is 
the page you will 
see when you visit 
the Google+ home 
page for the first 
time.
Figure 3.2 The “Create an account” 
link takes you to a new web page, 
allowing you to fill out all of the 
necessary information to get started 
with Google.

41
+3  •  Getting Started with Google+
After setting up your Google account, you can revisit the Google+ home 
page at http://plus.google.com. Click the “Sign in” button to go to the 
Google+ login screen (Figure 3.3).
Enter your email (Google account + @gmail.com) and password, and 
click the “Sign in” button. You are then redirected to the Upgrade page 
( Figure 3.4). To join Google+, you must create a public Google profile, 
which means that you need to fill in your first and last name, select your 
gender, add an optional photo for your profile image, and select a check 
box stating that “Google may use my information to personalize content 
and ads on non-Google web sites.” After completing the necessary steps, 
click the Upgrade button to continue.
Figure 3.3 The 
Google+ login 
page displays 
the logos for the 
various features 
of Google+ and 
allows you to sign 
in to the network.
Figure 3.4 The 
Google+ Upgrade 
page might not be 
visible to users with 
established Google 
accounts prior to 
attempting to sign 
up with Google+.

Google+ for Photographers
42
Suggest Users You Might Know
The Suggestions page pops up next and asks if you want to add individu-
als to your Google+ circles (Figure 3.5). You can either type in the names 
of any Google+ users that you know, add any of the users that Google 
suggests to you, or scroll down the Suggestions page to connect to your 
Yahoo or Hotmail email accounts to look for users you already know.
On the right side of the screen, Google+ attempts to 
explain what a circle is. In short, circles are groupings 
of individuals who share a common bond. You can 
have a circle for family members, one for landscape 
photographers, another for past clients, and so on.  
By separating individuals into circles, you have full 
control over who you publish content to as well as 
what content you see from others on Google+. There 
is no limit to the number of circles you can create. For 
more in-depth information on circles, see Chapter 4.
When you are ready to continue, click the Continue button in the bottom-
left corner.
Colby’s Quick Tips
If you know other photographers on 
Google+, now is the time to con-
nect with them and add them to your 
circles. Some of the biggest names in 
the photography industry are active on 
Google+, so don’t be shy; type in the 
names of the professional photogra-
phers you admire.
Figure 3.5 The 
Suggestions page 
helps you connect 
with individuals 
that you might 
already know. 

43
+3  •  Getting Started with Google+
Google’s Suggested User List
Next, Google takes you to its Suggested User List  
page (Figure 3.6). Google handpicks a selection of 
individuals who represent the various communities on 
Google+. You will find celebrities, musicians, journal-
ists, tech writers, politicians, and even painters and 
photographers in their respective groups on this page.
To view the individuals in these groups, simply click 
the group you are interested in. As a photographer, 
you may be more compelled to circle someone in the 
Photography & Art section. After you click the desired 
group, a screen appears that showcases the individu-
als in the group in the left scrolling sidebar. Select one 
or more individuals to see their latest Google+ posts 
on the right (Figure 3.7).
If you want to circle everyone in the selected group, simply click the Add 
button in the top left of the screen. To only add a selected individual from 
within this window, click the gray “Add to circles” button in the top right 
of the page. To return, click the gray X in the right corner.
When you are ready to continue, click the Continue button on the main 
screen of the Suggested User List.
Colby’s Quick Tips
The Google+ Suggested User List is 
purely a starting point. I wouldn’t add 
all of the photographers to your circles 
without first checking out some of 
their latest posts. The photography 
community on Google+ is not the only 
thriving community on the network. If 
you have interest or passions in other 
fields, be sure to add Google+ users 
from the respective sections of the 
Google+ Suggested User List as well.
Figure 3.6 The 
Google+ Sug-
gested User List 
provides you with 
a starting point for 
connecting with 
interesting people 
on Google+. The 
users have large 
followings, which 
means they provide 
more opportu-
nity to find and 
interact with other 
individuals through 
the content they 
publish.

Google+ for Photographers
44
Additional Profile Information
To complete your Google+ sign-up, the final page you’ll see is the Addi-
tional Profile Information page (Figure 3.8). The information you fill out on 
this page is purely optional. Here you can let everyone know about your 
education, place of employment, and current location, as well as change 
your profile photo.
Click the Finish button when you are ready to complete the sign-up 
process.
Figure 3.7 You can 
click various indi-
viduals in the group 
to view their most 
recent posts. This 
insight will give you 
an idea of the type 
of content they are 
providing to those 
who follow them.
Figure 3.8 Filling 
out the informa-
tion on this page is 
optional. You will 
have the oppor-
tunity to edit your 
entire Google+ 
profile from your 
Profile page.

45
+3  •  Getting Started with Google+
Understanding Your 
Google+ Profile
Now that you’ve completed the sign-up process, it 
is time to complete your Google+ profile. Your pro-
file is your home base on Google+. It gives you the 
opportunity to tell others about you and your pho-
tography work. Not only is it important to complete 
your profile so that it appears in search engine results, 
but also because it is your first opportunity to impress 
other Google+ users enough to start following you. To start, click the Pro-
file icon located in the Google+ navigation bar at the top of your screen 
(Figure 3.9).
The first time you view your profile, a Welcome screen pops up asking you 
to fill out various profile fields (Figure 3.10). Although most of the fields 
are pretty straightforward, your Tagline and profile image are especially 
important. Google+ users without profile images have a very difficult time 
building a following. Because your Tagline is searchable through Google+ 
and the Internet, you should include as many relevant keywords as possible 
so that others can easily find you. For example, my Tagline reads, “Profes-
sional Fine Art Landscape, Travel and Humanitarian Photographer, Educa-
tor, and Author.”
When you’ve finished filling out the profile fields, click the “Continue to my 
profile” button in the top right of the window.
Figure 3.9 The 
Profile icon is 
located in the mid-
dle of the icon set 
in the navigation 
bar. A silhouette 
of a person inside 
a circle represents 
your profile.
Figure 3.10 The Google+ profile Welcome screen only 
appears the first time you access your profile. It offers you the 
chance to easily fill in much of your profile from the start.
Colby’s Quick Tips
You might notice a check mark next 
to the name of various Google+ user 
profiles. This mark represents a veri-
fied account, which means that Google 
vouches for the validity that the owner 
of the account in question is in fact the 
person he or she claims to be. You will 
find this check mark mostly on user 
profiles that have a large number of 
followers.

Google+ for Photographers
46
Figure 3.11 This 
Google+ page is 
for The Giving Lens, 
an organization I 
started that blends 
photo education and 
giving back to local 
communities. Having 
a Google+ page 
instead of a separate 
user account allows 
me to let my multiple 
employees administer 
and manage the page 
without using my per-
sonal user profile.
User Profiles vs. Google+ Pages
When it comes to having an online presence 
as a photographer on Google+, you have two 
options: maintain a personal user account or 
create a Google+ business page ( Figure 3.11). 
A page is a Google+ account for an entity, 
organization, group, or company. A page can 
act in a similar manner as a user account, but 
it does have some restrictions. Note that you 
are required to have a personal user account in 
order to create a business page.
Although Google+ Pages and user profiles 
have many similarities, there are a few key 
differences:
•
Pages cannot add people to circles until the 
page has been added or tagged in a post by 
the user first.
•
Pages can be created for a variety of differ-
ent entities; profiles can only be created for 
a sole individual.
•
Pages can have multiple administrators.
Colby’s Quick Tips
The Google+ Pages feature is perfect 
for photo graphy organizations or com-
panies with more than one employee. 
If you are a one-man show, the ben-
efits of running just a user profile are 
greater than attempting to split your 
time between running your user profile 
and a photography page for your busi-
ness as well.

47
+3  •  Getting Started with Google+
•
You can add pages to your circles, just like a 
user account.
•
The default privacy setting for information 
on your page profile is set to public.
•
Pages contain the +1 button on the page 
profile, allowing you to increase your stand-
ing in search engine results.
•
Pages cannot +1 other pages, nor can they 
+1 anything on the Internet.
•
Pages can’t utilize the Games section on 
Google+.
•
Pages do not have the option of sharing con-
tent to Extended Circles ( Chapter 4).
•
Pages cannot start or join a hangout on a 
mobile device, but they can create a hangout 
and invite their followers on Google+ from a 
web browser.
To create a Google+ page, follow these steps.
1. Click the Google+ Pages icon, which is found 
on your Google+ home screen as well as on 
any other Google+ page.
2. Select the kind of business page you want to 
create (Figure 3.12).
3. Name the page you want to create, add the 
website (optional) you want it to be affiliated 
with, and fill in the “content appropriate” 
box before agreeing to the terms of service.
4. Click Create.
Figure 3.12 When 
creating a business 
page specifically for 
a photography busi-
ness, I recommend 
that you choose the 
Other category. A 
Photographer cat-
egory is not available 
within any of the 
other choices.

Google+ for Photographers
48
Profile Privacy Control
As with many of the Google+ features, you have complete control when 
it comes to deciding who can view the information you want to add to 
your Google+ profile. When you are in editing mode (by clicking the Edit 
Profile button in the top-right corner of your profile), you’ll notice a gray 
icon that looks like a globe next to many sections of 
your profile (Figure 3.13). This icon indicates that you 
can control the visibility of those sections to other 
Google+ users and anyone viewing your profile from 
the Internet.
If you click one of the gray icons, a window appears 
that contains the “Anyone on the web” button 
( Figure 3.14). When you click the button, a menu 
appears with the following options (Figure 3.15):
•
Anyone on the web. Anyone on the Web can view the information,  
not just individuals on Google+.
•
Extended circles. Those you have in your circles and those in their cir-
cles can view the information. This is explained more fully in Chapter 4.
•
Your circles. Everyone you have added to your Google+ circles can 
view the information.
Colby’s Quick Tips
If you want the most exposure as a 
photographer, you should allow much 
of your information to remain public. 
However, it’s best to keep your email 
address and phone number private 
(I do).
Figure 3.13 The 
gray globe icons 
on nearly every 
section of your 
Google+ profile 
indicate that you 
can control the 
visibility of those 
sections to other 
Google+ users.
Figure 3.14 The “Anyone 
on the web” button is found 
throughout your Google+ 
profile.
Figure 3.15 This 
menu allows you to 
have full control over 
the visibility of the 
content in question.

49
+3  •  Getting Started with Google+
•
Only you. Private. Only you can view the information.
•
Custom. You can select a few Google+ users, just two of your circles, or 
any other endless combination of people you have connected with on 
Google+ to view the information.
Profile Layout
After you have completed filling in the fields in the initial window, click the 
“Continue to my profile” button to be directed to your profile (Figure 3.16). 
Many different aspects and features of your Google+ profile are worth 
becoming familiar with. So click the Edit Profile button in the top-right cor-
ner, and let’s walk through your Google+ profile.
Profile image
Your Google+ profile image represents the thumbnail that all other Google 
users view first when connecting with you. Therefore, it’s important to 
select an image that represents you as a photographer. Although you cer-
tainly could use either your photography business logo or one of your best 
images, I recommend using your photo (Figure 3.17). As mentioned in 
Chapter 2, blending the image of your business to represent you and your 
photography work allows you to offer much more depth and character.
Figure 3.17 This is the image 
that I use as my Google+ 
profile photo. Not only does 
it give the viewer a chance 
to see my face (or most of 
it), but it shows one of my 
professional camera bodies in 
the frame as well. The idea is 
to inform viewers that I am a 
photographer.
Figure 3.16 This is my Google+ profile page. Here you can find out 
more about who I am, my photography work, and the content I publish 
on Google+.

Google+ for Photographers
50
By also including a camera in your photo, you automatically indicate to 
viewers that you are interested in photography.
To change your profile photo, click the “Change photo” link below the 
profile image. In the “Select profile photo” window that appears, you can 
upload a new photo, use another image you have already uploaded, use 
an image that you have been tagged in from another Google+ user, or 
take a new photo with your web camera (Figure 3.18). All of these options 
are on the left side of the screen.
Left sidebar
In the left sidebar on your profile page are a few important items: two 
message buttons and the Circle information section. 
Just below your profile image are two buttons that allow another Google+ 
user to send you a private message or an email (Figure 3.19). You have full 
control over who, if anyone, is allowed to use these buttons.
Figure 3.18 When changing your Google+ profile image, you have multiple 
options to choose from when selecting a new image.
Figure 3.19 These com-
munication buttons are 
optional and configurable. 
They allow other Google+ 
users to contact you 
directly.

51
+3  •  Getting Started with Google+
Send a message. This button allows a Google+ user 
to send a private message to the owner of the profile. 
The message box that appears is actually a Share box, 
which is what you normally use to publish content to 
Google+. The difference is that this message is just 
between the Google+ user and the owner of the pro-
file. However, you, as the owner of the profile, have 
the ability to add other Google+ users to the conver-
sation at your discretion.
Send an email. This button allows a Google+ user to 
email you through your Google+ profile. Your email address will remain 
hidden, however. 
Circle information. Just below the two message buttons is a section that 
displays information about who you have connected with (Figure 3.20). 
The top section showcases those you have in your circles, and the bottom 
section displays all of the individuals who have circled you. 
By default, these sections are set to display to anyone on the Web. To 
change the visibility settings, click the “Change who is visible here” link 
just below the section. A window appears (Figure 3.21) that allows you to 
disable the visibility of these sections or selectively control which circles 
you want to publicly show. For example, my profile shows that I am con-
nected to 91 Google+ users when in fact I have circled well over 2000. 
Instead of showcasing all of the individuals I have circled, I choose just to 
share my Photographer Inspiration circle, which contains some of my favor-
ite photographers on Google+.
Figure 3.20 The 
Circle information 
section allows you 
to showcase who 
you have connected 
with and who has 
connected with you. 
By default, these sec-
tions are turned on.
Figure 3.21 To 
change which 
circles you want 
to display on your 
Google+ profile, 
click the “1 circle” 
box.
Colby’s Quick Tips
As a photo educator, I like to make it 
very easy for other photographers to 
contact me. Both my private message 
and email buttons are active on my 
Google+ profile. I do get some spam 
because of it, but I also reach many 
more photographers.

Google+ for Photographers
52
Scrapbook images
Located at the top of your Google+ profile is a set of five thumbnail 
images (Figure 3.22). These images come from an album called “Scrap-
book photos,” which is connected to your profile. Although you could fill 
these thumbnails with some of your best work, you can also get creative 
and create a panorama of a single image that is sliced into five separate 
thumbnails.
If you search for “google plus thumbnail panorama” 
on www.Google.com, you’ll find a number of tutorials 
that walk you through the process of cutting up one 
of your images to fit these thumbnails.
When you have your thumbnails ready, follow these 
steps.
1. Access your Google+ profile.
2.  Click the “Edit profile” button in the top right of 
your page.
3. Click the “Add some photos here” box.
4. Click the gray Add Photo box.
5. Select the first image of your panorama.
6. Click the “Add photos to scrapbook” button in the bottom-right corner.
7. Repeat steps 4–6 for each section of the panorama.
8. When you’re finished, click OK.
Right sidebar
The right sidebar of your Google+ profile contains three sections that allow 
you to provide links to other websites (Figure 3.23): Other profiles, Con-
tributor to, and Recommended links. To edit these sections, click the “Edit 
profile” button in the top right of your Google+ profile.
Other profiles. In the “Other profiles” section you can add hyperlinks to 
your Google+ profile to highlight other locations on the Internet where 
Colby’s Quick Tips
A creative panorama thumbnail will 
have more of an effect than just five of 
your best images. If you don’t have an 
image that might work, the next time 
you go out shooting, try to keep it in 
mind when you are composing your 
images.
Figure 3.22 By 
finding a creative 
use of these five 
thumbnail images, 
you can give your 
Google+ profile 
some character.

53
+3  •  Getting Started with Google+
you showcase your photography work. This could 
be your website or blog, 500px, Flickr, or even your 
Facebook account.
After you click on the “Other profiles” section, a 
window appears (Figure 3.24). Here you can add a 
custom link (by clicking “Add custom link”) to any 
website you desire. Google+ allows you to connect 
with a handful of other service providers with ease.
To connect with these providers, click “Manage connected accounts.” 
You’ll then be able to easily connect with any of the providers listed 
( Figure 3.25). The benefits of connecting your Google+ account to these 
sites are that when you search, you will see relevant content that your 
friends have shared on the Web and you make it easier for people to find 
other content you have published outside of Google+.
Contributor to. The “Contributor to” section is meant to showcase other 
websites that you regularly contribute to. These sites could include other 
photography blogs that you frequently publish work on, a magazine that 
you write for on occasion, or even a photography message board that you 
frequent.
Colby’s Quick Tips
Include links to as many websites 
that host your photography work as 
possible. Google+ users are constantly 
finding me on 500px, Flickr, and Face-
book through my Google+ profile.
Figure 3.23 The right sidebar 
allows you to share links 
to other websites with any 
Google+ users who have 
checked out your profile. 
Photographers often have their 
work on multiple websites, so 
don’t be shy and list them here.
Figure 3.24 This is a list 
of the profiles that I have 
linked to on my Google+ 
profile.
Figure 3.25 Here is a list of the various 
service providers that you can directly 
connect your Google+ account with.

Google+ for Photographers
54
You can only add custom links in this section. Click the “Contributor to” 
link to get started (Figure 3.26).
Recommended links. The “Recommended links” section allows you to 
showcase links to other websites that you recommend other people check 
out. These sites could include photography related websites you enjoy, 
other photographer portfolios, or anything else you might be interested in.
You can only add custom links in this section. Click the “Recommended 
links” link to get started (Figure 3.27).
Profile tabs
In the middle of your Google+ profile page are a series of tabs that repre-
sent various viewable sections (Figure 3.28). Each of these sections allows 
you to showcase a different aspect of who you are as a photographer. The 
sections include Posts, About, Photos, Videos, and +1’s.
Posts. The Posts section represents all of the content you have published 
(Figure 3.29). Even if some of your posts were private and just between a 
few individuals, they will appear here. However, anyone viewing your pro-
file will only see the content that you have allowed them to, depending on 
which circles you originally published your posts to. For more on publish-
ing content, see Chapter 6.
Colby Quick Tips
You have the ability to opt in or out of 
allowing Google to use your contact 
information to suggest Google+ users 
who you have connected with on 
other sites. This setting is found on the 
“Manage connected accounts” section 
of your “Accounts overview” page in 
your Google+ settings.
Figure 3.26 The “Contributor to” section 
allows you to share links to websites that 
you frequently submit content to.
Figure 3.27 The “Recommended links” 
section allows you to showcase links to 
any other websites that you recommend 
your viewers check out.

55
+3  •  Getting Started with Google+
Figure 3.28 Five 
Google+ profile 
tabs are found 
in the middle of 
your profile page. 
Simply click the tab 
you want to view 
to see that section. 
The highlighted 
tab turns red when 
selected.
Figure 3.29 The 
Posts tab displays 
all of the content 
you have shared 
on Google+. Your 
most recent post is 
always listed first.

Google+ for Photographers
56
About. The About section acts as your Google+ bio (Figure 3.30). Here 
you can introduce yourself; list where you have worked, where you went to 
school, and where you have lived; indicate if you are married; provide any 
contact information; and add a whole lot more.
Figure 3.30 Your 
About section is 
one of the more 
important sections 
of your profile. You 
should include all 
necessary informa-
tion. Remember 
that your profile 
is searchable, so 
keywords count.
Colby’s Quick Tips
Having a creative and thorough About 
section will help you stand out from 
the crowd. For example, search for 
Patrick Di Fruscia on Google+ and 
check out his profile. He is also the fea-
tured pro photographer in Chapter 6.

57
+3  •  Getting Started with Google+
When you are in editing mode on your profile, you will have full control 
over what information is visible to whom (Figure 3.31). Do you want to 
publicly share your occupation while hiding your relationship stats or 
home phone number? No problem. Do you want to only share your email 
address with your family members? No problem.
Photos. In the Photos section (Figure 3.32), you’ll find three areas of 
thumbnails: Your shared albums, Photos of you with others, and Photos 
of you:
• Your shared albums. This area contains images and albums that you 
have uploaded and shared on Google+.
• Photos of you with others. This area displays profile thumbnails of 
other Google+ users that you have been tagged in a photo with.
•
Photos of you. This section displays image thumbnails of any image on 
Google+ that you have been tagged in.
Figure 3.31 To 
change the visibility 
of an About sec-
tion, just click the 
section while in 
editing mode. See 
the “Profile Privacy 
Control” sec-
tion earlier in this 
chapter for more 
information.
Colby’s Quick Tips
You can add hyperlinks to the Introduc-
tion section on your About tab, allow-
ing you to link to your photography 
website to showcase any workshops 
you have available, your photography 
portfolio, or any other piece of infor-
mation that you want to make visible 
on your bio.

Google+ for Photographers
58
When you are in editing mode on your profile, your Photos tab will dis-
play a handful of settings (Figure 3.33) that allow you to control how your 
Photos section works, including the option to turn on or off the ability for 
viewers to download your images. Be sure to check out these settings 
before moving on. For more on uploading and publishing photos, see 
Chapter 6.
Videos. The Videos tab allows you to showcase any videos that you have 
uploaded directly to Google+ (Figure 3.34). The current limitations for 
uploading a video to Google+ are that it cannot be longer than 15 min-
utes and the resolution cannot exceed 1080p, which is currently the stan-
dard for high-definition movies.
+1’s. As discussed in Chapter 1, one of the biggest benefits of being highly 
active on Google+ is its ability to help influence search engine results. 
This is done mostly through the Google +1 button, 
which you can now find in Google+ as well as all over 
the Internet. The +1’s tab contains a listing of all of 
the Web content outside of Google+ that you have 
assigned a +1 to (Figure 3.35). By default, this tab is 
hidden, but it can easily be turned on via the profile 
editing mode if you want to let others see the content 
you recommend.
Colby’s Quick Tips
In editing mode you can control 
whether or not the Videos tab is visible. 
By deselecting the visibility box, you 
can hide it from those viewing your 
profile.
Figure 3.32 The 
Photos section 
displays beautiful 
thumbnails of vari-
ous kinds of images 
that you are con-
nected with.

59
+3  •  Getting Started with Google+
Figure 3.35 The +1’s tab acts as a catchall for all the content you interact with on the 
Internet. Note that it does not currently list any content that you clicked +1 for within 
Google+.
Figure 3.33 When you are in editing mode on your Google+ profile, clicking your 
Photos tab will bring up a series of settings relevant to your photo section. Most impor-
tant is the setting to turn off the option of allowing viewers to download your photos.
Figure 3.34 The Videos tab allows you to show off any of your behind-the-scenes or 
photo education tutorials that you have uploaded to the network. However, with such 
tight integration with YouTube, most likely this section will soon allow you to mimic your 
YouTube channel instead.

Google+ for Photographers
60
62
37
Varina and Jay Patel:  
A Photographer’s Perspective
Varina and Jay Patel are professional nature and 
wilderness photographers based in the United 
States. They teach workshops and webinars, write 
eBooks, and maintain a blog with tips and tutori-
als for beginning and advanced photographers. 
Their award-winning work has been published all 
over the world by National Geographic, Popular 
Photography magazine, National Parks magazine, 
and many more.
Websites:
Varina: www.photographybyvarina.com
Jay: www.jaypatelphotography.com
Google+:
Varina: https://plus.google.com/ 
115105647022907007398 
Jay: https://plus.google.com/ 
101145980349117737014 
Q Google+ is a relative newcomer to the social 
networking world. How is Google+ different 
than the other networks for photographers?
For business owners like us, social networking 
is as much about marketing as it is about social-
izing. Most of us hate to admit that, but the truth 
is we’re running a business here. Google+ lets us 
get the word out about our products with fea-
tures that make it far more effective than other 
social networking sites.
First, we can update, personalize, adjust, and 
upload images to our accounts easily. Facebook’s 
settings options are confusing and difficult to 
find within its scattered interface. The Google+ 
interface is straightforward and intuitive—and it 
looks great, too. Our images show up nice and 
large in the stream, so users will notice them 
right away. The image browser shows uncropped 
images—not the standard square crop other sites 
use—which preserves the integrity of the original 
image. Combine this with the infinite scrolling fea-
ture, and you have an excellent way to browse for 
photos that catch your eye.
Second, the entire interface is built around 
encouraging social interaction, not in miniature 
sound bites like Twitter, but in the form of full-
length discussions with diverse groups of people. 
We can even use the Hangouts feature (which 
keeps getting better and better) to talk face to 
face with other users in real time! Google’s fan-
tastic search functionality helps us find interesting 
posts and discussions to join, as well as others 
who share our passion for photography. At the 
same time, those search capabilities mean others 
can find our work, too. Google+ makes it easy 
to share photos, posts, and even circles. And to 
add icing to the cake, the subscriber model allows 
users to follow others even if those people don’t 
want to reciprocate.
Third, Google+ lets us take our marketing beyond 
the norm, getting to know our followers, offering 
tips and advice, asking and answering questions, 
and having in-depth conversations with people 
who become our friends. We’ve been able to turn 
Photo by Jay Patel
Photo by Varina Patel
Photo by Jay Patel

61
+3  •  Getting Started with Google+
89
40
92
marketing into meaningful personal interactions 
and lasting relationships.
Q Google has spent a lot of time and energy 
on designing Google+’s user interface. What is 
your favorite aspect of the interface?
Effective marketing hinges on being able to target 
your audience. We both agree that circles are our 
favorite Google+ feature. They let me quickly and 
easily sort people into logical groups—those who 
are interested in learning the basics of photogra-
phy; those who want to learn more complex tech-
niques; those who plan to attend an upcoming 
workshop—the options are endless. Our circles 
are constantly evolving to meet our needs. We 
don’t need to spam all our followers with posts 
and discussions that are meant for a small group 
of people, and we can keep private posts meant 
for close friends and family out of the public 
stream.
We also love the features that allow us to edit 
posts, include hashtags as searchable links, share 
instantly, and hang out with other users.
Q Is it important for an individual or company 
to fully fill out its profile on Google+? Why?
Filling out our Google+ profiles was a priority for 
us, and we make an effort to update them now 
and then as well. If users see a post or an image 
and want more information, the first place they’ll 
visit is likely to be your Google+ profile. This is an 
opportunity to provide more information about 
who you are, what you do, and what services you 
offer. It doesn’t take long to fill it out, but a little 
bit of careful thought about the persona you want 
to present can go a long way. For an artist or a 
photographer, a well-organized profile conveys a 
sense of professionalism and pride in your work. 
It can also drive business by making it easy for 
potential clients and customers to find you online.
Q What piece of advice do you have for those 
filling out their profiles when they start using 
Google+?
Think of your profile as you would a résumé. Your 
Google+ profile should showcase your talents 
and your work, and it should contain organized 
contact information in an easy-to-read format. We 
recommend enabling the Send a Message option 
so that potential customers can contact you eas-
ily. Include links to your website and blog, and be 
sure to include links to any external sites where 
your products are on display or available for sale. 
Take a moment to write a few lines that represent 
who you are—be honest and real, and keep it 
light. Nobody enjoys reading stiff biographical 
text. Include your accomplishments, publications, 
and awards if you’d like, and be sure to include a 
profile photo. To get ideas for your own profile, 
take a look at the profile pages of some of the 
Google+ users you admire. Some are very cre-
ative and interesting.
Photo by Varina Patel
Photo by Varina Patel
Photo by Jay Patel

Google+ for Photographers
62
Core Features of Google+
Now that you’ve signed up for Google+ and have completed your pro-
file, let’s take a look at some of the core features of the network. Many 
of these features I discuss in more depth in the coming chapters, but this 
overview should provide you with some context for navigating Google+ 
and making the most out of your time using the service.
Streams
Your Google+ streams are the lifeblood of your Google+ experience. They 
are not only where you will find all of the content published to Google+, 
but also where all the interaction and engagement happens (Figure 3.36). 
Google provides you with a variety of filters that allow you to separate the 
content you view by groupings of individuals (circles) and give you control 
over noise as well. For more detail on streams, see Chapter 5.
Figure 3.36 Your 
Google+ streams 
display all of the 
content published 
to Google+.

63
+3  •  Getting Started with Google+
Circles
Circles are Google+’s answer to the complex social relationships everyone 
deals with on a daily basis (Figure 3.37). With circles, you have full control 
over who you share your content with, as well as what content you view in 
Google+. In Chapter 4 I walk you through how to manage your circles.
Photos
As a photographer, one of the most important features of an online net-
work is how it displays your images. With Google+, there is nothing to 
worry about. From the endless streams of beautiful thumbnails to the strik-
ing lightboxes that display your individual photos, Google+ makes your 
photographs look amazing (Figure 3.38). See Chapter 6 for more about 
uploading and sharing photos on Google+.
Figure 3.37 By 
grouping people 
into circles, you 
maintain full con-
trol over how you 
interact and what 
content you share 
with other Google+ 
users.

Google+ for Photographers
64
Hangouts
When it comes to interacting and engaging in an online network, 
the biggest problem to overcome is the lack of personal engage-
ment. With Google+ Hangouts, this is no longer a problem. With hangouts, 
you have the ability to jump into a group video conference with up to nine 
other people from all over the world (Figure 3.39). You can share screens, 
watch YouTube videos, and even edit Google+ documents in real time.  
I explain Google+ Hangouts in depth in Chapter 8.
Figure 3.38 In the 
Photos section of 
Google+, you’ll 
find an endless 
stream of thumb-
nail images from all 
of the people you 
have connected 
with on Google+.
Figure 3.39  
The Google+ 
Hangouts feature 
allows you to make 
personal connec-
tions with individu-
als from all over the 
globe.

65
+3  •  Getting Started with Google+
Google+ Navigation Bar
The Google and Google+ navigation bars sit at the top of every page on 
Google+ (Figure 3.40). The thin black bar at the very top of the screen 
acts as a road map for you to navigate to any of the other Google prod-
ucts or services that they offer. The more popular options are listed right 
on the black bar, including Calendar, Search, Images, Maps, YouTube, 
News, Gmail, and Documents. If you can’t find what you are looking for, 
click on the More tab just to the right of Documents to display everything 
else that Google has to offer.
In Figure 3.41, you will find the Google+ Navigation bar that acts as a 
guide for getting around the network.
Figure 3.41 The Google+ navigation bar allows you to easily move throughout Google+ 
as well as to all other Google products and services.
Figure 3.40  
Present at the top of every page on Google+ are both the black Google and gray 
Google+ navigation bars. Using each of these bars, you should have no problems navi-
gating through available features.

Google+ for Photographers
66
Google+ icons
To the right of the Google+ logo are the icons for the various sections of 
Google+:
•
Stream. This section acts as the lifeblood of Google+. It is where you 
view and interact with all the content that is published on the network.
•
Photos. This section displays an endless stream of thumbnails that rep-
resent images that have been uploaded to Google+. You have multiple 
filtering options on the left side and even the ability to upload new 
photos (see Chapter 6).
•
Profile. This section represents your personal page on Google+. It gives 
you the opportunity to tell other Google+ users about you, display your 
photography work, and share links with all other relevant websites that 
relate to you as a photographer.
•
Circles. This section gives you full control over both the complex and 
simple relationships you form on Google+. You can group individuals 
into circles, which help you dictate who you share content with and 
what content you want to view from others.
•
Games. Although I don’t talk about the Games section in this book, it 
is a very popular Google+ feature. You can interact with other Google+ 
users, play a variety of games, compare high scores, and even challenge 
each other in multiplayer games. Unlike other social networks, you have 
the ability to turn off all notifications from the Games section.
Search box
Located in the middle of the Google+ navigation bar at the top of your 
screen is the Google+ search box (Figure 3.42). Here you can search for 
Google+ users, any content published on Google+, and even popular 
Internet topics. Google+ gives you a pretty advanced set of filtering tools 
to ensure that you find what you are looking for. See Chapter 5 for more 
details about the Google+ search box.
Figure 3.42 The Google+ search box allows you to find nearly anything you could imag-
ine on Google+.

67
+3  •  Getting Started with Google+
Notification box, Share box, and Google+ account information
Located on the right of the Google+ navigation bar are the Notification 
box, Share box, and account information menu (Figure 3.43).
Notification box. The Google+ Notification box acts as a constant 
reminder of all of your interactions on the network. By default, the box 
is clear and displays a 0 in the middle of it. However, when someone has 
interacted with you, the box turns red and the number displayed indicates 
the number of notifications you currently have waiting for you. If you click 
the box, a window appears showing your notifications (Figure 3.44). I talk 
more about the Notification box in Chapter 5.
Figure 3.43 The right side of the 
Google+ navigation bar is certainly 
not to be missed. However, with the 
Notification box in the corner, you will 
have a hard time ignoring it regardless.
Figure 3.44 Inside the Notification win-
dow you’ll find short descriptions of the 
various notifications you have received. 
Notifications that you have already 
viewed will have a gray background; 
new notifications will be white. Click a 
notification to view the actual interaction.

Google+ for Photographers
68
Share box. The Share box is where you can create and publish content 
to Google+. Although a Share box is embedded on your main Google+ 
home page, the box in the navigation bar allows you to create and publish 
content from any section in Google+. By clicking the Share icon, a window 
appears allowing you to share content (Figure 3.45). See Chapter 6 for 
more on sharing content and photographs.
Account information. In the very corner of the navigation bar you’ll find 
a small thumbnail image of your profile photo. By clicking the thumbnail, 
a menu appears that provides direct links to your Google+ profile, home 
page, account settings, and privacy controls. The menu also gives you the 
option of signing out of Google+ (Figure 3.46).
Google+ Product Integration
As you are probably already aware, Google is much more than just 
Google+. With hundreds of millions of customers using a wide variety of 
Google’s products and services, it is only a matter of time before they are 
all pulled in under the umbrella of Google+. As men-
tioned previously, signing up for Google+ means that 
you must create a Google account to access all of the 
Google+ products mentioned earlier in this chapter. 
Google is investing a lot of money into Google+, and 
every month more features and Google products are 
integrated into the network. By being the king of 
search on the Internet, Google+ is quickly becoming 
the hub for all things digital.
Figure 3.45 The Google+ Share box in the 
navigation bar gives you complete access 
to publishing content from any page within 
Google+.
Figure 3.46 The account informa-
tion menu provides quick access 
to many settings and features on 
Google+.
Colby’s Quick Tips
As Google continues to integrate more 
and more of its products into Google+, 
you’ll find more photographers, clients, 
and potential customers joining the 
network. Google+ is already the fast-
est growing online network in history, 
so get out there and start building 
your following. More users are joining 
every day.

69
+3  •  Getting Started with Google+
Changing Your Google+ Settings
Google+ is all about giving control to the end user. This mind-set is not 
just about controlling who you connect with and how, but it also dictates 
your overall experience on the network. Unlike other social networks, 
the bulk of your Google+ settings are not buried under several different 
menu layers.
Privacy Settings
One of the hottest topics when it comes to connecting with people on the 
Internet is privacy control. Every time Facebook changes a feature, people 
are up in arms because of how it directly affects their ability to control who 
can see their content and information.
To access your privacy settings, follow these steps.
1. Click the mini thumbnail image on the far right of your Google+ naviga-
tion bar.
2. Choose Privacy from the menu.
On the “Profile and privacy” page that appears (Figure 3.47), you’ll notice 
that it is broken into various sections: Google Profiles, Sharing, Google+, 
and Google privacy.
Figure 3.47 The 
Google+ “Profile 
and privacy” page 
gives you full 
control to limit the 
visibility or interac-
tions that others 
can have with you 
on the network.

Google+ for Photographers
70
Every feature contains a thorough description that explains the setting 
you are attempting to adjust. Many of the buttons on the page are links to 
other sections of Google+ where the actual controls for the respective sec-
tions exist.
One other very important section for privacy settings is found in the 
Google+ tab in the left sidebar of the current page. When you click the 
Google+ link, you will be directed to a new settings page. Here you will 
find the “Who can interact with you and your posts” setting. This allows 
you to control who can send you notifications, who can comment on your 
public posts, and who can start a mobile Messenger conversation with you. 
By default, these are set to Anyone on Google+.
Notification Settings
As you continue to connect and engage with more and more people on 
Google+, you will naturally start to receive more and more notifications. 
By default, Google+ will send you email notifications as well as light up 
the Notification box from within the network by turning the Notification 
box bright red. After you’ve connected with a few hundred people, your 
email inbox will quickly and constantly fill up. You also have the option of 
connecting your cell phone number to Google+ so you can receive SMS 
notifications too. Although this might not sound like a great idea, the noti-
fication settings allow you full control over which notifications, if any, you 
want to receive via email or phone.
To access your notification settings, follow these steps.
1. Click the mini thumbnail image on the far right of your Google+ naviga-
tion bar.
2. Choose Account Settings from the menu.
3. In the left sidebar, click Google+.
About a quarter of the way down the page are the notification settings. 
The first section deals with notification delivery. Here you can add your cell 
phone number to receive SMS updates.
To shut off email notifications, make your way to the 
“Receive notifications” section (Figure 3.48). Here you 
have full control over all of the various types of notifi-
cations and how you want to receive them. Deselect-
ing all of the boxes under Email means that you will 
not receive any email notifications from Google+.
Colby’s Quick Tips
I highly recommend turning off all 
email notifications except for features 
that you feel would be important to 
know immediately. You will still receive 
a notification in your Notification box 
no matter what you decide.

71
+3  •  Getting Started with Google+
Photo Settings
As a photographer, controlling who can view and  
download your images is an important feature of any 
network you are thinking about joining. Although 
most of the photo settings are geared more toward 
the average user, you still have the ability to not allow 
someone to download your images on Google+. 
Note that although turning off this setting doesn’t 
allow a Google+ user to use the Download Image 
option on your image (which downloads the photo at 
the resolution you uploaded it at), others can still take 
a screen shot or use a mouse to drag and drop your 
image from their web browser to their desktop.
Figure 3.48 Be 
sure to thoroughly 
look through the 
various notification 
settings so that 
you can adjust the 
right notifications 
and make sure 
you receive the 
ones you feel are 
important.
Colby’s Quick Tips
I allow other Google+ users to 
download my images because I feel 
that it helps to promote marketing for 
my business. I apply a very small text 
watermark to my images that lists my 
website address. Whether a user gives 
me credit for my image or not, the 
exposure has helped my business grow 
substantially, not just on Google+.

Google+ for Photographers
72
To access the photo settings, follow these steps.
1. Click the mini thumbnail image on the far right of your Google+ naviga-
tion bar.
2. Choose Account Settings from the menu.
3. In the left sidebar, click Google+.
At the bottom of the page that appears, you’ll find a section called Photos 
(Figure 3.49). Here you can deselect the option to allow users to down-
load your image, adjust photo-tagging options, and change the visibility of 
the geo location of your images.
Page Settings
If you decided to create a Google+ business page, you too have a handful 
of options at your disposal.
To access your Google+ page settings, follow these steps.
1. Change to your Google+ page account by clicking the down arrow just 
to the right of your mini thumbnail image on the left sidebar of your 
home page and selecting the page in question.
2. On your Google+ page home screen, click the Settings link at the top 
of the sidebar on the right.
Notice that there are two options in the left sidebar: General and 
Managers.
General
In the General section (Figure 3.50) you have control over who interacts 
with your page posts. You can also add an email for email notifications, 
and you can change your photo settings for the page in question.
Figure 3.49 These 
settings are identi-
cal to the Photos 
section settings on 
your Google+ pro-
file, which you can 
access when you’re 
in editing mode on 
your profile.

73
+3  •  Getting Started with Google+
Managers
One of the most exciting features of a Google+ page is the ability to have 
multiple administrators, or managers as Google+ refers to them. You can 
set up these managers in the Managers section of your page settings 
( Figure 3.51).
You must know the email address of those you want to assign, because 
Google+ does not currently allow you to set up a manager via just a user 
account.
Figure 3.50 The 
General section 
offers you control 
over the basic set-
tings for your page.
Figure 3.51 The 
Managers section 
of your page set-
tings allows you 
to add multiple 
managers to help 
you run your page. 
This is a must-have 
feature for large 
companies.

9
9
9
+1

75
40
4
Working with 
Circles to Stay 
Organized
Circles are Google’s answer to the diverse social layer issue that 
is found in most online social networks. In the digital age we live 
in, we are constantly trying to simplify our lives. Although this 
is possible with menial tasks, such are paying our bills online or 
researching the next piece of camera gear we want to purchase, 
the various degrees of human interactions are far more complex. 
A computer system cannot predict the organic and dynamic 
flow of a relationship over time. Life is not stagnant, but instead 
is dynamic—always changing and always moving forward. To 
accurately and effectively manage your interpersonal relation-
ships online, you need control. You need choice. This is where 
the Google+ Circles feature steps in. 
In this chapter, I’ll explain what circles are, how to use them, and 
how to organize them so that you can get the most out of your 
time on Google+.

Google+ for Photographers
76
What Are Circles?
As individuals, we are constantly interacting with a multitude of different 
types of people throughout life. On a given day you might pick up the 
phone and call a friend or a professional colleague, or maybe even a family 
member to share and receive specific information. Although you wouldn’t 
necessarily have the same conversation with all three, there might be 
some overlap. For example, in Figure 4.1, you might have three groups of 
individuals that you connect with on a regular basis: Friends, Clients, and 
Photographers. Even though Rose is a friend, she also happens to be a 
photographer. However, she is not one of your clients. So although you 
might share with her some personal information because she is a friend or 
ask her to go on a photography trip with you because she is a photogra-
pher, you would not send her the marketing newsletters that you send your 
past clients. 
Interpersonal communication is rich, has depth, and is not always symmet-
ric. Google+ addresses these complexities by allowing you to selectively 
gather those you want to connect with into various groups, otherwise 
known as circles. Circles are arguably the most important feature of 
Google+ you need to understand because they control how you commu-
nicate and connect with customers, clients, photographers, and everyone 
else on Google+.
Friends
Photographers
Clients
Jake
Sarah
Ryan
Hank
Arron
Mary
Pete
Jane
Ted
Ed
Jake
Roger
Rose
Will
Figure 4.1 An 
example of the 
often complex 
interpersonal 
relationships we all 
have in our daily 
lives.

77
+4  •  Working with Circles to Stay Organized
How Do Circles Work?
Circles (Figure 4.2) act as filters for all content being shared on Google+. 
They allow you to control not only who you share your content with, but 
whose content you want to view as well.
They function in a manner very similar to how lens filters work. For exam-
ple, as photographers, we have the ability to filter out certain spectrums of 
light or even color with specific filters that we attach to our lenses. These 
tools give us more control over what we see and what we are capable of 
capturing with our cameras. Google+ circles work in the same way. You 
have the ability to create a circle that contains just your family members, 
your clients, or other local photographers. By doing so, you can then share 
content and information with just those individuals. On the flip side, you 
can utilize those same circles to filter out content, information, and media 
coming to you through Google+. If you want to only see what your clients, 
friends, or other local photographers are publishing, it is as simple as a 
mouse click (see Chapter 5).
Circle Organization
All of your circle management needs are on the Circles  
page. To access that page, locate the gray Google+ 
navigation bar located near the top of your screen 
(Figure 4.3) and click the Circles icon, which is the 
second from the right. 
The Circles page appears. Figure 4.4 shows the gen-
eral layout of the  Circles page. Let’s explore this page 
and some of its key elements.
Colby’s Quick Tips
Circles are private in that if you add 
me to one or more of your circles, I am 
notified that you have added me to 
your circles, but I do not know which 
circles I have been placed in.
Figure 4.2  
A selection of my top Google+ circles containing people I connect with more frequently than others.

Google+ for Photographers
78
Near the top of the screen you’ll find three main 
tabs—People in your circles, People who’ve added 
you, and Find people—that allow you to filter through 
the individuals that you are connected with. In the 
middle of your screen are the Google+ profile thumb-
nails, and at the bottom of your screen are your 
circles. 
Figure 4.3 The 
Google+ naviga-
tion bar makes 
it easy to navi-
gate through not 
only the various 
Google+ features, 
but all Google 
products as well.
Figure 4.4 The 
Google+ Circles 
page allows you to 
easily manage all 
of your connec-
tions with Google+. 
Here you can sort 
individuals into 
circles, view who 
has circled you, 
and import people 
from your com-
puter address book.
Colby’s Quick Tips
When you hover your mouse over 
a Google+ profile name, a box will 
appear that shows a larger profile 
thumbnail, a tag line, the circles you 
have that profile in, and how many 
people you know in common.

79
+4  •  Working with Circles to Stay Organized
Advice on Setting Up Your Google+ Circles
Before you begin adding Google+ profiles into your circles, it is important to 
understand why you signed up for the service. Here are some helpful questions 
to consider before you get started:
•
What are your goals for signing up for Google+?
Many photographers wander aimlessly in the social networking world. By 
defining your goals, you can devise a better plan for how you want to 
engage other individuals on Google+. 
•
Are you using Google+ to expand your photography business? 
If you are using Google+ to sell photography prints, you need to look for 
customers. But first you need to determine who your clients are. Unless you 
are a photo educator, typically, photographers are not your clients. 
•
Are you using the service to learn from professionals? 
If you are using Google+ to improve your photography skills, you should add 
professional photographers you admire to your circles. There are thousands 
of professional photographers that are eager to share their knowledge and 
experiences with you.
•
Are you interested in finding inspiration from other photographers?
If you are using Google+ to find inspiration from other photographers, you 
certainly will not find a shortage of amazing images to view. Google+ is a 
global network with millions of people from all over the world. Check out the 
“Making Connections” sidebar later in this chapter to find lists of photogra-
phers on Google+. 
The answers to these questions should help dictate your approach to connecting 
with people through Google+. Remember to be selective and only circle individ-
uals that you want to connect with. Photographers commonly make the mistake 
of always wanting or needing the approval of other photographers. Google+ is 
not a popularity contest, and it is much more important how you interact with 
those you circle than the sheer number of people in your circle or that circle you. 
A great starting point is the Google+ search box located at the top of every 
page. Here you can search all of Google for people by location, keywords, and 
names of individuals that you want to connect with.

Google+ for Photographers
80
Creating a Circle
To create a circle, you have three main options:
•
You can drag and drop multiple Google+ profile thumbnails into the 
first circle (Figure 4.5) and click Create Circle. Then click the blue 
Create Circle link inside the first circle to easily name and finalize the 
creation of the circle (Figure 4.6).
•
You can move your mouse over the first circle (Figure 4.7), and the text 
inside the circle will change to a “Create circle” link (Figure 4.8). Click 
that link to open the box that will allow you to easily name your new 
circle as well as populate it with the desired profiles (Figure 4.9).
Figure 4.5 Drag Google+ 
profiles to add people to a 
new circle.
Figure 4.6 Name the newly created circle using a 
descriptive name that represents its members.
Figure 4.7 The standard view of your Google+ 
Circle section.
Figure 4.8 By hovering your mouse inside the white 
circle, the text changes to “Create circle.”
Figure 4.9 Now you can name and populate your 
new circle.

81
+4  •  Working with Circles to Stay Organized
•
When browsing through Google+, hover your  
mouse over a Google+ profile name. A box 
appears that allows you to click the Add to Circles 
button, which then displays a number of options. 
At the bottom of your Circle options is the “Create 
new circle” link (Figure 4.10). Click that link and 
add the selected profile to a brand-new circle. 
Making Connections
Google+ is unique in that it allows you to have total control over your user expe-
rience. Making connections with other individuals and businesses will help dic-
tate whom you interact with and what information you see coming through your 
streams. As a photographer, you have a multitude of third-party websites that 
can help you find and connect with the thriving photo community on Google+.
Here are a few examples:
•
Group/As (www.group.as). A website that allows users to create custom 
lists of Google+ users. 
•
Recommended Users (www.recommendedusers.com). A website that offers 
its own curated lists, which include groups of photographers, such as Most 
Followed, Inspirational, Landscape & Wildlife, Portrait / Wedding, and more.
•
Google+ Counter (http://gpc.fm). Similar to Group/As, this website offers 
users the ability to create custom user lists of various kinds.
Colby’s Quick Tips
There is no limit to the number of circles 
you can create. Get creative and plan 
ahead. It is much easier to think proac-
tively from the start about the kinds of 
people you want to connect with than 
it is to work backwards after you have 
circles containing 1000 people.
Figure 4.10 After 
you have clicked 
the Add to Circles 
button, a box 
appears allowing 
you to add the pro-
file to a new circle 
or a circle you have 
already created.

Google+ for Photographers
82
60
71
Scott Jarvie:  
A Photographer’s Perspective 
Scott Jarvie is a wedding and portrait photo-
grapher and photo educator based out of Salt 
Lake City, Utah. He puts a piece of himself into 
everything he does, which is a testament to his 
success as a professional photographer and the 
reason his images are full of personality and 
emotion. When he is not giving presentations or 
capturing a bride’s most special moment, he is 
partaking in his love of travel photography through 
various trips around the world. It doesn’t hurt that 
he is fluent in five different languages.
Website: www.jarviedigital.com
Google+: https://plus.google.com/ 
100962871525684315897 
Q Why are circles an important feature of 
Google+?
Circles create the foundation of our communi-
cation on Google+. Circles dictate who you’re 
speaking to (when you have something to share) 
and who you’re listening to (when you feel like 
seeing what’s going on). For me, circles also help 
me remember how I know this person, like quick 
labels.
Q Does organizing your circles make a differ­
ence in your Google+ experience? Why?
Yes. I have a lot of circles, and keeping them orga-
nized helps me apply the circles quicker so that it 
is less of a chore. I organize my circles by putting 
the most important or most used circles higher 
in the list so I don’t have to scroll down to find 
them. Using a number in addition to naming my 
circles helps me by associating the numbers and 
finding the circles faster when publishing content 
to those circles.
Q What are the top five circles you think every 
photographer should create on Google+?
The five types of circles I think every photogra-
pher should create include:
•
Photographers by location. Especially those 
in your own region.
•
Photographers by style. Especially those 
using the same style of photography as 
you do. For me, that’s weddings and travel 
photography.
•
Photography business pages. Because the 
vendors and product makers are great to 

83
+4  •  Working with Circles to Stay Organized
97
84
32
follow. My tip is to name the circle using (p) in 
front so you know it’s a circle of pages.
•
Nonphotographer circles. This circle is proba-
bly the most important because if the majority 
of what you share is photography, then most 
times the only things you’ll direct specifically 
to a circle are nonphotography posts.
•
Most interesting. Whether it be lists of the 
most interactive photographers, photogra-
phers you are friends with, or the photogra-
phers that inspire you the most, you’ll need a 
couple of circles that will be your go-to circles 
when you want to quickly and easily find help-
ful content.
Q What tips do you have for maintaining your 
circles in the long run?
Besides all the tips I’ve already listed, I think 
people should
•
Remember that creating circles and then add-
ing lots of people to them later on when your 
circles have already been established is a lot 
of work. 
•
Make a list of all the circles (based on the five 
types of circles listed previously) you think you 
might ever use or want to use. Circle people 
from the get go. Users will naturally find that 
they gravitate to using certain circles; later 
on they can decide to remove the ones they 
didn’t use often.
•
Do everything I stated in question 2.
•
Most of all, don’t stress about circles, and 
don’t let them become a deterrent to using 
Google+.

Google+ for Photographers
84
The sky is the limit when it comes to the kinds of circles you can create. 
Table 4.1 lists a number of potential circles that you can create and utilize.
Table 4.1 Different Types of Circles
Circle Type
Definition
Family
This circle consists of family members.
Friends
This circle consists of friends.
Coworkers
This circle consists of coworkers.
Local Photographers
This circle consists of photographers who are based out of your 
current location.
Clients
This circle consists of clients you have worked with in the past.
Photo Industry
This circle consists of key players in the photo industry who 
work for various companies.
Photo Educators
This circle consists of photographers who teach photography 
classes, workshops, seminars, and webinars.
Google Employees
This circle consists of Google employees who share information 
and new Google+ features. 
Google+ Pages
This circle consists of various business pages found on Google+
Renaming Circles
As you continue to become more engaged within Google+ and you begin 
to connect with a variety of different people, you might need to refine the 
names of your circles to stay accurate. For example, you might have cre-
ated a circle called Colorado Landscape Photographers only to realize that 
you want to add Colorado Wildlife Photographers to it as well. To rename 
a circle, perform the following steps.
1. Click the title of the circle you want to rename (Figure 4.11).
Figure 4.11 Select 
the circle you want 
to rename.

85
+4  •  Working with Circles to Stay Organized
Figure 4.13 Rename your 
circle and enter any descriptive 
text desired.
2. Click the Edit icon, represented by a graphic that looks like a pencil. 
(Figure 4.12).
3. Fill in the necessary information in the correct boxes (Figure 4.13).
4. Click Save.
Reordering Circles
Changing the order of your circles not only allows you to customize your 
Google+ Circles page, but it makes filtering the content you view on 
Google+ that much easier. Google+ will display the first five circles you 
have listed in your Circles page in the sidebar on the Google+ home page. 
Selecting one of these circles allows you to view published content from 
only individuals in the selected circle. The circles you interact with the most 
should be first.
To change the order of your circles, follow these steps.
1. Click and hold on a circle that you want to reorder.
2. Drag the selected circle to the location at which 
you want to place the circle.
3. A gray line appears (Figure 4.14) to indicate the 
placement of the circle being moved.
Figure 4.12 Click 
Edit to make any 
changes needed.
Colby’s Quick Tips
When you’re looking for people to 
connect with on Google+, the Search 
bar is a great place to start. For 
example, you can search for “Colorado 
Photographers” and find a dynamic list 
of people to add to your circles.

Google+ for Photographers
86
Removing Profiles from Circles
As you continue to engage and interact with more and more photogra-
phers and clients on Google+, you might find the need to remove certain 
individuals from your circles that you no longer want to connect with. You 
can remove profiles using the Circles page or the Profile page. Let’s look at 
both ways to do this.
To remove profiles using the Circles page, follow these steps.
1. Click the title of the circle you want to remove (Figure 4.15). All of the 
Google+ profiles in that circle will populate the profile thumbnail area 
above the Circle section.
2. Click the profiles you want to remove. When clicked, the selected pro-
files will turn blue (Figure 4.16).
3. Click the Remove button located just above the profile thumbnails.
Figure 4.14 Reor-
dering your circles 
helps to prioritize 
your circles for 
easier and quicker 
access.

87
+4  •  Working with Circles to Stay Organized
Figure 4.18 Deselect all the circle 
boxes containing the profile.
Figure 4.17 Click the green box at the top right of the Google+ Profile 
page to see which circles contain this profile.
To remove profiles using the Profile page, follow these steps.
1. Go to the Profile page of the individual or business you want to remove.
2. Click the green box in the top right of the web page (Figure 4.17). This 
box represents the circles you currently have this profile in.
3. Deselect the check boxes next to the circles that you currently have this 
profile in (Figure 4.18).
Figure 4.15 Select 
the circle that you 
want to modify.
Figure 4.16 Select 
the Google+ pro-
files you want to 
remove, and then 
click the Remove 
link.

Google+ for Photographers
88
Sharing Circles
Circle sharing is one of the best ways to get people to circle you. If you 
see others asking for “landscape photographers,” and you happen to pho-
tograph landscapes, comment on their post and try to get them to add 
you to their circle. When they share that circle to the public or with their 
circles, you have a good chance of other photographers connecting with 
you and adding you to their circles.
To share a circle from your Circles page, follow these steps.
1. Click the name of the circle you want to share (Figure 4.19).
2. Click the Share link in the circle you originally selected (Figure 4.20).
3. Add text in the Comments section to describe the circle you are shar-
ing, and then choose the circle you want to share this group with 
( Figure 4.21). Sharing to Public will always allow you the most visibility.
4. Click the green box titled Share.
Figure 4.19  
Select the circle 
you want to share 
with others.
Figure 4.20 By 
clicking the Share 
icon, a box will 
open, allowing you 
to easily share your 
Google+ circle with 
others.
Colby’s Quick Tips
Currently, there is a 500 person limit 
to the circles that you can share. If 
you share a circle with 1000 people in 
it, it will only share the names of 500 
individuals.
Figure 4.21 Add text to the Comments 
section of the circle shared to provide 
details about the circle.

89
+4  •  Working with Circles to Stay Organized
Public vs. Extended Circles
When you get ready to start sharing photographs and content on Google+ 
(see Chapter 6), you will find two main circles that come standard with 
every Google+ account: Public and Extended Circles. Understanding the 
difference between the two is important.
Public Circles 
When you share content to the Public circle, it is visible 
to everyone on Google+ as well as the entire World 
Wide Web. As a search giant, Google works hard to make sure it indexes 
all public Google+ posts for search results. By performing a Google search 
of “Colby Brown Photography” (Figure 4.22), you’ll notice that not only 
does my Google+ profile appear as a result, but a popular Google+ post 
as well.
Figure 4.22  
A Google search 
reveals that 
Google+ posts are 
searchable.

Google+ for Photographers
90
Although the benefits of posting to your Public circle 
are that everyone can see what you publish, it can 
also be a drawback. Not everyone who adds you to 
his or her circles might want to see everything you 
send out via Google+. As a rule of thumb, I never 
publish content that talks about religion, politics, or 
polarizing topics to my Public circle unless I truly feel 
compelled to. As a photographer, my name is my 
brand, and I don’t want to alienate potential clients, customers, or friends 
because of my beliefs.
Extended Circles 
Understanding what happens when you pub-
lish content to your Public circle is fairly 
straightforward, but publishing to your Extended Circles is not as clear-cut. 
The reason is that the group of people in your Extended Circles is con-
stantly changing. Your Extended Circles are in essence everyone in your cir-
cles, plus everyone in their circles. Think of it as your circles’ circles. 
However, Extended Circles only go two connections deep.
For example, if I am in your Colorado Photographer’s circle and you pub-
lish content to that circle, I will be able to view it. But my friend Scott 
Jarvie in Utah would not be able to because he is not in that specific circle. 
However, if you publish your content to your Extended Circles, Scott Jarvie 
would be able to see the content, because even though he is not in your 
circles, he is in mine.
Colby’s Quick Tips
Always post your photography work 
to your Public circle to ensure that the 
largest number of people possible will 
see your images.

91
+4  •  Working with Circles to Stay Organized
52
47
30
Melaine Schweighardt: 
What Google+ Means to You
As a freelance photographer and a photo enthu-
siast, I’m always searching for that amazing shot. 
I love it all; from majestic landscapes to an emo-
tional portrait and everything in between. My 
inspiration comes from so many amazing people 
(family, friends, and other photographers). I just 
hope I can pay it forward to a fellow photo enthu-
siast. That would be amazing!
Website: http://photoswithhardt.blogspot.com
Google+: https://plus.google.com/ 
u/0/100019364506073195455 
Essay
Photography is a passion that ignites a feeling, a 
conversation, a memory, a moment in time. It cap-
tures someone’s vision. It is a link to our past and 
leaves a legacy for our future. I have been inter-
ested in photography since I was 4. My mother 
is also a photographer. She took me to the 
Appalachian Trail (High Point, New Jersey) during 
autumn when the leaves were changing. She put 
a Kodak Instamatic camera in my hand and said 
to me, “Look out there; when you see something 
interesting, click this button.” We spent the next 
few hours hiking and taking pictures. She let me 
get familiar with my camera and my surroundings 
and guided me toward some great shots. It’s the 
common bond that linked us from that moment 
on. Her passion became my passion. 
That’s the thing I love about Google+. I am able 
to share that passion with amazing photogra-
phers. It doesn’t discriminate; amateurs and pro-
fessionals meld together, inspiring one another. It 
is a community of artists that teaches, shares, and 
showcases these wonderful creations. Every day I 
am inspired to grab my camera and try something 
new. It’s a way of sharing what you know, what 
you do, and who you are. It gives me a place to 
get lost and enjoy myself while I journey through 
other people’s adventures, and it inspires me to 
share mine. I am grateful and excited to be part 
of a circle of amazing people. Now, I just have to 
get my mom to sign up.

9
9
9
9
9
9
+1

93
62
5
Learning How 
to Interact on 
Google+
As mentioned previously, Google+ is an online network that 
thrives on connections and interaction. It is an information and 
media-streaming powerhouse that allows you to engage with all 
kinds of individuals who share your interests and passions. How-
ever, as you continue to connect with more and more people on 
Google+, you’ll need to control how you view and interact with 
content.
Google+ offers a handful of unique tools and features that make 
handling content a simple process. In this chapter, I’ll discuss 
the use of Google+ Circles, filtering your stream, and dealing 
with spam. I’ll also give you pointers on how to use the Google+ 
search and explain the difference between blocking and ignor-
ing an individual.

Google+ for Photographers
94
Understanding Your 
Google+ Stream
The Google+ Stream is the lifeblood of Google+. It is the medium in which 
the main flow of information, ideas, photos, videos, and Google+ features 
become visible to the end user. Basically, it centralizes all of the content 
people have shared with each other into an endless stream. To access 
your main stream, click the Home icon in the Google+ navigation bar 
(Figure 5.1).
How Does Your Stream Work?
As mentioned in Chapter 4, circles are Google’s answer to the various 
dynamic layers of interpersonal communication that we experience in our 
real lives. By grouping individuals into circles, you can effectively control 
the flow of information throughout the entire network.
In essence, Google+ Circles filters all of the information that flows through 
your stream. When you initially visit your Google+ home page, content 
from everyone you have circled on Google+ is displayed in your stream 
(Figure 5.2). Although this might not be an issue when you’ve only added 
100 people to your circles, it can be daunting to keep up with everyone 
and everything that is being shared when you have circled 4000 individuals. 
This is one of the primary reasons that circle management is so important 
in Google+. If you have taken the time to break down the various types of 
connections that you’ve made into separate circles, you’ll gain total control 
over your stream.
Located just under your profile thumbnail on the 
Google+ home screen are the various circle filters for 
your stream. To view the content from a specific circle, 
simply click the corresponding circle title of choice. 
Google+ displays the names of your first five circles in 
this section (Figure 5.3); however, if the circle you are 
looking for is not in the initial section, you can click 
the More link to show all of your circles.
The title of the circle filter you are currently using 
sits at the top of your home screen, just below the 
Google+ search box (Figure 5.4). When the title 
stream is displayed, you know you are using the default setting, which 
shows you content from everyone you have circled.
Colby’s Quick Tips
Carefully choose the order of your 
Google+ circles. My top five circles are 
Inspirational Photographers, Colorado 
Photographers, Photo Educators, 
Google Employees, and Google+ 
Pages. I interact with individuals in 
these circles more so than anyone else 
on the network, and having them one 
click away is a big time-saver.
Figure 5.1 The 
Home icon on the 
Google+ naviga-
tion bar brings 
you to your home 
screen, showcasing 
your main stream 
of content.

95
+5  •  Learning How to Interact on Google+
Figure 5.4 By 
clicking my Inspi-
rational circle filter, 
my stream will now 
only show pub-
lished content for 
the individuals in 
that circle. I know 
which filter is being 
applied by the title 
of the stream being 
displayed.
Figure 5.2 The default stream 
of content shown on your 
home screen allows you to 
view content from everyone 
you have circled on Google+.
Figure 5.3 Your first five 
circles appear in the left 
sidebar of your home screen, 
allowing you easy access to 
filter your stream to only view 
content from these circles.

Google+ for Photographers
96
Priority controls for your stream
Although you certainly have the ability to use your circles to completely 
filter out the content you want to view, you might want more control over 
your main Google+ stream that displays content from everyone you’ve 
circled. With Google+, you have the ability to fine-tune your stream by giv-
ing priority to some circles over others, allowing you to see more content 
from those you are most interested in connecting with.
This is done through a simple slider that is found at the top of every circle 
filter page (Figure 5.5). To get to the correct page, click the title of the 
circle you want to fine-tune on your home screen in the left sidebar. The 
slider is located just above the Share box and to the right of the title of 
the circle at the top of the page. You have four levels of control. Start-
ing with the slider on the far left and moving to the right, these controls 
include the following:
•
Show nothing from this stream in my main stream
•
Show fewer things from this stream in my main stream
•
Show most things from this stream in my main stream
•
Show everything from this stream in my main stream
Figure 5.5 The 
circle filter slider 
gives you the 
ability to dictate 
which circles you 
want to receive the 
most content from 
when it comes to 
your main Google+ 
stream.
Colby’s Quick Tips
I make sure I see all of the content 
from a handful of certain photogra-
phers on Google+.
Colby’s Quick Tips
Relationships on Google+ are not a 
two-way street like many other social 
networks; they operate in a single 
direction (see Chapter 4). When you 
circle someone, it allows you to view 
the content that person shares. But  
for that person to see what you pub-
lish, the individual has to circle you 
back. Until this happens, the Incom-
ing section will contain the content 
you publish to individuals who have 
not added you to their circles.

97
+5  •  Learning How to Interact on Google+
Interacting with Google+ Posts
As you are viewing content that is flowing through 
your various Google+ streams, you have a variety of 
ways in which you can interact and engage with other 
Google+ users.
Leaving a Comment
Located at the bottom of every post on Google+ is a 
box that displays the words “Add a comment” ( Figure 5.6). Here you can 
share a comment about the post as well as tag someone so that person is 
notified to check out your comment.
Colby’s Quick Tips
When engaging with individuals, you 
might scroll far down your stream. To 
quickly get back to the top of the page 
you are on, click any blank spot in the 
gray Google+ bar at the top of your 
screen.
Figure 5.6 Leaving com-
ments on Google+ is a 
great way to engage with 
other individuals on the 
network. By interacting 
with other people, you 
have a higher chance of 
them adding you to their 
circles.

Google+ for Photographers
98
Although you do not have the ability to use HTML code to leave a dynamic 
comment, you do have a few options when it comes stylizing your words:
•
Bold. By adding an asterisk (*) before and after a word (or string of 
words), you can enable the Bold stylization. For example, *photography* 
would read photography.
•
Underline. Add an underscore (_) before and after the word(s) that you 
want to underline. For example, _Google+ for Photographers_ would 
read Google+ for Photographers.
•
Strike Through. To add a strikethrough as though you are editing 
a word or a string of words, add a hyphen (-) before and after the 
selected word(s). For example, Tomorrow I am leaving at -9am- 8am 
would read Tomorrow I am leaving at 9am 8am.
Tagging an Individual or Google+ Page
To get the attention of another Google+ member, you can tag that individ-
ual in a post or a comment. By doing so, a notification will be sent to that 
member so that the person has a higher chance of seeing the comment or 
post in question.
To tag an individual, simply add the + or @ character before you type the 
person’s name. When you start to type a name to tag, Google+ provides 
suggestions based on the letters typed and the names in your circles 
(Figure 5.7). Google’s recommendations even include a profile thumbnail 
image for you to ensure that you are tagging the right individual. So, for 
example, if you type +Colby Brown or @Colby Brown, you will tag me.
Sharing a Post
One of the best ways to engage with others is to share a post with your 
own circles (Figure 5.8). Google+ is based on interaction and engagement, 
so there is no better way to show that you enjoyed a post on Google+ 
than to share it with your circles and spread the word.
To share a post, follow these steps.
1. Click the Share link located at the bottom of the post in question.
2. Type anything you would like to add to the share of the post in the 
blank box located at the top of the pop-up window.
3. Don’t forget to correctly choose which circles you want to share the 
post with in the bottom box. You can also share the post with individual 
people instead of an entire circle. To do so, just type in their names in 
the same location.

99
+5  •  Learning How to Interact on Google+
Figure 5.7 Tagging other Google+ users in a 
comment or in a post is one of the best ways to 
attempt to grab their attention. A message will be 
sent to their Notification box. 
Figure 5.8 By sharing a post from another 
Google+ member, you are extending your possibil-
ity for interaction on the network. Although I feel 
that you should focus on creating your own original 
content, sharing a creative or intriguing post not 
only keeps your stream diverse, but it allows you 
to connect with more Google+ users in ways you 
might not have otherwise.
Colby’s Quick Tips
When you share a post that has 
already been shared, only the original 
post is carried over. Anything that the 
previous sharer had mentioned will 
not appear. This keeps the focus on 
the original post creator and helps to 
promote the creation of original and 
creative content that is worth sharing.

Google+ for Photographers
100
68
51
37
25
Catherine Hall:  
A Photographer’s Perspective
Catherine Hall approaches her work with a fine-
arts sensibility, technical mastery, and cultivated 
creativity. Cohost of “Best New Technology Pod-
cast” TWiT Photo, Catherine is regularly featured 
in leading publications, such as the New York 
Times and National Geographic Traveler. Her 
adventure-driven projects have spanned over 30 
countries and have been exhibited worldwide.
Website: www.catherinehall.net 
Google+: https://plus.google.com/ 
117757565120070816446 
Q Why is it important to control your Google+ 
streams?
Google+ has been an incredibly inspiring network 
for me to share work and communicate with a 
vibrant community. I discover new work and tal-
ented photographers regularly, as well as get my 
news daily from tech and photography bloggers. 
To get a better experience out of the network, I 
organize people into various circles based on their 
specialty or interest. This way, I can view similar 
content when I click on a circle. This makes it 
easier for me to manage all my social media mes-
sages, keep my head above the noise, and con-
nect more meaningfully.
Q Do you use the Block or Ignore functions in 
Google+?
Very rarely. Google+ has been really good to 
me so far, and I haven’t had much need to block 
people. In fact, I really enjoy seeing a constant 
stream of phenomenal photography and art every 
day—in many cases from people I’ve never heard 
of prior to joining Google+. This wouldn’t have 
been possible if I restricted interaction to a small 
group of people. Through my photo contests, for 
example, I have added large numbers of people 
to my circles, and I’m still in awe of the amount 
of high-quality work I’m seeing each time I orga-
nize a contest. This has been invaluable because 
it exposes me to passionate people with similar 
interests. Although I have to say, the Block fea-
ture is pretty well-devised; you’re not only able 
to remove people from your circles and extended 
circles, but they will not be able to mention you, 
or view or comment on your content. Kudos to 
Google.
Q How important is the Google+ search box? 
Do you have any saved searches that you could 
recommend to other photographers?
I use the search field often. Before Google+ 
descended upon my social media life, I often 

101
+5  •  Learning How to Interact on Google+
70
wished for a feature that allowed me to search 
through my posts as well as my friends’ posts. 
The Google+ search box allows me to do exactly 
that and more. I can easily find users, posts, news, 
and relevant content from the Web by using key-
words. Exactly like I do in Google.
I would recommend photogs check out my follow-
ing favorite saved searches:
•
TWiT Photo (of course!)
•
Google+ Tips
•
Canon Photographers
•
San Francisco Photographers (or your 
local region)
•
Photo Contests
•
Portrait Photographers
•
Photography News
•
Social Media Tips
•
Professional Photographers
Q Interaction is a large part of what makes 
Google+ so great. Why is it important to 
engage with other Google+ users?
If you haven’t already heard, I love Google+. 
I’m a nerd and a workaholic, and I rarely have 
the opportunity to get out to socialize (read: 
LOOOSer). Google+ and its inspiring community 
of thoughtful, talented people are a welcome 
addition to my social life. Times have changed; 
today, people look for others with similar interests 
online. I enjoy being able to “talk” to my Google+ 
community, “hang out,” and be involved in other 
meaningful conversations. Like every relationship, 
you have to contribute, whether it’s socializing, 
providing well-considered messages, or simply 
saying “Hello.” It is not only essential for building 
a community, but also for staying inspired. One 
of the greatest things about Google+ is that you 
interact with a variety of people, and they are all 
interested in creating a dynamic, interesting com-
munity, not merely broadcasting stock messages.

Google+ for Photographers
102
Recommending Content Through 
the Google +1 Button 
One of the biggest benefits to being actively involved on Google+ 
is the ability to influence search engine results. This is primarily 
done through the use of the Google +1 button that is found throughout 
Google+ and much of the Internet.
When you click a +1 button, it turns blue to confirm 
that you’ve recommended that content (Figure 5.9). 
This action carries weight because Google looks at 
your social connections across the Internet to see who 
could benefit the most from seeing the content you 
recommend. As a Google+ post or a regular website 
begins to receive a high number of +1 recommenda-
tions, it will begin to climb in Google’s search results 
for those currently signed into their Google account 
(Chapter 1).
To leave a +1 recommendation on a comment or a 
post, simply click the +1 button found just above 
the Comment section on a post and just below a comment next to the 
time stamp.
Figure 5.9 When 
you click the +1 
button, it turns 
from white to blue.
Colby’s Quick Tips
As you continue to build up a large fol-
lowing on Google+, you will naturally 
receive more and more +1’s for the 
content you publish. The more you 
connect and engage with others, the 
more they will engage back. Active 
Google+ users have a much higher 
chance of influencing their search 
engine results than those not on the 
network.

103
+5  •  Learning How to Interact on Google+
Starting or Joining a Hangout Through a Post
You can easily start or join a hangout via a post on Google+. Located at 
the bottom of every Google+ post is a Hangout link. Click it to start your 
own hangout and invite everyone who has commented on the specified 
post (Figure 5.10). If someone else has already started a hangout through 
this post, you will see an invitation to join the hangout in the Comments 
section. This is a great way to further a conversation in a more personal 
and face-to-face manner.
Muting a Post
Often you’ll come across a post on Google+ that has the community 
engaged. These posts are great ways to interact with a wide variety of 
people. However, if you post a comment on one of these threads, you will 
automatically be notified anytime anyone adds a +1 to your comment or 
Figure 5.10 Hang-
outs are one of 
the best Google+ 
features. Be sure 
to read Chapter 8 
to fully understand 
Google+ Hangouts.

Google+ for Photographers
104
an individual adds a comment after yours. With 50 people commenting on 
a post, your notification system can quickly spiral out of control. The solu-
tion is to mute the post. Muting a post means that you want to stop receiv-
ing all notifications from a specific post, and you want to remove the post 
from your stream.
To mute a post in your stream, follow these steps (Figure 5.11).
1. Find the post you want to mute.
2. Click the down arrow at the top right of the post.
3. Click “Mute this post.”
To mute a post from your Notification menu, follow these steps (Figure 5.12).
1. Click the Notification box located in the top right of your screen.
2. Click the notification for the post that you want to mute.
3. Click “Mute this post,” which is located in the bottom right part of the 
Notification box.
Figure 5.11 With two simple clicks, you can mute a post from your 
Google+ Stream.
Figure 5.12 From the Notification 
box, you can easily mute a post that 
is sending you more notifications 
than you want.

105
+5  •  Learning How to Interact on Google+
The Power of Search 
with Google+
It is no secret that as a company Google is focused on search. It has invested 
billions of dollars and an amazing amount of time developing advanced 
mathematical algorithms that help to make our lives easier.  Having the most 
preferred search engine on the Internet, it is understandable that Google 
integrated many of its search features into the Google+ network.
Searching for Content
Located in the middle of the Google+ navigation bar 
found at the top of every page is the Google+ search 
box (Figure 5.13). Here you can search for a Google+ 
user, a specific post, or a broad topic. As you begin 
to type in the search box, Google+ instantly displays 
profiles and pages that attempt to match your search 
terms (Figure 5.14). A search on my Google+ account 
for “Colorado,” for example, brings up two user 
profiles and five Google+ pages, all with Colorado in 
their names. Although this feature works well if you are looking for an indi-
vidual or a business, it does not help you search for content. To sidestep 
selecting one of the displayed profiles, simply press Enter to perform a 
Figure 5.13 The Google+ search bar is located at the top of every page on Google+. 
Use it to find interesting content, other Google+ users, and even content you published 
months ago.
Figure 5.14 As 
you are typing a 
search into the 
Google+ search 
bar, it will attempt 
to suggest options 
that match what 
you are looking for.
Colby’s Quick Tips
The Google+ search bar is a great 
way to find one of your old posts. 
Simply type in whatever keywords 
you remember, and then change the 
search filters to “Google+ Posts” and 
“From You.” 

Google+ for Photographers
106
standard search. Once on the search page, you’ll notice a similar layout to 
your main stream, but this one has a few new features. 
The content stream on the Google+ search page operates in real time. This 
means that while you are looking at the stream, any new content that was 
added to the network since you searched will continue to scroll through 
your stream automatically. To pause the stream so that you can inspect the 
content more closely, simply click the Pause button located at the top of 
the stream. Note that the Pause button only becomes visible if more con-
tent is published to Google+ that pertains to your search.
Search filters
Included in the Google+ search function is a set of fairly advanced filters 
that allow you to more accurately pinpoint your search results. These filters 
are located near the top of the search page and are divided into three sec-
tions: Type of Content, Source of Content, and Location (Figure 5.15).
The Type of Content filter includes the following 
options:
•
Everything. Anything on the entire Internet 
•
People and Pages. Only individual profiles and 
pages on Google+
•
Google+ Posts. Only content published on 
Google+
•
Sparks. Trending content found on the Internet 
(see the “Trends”  section next)
•
Hangouts. Search Google+ Hangouts 
descriptions 
The Source of Content filter includes the following options:
•
From everyone. Content from everyone on Google+
•
From your circles. Content only from people you have in your  
Google+ circles
•
From you. Only content you have published on Google+
Figure 5.15 All 
three types of search 
filters are found just 
below the Google+ 
search bar.
Colby’s Quick Tips
To search for local photographers to 
connect with, simply type the name of 
your location and the word “photogra-
pher” into the search box. Be sure to 
change the search filter to People and 
Pages. The search feature on Google+ 
will comb through Google+ profiles 
to find people who live in your area 
and indicate that they are interested in 
photography in their bios.

107
+5  •  Learning How to Interact on Google+
The Location filter includes the following options:
•
From Everywhere. Content from any location on the planet
•
Specified Location. Content from a specific location, such as Chicago 
or Denver.
Below these search filters you’ll find two additional filter options:
•
Best of. Content that has the most relevance to your initial search. 
•
Most Recent. Content that was published most recently.
Trends
Located on the right side of the search page is a section called Trends 
(Figure 5.16). This section is meant to reflect the most popular subjects on 
Google+. When you click one of the Trend topics, a page appears showing 
you all of the most recent content published from Google+ users involving 
the selected subject.
Although this section hardly ever relates to photography, it can be helpful 
to gather information regarding current events in the news on a variety 
of topics.
Figure 5.16 Trend 
topics are found 
on the right side 
of the Google+ 
search page. 
These topics are 
constantly chang-
ing based on the 
number of people 
talking about them 
at any given time 
on the network.

Google+ for Photographers
108
Saved searches
If you are constantly performing the same Google+ search over and over, 
you’ll love Saved Searches.  Utilizing this feature allows you to easily repeat 
a Google+ search with ease.
After performing a search for any term, you’ll notice a button labeled 
“Save this search” just to the right of the displayed search criteria 
(Figure 5.17).
Click this button to add the current search to a list found in the sidebar on 
the left located just under your stream filters. You can identify these saved 
searches by the magnifying glass icon located to their left (Figure 5.18). 
If you ever want to perform the same search again, just click the appro-
priate link and Google+ will bring up the most recent content involving 
your search.
As a photography instructor, I am always looking for 
ways to connect with photographers in my region. By 
saving the search “Colorado Photography,” I can eas-
ily find local photographers and individuals who are 
interested in photography in my home state. In prin-
ciple this can work for nearly any topic you might find 
interesting. Do you like black-and-white photography 
or perhaps images from New Zealand? Are you look-
ing for travel advice for visiting Nepal? Simply save a search and revisit it 
as many times as you want.
Figure 5.17 By utilizing the “Save this search” feature on Google+, you can 
maximize your time looking for specific content on Google+.
Figure 5.18 You can 
create as many saved 
searches as you like, but 
only five will display by 
default until you click 
More.
Colby’s Quick Tips
Located just above your Saved 
Searches you’ll find a link to “What’s 
hot.” This represents a specific post on 
Google+ that has had a lot of interac-
tion in a short period of time.

109
+5  •  Learning How to Interact on Google+
Recommended Saved Searches
Whether you are on the network to build your business or just looking for inspi-
ration, a wide variety of Google+ searches are available that you might find ben-
eficial to your experience on Google+.
If you want to connect with other photographers, save these searches: 
•
Search for local photographers, for example, “Colorado Photographers”  
or “New York Photographers”
•
Search by photograph category, for example, “Nature Photographer”  
or “Wildlife Photographer”
•
Search by a person’s name, for example, “Colby Brown,” “Trey Ratcliff,”  
or “Catherine Hall”
If you are interested in photography, save these searches:
• “Black and White”
• “Macro Photography”
• “Yosemite National Park”
If you are interested in photography themed days (discussed in more detail in 
Chapter 6), save these searches:
• “Mountain Mondays”
• “Waterfall Wednesdays”
• “Selfless Sundays”
For all things Google, save these searches:
• “Android”
• “Google Plus Updates” (to find newly announced features on Google+)
Hashtags
The Internet has been utilizing hashtags for years, but 
hashtags were mostly made popular by another social 
network, Twitter. Basically, they are simplified key-
words that allow you to find content on the Internet. 
However, a number sign (#) precedes them to indicate 
they are in fact a hashtag. Although you do not have 
to use hashtags when utilizing the Google+ search 
bar, including them in your posts can be beneficial 
( Figure 5.19). On Google+, a hashtag is automatically 
converted to a hyperlink that when clicked will link 
you to search results for the specified hashtag.
Colby’s Quick Tips 
Hashtags can provide great opportu-
nities to group similar content, such 
as images from an event. You can 
even create your own hashtag, such 
as #yosemite2011 and have all those 
who went on that trip use the same 
hashtag on their image posts. When 
you then search for #yosemite2011 in 
the Google+ search bar, you’ll find all 
relevant content easily.

Google+ for Photographers
110
Figure 5.19 By 
adding hashtags to 
your images, you 
can easily share 
in community 
projects, such as 
themed days. Many 
photographers on 
Google+ partici-
pate in these daily 
events, and by par-
ticipating, you have 
a good chance of 
interacting with 
others who join in. 
See Chapter 6 for 
more information 
on theme days.
How Does Google+ 
Deal with Spam?
With any social network that has a growing user base and that has 
attracted a lot of attention, spammers are sure to follow. The reality is that 
although we may personally have disdain for such practices, they do exist 
for a reason, and someone somewhere is making money on those prac-
tices; otherwise, spam would cease to exist.
Google+, however, does take spam very seriously and offers a handful 
of different solutions to combat the annoying experience of dealing with 
spammers.
Reporting Spam
As Google+’s first line of defense, it is its users who are responsible for 
finding and reporting any spam they come across. Three different aspects 
of Google+ can be reported as spam: a Google+ account, a post, or a 
comment.

111
+5  •  Learning How to Interact on Google+
Google+ account
There may come a time when you realize that an individual or business is 
violating the rules of Google+, and you’ll need to report that account. On 
the announce page in question (profile or page) at the bottom of the left 
sidebar is a “Report this profile” link. By clicking this link, you can report 
the account for the following reasons: spam, nudity, hate speech or vio-
lence, copyright infringement, impersonation, or having a fake profile. 
Post
If you find a post from an individual that you feel is spam or that has vio-
lated any of Google+’s rules, you can easily report the post in question.
To report a post, follow these steps.
1. Click the down arrow located in the top-right corner of every post on 
Google+.
2. Choose Report Abuse (Figure 5.20).
3. Report the post as spam, nudity, hate speech or violence, or copyright 
infringement.
Colby’s Quick Tips
It is important to note that report-
ing an account, post, or comment 
only flags the possible infringement 
for review; it does not automatically 
remove it from Google+.
Figure 5.20 By 
clicking a post’s 
drop-down menu, 
you have access 
to a few hidden 
features, such as 
muting a post and 
reporting it as a 
violation against 
Google+’s rules.

Google+ for Photographers
112
Comment
The most common form of spam is a comment on a post from another 
Google+ member. If you want to report an individual comment as spam, 
simply click the gray flag icon that appears as you move your mouse over 
the comment in question (Figure 5.21). By doing so, you will flag the com-
ment for review by Google and bring the possible violation to the atten-
tion of the post’s creator.
If you are the creator of a post with flagged content, you also have the 
ability to delete any comment in the comment thread. Located next to the 
gray flag is an “x” icon that signifies the deletion of that specific comment. 
This is handy when dealing with spammers. I will first flag the comment, 
and then delete it. As a result, the Google+ system will get better at auto 
detecting spam in the first place.
Auto Detecting Spam
Google+ has a comment spam moderation system in place to help actively 
combat spam. It works to detect spam, even before you see it appear in 
one of your posts.
If spam is detected as a comment on a Google+ post, the system does the 
following:
•
Automatically marks the comment in question for review.
•
Allows only the creator of the post to see the questionable comment.
•
Creates a gray overlay over the possible spam, 
allowing the post’s creator to identify it.
•
Gives the post’s creator a choice to remove the 
comment or approve the comment and restore it 
to the post.
•
Doesn’t allow the creator of the comment in 
question to know that it has been marked as 
spam.
Figure 5.21 The 
icon to report a 
comment as spam 
is hidden until you 
move your mouse 
over the comment 
in question.
Colby’s Quick Tips
The only caveat to this automated 
system is that it is constantly learning. 
It requires you to manually report any 
spam you find on Google+. The more 
spam that is flagged, the better the 
system will become at automatically 
detecting spam in the future.

113
+5  •  Learning How to Interact on Google+
Block vs. Ignore
At some point, you may want to totally disconnect from an individual on 
Google+. You have two main options when it comes to distancing yourself 
from that person: Block or Ignore; one is more severe than the other.
Block
When you choose to block someone, you will break all contact with that 
individual or Google+ page. It is the most severe action you can take to 
separate from the other person.
When you block someone
•
You won’t see that person’s content in the stream or in the Incoming 
section (although you will remain in that person’s circles).
•
The individual will be removed from your circles.
•
The person will be removed from your extended circles, even if you 
have mutual connections with other individuals.
•
The person won’t be able to comment on any of your content that was 
posted after the individual was blocked.
•
The person won’t be able to view content shared with your circles 
(although the individual may still see content you post publicly).
•
The person won’t be able to tag/mention you in a post or comment, 
because the system will not allow it to happen.
How do you block someone? Well, there are multiple ways in which you 
can block someone on Google+.
From a profile:
1. Go to the individual’s profile.
2. On the left sidebar click Block [person’s name] (Figure 5.22).
3. Confirm that you want to block this individual.
From your Circles page:
1. Go to the Circles page on Google+.
2. Highlight the individual you want to block.
3. Click the More button located just above the profile thumbnails.
4. Choose Block (Figure 5.23).
5. Confirm that you want to block this individual.

Google+ for Photographers
114
Figure 5.22 To block a Google+ user, visit the user’s profile and click the Block [person’s 
name] link, which is always located on the left sidebar of the page.
From one of the individual’s posts:
1. Locate a post from the individual you want to block.
2. Click the down arrow located in the top-right corner of the post.
3. Choose “Report abuse” from the options.
4. Select Spam and click the Submit button (Figure 5.24).
Figure 5.23 After clicking the profile you want to block, click the down arrow at the top right of the screen 
and choose Block.

115
+5  •  Learning How to Interact on Google+
Figure 5.24 This small 
pop-up window appears 
after you click “Report 
abuse.”
From a hangout:
1. Hover your mouse over the individual’s video feed.
2. Click the Block link that appears.
3. Confirm that you want to block the person in question.
Blocking an individual in a hangout is slightly different than blocking using 
any of the other options. Here is how blocking works in hangouts:
•
If you block someone while in a hangout, you will not be able to see or 
hear the individual for the remainder of the hangout. However, the per-
son will not be removed from the hangout automatically.
•
Everyone will see that you blocked someone, including the person you 
blocked.
•
You will not be allowed to enter a hangout if someone you have 
blocked is already in the hangout.
•
Anyone you block will not be able to enter a hangout that you are cur-
rently in.
Ignore
Using the Ignore feature is much less severe than 
blocking an individual, but it will still provide some 
distance between you and the ignored individual.
When you ignore a person:
• That person will be removed from the list of peo-
ple who have added you to their circles on your 
Circles page.
• Any new content from the individual will not 
appear in your Incoming stream, and any content that person has 
already shared will be removed from your streams.
• You will not receive a notification if the ignored person mentions you in 
a post or a comment on Google+.
Colby’s Quick Tips
To view a list of everyone you have 
blocked or ignored on Google+, head 
to your Google+ Circles page. Click 
“More actions” in the top right of your 
screen, and choose View Blocked or 
View Ignored.

Google+ for Photographers
116
There are multiple ways to ignore someone on Google+.
You can ignore someone through Notifications.
1. Click your Notification box.
2. Click a notification that shows “Added you on Google+.”
3. You can either add the individual to your circles or ignore that individual.
4. Click Ignore (Figure 5.25).
You can ignore someone from your Circles page.
1. Head to your Circles page on Google+.
2. Click “People who’ve added you,” which is located in the left sidebar.
3. Highlight the individual you want to ignore.
4. Click the Ignore button just above the profile thumbnails (Figure 5.26).
Figure 5.25 Ignoring people 
through the Notification box is 
not the best choice in my opinion, 
because it does not give you the 
chance to learn about the individual 
or see what content that person 
has published on Google+.

117
+5  •  Learning How to Interact on Google+
Figure 5.26 Ignoring Google+ users through the Circles page allows you to select multiple 
accounts at once to ignore.

9
9
9
+1

119
59
6
Publishing Your 
Photographs and 
Other Content
One of the biggest reasons for photographers to get involved 
in any online network is to share their artwork with others. 
Because of the advances in digital technology, the fact that 
personal computers and smart phones are more affordable than 
ever, and the increasing popularity of online networks, you have 
the opportunity to reach a wide variety of individuals from all 
over the globe in ways that were not possible ten years ago. 
Now that you’ve spent some time getting to know Google+, it 
is time to start sharing some content.
In this chapter I’ll walk you through the process of creating a 
post, show you how to upload your images and videos to the 
network, and give you some examples of how to increase the 
amount of interaction you receive on Google+.

Google+ for Photographers
120
Publishing Content to Google+
The center point for all interaction on Google+ is content. With over 100 
million Google+ members, you can bet that at any given moment some-
one is sharing information on the network that was heard, created, read, 
or seen (Figure 6.1). Although I discussed the importance of sharing other 
Google+ members’ content with your followers in Chapter 5, nothing 
beats creating your own posts for others to engage with. Sharing a very 
popular post that is being passed around the network is not nearly the 
same as being the original creator of the post that is being shared. If your 
goal is to build a following and establish yourself as a photographer on 
Google+, sharing your own content is key.
Figure 6.1 When 
you create your 
own content, you 
allow more people 
the opportunity 
to engage and 
interact with you. 
Jay Patel received 
114 +1’s, 10 shares, 
and 47 comments 
from this post that 
he created and 
published.

121
+6  •  Publishing Your Photographs and Other Content
Creating a Post
To create a post on Google+, you must utilize the 
Share box, which is found at the top of any Google+ 
Stream page as well as in the Google+ navigation bar 
(Figure 6.2) on every page on the network. It is here 
that you can share text, a link, a movie, a photo, and 
even your GPS location. 
To begin creating a post to share, click one of the 
previously mentioned Share boxes. The Share box in 
either location displays the same sharing features and 
the same screen (Figure 6.3).
The blank space in the middle of a Share box is where you can write in any 
relevant text to include in your post. Five small icons located in the lower-
right corner of the Share box represent the various items you can include 
in your post (from left to right):
•
Photos from your phone. With the Instant Upload (Chapter 9) fea-
ture turned on for your mobile phone or tablet, clicking this icon 
allows you to easily add to a post images that you have taken on your 
mobile device.
Figure 6.2 The 
Google+ Share 
boxes are your 
main source for 
creating and shar-
ing content on 
Google+. They 
are very easy 
to use and are 
visible on every 
page throughout 
Google+, allow-
ing you to share 
content no matter 
what you are doing.
Figure 6.3 Once inside the Google+ Share 
box, you have the ability to easily share text, an 
image from your mobile device, a photo from 
your computer, a video from YouTube, a link to 
another website, and your current location.
Colby’s Quick Tips
As mentioned in Chapter 5, you 
have some ability to format your text 
when you create a post. By adding an 
underscore (_), asterisk (*), or hyphen 
(-) at the beginning and end of a word 
or phrase, you can underline, bold, or 
add a strikethrough, respectively. See 
Chapter 5 for more details.

Google+ for Photographers
122
•
Add photos. Clicking the green camera icon 
allows you to add photos to your post from your 
computer, create a new photo album, or select 
images from your mobile device.
•
Videos. Clicking the box with the red arrow icon 
allows you to upload a video from your computer, 
share a YouTube video, upload a video from 
your mobile device, or even record a quick video 
broadcast to share with your followers. You can 
share only one video per post via this feature.
•
Web links. Clicking the paper clip icon allows you 
to share a link in your post. Any visible images 
and any metadata description on a supplied link 
can appear as a thumbnail teaser, giving viewers 
a glimpse of what the link is about. You can share 
only one link per post via this feature.
•
Your current location. Clicking the red pinpoint 
icon allows you to share your current location. 
Google attempts to identify your location for you, 
although it is not always 100 percent accurate 
from a web browser compared to a mobile device 
(Chapter 9) with GPS functionality.
At the bottom of the Share box you can determine who to share your post 
with via the “Share to” box (Figure 6.4). Google+ gives you full control 
over sharing your content with whomever you choose. If you want to share 
an image with your family or past clients only, select your Family or Clients 
circle so that those in the circle are the only ones who can view the post. If 
you click the “+Add more people” link, a menu appears listing your first 
five circles, a link to see all of your circles, or the options to select any of 
the standard Google+ circles (Figure 6.5):
•
Your circles. This option makes the current post visible to everyone  
you have circled, by default. You can, however, customize which  
circles you wish to include in “Your Circles.” Select “Your Circles” and 
use your mouse to hover over it inside your “Share to” box. Then click 
“Customize.”
•
Extended circles. This option makes the current post visible to every-
one in your circles plus everyone in their circles.
•
Public. This option makes the current post visible to everyone on 
Google+ as well as the entire Internet.
Colby’s Quick Tips
When you share a photo directly to a 
post, it is automatically placed in your 
Images from Posts photo album on 
Google+. Later in the chapter I discuss 
a better approach for uploading 
images and organizing your albums.
Colby’s Quick Tips
If you are publishing a post to a circle 
with fewer than 100 Google+ users 
in it, you have the ability to notify 
those individuals of your post. Once 
you have selected the circle you want 
to publish to, move your mouse over 
that circle in the “Share to” box and 
select “Notify about this post” in the 
window that pops up. Use this spar-
ingly though, because it can annoy 
other users.

123
+6  •  Publishing Your Photographs and Other Content
Figure 6.4 The “Share to” box gives you full control over who you want to 
share the current post with. You can share a post privately with just one other 
person, to a group of individuals in a circle, or with everyone on Google+.
Figure 6.5 This menu makes it easy for you 
to select the circle you want to share your 
post with. Organizing the order of your circles 
so that those you interact and share with the 
most are first (Chapter 4) allows you to quickly 
and easily share posts with just those circles.
Figure 6.6 When sending a private message, I highly 
recommend that you type the words private message
at the top of the post so that the Google+ users you 
are sending the post to know that it is private and not 
to be shared with others.
In the “Share to” box, you can also share a post privately with one or more 
Google+ users. To do this, click in the box and begin to type in the name 
of the Google+ user you want to share your post with (Figure 6.6). To 
make the process easier, Google+ automatically provides a list of sugges-
tions based on who you have circled and interacted with on the network.
Editing a Post
As a photographer, I pride myself on not only the images I take, but also 
the stories I write about my experiences; however, I happen to be horrible 
at spelling. On other online networks, I’ve often cringed after reading one 
of my posts, knowing full well that I don’t have the ability to edit what I’ve 
written. With Google+, I don’t have to worry.
To edit one of your posts, follow these steps.
1. Click the down arrow located in the top right of the post in question.
2. Choose “Edit this post” from the menu (Figure 6.8).
3. Make adjustments to your post (you can even fix a web link).
4. Click the Save button at the bottom of your post.

Google+ for Photographers
124
Google+ Snippets
The integration of other Google products and 
services into Google+ is vital to the sustained 
growth of the network. Currently, Google 
allows you to share snippets of content from 
Google Maps, Google Books, Google Offers, 
and Google Product Search directly to Google+ 
from within these separate services. This is done 
through the Google+ navigation bar, which 
is slowly being rolled into all other Google 
products and services. For example, you could 
share driving directions from Google Maps 
directly with a friend or customer on Google+ 
(Figure 6.7).
To share a snippet from Google Maps, follow 
these steps.
1. Visit Google Maps at http://maps.google.
com, or move your mouse over the Google 
logo in the Google+ navigation bar to 
display the Google menu and click the 
Maps icon.
2. Click the Get Directions button just below 
the Google logo in the top left of your 
screen.
3. Fill in the point A and B boxes with locations 
of your choice, and click the Get Directions 
button.
4. Click the + Share box located at the far right 
of the Google+ navigation bar.
5. Notice that the driving directions are already 
in the Share box. Add any text you want to 
add to the post, and then select who you 
want to share your post with.
6. Click the Share button.
Currently, the snippets feature works only with 
Google Maps, Google Books, Google Offers, 
and Google Product Search.
Figure 6.7 As Google continues to integrate more and more of its products and services, 
the ability to find and share content will continue to grow. With Google Calendar, Google 
Music, and many other Google products, the possibilities for integration are endless.

125
+6  •  Publishing Your Photographs and Other Content
Controlling How Others Can Interact 
with the Content You Publish
Often, when you reshare someone’s post or you send private messages to 
other Google+ members, you’ll want to exercise more control over how 
people can interact with what you are sharing. Google+ allows you to lock 
your post so no one can reshare it and to disable comments so that no 
other Google+ user can comment on the post.
You can enable either of these features in two ways:
• Click the down arrow located at the far right of 
the “Share to” box when first creating your post 
( Figure 6.9), and choose “Lock this post” or Dis-
able Comments.
• Click the down arrow located in the top-right cor-
ner of your post that has already been published 
and choose “Lock this post” or “Disable com-
ments” (Figure 6.10).
Figure 6.8 You can always 
edit any post you’ve pub-
lished on Google+, fixing any 
mistakes or even updating 
the post if new information 
comes to light after you’ve 
shared it. The one post you 
cannot edit is a circle that 
you’ve shared (Chapter 4).
	

Google+ for Photographers
126
Tracking Your Post
Have you ever published a very creative or engaging image or article on 
the Internet and watched as it was spread throughout Facebook, Twitter, 
Tumblr, and any of the other online networks? Wouldn’t it be great if you 
could follow the path of interactions while your creation is being spread 
across the network? With Google+ Ripples you have that ability.
Google+ Ripples displays an interactive graphic of public shares of any 
post on the network, as shown in Figure 6.11.
To view the ripples of a post, follow these steps.
1. On the post in question, click the down arrow in the top-right corner of 
the post to display a menu.
2. Choose View Ripples.
On the Google+ Ripples page you’ll find lots of statistical information: 
•
Public shares and comments. In the main window you’ll see a graphic 
representation of the public shares of the post. People who have 
shared the post will be displayed with their own circles. Inside those 
circles will be people who have reshared the post from those people 
(and so on). The size of the circles is representative of a person’s influ-
ence; so those with many followers will have larger circles, showcasing 
their potential influence over others.
The comments added by users when the post was shared will appear 
in the sidebar at the right. As you zoom in and out of the circles, you’ll 
Figure 6.9 The best way to implement control over 
the interaction of your posts is to select the corre-
sponding setting before the post is published.
Figure 6.10 After you have published a post, the only 
way to enable these control features is by using the 
menu in the post.

127
+6  •  Publishing Your Photographs and Other Content
see different comments from various individuals. You can also view the 
comments people made on their reshare by hovering your mouse over 
their names in their representative circles.
•
How a post was shared over time. At the bottom of the Ripples page 
is an animated graph that shows how the post was shared over time. 
You can even click the Play button under the graph to watch how the 
post was shared across the network.
•
Post statistics. At the bottom of the Ripples page you’ll find all the 
post statistics (Figure 6.12). You can determine who helped share  
the post the most, view statistics for how the post was shared, and 
even see the native languages in which the post was shared.
Figure 6.11  
Google+ Ripples 
represents an excel-
lent way to track a 
post as it is shared 
throughout the 
network. If used 
correctly, it can show 
you which individu-
als on Google+ can 
help spread other 
content you publish 
because they have 
a larger sphere of 
influence.
Figure 6.12 Ripple 
statistics can help 
you identify your 
influencers easily 
and provide other 
data that show how 
far reaching the 
post became.

Google+ for Photographers
128
Uploading and Sharing 
Photos to Google+
When it comes to uploading photos and videos to Google+, you have 
more options than just using the Share box mentioned previously. 
Although the Share box is convenient and always just a click away, its big-
gest drawback is the fact that all of your photos shared directly to a post 
are automatically moved into your “Photos from posts” photo album. As 
a photographer, I like to keep my photography work organized on my 
work computers and online. The two best places to upload new images 
to Google+ that you want to share are through the Google+ Photos page 
and on your Google+ profile.
From the Google+ Photos Page
To access the Google+ Photos page, click the Photos icon in the Google+ 
navigation bar (Figure 6.13). The default section of thumbnail images 
you’ll see will be “Photos from your circles” (Figure 6.14). On the Google+ 
Photos page you have a multitude of options for uploading and sharing 
images on Google+.
Uploading a new photo
To upload and share a new photo (or multiple photos) to Google+, follow 
these steps.
1. Click the Upload New Photos button located in the top-right area of 
the Google+ Photos page.
2. Decide if you want to create a new album to store your image in or 
if you want to add it to an existing album. Both options are located 
at the top of the “Upload and share photos” window that appears 
(Figure 6.15).
Colby’s Quick Tips
Google+ allows you to upload photos 
up to 2048 x 2048 pixels in size. Any 
images larger than those dimensions 
will automatically be resized to 2048 
pixels on the photo’s longest edge. 
Google+ also strips all metadata if it 
has to resize your image, including 
copyright information.

129
+6  •  Publishing Your Photographs and Other Content
Figure 6.14 The 
Google+ Photos 
page allows you 
to not only upload 
and share your own 
images, but view 
photos that others 
have published to 
Google+ as well. 
It is the access 
point for view-
ing, sharing, and 
organizing photos 
on Google+.
Figure 6.13 The Google+ Photos icon on the navigation bar is represented by a photo frame with a green 
mountain in it.
Figure 6.15 The 
“Upload and share 
photos” window 
appears when you 
click the Upload 
New Photos button 
in the main section 
of the Google+ 
Photos page.

Google+ for Photographers
130
Figure 6.16 Editing the caption of your images is important 
because Google scans the captions when performing searches 
in Google+ and on the Internet (if you share the image publicly).
Figure 6.17 Adding backstory and all 
relevant image information, such as ISO, 
shutter speed, and aperture, to the body 
of your post will help other Google+ 
users connect with your image. Telling the 
story behind the image might elicit more 
interaction on the photos you publish to 
the network.
3. Either drag the photo(s) from your desktop to the middle of the 
“Upload and share photos” window or click the “Select photos from 
your computer” button to choose the images you want to upload.
4. Edit the caption of the photo(s) you selected to upload by clicking in 
the area just below the image thumbnail (Figure 6.16).
5. Click the “Add photos” button in the bottom-right corner of the  
window when you are ready to proceed.
Colby’s Quick Tips
I recommend uploading images that 
are at least 1024 pixels in length on a 
photo’s longest edge. This will ensure 
that those viewing your work will be 
able to see enough detail. Be sure to 
upload images in the sRGB color space 
to make sure the colors are displayed 
consistently across different types of 
monitors. A Google search for sRGB 
will explain sRGB in more detail.
Colby’s Quick Tips
Always share your images to the 
Public circle to ensure that all those on 
Google+ can view your image if they 
have you in their circles or if they come 
across the image through someone 
sharing your photo.

131
+6  •  Publishing Your Photographs and Other Content
6. A Share box appears allowing you to share the 
image you just uploaded with other users on 
Google+ (Figure 6.17). Add any relevant text or 
backstory to the body of the post and be sure to 
select which circles or individuals you are sharing 
the post and image to. When you are ready, click 
the Share button in the lower-left corner of the 
Share box window.
Sharing a photo from your phone
If you have the Instant Upload feature turned on on your Android mobile 
device (not compatible on iPhones or iPads), you can easily add images 
you took on your phone or tablet to a Google+ photo album or a post to 
share with your followers on Google+.
To share a photo from your mobile device, follow these steps.
1. Click the “Photos from your phone” link located in the left sidebar of 
the Google+ Photos page (Figure 6.18).
2. The photos on your “Photos from your phone” page are divided into 
separate sections that represent different days that the photos were 
taken and uploaded on your mobile device. Click the photo(s) you 
want to share. A red border appears around the selected photos 
(Figure 6.19).
Colby’s Quick Tips
The Instant Upload feature is enabled 
on all of my Android devices, making 
it much easier for me to share the 
images I take while on the run. Taking 
the images with my cell phone and 
then using a web browser to publish 
them gives me much more control than 
using the Google+ mobile application 
(Chapter 9).
Figure 6.18 The 
“ Photos from your 
phone” link is the 
second option from the 
top in the left sidebar 
on the Google+ Photos 
page, just below your 
profile thumbnail.
Figure 6.19 You 
can select as many 
photos as you want 
to share or add to 
a Google+ album. 

Google+ for Photographers
132
3. Decide if you want to share the photo(s) immediately (the selected 
images will automatically be moved to your “Photos from posts” 
Google+ photo album) or if you want to add them to a new or existing 
photo album and then share the photo(s) with your followers. Click the 
Share button if you want to share instantly or the “Add to album” but-
ton if you want to organize the photo(s) into albums first (Figure 6.20).
4. If you click the “Add to album” button, a window appears allowing 
you to add a caption to the photo(s) as well as choose in which photo 
album the selected photo(s) will be placed, whether it is a new album 
or an existing one (Figure 6.21). When you are ready, click the “Add to 
album” button in the lower-right corner of the window.
5. A Share box appears allowing you to share the selected photo(s) with 
your followers.
Figure 6.20 The 
Share button and 
“Add to album” 
button are found 
at the top of the 
“Photos from your 
phone” page.
Figure 6.21 Don’t 
forget to add a 
caption to your 
photo before you 
choose which 
folder to place it in.
Colby’s Quick Tips
Organizing your photos in the correct 
folders will allow you and your follow-
ers to find them easily in the future.

133
+6  •  Publishing Your Photographs and Other Content
Sharing an image you have already uploaded
There might be a time when you want to reshare a 
photo that you’ve already uploaded and shared with 
your followers on Google+. Although this is an easy 
process on Google+, you are not in fact sharing your 
previously uploaded photo; instead, you are creating 
a duplicate of it on Google+. Your current comments 
and +1’s will not transfer over, so keep that in mind.
To share an image that you’ve already uploaded to 
Google+, follow these steps.
1. Click the “Your albums” link (Figure 6.22) in the 
left sidebar of the Google+ Photos page. (You can also access this  
section from your Google+ profile.)
2. A series of thumbnails appears that represents the various albums you 
have on Google+. Click the album that contains the photo you want to 
reshare, and then click the specified photo.
3. A lightbox containing the selected photo appears, allowing you to 
view the image with a black background. Click the Share button in the 
bottom-right corner of the window (Figure 6.23).
4. A Share box appears allowing you to share the selected photo with 
your followers.
Colby’s Quick Tips
You can also share a link to your 
Google+ post that contains an image 
you want to reshare. Click the down 
arrow in the top-right corner of the 
post in question and choose “Link 
from post.” Copy the URL it provides, 
and create a new post using the cop-
ied URL in the link. 
Figure 6.22 The 
“Your albums” link 
is located at the 
bottom of the left 
sidebar, just below 
your Google+ 
thumbnail profile 
photo.
Figure 6.23 The Share box on the Google+ lightbox is tucked away in the lower-right 
corner of the window.

Google+ for Photographers
134
From Your Google+ Profile
On your Google+ profile you’ll notice a Photos tab (discussed in Chap-
ter 3). From the Photos tab you can upload a new photo and share an 
existing photo on Google+ with your followers, just as you can from the 
Google+ Photos page.
To upload a new photo or share an existing photo, follow these steps.
1. Access your Google+ Profile page by clicking the Profile icon in the 
Google+ navigation bar (Figure 6.24).
2. Click the Photos tab (Figure 6.25).
3. To upload a new photo, click the Upload New Photos button just above 
the thumbnail images that represent your photo albums, and then fol-
low steps 2–6 in the “Uploading a new photo” section earlier in this 
chapter. 
Figure 6.24 The 
icon for your 
Google+ profile is 
a circle with a blue 
person in its center.
Figure 6.25 The 
Photos tab in your 
Google+ profile 
is in the gray bar 
located in the 
middle of your 
profile.

135
+6  •  Publishing Your Photographs and Other Content
4. To share an existing photo with your Google+ followers, click the album 
that contains the image you want to share. If you do not see the album 
in question, click the “View all of your albums” link just below the 
Upload New Photos button (Figure 6.26). When you’ve found the cor-
rect album, select the photo you want to reshare, and then follow steps 
2–4 in the “Sharing an image you have already uploaded” section ear-
lier in this chapter. 
Ways to Increase Interaction
When you first join an online network, it can seem daunting to attempt to 
build a following or even get any interaction on the content you publish. 
This is a common problem on networks like Facebook where you will only 
receive a few “likes” on anything you share.
Although the Google+ network thrives on interaction and has a growing 
and energetic photography community, it doesn’t mean that you will not 
have to put in some effort to get the most out of your time spent there. A 
very common misconception, even from seasoned professional photog-
raphers, is that simply sharing your photographs online—no matter how 
beautiful they may be—is enough. Instead, it is just the beginning. To help 
you increase the interaction you receive on Google+, you should think 
about creating original content, schedule your posts to coincide with high-
traffic times on the network, join a theme photo day, or even submit the 
images you upload on Google+ to a third-party website that showcases 
talented photographers on its network.
Figure 6.26 From 
your Google+ pro-
file, you can access 
all of the images 
you’ve uploaded 
by clicking the 
Photos tab and 
then clicking “View 
all of your albums.”

Google+ for Photographers
136
Uploading a Video to Google+
As mentioned in the “Creating a post” section earlier in this chapter, you can 
upload videos directly to Google+. Although you can upload and add a video to 
a post using the Share box, you can also do so via your Google+ profile.
To upload and share a video from your Google+ profile, follow these steps.
1. Click the Videos tab in the middle of your Google+ profile (Figure 6.27).
2. Click the Upload New Videos button on the right side of your profile on the 
Videos page.
3. Follow steps 2–6 in the “Uploading a new photo” section earlier in this 
chapter.
You can upload an unlimited number of videos, but each video cannot be longer 
than 15 minutes or larger than 1080p in resolution.
Figure 6.27 The Videos tab in your Google+ profile contains all of the videos 
you have uploaded directly to the network but none of the videos that you have 
uploaded to Google’s YouTube service.

137
+6  •  Publishing Your Photographs and Other Content
The Power of Original and Creative Content
As discussed in Chapter 2, there is no substitute for creating original and 
creative content and sharing it on any online network. Resharing posts cre-
ated by other Google+ members is important, but wouldn’t you rather be 
the one sharing a post or have hundreds or thousands of other Google+ 
users sharing your post (Figure 6.28)?
You must realize that on any online network, nearly all users want to have 
their voices heard. Even with Google+, which has over 60 million users (a 
fraction of Facebook’s 850+ million), that’s a lot of people vying for your 
attention to the content they create and share. Photographers are no dif-
ferent. Many love sharing their work as much as they love the process of 
Figure 6.28  
Photographer  
Mike Shaw is 
known for the 
compelling content 
he publishes and 
shares on Google+. 
He puts a lot of 
thought and heart 
into his posts, and 
the high level of 
interaction and 
engagement he 
gets from other 
Google+ users is a 
testament to being 
creative and shar-
ing personal pieces 
of yourself via your 
photography.

138
Google+ for Photographers
creating their photographs. However, too often I see photographers on 
Google+ making the same mistakes. They take a beautiful photo, share the 
image with no background information, and then sit and wait for the flood 
of comments, shares, and +1’s that never come. Why? Most of the time it 
is because the post doesn’t stand out from the crowd.
Try to think outside the box. For example, imagine you and a group of nine 
other photographers are visiting a beautiful glacier. Everyone is standing 
right next to each other taking the same photograph. Looking at each of 
the ten images, how difficult is it for your image to stand out if each photo 
looks the same (Figure 6.29)?
To separate your posts from the rest of the traffic on Google+, you need 
to mix it up. Don’t just share a photograph; share the backstory of what it 
took to capture the image. Don’t just post about your photography work; 
tell everyone about you or your family (Figure 6.30). If you want to hold a 
contest to give away some of your prints, engage with the community and 
don’t make it about you. Be creative. Be original. Be you.
Figure 6.29 I took this photograph while 
at the Perito Moreno Glacier in southern 
Argentina. Although the glacier is certainly 
a sight to see, it always confused me as to 
why everyone at the bottom of the image 
seemed to want to stand right next to each 
other and capture the same shot.
Figure 6.30 In August 2010, my wife and I welcomed 
our first son, Jack, into this world. Sharing my adven-
tures of being a new parent with my Google+ circles 
has allowed my followers to get to know me in a more 
personal way. Social networking is about personal inter-
action, not just marketing pitches.

139
+6  •  Publishing Your Photographs and Other Content
76
Grayson Hartman:  
What Google+ Means to You
Grayson spent his summers as a wildland fire-
fighter, a Hotshot with the USDA Forest Service, 
from his Cal Poly SLO years through 2010. He 
always carried a camera in his shirt pocket so he 
could capture the stunning images that fueled his 
passion. In 2009, Gray purchased his first profes-
sional DSLR camera. It redefined his existence. 
Since then, as a self-described adventure seeker, 
he has documented his work and travel adven-
tures, continually endeavoring to attain an ever-
increasing level of mastery and honing his uniquely 
sensitive style of digital photography.
Website: http://grayhartphotography.com 
Google+: https://plus.google.com/ 
111674748486766258557 
Essay
Imagine a place for photographers to go where 
images flow in an endless stream of information, 
inspiration, and education. This community of 
people is the solid bedrock on which the stream 
flows. And the conversations, +1’s, comments, 
and shares are the web of communication that tie 
everyone together, amateurs and pros alike. This 
place is Google+.
Google+ is an inspirational and dynamic inter-
active community for novice and professional 
photographers. For aspiring and budding pho-
tographers, it is indispensable as a tool and arena 
from which point critique and exposure can take 
place. Professionals can use Google+ to share 
images and indispensable knowledge or to net-
work with relative ease, making communication 
possible with amateurs as well as other seasoned 
photographers.
In true Google fashion, the Google+ platform 
is clean, user friendly, and intuitive. Images look 
great in their native thumbnail size, and look even 
better in their black box.
Google+ is great for beginners, too—add some 
photography circles, find some tutorials, post 
a photograph, and ask for critique. If you don’t 
know what to post, there are daily photography 
themes to get the ball rolling.
Google+ is the social networking place for 
photographers.

Google+ for Photographers
140
Scheduling Your Post on Google+
One of the most overlooked aspects of social networking is the fact that it 
happens on a global scale. Although the bulk of users on Google+ might 
be in the United States or Europe, the network certainly reaches the far 
corners of the earth. One of the first questions I ask those who come to 
me for advice on how to get more people to interact with their posts is, 
“At what time of day do you publish your content?” You see, social market-
ing is still at its core a numbers game. That doesn’t mean that quantity 
overshadows quality but simply that numbers do still play a role. If you 
publish a post at 3 a.m. on a Sunday night, do you think you would get the 
same level of interaction on your post as if you published it at 1 p.m. on a 
Wednesday? For people to see your posts, they have to be on Google+. 
One of the challenges of Google+ is dealing with the dynamic nature of 
streams. Unlike Facebook, where you have a stagnant wall, your streams 
are constantly moving, often at a fast pace. This means that the life of any-
thing you publish is often short lived. Therefore, you should schedule your 
posts so you are publishing during high traffic times on the network for the 
Google+ users that you want to reach.
Unfortunately, there is no magic formula that I can 
give you to maximize the timing of your posts on 
Google+. However, the best piece of advice I can 
give you is to study the posts you publish to Google+ 
over the span of a month. Take into account the time 
of day, day of the week, and any holidays that occur 
when you’re looking at your numbers. Not everyone 
on Google+ has the same number of followers from 
the same countries, so results will vary. If you find that more of your follow-
ers are from France or the west coast of the United States, you might want 
to think about adjusting the time you publish each day to compensate for 
the time difference between your location and that of your followers.
In my experience on Google+, I receive the most interaction during these 
times:
•
8 a.m.–9 a.m. on any weekday
•
12 p.m.–2 p.m. on any weekday
•
6 p.m.–7 p.m. on any weekday
•
6 p.m.–8 p.m. on Sunday night
•
Mid afternoon on a holiday
(I live in Denver, Colorado, which is Mountain Standard Time or UTC/GMT 
–7 hours.)
Colby’s Quick Tips
My favorite time of day to publish con-
tent is between 6 p.m. and 7 p.m. MST. 
Because most of my active followers 
live in the United States, this is the 
time most people are home from work.

141
+6  •  Publishing Your Photographs and Other Content
Take Part in a Daily Photo Theme
One of the most creative examples of getting more interaction on your 
Google+ account is to join a daily photo theme. Google+ members have 
created days of the week that correspond with a specific subject. Daily 
photo themes are open to the public, and those who want to join in simply 
have to add the appropriate hashtag (such as #mountainmonday) to their 
post and share it to their Public circle (Figure 6.31). The use of hashtags 
allows other people joining in on the themed day to use the Google+ 
search bar to see what other Google+ users have shared for the theme. 
Not only does it help to promote interaction, but it also allows you to 
show your photography work in a noncompetitive way.
Figure 6.31  Eric 
Leslie is one of 
many organizers 
for some of the 
Google+ themed 
days. He submit-
ted this photo for 
Mountain Mon-
day, which was 
originally started by 
Michael Russell. By 
joining this themed 
day, Eric was able 
to get 123 +1’s, 
8 shares, and 24 
comments.
Colby’s Quick Tips
The Google+ daily photo themes are 
100 percent open to the public. And 
you don’t need to go through a theme 
organizer to start your own. Eric Leslie 
is just one of many organizers working 
hard to keep theme days organized 
and running smoothly.

Google+ for Photographers
142
Although anyone can create a theme and put the effort into getting it to 
catch on, a few Google+ members have gone the extra mile and have 
begun to organize various lists of themed days throughout the week. One 
of those organizers is Eric Leslie from northern California. This is what Eric 
had to say about daily photo themes:
The daily photography themes on Google+ are a simple way to 
connect with other like-minded photographers. Each theme is 
assigned to a day of the week, and anyone can contribute by post-
ing an appropriate photo using the theme’s unique hashtag. Then 
you search for the hashtag, and your stream becomes filled with 
hundreds of photos matching that subject. You can click Save this 
Search to create a link in the left column to easily follow the theme 
later. Each theme has one or more curators who help answer ques-
tions and run weekly challenges, and many share the best submis-
sions from the day.
The themes were born out of the explosive passion in the photogra-
phy community here on Google+. Everyone has something unique 
to bring to the table, and there are themes that cover every interest 
imaginable. Your work gets exposed to a much larger audience that 
goes beyond the people who have circled you. You can also break 
into new themes where you are weak and get feedback from the 
best in the community. This really challenges you to get out of your 
comfort zone and recharge your creative batteries.
We create images to get seen, so come join in to get inspired and 
get noticed.
Table 6.1 provides a handful, but not all, of the Google+ daily photo 
themes.
Table 6.1 Google+ Daily Photo Themes
Photo Themes
Hashtag
Selfless Sunday
#selflesssunday
Mountain Monday
#mountainmonday
Tree Tuesday
#treetuesday
Waterfall Wednesday
#waterfallwednesday
Travel Thursday
#travelthursday
Floral Friday
#floralfriday
Sunset Saturday
#sunsetsaturday
You can find more daily photo themes by visiting the Daily Photography 
Themes Google+ page. Use the Google+ search bar to point you in the 
right direction.

143
+6  •  Publishing Your Photographs and Other Content
Submit Your Photos to Plus Photo Extract
As Google+ continues to grow, and the photography community on the 
network continues to establish itself as the place for photographers to be 
on the Internet, you’ll start to see more and more curators join in. A cura-
tor is not necessarily a professional photographer, but instead is a lover of 
art who likes to highlight the work of others. One of my favorite curators 
on Google+ is Jarek Klimek who runs Plus Extract, which is part of his web-
site PhotoExtract.com (www.photoextract.com/plus-extract).
With Plus Extract, Jarek showcases daily sets of some of the top Google+ 
photographs that were chosen by an algorithm that combines auto-
matic and manual curating (Figure 6.32). By doing this, his selections 
are not based solely on the popularity of a given Google+ photographer, 
but instead allow photographers with a small following a chance to be 
featured.
Although Jarek’s algorithm automatically finds photographs to include in 
his daily selections, you can add the #PlusPhotoExtract hashtag to any post 
containing a photo you would like him to consider.
Figure 6.32 Jarek 
Klimek’s Plus 
Extract displays 
images in a beauti-
ful 1150 pixel wide 
format, allowing 
chosen images to 
pop and stand out 
on the website. 
The featured 
photographers 
receive the credit, 
and plenty of 
links are provided 
directly back to 
the photographers’ 
Google+ Profile 
pages.

Google+ for Photographers
144
30
77
Patrick Di Fruscia:  
A Photographer’s Perspective
Patrick Di Fruscia is an award-winning visionary, 
fine art, nature, and landscape photographer. His 
work has been published and displayed through a 
multitude of media (books, calendars, magazines, 
travel guides, etc.) and by many prestigious com-
panies, such as National Geographic, Greenpeace, 
and Kodak, just to name a few. His work has also 
been displayed in several art galleries around the 
world. 
Website: www.DiFrusciaphotography.com
Google +: https://plus.google.com/ 
109330684746468207713
Q Why do you feel photographers have taken 
to Google+ so quickly?
I personally think there are various factors. First 
of all, photographers were tired of the way 
Facebook displayed their pictures. Both the 
compression and size were unsatisfactory for the 
demanding photographer. Second, some influen-
tial photographers joined Google + right from the 
start and began spreading the merits of this great 
social media platform. They quickly convinced 
their followers to do the same, and in no time 
this created a so-called snowball effect. The fact 
that this platform is still new and everyone got on 
board at the same time created this great commu-
nity spirit between us all.
Q How many photos do you upload a day? 
Why?
When possible, I try to upload two to three a 
day—one first thing in the morning, one in the 
afternoon, and one in the evening. I never share 
the same image twice in a day, so if some people 
saw my previous post, they are likely to appreci-
ate seeing another one of my images. If you want 
to post the same image again, wait a few days 
or weeks and share it but at a different time. For 
example, you may be very proud of a photo you 
just took. So you decide to share it to the Public 
circle first thing in the morning. Many will not 
have the chance to see it due to various factors: 
time of day, time zone, speed at which the stream 
is flowing, and so on. It is advisable to share it 
another day at another time, perhaps in the eve-
ning this time. Chances are you will reach a brand-
new audience. 

145
+6  •  Publishing Your Photographs and Other Content
51
48
54
94
Q Do you share your photography work to the 
Public circle or privately? Why?
I always share my images to the Public circle. 
Being a professional photographer, exposure 
and recognition for my art is a must. Most of my 
clients are not photographers, so if I was to share 
my art with only my Photographer circle, I would 
immediately eliminate the chances of exposing 
my work to some potential clients. One of the 
main reasons there are so many starving art-
ists out there is not the lack of talent. It’s simply 
because they are unknown. It all boils down to 
do what you are passionate about, do it well, and 
then do what you have to do to get recognized in 
your field. 
Q What would your best piece of advice be for 
those who want to begin uploading and sharing 
their images?
I would say share your work or opinion two to 
three times a day at least. Be proactive; respond 
to all the questions and engage with others. This 
is called a “social” media, so be social. When you 
like an image from another photographer, put 
your pride aside and share your thoughts with 
that artist. Even share that artist’s work if that 
person really inspires you. You will quickly build 
strong bonds with other people, and they will be 
more than happy to pay it forward when they feel 
the same. 

9
9
9
9
+1

147
76
7
Photo 
Management 
on Google+
For many of us, photography is not only a passion, but also an 
addiction. We can’t help the desire to document life by captur-
ing frozen moments in time in various locations and covering 
many different subjects. For most photographers, the more you 
shoot, the more you understand the importance of organizing 
your images. Many photographers have tens of thousands of 
images stored on their home and office computers, and with-
out implementing essential photo management practices they 
would have a hard time finding their work at any given time. 
Managing images on online networks works in a similar way 
except for one big difference, you are not the only one looking 
at your work. Organizing your photographs on Google+ not 
only looks professional, but it allows other Google+ users easy 
access to view your work based on their interests. 

Google+ for Photographers
148
At the heart of Google+’s photo and album management is Google’s 
Picasa Web photo-sharing service. Although many of Picasa’s features are 
being ported directly to Google+, a handful of features have not made 
the jump just yet, forcing you to make adjustments in Picasa to see the 
required results in Google+. 
In this chapter I’ll walk you through the process of organizing your indi-
vidual photos by showing you how to move images between different 
photo albums, how to add and edit image descriptions, and how to use 
the Google+ Creative Kit to help fix minor errors in the images you upload. 
I’ll also show you how to manage your photo albums on Google+ so that 
you can choose which albums are featured on your profile, how to edit the 
names of your photo albums, as well as how to select the image you want 
to represent your various albums.
Photo Organization 
and Maintenance
Now that you’ve created your Google+ profile, added several users to your 
circles, and begun uploading your photography work to share with the 
world, you need to make sure that your photos are organized, that they 
display the correct information, and that they are flawless when it comes to 
how you want to present them.
Editing Image Descriptions
When you first upload an image to Google+, you have the ability to add a 
description to the photo. Image descriptions are important because they 
always stay with the image, and they give people a tidbit of background 
information about the image. If Google+ users are viewing your pho-
tography work from the photo section of your profile or from within the 
Google+ lightbox (Figure 7.1), they will not see any of the text that you 
originally included in the post you published and shared with your follow-
ers (Figure 7.2).
As you upload more and more images, you might need to update your 
image descriptions so they are more accurate or so they contain more 
information for your followers.

149
+7  •  Photo Management on Google+
Figure 7.1 When 
viewing an image 
from within the 
Google+ lightbox, 
you and your users 
can only view the 
image description, 
tags, +1’s, and 
comments the 
image has received.
Figure 7.2 The quote I included 
in the post that contained the 
image shown in Figure 7.1 is not 
visible when viewing the image in 
the Google+ lightbox. 
Colby’s Quick Tips
Currently, Google+ does not index 
image descriptions for search. How-
ever, if you post an album of photos 
and someone comments on or +1’s 
one of the photos in the Google+ 
lightbox, the system will automatically 
create a single photo post and use 
the image description as the post text, 
which then becomes searchable.

Google+ for Photographers
150
To update your image descriptions, follow these steps.
1. Select the image in question and open it in the Google+ lightbox 
( Figure 7.3).
2. Located at the top of the sidebar on the right, you’ll notice some text 
just under your profile thumbnail. Move your mouse over the text until 
an Edit link appears (Figure 7.4), and then click the Edit link.
3. Fill in your image description and finish by clicking the “Add descrip-
tion” button (Figure 7.5).
Figure 7.3 To bring an 
image into the Google+ 
lightbox, you can click 
the image in question in 
a published post, in the 
Google+ photo section 
through the Photos 
tab, or in any Google+ 
profile.
Figure 7.4 At the top of the sidebar that 
contains all of the comments your image 
has received, you’ll find your profile thumb-
nail and the area for the image description 
just below it.
Figure 7.5 Add or change your 
image description, and then click 
the green button when you’re 
done.

151
+7  •  Photo Management on Google+
Moving Photos from One Album to Another
As previously mentioned, the underlying system for all Google+ images 
and videos is Google’s Picasa photo-sharing service. Although the photo 
team at Google+ is working hard to implement all of Picasa’s management 
features into Google+, the team has not yet been able to do so for every 
feature or setting. The ability to move images from one album to another 
is one of the missing features in Google+.
To move a photo from one of your Google+ photo albums to another,  
follow these steps.
1. Access Picasa Web Albums by visiting http://picasaweb.google.com. 
Sign in to your Google account if necessary.
2. Click the photo album that contains the image you want to move 
(Figure 7.6). If you don’t see the album in question, click Show More 
Albums.
3. Click the Organize tab at the top of the photo album window 
(Figure 7.7).
4. Select the photo(s) you want to move to a new album. A blue frame will 
appear around the highlighted images. Click the Move button when 
you’ve made your selections (Figure 7.8).
Figure 7.6 The 
home page for 
Picasa Web Albums 
displays thumbnail 
previews of all 
the albums you 
have uploaded to 
Google+.

Google+ for Photographers
152
Figure 7.7 Once inside a photo album in Picasa Web Albums, you can see and interact 
with all of the images in that album. Many of the features used to manage and organize 
photos will eventually be available in Google+.
Figure 7.8 After clicking the Organize tab, thumbnail previews of all the images in the 
selected album will be displayed. Select the photo(s) you want to move, and then click 
the Move button.
Figure 7.9 The window that opens after you have 
selected the photo(s) you want to move allows you 
to create a brand new album if an existing album 
doesn’t work for you.
Figure 7.10 If you don’t see the photo album that 
you want to move the selected photo(s) to at first, 
scroll down the window.

153
+7  •  Photo Management on Google+
5. You can choose to create a new photo album by typing in the Title box, 
or move the photo(s) to an existing album by clicking “choose an exist-
ing album” (Figure 7.9).
6. If you decide to move to an existing album, click “choose an exist-
ing album,” select the destination album for the selected image 
( Figure 7.10), and then click the Select Album button.
Editing Photos with the Google+ Creative Kit
One of the most helpful and entertaining tools on Google+ is the Creative 
Kit, which is available to every Google+ user. With it you have the ability to 
do nonadvanced yet very creative edits to any image you have uploaded 
to the network. As photographers, we often want to put our best foot for-
ward when displaying our work; however, sometimes we can miss a small 
detail. Whether you want to touch up a photo you took on your mobile 
phone, spice up your Google+ profile photo, or clean up an image you 
uploaded in a hurry, the Google+ Creative Kit is the tool for you.
To access the kit, follow these steps.
1. Click one of your photos to display it in the Google+ lightbox.
2. Click the Creative Kit button in the top-left corner of the lightbox 
( Figure 7.11).
With the Creative Kit you have the ability to do basic edits, such as crop, 
rotate, tweak exposure, adjust colors, sharpen, and resize, as well as add 
more stylized effects, such as converting an image to black and white 
( Figure 7.12).
Figure 7.11 You 
can only use the 
Google+ Creative 
Kit on the images 
you upload to the 
network.

Google+ for Photographers
154
The Creative Kit offers five main tabs:
•
Basic Edits. Allows you to make very simple adjustments to an image, 
such as cropping or fixing the exposure.
•
Effects. Allows you to convert your image to black and white, make it 
look like a Polaroid, and add other funky color effects.
•
Seasonal. Allows you to add seasonal effects, such as Christmas lights 
at the end of the year or spider webs at Halloween.
•
Decorate. Allows you to add fake mustaches, add face paint, or simply 
doodle on your photo.
•
Text. Allows you to add all sorts of text to your image.
During the holidays, many Google+ users will edit 
their profile image using the Seasonal tab in the Cre-
ative Kit to have a little fun. The holiday version of my 
Google+ profile image is shown in Figure 7.13.
When you are finished editing your photo, click the 
Save button in the top-right corner of the Creative Kit. 
You’ll then be asked if you want to replace your photo 
or save a new copy.
Colby’s Quick Tips
Google+ does not allow you to replace 
an image that you have uploaded to 
the network with a new version. The 
only way you can replace an image is 
through the Creative Kit. If you have 
a few simple edits that you want to 
apply to an image, try the Creative Kit 
first before attempting to upload a 
second version of the image from your 
computer.
Figure 7.12 With the Creative Kit you can make all sorts of 
adjustments to your image. Although the program is not as 
powerful as a professional editing application, it is great to 
use if you notice a minor error on one of your images and you 
don’t want to upload a new image.
Figure 7.13 This is my 2011 holiday profile 
photo. Not only do many photographers 
edit their profile images during the various 
holidays throughout the year, but many of 
the big executives at Google do as well. It is 
purely for fun.

155
+7  •  Photo Management on Google+
Photo Album Organization
Although cleaning up individual images and providing accurate image 
descriptions are important, very often your followers’ first experience with 
your work will be through your photo albums. Making sure your albums 
have accurate titles, are displayed in the correct order, and emphasize the 
right cover image all play a large role in how your followers experience 
your photography work and portfolio.
Renaming Photo Albums
After uploading a couple of hundred photographs to Google+, you might 
want to consolidate some of your photo albums to create a more effec-
tive presentation of your photography portfolio. Instead of starting from 
scratch with a brand new album, you can easily change the name of your 
albums within Google+.
To rename a photo album in Google+, follow these steps.
1. Click the Photos icon on the Google+ navigation bar (Figure 7.14) to 
go to your Google+ photo section.
2. Click the “Your albums” link in the left sidebar (Figure 7.15).
Figure 7.14 The 
Photos icon is 
located in the 
Google+ naviga-
tion bar and is 
represented by 
an image of a 
green mountain 
with a blue frame 
around it.
Figure 7.15 The 
“Your albums” sec-
tion on Google+ 
displays beautiful 
thumbnail images 
that represent the 
various albums you 
have created on 
Google+.

Google+ for Photographers
156
3. Click the album you want to rename.
4. Move your mouse over the current name of the photo album, which 
is located near the top of the page. A blue frame appears around the 
album name. Click anywhere inside that frame to edit the name of your 
album (Figure 7.16).
5. When you are finished, just click anywhere outside the frame or press 
Enter to save the changes (Figure 7.17).
Colby’s Quick Tips
Use descriptive titles when naming 
your albums. If you want to create an 
album for black-and-white landscape 
photography, label it accordingly so 
that visitors to your albums will get an 
idea of what to expect in each album.
Figure 7.16 There 
is no edit button; 
all you need to do 
to rename your 
photo album is to 
click the album title, 
change the name, 
and press Enter.
Figure 7.17  
Changes to a 
photo album title 
are instant. You can 
see the results as 
soon as you press 
Enter or click away 
from the photo 
album title.

157
+7  •  Photo Management on Google+
Selecting the Photo Album Image Cover
Photographers are very visual creatures and have a thing for aesthetics. So, 
it is essential that all of your photo albums have the image you want repre-
senting each album. Although not every image you take is award winning, 
you should put your best foot forward when displaying your art.
As vital as choosing which photos represent your various albums is, this 
feature is not currently available in Google+, so you must venture to 
Google’s Picasa Web Albums to adjust the photo album cover.
To change a photo album image cover, follow these steps.
1. Access Picasa Web Albums by visiting http://picasaweb.google.com. 
Sign in to your Google account if necessary.
2. Click the photo album in question (Figure 7.18).
Figure 7.18 The 
home page for 
Google’s Picasa 
Web Albums 
displays thumbnail 
previews of your 
various photo 
albums. Click the 
photo album you 
want to modify.
Colby’s Quick Tips
I recommend that you select an eye-
catching image for your photo album 
cover. It doesn’t have to be the best 
image in your album, but it should be 
one that looks good in the thumbnail 
box and represents the rest of the 
images in the album.
Colby’s Quick Tips
While you are in Picasa Web Albums, 
you can track the number of views 
your photographs have received on 
Google+. Click the album containing 
the specified image, and then click the 
image. Located just below the image is 
a gray bar that shows “Views 10,500,” 
for example.

Google+ for Photographers
158
3. Click the photo you want to represent the photo album as its cover 
(Figure 7.19).
4. Click the Actions menu above the selected image and choose “Set as 
album cover” (Figure 7.20).
There is no confirmation that the change took effect, but if you return to 
Google+, you’ll see the new album cover displayed on the selected photo 
album (Figure 7.21).
Figure 7.20 The 
Actions menu just 
above the image 
allows you to set 
the current image 
as the album cover; 
delete the image; 
and edit, copy, 
move, and down-
load the selected 
image.
Figure 7.19 Within 
a photo album, 
you’ll find thumb-
nails that represent 
previews of all the 
images inside the 
selected photo 
album. Click the 
image you want to 
be on the photo 
album cover.

159
+7  •  Photo Management on Google+
Figure 7.21  
Although you 
don’t receive a 
confirmation that 
you changed a 
photo album cover, 
a quick visit back 
to Google+ will 
reflect the changes 
instantly.
Reordering Your Profile Photo Album Display 
When you’re looking at the photo section in your Google+ profile, you’ll 
notice that only four of your photo albums are visible (Figure 7.22), even 
though you probably have many others (all of which you can access by 
clicking “View all of your albums”). The albums that appear on this page 
are displayed in the order in which the albums were created. To customize 
the albums you want to display on your profile, you need to edit the album 
properties in Picasa Web Albums.
By default, the first two albums displayed on your Google+ profile are 
“Profile photos” and “Photos from posts,” leaving you only two open spots 
to showcase your work. The “Profile photos” album must be displayed 
Figure 7.22 Your 
Google+ profile 
gives you the 
opportunity to 
display four albums 
on the main page 
of your Photos 
tab. Choosing 
which albums are 
featured here gives 
you more control 
over directing view-
ers of your profile 
to the images and 
albums you want 
them to see.

Google+ for Photographers
160
on your profile, but you can remove the “Photos from posts” album from 
appearing by moving all of the images in that album to other albums 
using the method mentioned in the “Moving Photos from One Album to 
Another” section earlier in this chapter.
To change the order of the photo albums that are displayed on your 
Google+ profile, follow these steps.
1. Access Picasa Web Albums by visiting http://picasaweb.google.com. 
Sign in to your Google account if necessary.
2. Click the photo album you want to appear first (Figure 7.23).
3. Click the Actions tab menu and choose “Album properties” 
(Figure 7.24).
Figure 7.23 The 
home page of 
Picasa Web Albums 
displays many of 
your Google+ 
photo albums. If 
you do not see 
the album you are 
looking for, click 
the Show More 
Albums link.
Figure 7.24 Just 
above the images 
thumbnails in the 
selected photo 
album, you’ll find 
a series of tabs 
and settings. Click 
the Actions tab, 
and then choose 
“Album properties” 
from the menu.

161
+7  •  Photo Management on Google+
4. Click the Date section to bring up a calendar and 
select a date in the future, such as July 17, 2015 
(Figure 7.25). When you are finished, click the 
Save Changes button.
This photo album will then appear second in line (next 
to the “Profile photos” album). To adjust the order of 
the rest of your albums, all you need to do is repeat 
the preceding steps, but each time select a date 
earlier than one you just selected. So instead of July 
17, 2015, select July 10, 2015 for the album that you 
want to appear next. Continue this practice until your 
photo albums are in the order you desire.
Figure 7.25 By 
choosing a date in 
the future for creat-
ing a photo album, 
you are in essence 
tricking the Picasa 
system into display-
ing the album on 
the main section 
of your Google+ 
profile Photos tab 
section.
Colby’s Quick Tips
Note that anytime you add another 
photo to your “Photos from posts” 
album, that album will reappear on 
your profile, knocking out one of your 
selected photo albums from being 
displayed first. If you move all photos 
from the “Photos from posts” album 
to other albums, it will disappear from 
your profile altogether.

Google+ for Photographers
162
51
37
Alex Koloskov:  
A Photographer’s Perspective
I am a mix of technicality, innovation, and out of 
the box thinking; I don’t know the rules, nor do I 
care about them. I am inspired by progress and 
movement. I am incredibly persistent and never 
take “less than perfect” for an answer.
It allows me to experiment, see outside the bor-
ders, challenge the authorities, and create a stun-
ning photography style that is crisp, sharp, and 
crystal clear.
Website: www.koloskov.com
Google+: https://plus.google.com/ 
102865263115020893218/ 
Q Your photography albums on Google+ are 
very organized. Why did you take the time to 
set up your Google+ galleries this way?
Because my photography interests spread over 
a relatively wide area, from landscapes to studio 
and liquid photography, the only way to organize 
images is to keep them in separate albums. Also, 
having dedicated albums helps when I need to 
share the whole album as an illustration to my 
Google+ post. 
Q Do you showcase your best photography 
work on Google+? Why?
It is very important to showcase only the best of 
your images, IMO. Although I post many that are 
not the best but instead are funny or interesting, I 
do not include them in my Google+ albums. Such 
images will sink in a stream, whereas albums will 
stay clean and well organized. I treat them as my 
Google+ portfolio, meaning I can have only the 
best images in my albums.
Q Why are captions important?
There are three main reasons why they are impor-
tant to me:
First, I use them to tell a viewer about the photo: 
The caption can be some technical details or 
the information about where I shot it. Such 
description promotes dialogue with the viewer 
and makes browsing through my albums more 
interesting.
Second, I use them to include credits for the 
creator(s): Beside a photographer’s name, I always 
include the name(s) of those who worked on the 

163
+7  •  Photo Management on Google+
77
45
image, such as the postproduction artist (if the 
image was manipulated after the shot). 
Third, I always include a website that I want to 
promote and expose with the image—not only 
for the promotion, but such a link always leads to 
something potentially interesting to a viewer: an 
educational blog, and so on.
Q What would your best piece of advice be for 
those who want to manage their photographs 
on Google+?
•
Use Picasa Web Albums (picasaweb.google.
com) to keep your Google+ albums organized. 
You can set or change an album cover image, 
rearrange images within an album, create 
new albums and copy or move your photos 
between them, and perform many other useful 
Google+ photographer tasks. For example, 
from time to time I change the first (not cover) 
image in the album I want to share on my 
Google+ stream: The first image is what is 
displayed in the large thumbnail on a Google+ 
post, and it is best to have a new image every 
time I share the whole album. 
•
If you have different areas of interests in pho-
tography, keep images from these areas in 
separate albums. However, if you concentrate 
in only one area, it’s wise to have only one 
album containing the most important and 
interesting images for your area. I agree with 
Trey Ratcliff, who prefers to keep everything in 
one album. Once viewers start browsing your 
images, they’re less likely to switch albums.
•
Upload relatively large images: my favorite 
size is 1200 x 800 px. It looks the best on 
medium- and large-size monitors.

9
9
+1

165
80
8
Using Hangouts 
to Interact 
with People 
Worldwide
There is no doubt that Google+ Hangouts is the single most 
talked about and exciting Google+ feature. Companies like 
Skype and Fring have had their foot firmly planted in the 
one-on-one video chat business for some time, but Google+ 
Hangouts gives you the ability to easily and seamlessly jump 
into a group video and converse with nine other Google+ 
users (ten in all) from anywhere in the world—for free. Imagine 
having the opportunity to talk face to face with your clients or 
customers, watch another photographer teach a new digital-
editing technique, or strike up a conversation with a profes-
sional photographer you have admired for some time. With the 
added capability of screen sharing, document collaboration, and 
recorded video streaming straight to YouTube via Hangouts On 
Air, the Hangouts feature will change not only the way you inter-
act with your followers, but the very way businesses of all sizes 
will approach marketing.

Google+ for Photographers
166
In this chapter I’ll walk you through Google+ Hangouts, talk about the vari-
ous kinds of hangouts, show you how to join or create your own hangouts, 
and discuss in depth how hangouts have the potential to change the way 
companies think about marketing their products or services.
The Importance of 
Google+ Hangouts
In Chapter 2 I talked about the importance of consistency in the messages 
and images you publish, and of personal interaction as well. As digital 
technology continues to become more ingrained in our everyday lives, 
the value of interacting with individuals on a more personal level will only 
increase, especially for those running businesses. With Google+ you have 
the ability to interact with millions of other individuals across the globe 
who share in your passions and interests. Using hangouts, you can bring 
live interaction back to social networking (Figure 8.1).
Figure 8.1  
Google+ Hangouts 
gives you the abil-
ity to talk, share, 
and collaborate 
with various indi-
viduals worldwide. 
You can jump into 
a hangout to talk 
with potential 
clients, collaborate 
on a project with 
some of your fellow 
employees, or just 
share your experi-
ences with other 
Google+ users.

167
+8  •  Using Hangouts to Interact with People Worldwide
As a professional photographer, you have the ability to develop relation-
ships with your potential clients and customers through Google+ Hang-
outs by hosting webinars, discussions, and question and answer sessions. 
As an aspiring photographer, you can jump into a hangout with some of 
the top photographers in the world and ask them questions, watch them 
teach their craft, and get to know what makes them unique (Figure 8.2). 
Google+ Hangouts is starting to change social marketing, and many cre-
ative types are already putting the feature to good use.
Using Hangouts to Change Social Marketing
Google+ Hangouts on its own is not a new concept (video conferencing 
has been a possibility for years), but Hangouts On Air will certainly change 
the way businesses approach marketing to the masses. Having the ability 
to live stream and automatically record a Google+ hangout, in essence, 
allows you to have your own TV station that you can broadcast to the 
world. There is no need for an expensive computer system or terabytes of 
storage to host your video recordings; everything is automated, the pro-
cess is simple, and everything is free.
In the past a company would spend hundreds or thousands of dollars for 
an ad campaign in a magazine or a TV commercial to reach new users. The 
problem with those avenues for marketing a product is twofold: cost and 
a lack of interaction. With Google+ Hangouts I’ve already seen Michael 
Dell of Dell computers host question and answer sessions with customers 
( Figure 8.3), the owners of SmugMug host and sponsor several photog-
raphy related hangouts, and even musicians like Daria Musk host live con-
certs (Figure 8.4), all from within Google+.
So why should this matter to you? As a consumer, you will soon have the 
ability to have a more personal and connected relationship with the com-
panies and products you enjoy. As a photographer, the avenues in which 
Figure 8.2 Trey Ratcliff is known for his 
HDR photography work and popular 
website, Stuck in Customs. Like many 
well-established professional photogra-
phers on Google+, he regularly holds 
hangouts to share his experiences and 
knowledge, as well get to know those 
who follow his work.

Google+ for Photographers
168
Figure 8.3 Michael 
Dell, the CEO of 
Dell computers, 
is known to hold 
Google+ hangouts 
to get feedback 
and talk to custom-
ers who purchase 
his products. 
Nowhere else on 
the Internet is this 
level of access 
possible.
Figure 8.4 Daria 
Musk is an incred-
ibly talented singer 
and songwriter 
who has taken 
full advantage of 
Google+ Hangouts. 
Her live streaming 
of a concert on 
New Year’s Eve 
reached hundreds 
of thousands of 
people who might 
not have heard of 
her otherwise.
you will want to spend your time marketing your business not only will 
drastically change, but will allow you to get to know your clients and fol-
lowers of your work like never before. You will be able to break free from 
the limitations of digital marketing and get back to the heart and soul of 
building your business through personal interaction.

169
+8  •  Using Hangouts to Interact with People Worldwide
Creative Uses of Hangouts
With over 100 million Google+ users, there is no doubt that many individu-
als have gotten creative when it comes to utilizing the Hangouts feature to 
suit their needs and interests. The following two lists provide of a handful 
of creative hangout uses for photographers and nonphotographers alike.
Photography-specific uses include:
•
Photography talk shows (webisodes)
•
Photo critique group sessions
•
Photography gear reviews
•
Digital editing workshops (with screen sharing)
•
Photo club meetings
•
Pre-trip photography workshop discussions
•
Hangout via Google+ mobile application during a photography shoot
•
Photography trip planning
Nonphotography-specific uses include:
•
Customer service for large companies
•
Cooking classes
•
Yoga hangouts
•
Live music concerts
•
Cable news hangouts live on air
•
Talent shows
•
Improv comedy shows
•
Movie nights (via the YouTube feature)
•
Talks with the Dalai Lama
•
NASA question and answer sessions
Needless to say, the opportunities and potential to not only interact with 
other Google+ users, but find unique and creative ways to build your 
photo graphy business or increase your skills are endless.

Google+ for Photographers
170
Types of Google+ Hangouts
When Google+ launched its service at the end of June 2011, only one 
form of hangouts was available (Figure 8.5). As with many aspects of the 
network, Google employees have worked nonstop to continue to add new 
features, fix bugs, and listen to customer feedback to improve the user 
experience on Google+. 
Less than three months after the launch, Google added Hangouts with 
Extras—a new and improved Google+ Hangouts option. Hangouts  
with Extras offers a few new features that allow you to interact and  
engage with other users in a new way. Instead of replacing the original, 
incredibly popular Hangouts feature, Google provides you with the choice 
of creating a hangout you feel works for you.
Original Google+ Hangouts
As mentioned earlier, Google+ Hangouts has been around since the net-
work launched. However, many of the features discussed in this chapter are 
currently being tested by a handful of users, including me. If your screens 
do not match my screen shots, don’t worry; Google is working hard to roll 
out these features in the near future.
Google+ Hangouts layout
In the middle of a hangout screen you’ll find the indi-
vidual who has center stage (Figure 8.6). Google has 
implemented advanced computer algorithms that 
detect who is talking and should have your attention. 
Throughout a given hangout, if left on the default set-
ting, the highlighted individual will change depending 
on who “has the floor” at any given moment.
Figure 8.5 This screen shot 
was pulled from the Google+ 
home page, which advertises 
the various prominent features 
of the network. This image for 
hangouts has not changed since 
day one.
Colby’s Quick Tips
To bypass the automatic switching 
of users who are speaking and have 
center stage in a hangout, you can 
simply click the thumbnail of the user 
you want to view. A blue frame will 
surround that person’s thumbnail, even 
if that person is not speaking.

171
+8  •  Using Hangouts to Interact with People Worldwide
At the bottom of the Hangout window you’ll find live 
thumbnail video feeds of everyone currently in the 
hangout (Figure 8.7). The thumbnail of the individual 
who currently has the floor will have a blue frame. At 
the bottom right of the screen is a Send Feedback 
button that allows you to tell the Google+ Hangouts 
team about any bugs, your thoughts, and any feature 
requests you might have.
Figure 8.6 The 
original and still 
wildly popular 
Google+ Hang-
outs feature has 
received a few 
updates and 
upgrades since 
the network 
launched, allowing 
it to run faster and 
smoother while 
adding in desired 
features like screen 
sharing.
Figure 8.7 The video thumbnail feeds allow you to keep an eye on the other Google+ 
users in the hangout while still focusing your attention on the user who currently has 
center stage.
Colby’s Quick Tips
On occasion you might be forced to 
block or mute another Google+ user 
in a hangout. To do this, simply move 
your mouse over that person’s thumb-
nail image and click the Mute or Block 
icons that appear.

Google+ for Photographers
172
Google+ Hangouts tabs
The Hangouts tabs allow you to enable various features in Google+ Hang-
outs (Figure 8.8):
•
Chat. If you choose this option, a side chat box appears on the left side 
of the Google+ window, allowing you to text chat with other Google+ 
users in the hangout.
•
Invite. You can invite other Google+ users to the hangout or send an 
invite to an entire circle, including your Public circle, which makes the 
invitation visible to everyone on Google+ (Figure 8.9).
•
Screenshare. You can share your screen with other Google+ users in 
the current hangout (Figure 8.10). Click the tab and then select the 
window on your computer that you want to share.
•
YouTube. You can watch a YouTube video with the other users in the 
hangout, creating a virtual movie theater on the Internet.
Figure 8.8 In the top left of your Hangout window 
you can access some of the main features, such as 
screen sharing and watching YouTube videos with 
other users in the hangout.
Figure 8.9 Even after you’ve entered or started a 
Google+ hangout, you have the ability to invite  
other Google+ members or entire circles.
Figure 8.10 The ability to share your screen in a 
Google+ hangout can lead to endless possibilities 
when it comes to interacting with clients, educating 
other photographers, or collaborating on projects.
Figure 8.11 In a similar fashion to the Google+ 
Creative Kit mentioned in Chapter 7, the seasonal 
effects are a fun tool that allow you to get creative 
and have a good time with other Google+ users.

173
+8  •  Using Hangouts to Interact with People Worldwide
•
Apps. You can enable various third-party applications that allow you to 
change or alter your experience in Google+. 
•
Seasonal graphics. You can add fun and entertaining graphics to your 
video feed that change with the seasons. Figure 8.11 shows Google+ 
users adding reindeer antlers and Rudolph’s nose to their video feeds.
Google+ Hangouts settings
In the top right of your screen you’ll find a few 
Google+ settings that allow you to control part of 
your user experience in a hangout (Figure 8.12):
•
Mute Audio. Mutes or turns off your audio feed so 
that other users in the hangout cannot hear you.
•
Mute Video. Turns off your webcam feed so that 
other users can’t see you. It turns your thumbnail 
black.
•
Google+ Hangout Settings. Gives you access to 
change which microphone, web camera, and speakers you want to use 
for your hangout, as well as to adjust your connection speed to account 
for slower Internet connections (Figure 8.13).
•
Exit the Hangout. Closes the Hangout window and ends the current 
hangout session.
Figure 8.12 You have quick 
access to a few key features, such 
as muting your audio or video 
from within the Google+ window.
Colby’s Quick Tips
By changing your connection speed in 
the Google+ Settings menu, you adjust 
the amount of video compression that 
is being sent to your computer so you 
can have a better user experience in 
the hangout if you have a slow Internet 
connection.
Figure 8.13 Not only do you 
have the ability to change the 
microphone or web camera in the 
Google+ Settings, but you can test 
the changes as well through a video 
feed of your webcam and an audio 
bar that lets you know how loud you 
are when you speak.

Google+ for Photographers
174
36
Trey Ratcliff:  
A Photographer’s Perspective
Trey Ratcliff is the old-school gentleman explorer 
with really cool toys behind StuckInCustoms.com. 
He’s a travel photographer who shares new photos 
every day on his blog, and he takes the time to 
talk about the art and science behind his work. 
Trey feels that photography is a lifestyle first and a 
career second.
Website: www.stuckincustoms.com
Google+: https://plus.google.com/ 
105237212888595777019 
Q Hangouts seems to be one of the most 
talked about Google+ features. Why is that?
Photographers are lonely people. Our sport is a 
solitary one. We take photos by ourselves. We 
post-process by ourselves. But, just like normal 
humans, photographers like social interaction too. 
Because we’re in front of our computers so much, 
the chance to hang out with other photographers 
face to face is inviting. 
It reminds me of the late nineteenth century 
in France when the great impressionists would 
gather at local cafes in Paris and talk about their 
art. It’s also one of the reasons there was such an 
explosion of creativity during that time period.
Q How do you use Google+ Hangouts?
I use the Hangouts feature to discuss photo-
graphy with old friends and new friends. In 
my hangouts I prefer to have a mix of veteran 
photographers and new photographers. Since 
Google+ has come along, a ton of people have 
become my followers. It seems like a good oppor-
tunity to expose new photographers to hundreds 
of thousands of other people, especially with the 
ability to broadcast live on YouTube.
Q What are a few creative examples of 
Google+ Hangouts that you have seen?
I love to hear photographers share their work 
and talk openly about it. There is a stream of 
consciousness that comes out if people are truly 

175
+8  •  Using Hangouts to Interact with People Worldwide
54
93
70
open. I like using hangouts to present people 
with chances for these little magical events to 
transpire.
Q For new photographers interested in getting 
involved with Google+, what is the best piece 
of advice you would give them about hangouts?
When you go into a room, don’t assume that all 
the people there are friends and you are an out-
sider. That is rarely the case, even if they seem to 
have a nice rapport with the other people in the 
hangout. Just be normal and engaging. Don’t let 
fear demotivate you. Let the possibilities of what 
can be motivate you to engage.

Google+ for Photographers
176
Hangouts with Extras
The newest version of Google+ Hangouts is Hangouts with Extras. It con-
tains many features not found in the original version as well as a noticeably 
different layout.
Hangouts with Extras layout
One of the first differences you’ll notice in Hangouts with Extras is that the 
video thumbnails of the various Google+ users in the hangout are now 
located along the right side of the screen (Figure 8.14). Just as before, 
you have the ability to mute or block an individual if you hover your mouse 
over that person’s thumbnail and select the respective option. On the left 
side of the screen is the Group Chat feature, which is identical to the one 
in the original Google+ Hangouts. 
Figure 8.14 Hang-
outs with Extras 
gives you a handful 
of extra tools that 
you do not have 
in the original 
Google+ Hangouts 
to connect and 
engage with others 
Google+ users. 
You can share 
documents, editing 
them together in 
real time, and you 
can call phone 
numbers to invite 
other people (who 
are not Google+ 
members) into the 
conversation.

177
+8  •  Using Hangouts to Interact with People Worldwide
Hangouts with Extras features
The Hangouts with Extras features are what truly separate it from the 
original Google+ Hangouts. With these features you can take notes, draw, 
share Google Docs documents, share your screen, and even make phone 
calls to anyone in the world:
•
Notes. Located above the Chat window, the notes feature opens a 
new Google Docs document that allows you to take notes throughout 
the hangout (Figure 8.15). Other users in the hangout will not see your 
notes until they too click the Notes icon. The notes document will con-
tinue to save automatically while it is open, allowing you to retrieve your 
hangout notes after the hangout has ended by accessing your Google 
Docs account via http://docs.google.com. 
•
Sketchpad. Located above the Chat window, the sketchpad is very 
similar to the old paint programs you had on your computer when you 
were younger. You can create simple graphics, use a paintbrush, and 
even import images from your Google+ account, all in real time with 
everyone else in the hangout (Figure 8.16).
Figure 8.15 The 
Notes feature on 
Google+ allows 
you to write down 
information that 
pertains to the 
Google+ hangout 
you are in and 
revisit it at any 
time.

Google+ for Photographers
178
Figure 8.16 The 
Sketchpad feature 
allows you to col-
laborate and create 
some unique “art” 
with your fellow 
Google+ users in 
the hangout in real 
time. This sketch 
was created by 
nine users who 
jumped in my 
Google hangout 
so that I could take 
these screen shots.
Figure 8.17  
Google Docs is 
one of my favorite 
Google products. 
It gives me a fully 
functional docu-
ment editor, like 
Microsoft Word, 
that I can use on 
any browser and on 
any computer on 
the Internet. I can 
then share docu-
ments with others 
and collaborate in 
real time.

179
+8  •  Using Hangouts to Interact with People Worldwide
•
Add a Document. If you have created a Google Docs document that 
you want to share with other users in the hangout, you can click this link 
(located above the chat box) to bring up a list of all the saved docu-
ments you have in your Google Docs account (Figure 8.17).
•
Screen Sharing. Located just above the main video feed is the Screen 
Sharing button. This feature works in the same way as the feature in the 
original Google+ Hangouts (Figure 8.18).
•
Phone Calls from Hangouts. A unique feature of Hangouts with Extras 
is the ability to invite someone to a hangout by calling that person from 
within the Hangout window. Simply click the Invite button at the top 
of your screen, and then click the Phone option on the left side of the 
window (Figure 8.19). This feature is free when you make phone calls 
to the United States and Canada but does cost money if you try to call 
individuals who live elsewhere.
Figure 8.18 In 
the same fashion 
as the original 
Google+ Hangouts, 
you can share your 
screen with other 
members in the 
hangout, allowing 
you to show off the 
latest images you 
are editing or any 
other window cur-
rently open on your 
computer.
Figure 8.19 Making phone calls 
from within hangouts is a new 
feature that allows you to easily 
connect with more people around 
the world. Google is working 
hard to create features that work 
not only for the average user, but 
for large corporations as well. 
Seamless networking with anyone 
around the globe is not far off.

Google+ for Photographers
180
Hangouts On Air
One of the most exciting features within 
Google+ Hangouts is the ability to live stream 
and record hangouts with the entire world. Nor-
mally, you are limited to just ten Google+ users 
in a hangout; however, with Hangouts On Air 
you have the ability to offer live streaming—
anyone on Google+ can watch your hangout live 
(Figure 8.20). In addition, the Hangouts On Air 
feature also records the hangout to YouTube, so 
that you can share the recorded video with any-
one who did not get a chance to watch it live.
Currently, this feature is limited to only a handful 
of Google+ users who have been very active in 
Google+ Hangouts, including me. However, at 
some point in the first half of 2012, this feature 
will be rolled out to everyone, allowing you to 
literally be your own online TV station.
To watch a Hangouts On Air live stream, simply 
look for the graphic shown in Figure 8.21 to roll 
through your Google+ stream. Click the Play 
arrow in the middle of the image and you are 
good to go.
Figure 8.20 The Hangouts On Air 
feature has the potential to com-
pletely change the way companies 
approach marketing. Having the 
ability to directly reach millions of 
potential clients in a personal way for 
free is huge. In the near future, you 
might not have to spend hundreds if 
not thousands of dollars on market-
ing your photography business, but 
instead will be able to focus on social 
marketing and reaching your clients 
on a more personal level.
Figure 8.21 Anytime you see this image in your Google+ 
stream, you have the ability to watch the live streaming hang-
out in real time without having to worry about getting one of 
the ten available spots in the hangout.

181
+8  •  Using Hangouts to Interact with People Worldwide
Once Google+ has enabled this feature on your 
Google+ account, follow these steps to start live 
streaming and recording a Google+ hangout.
1.
Click the “Start a hangout” button on the 
right sidebar of your Google+ stream.
2.
Click the “broadcast and record” link located 
under your video preview (Figure 8.22).
3.
Enter a description for your hangout, and 
then click the Hang Out button (Figure 8.23).
4. You will be asked to accept the Google+ 
Hangouts On Air and YouTube terms, which 
state that you are responsible for the con-
tent of the hangout.
After the hangout has ended, the recorded 
hangout will then be placed on your YouTube 
account.
Figure 8.22 It’s easy to miss the small text 
under the Hang Out button, so be sure to 
look for it. If you don’t see the “broadcast 
and record” link, you do not have this feature 
enabled yet.
Figure 8.23 Don’t forget to fill out the 
description of your hangout, because it tells 
other Google+ users what your hangout is 
about and will be part of the recorded hang-
out that is sent to your YouTube account.

Google+ for Photographers
182
Hangouts with Extras settings
Located in the top-right corner of the Hangouts with Extras window 
are your settings. These function the same way as those in the original 
Google+ Hangouts feature:
•
Mute Audio. Mutes or turns off your audio feed so that other users in 
the hangout cannot hear you.
•
Mute Video. Turns off your webcam feed so that other users cannot 
see you. It turns your thumbnail black.
•
Google+ Hangout Settings. Gives you access to change which micro-
phone, web camera, and speakers you want to use for your hangout, as 
well as to adjust your connection speed to account for slower Internet 
connections.
•
Exit the Hangout. Closes the Hangout window and ends the current 
hangout session.
Getting Involved in 
Google+ Hangouts
When it comes to getting your feet wet with Google+ Hangouts, you have 
two options: start your own or join someone else’s.
Starting Your Own Hangout
To create your own Google+ hangout, follow these steps.
1. On your Google+ stream page, click the “Start a hangout” button on 
the right sidebar (Figure 8.24).
2. On the right side of the window that appears you’ll see a listing of 
hangouts currently in progress from those in your circles (Figure 8.25). 
To join one of these hangouts, just click the Join this Hangout link 
below each listing.
To create your own hangout, utilize the box in the center of the window. 
If you want to start an original hangout, choose the individuals or circles 
you want to invite, and then click the Hang Out button. If you want to 
start a Hangouts with Extras hangout, click the text located at the bot-
tom of the windows.

183
+8  •  Using Hangouts to Interact with People Worldwide
Figure 8.24 To 
start your own 
Google+ hangout, 
click the “Start a 
hangout” button 
located on any 
of your Google+ 
streams. If you try 
to start a hangout 
while looking at 
one of your circle 
filters, Google+ will 
automatically add 
the circle to the list 
of people to invite.
Figure 8.25 Often, you’ll want to start a hangout when plenty of other hangouts are 
currently live. If you are new to Google+ and want to connect with other Google+ users, 
jumping in an established hangout might be a better option than creating your own. You 
certainly have the ability to host a private hangout between friends, but filling a public 
hangout before you’ve established a following might be difficult.

Google+ for Photographers
184
On the Hangouts with Extras start-up screen, you’ll be asked to fill out 
a hangout description as well to let those you have invited know what  
the hangout is about (Figure 8.26).
Joining a Hangout
You can join a Google+ hangout in three ways: through your stream, 
through the Notification box, and through Google Chat. 
Joining a hangout through your stream
When you are flipping through your stream, you might come across a post 
that looks like Figure 8.27. This post indicates an open invitation for you 
to join the hangout. To join, simply click the “Join this hangout” button at 
the bottom of the post.
Joining a hangout through your Notification box
When you click your red Notification box on the Google+ navigation bar, 
you might see a notification that looks like the one in Figure 8.28. You 
need to click that notification to bring up the window (Figure 8.29) that 
allows you to join the hangout.
Figure 8.26 Filling out the 
description is important not 
only because it gives your 
followers an idea of what the 
hangout is about, but also 
because the description is actu-
ally searchable via the Google+ 
search bar.

185
+8  •  Using Hangouts to Interact with People Worldwide
Joining a hangout through Google Chat
With Google Chat being fully integrated into Google+, you’ll be notified 
via a chat box if another Google+ user in your circles sends you a direct 
invite to a hangout. You’ll know when this happens because you’ll hear a 
tune on your computer speakers and see an image pop up that looks like 
the one in Figure 8.30.
Figure 8.27 When you come across a 
Google+ hangout in your stream, but did 
not receive a notification about the hang-
out, it means that the Google+ user who 
created the hangout invited all those in a 
large circle that you are in. You’ll receive a 
Google+ notification if the host invites you 
individually or if the host invites a circle with 
fewer than 100 users. 
Figure 8.28 When you see this message 
appear in your Notification box, it means that 
someone has intentionally invited you to a 
Google+ hangout.
Figure 8.29 When you are ready to join a 
hangout, adjust your camera and microphone 
settings, click the “Join this hangout” button, 
and get ready to start.
Figure 8.30 When you hear the music 
playing, click the “Hang out” button to 
join the hangout. You do not need to be 
chatting with the individual who invites 
you in order for the music to begin 
playing.

9
9
+1

187
49
9
Google+  
on the Go
Photographers always seem to be on the move. Although not 
all photographers have the ability to jump on a plane and head 
to Patagonia to explore its rugged wilderness, many of you take 
images while away from your homes. 
Whether you are simply on a walk around the neighborhood, 
heading to a meeting with a client, or on the way to a day 
job, staying connected is often required to keep your follow-
ers engaged and your Google+ profile or page from becoming 
stagnant. One of the best ways to stay connected is through the 
Google+ mobile app.
In this chapter, I’ll cover the ins and outs of the Google+ mobile 
app and explain the importance of keeping in touch while on 
the road.

Google+ for Photographers
188
Google+ Mobile App
When you are on a shoot or simply away from your computer, the Google+ 
mobile application allows you to stay connected and engaged with other 
Google+ users with ease. It has nearly all of the functionality of the web 
browser Google+ experience, including the ability to join hangouts, orga-
nize your circles, and publish content. As mentioned in Chapter 2, one of 
the most important aspects of building a brand and a following on online 
networks is consistency. Maintaining your online presence while traveling 
is key.
The Google+ mobile application is available for 
Android and iOS (Apple) devices. Because of the 
high-speed nature in which mobile applications are 
developed and updated, the Android and iOS appli-
cations might have slight discrepancies between 
them at any given time. Although you can also access 
Google+ from a mobile web browser, you will be lim-
ited in what you can do. Table 9.1 showcases the vari-
ous features available through mobile devices.
Table 9.1 Availability of Features in the Google+ Mobile App
Feature
Android App
iPhone App
Web App
Messenger
•
•
Instant upload
•
Share in the stream
•
•
•
Reshare posts
•
•
•
Nearby streams
•
•
•
Create circles
•
•
•
Check-ins
•
•
•
Join hangouts
•
•
•
Moderate comments & posts
•
•
•
Post & delete photos
•
•
Push notifications
•
•
Posting widget
•
All screen shots and featured instructions included in this chapter are for a 
Google Android device, but similar functionality and layout are at the core 
of the applications for each operating system.
Colby’s Quick Tips
The search feature on the Google+ 
mobile app will find Google+ pages as 
well when you select the People sec-
tion. A search for “Android” will bring 
up the Android Google+ page and all 
those who have Android in their profile.

189
+9  •  Google+ on the Go 
Core Features
Google has put in a lot of energy and effort to bring several features and 
advanced functionality to the Google+ mobile application, so let’s explore 
its many features.
Home screen
When you open the Google+ mobile application, you’ll see the home 
screen (Figure 9.1). Much like with the Google+ website, you’ll find nearly 
all of the main features of the application on the home screen.
The black toolbar at the top of your screen contains icons for Search, the 
Notification box, and options (Figure 9.2).
Search. As with the Google+ search bar on the website, you can search 
for individuals on Google+ as well as specific content. To change the filter 
from Posts to People, just touch the respective tab at the top of the search 
screen. The selected filter will display a highlighted blue bar below it. 
Notification box. Much like the Notification box 
found on the Google+ website, this small red icon 
tells you how many notifications you currently have. 
When you tap the box, your notification screen 
appears, which shows more detail about each of your 
notifications (Figure 9.3). If you tap a notification, the 
specific post appears. You can always tap the Refresh 
icon in the top right of this screen to refresh your 
notifications in real time.
Figure 9.1 On the home screen you’ll be 
able to access your Stream,  Photos, Profile, 
Circles, and Messenger sections.
Figure 9.2 The top navigation bar gives 
you quick access to search for content, 
view your Google+ notifications, and 
view other options, which include creat-
ing a new post.
Colby’s Quick Tips
When you tap the Notification box in 
the Google+ mobile app, it automati-
cally resets the counter to 0. However, 
it will keep unread notifications in bold, 
allowing you to determine which notifi-
cations you still need to check out.

Google+ for Photographers
190
Option menu. Represented by three gray squares in a vertical line,  
the Option menu gives you quick access to alternative features from the 
Google+ mobile application home screen (Figure 9.4). 
Note that the Option menu changes depending on the screen you are cur-
rently on. While on the home screen, you’ll find the following options:
•
New post. With this option you can easily create a new post and pub-
lish it on Google+ (Figure 9.5). The three sections on this screen pro-
vide options for your post:
•
The top box controls which circles you are sharing the post with. To 
add more circles, tap the + icon to the right of the box.
•
The middle box contains the words “Type to compose” and is where 
you write your post.
•
The bottom of the three boxes is your GPS location. If you have 
GPS turned off on your mobile device, it will display “No location 
attached.” To add your current GPS location, tap the box. You’ll then 
be given a list of options of various locations around you to include 
as a GPS marker on your post.
Figure 9.3 The stream of noti-
fications is not endless but will 
allow you to scroll back to notifi-
cations from a few days prior.
Figure 9.4 The Option menu 
opens when you tap the Option 
icon in the top right of your 
mobile device’s screen.
Figure 9.5 The “Create a post” 
screen allows you to create a 
post on Google+ that contains 
GPS coordinates, text, and 
multi media (photo or video).

191
+9  •  Google+ on the Go 
•
The three icons at the bottom of the screen represent your GPS 
location toggle and Camera and Gallery features (Figure 9.6). The 
GPS toggle automatically attaches your GPS location to the Google+ 
post you are creating. The Camera icon allows you to take a photo 
on your mobile device’s camera and automatically add it to the post. 
The Gallery icon allows you to choose an image you have taken pre-
viously on your mobile device and attach it to the post.
•
Settings. This option allows you to adjust Google+ Notification options, 
Messenger settings, and photo settings, and choose to sync your 
Google+ contacts with your phone.
•
Send feedback. If a feature on the Google+ mobile application is not 
working properly or is missing, you can use this feature to send feed-
back directly to the Google+ engineering team.
•
Sign out. This option is useful if you need to sign out of your Google+ 
account so that someone else can log in.
•
Help. This option takes you to the Help website for Google+, where 
you can search for answers to any questions you may have about differ-
ent Google+ features.
•
Privacy policy. This option takes you to the website that details the 
Google+ privacy policy.
•
Terms of service. This option takes you to the website that explains the 
Google TOS agreement in detail.
Stream
The Stream page is very similar to your home page on the 
Google+ website. Here you can view the published content from 
everyone you have in your circles as well as create your own post
(Figure 9.7). The Stream page includes the top navigation bar, 
the Circle Filter bar, and the stream of content.
Top navigation bar. The top navigation bar allows you to check in at 
a location and create a post (Figure 9.8). To selectively filter out your 
stream, tap the Option menu icon in the top right of your screen and 
select “Choose circles.” Here you can select which circles you want to view 
content from (Figure 9.9). Unlike the desktop version of Google+, you can 
Figure 9.6 The black shortcut bar contains icons 
that enable you to easily toggle on GPS coordi-
nates to your post, take a photo, or upload a photo 
from your mobile device’s gallery.

Google+ for Photographers
192
Figure 9.7 The 
Stream page 
on the Google+ 
mobile app allows 
you to view others’ 
posts and create 
your own content.
Figure 9.8 The top navigation 
bar allows you quick access to 
check in at a location, create 
new content, and return to the 
home screen.
Figure 9.9 The “Choose circles” 
feature in the Option menu allows 
you more control over filtering the 
content you view in your stream 
than anywhere else on Google+.
choose any combination of circles to filter. If you want to only see content 
from your Top Photographers and Colorado Photographers circles, no 
problem, just select those circles.
Circle Filter bar. Located just below the top navigation bar, this slightly 
lighter gray bar allows you to filter the content you see in your stream 
( Figure 9.10). To select one of the three filters, slide your finger across 
your screen to the left or right in the direction of the filter you want 
to view:
•
Nearby. This filter shows you content that was published near your GPS 
location. If you do not have the GPS feature on your mobile device 
turned on, it attempts to locate your general whereabouts using your 
cell connection.
•
All Circles. This filter displays published content from everyone you 
have in your Google+ circles.

193
+9  •  Google+ on the Go 
•
Incoming. This filter displays published content from people who are 
not in your circles but have you in their circles. It is a great way to find 
new and interesting people to connect with.
Stream of content. The stream of content area is where you’ll find all of 
the content that has been shared with you by individuals and business 
pages on Google+. There are a handful of ways that you can interact with 
this content (Figure 9.11):
•
Slide your finger either up or down on the stream to navigate through 
the post.
•
Press the profile thumbnail or post author to go to that person’s 
Google+ profile.
•
Press and hold your finger over a post to bring up a menu that allows 
you to +1, share, or mute the specified post.
•
Tap a post to bring up its content. You can then leave a comment 
on the post by typing in the bottom bar where the words “Type a 
comment” appear.
Figure 9.10 The Circle Filter 
bar gives you quick access to 
filter the content of your stream 
by allowing you to view content 
from individuals nearby, from 
everyone you have circled, or 
from those who have circled you.
Figure 9.11 Your content 
stream allows you to view and 
interact with content that has 
been published to Google+.

Google+ for Photographers
194
Photos
The Photos section of the Google+ mobile application allows you 
to easily view and interact with all of your uploaded photos and 
photos that are still on your phone, as well as the recent photo 
uploads of people in your circles.
On the main screen of the Photos section, you’ll notice sectional thumb-
nails of various photo albums, most of which belong to you (Figure 9.12). 
However, you’ll find three default photo albums on every Google+ 
account:
•
From your circles. This album showcases images that have recently 
been uploaded to Google+ from anyone in your circles. It displays a 
maximum of 50 photo thumbnails.
•
From your phone. This album acts as a gallery for all of the images 
currently on your mobile device. Because these images are not on 
Google+, you cannot interact with them.
•
Photos of you. This album contains photos in which you have been 
tagged. It is meant to be a collection of images that have you in them.
To interact with an image, you must first tap the photo album that it 
resides in, and then tap the image. On the main image screen, the +1 
button is located in the top right of the screen, and the photo informa-
tion is located just under the photo. This information contains the artist’s 
name, the name of the photo album, the number of +1’s, and the number 
of comments the image has already received (Figure 9.13). When you tap 
the image, it will expand to the full screen size of your device. Tap again 
to return it to the standard position. To leave a comment, simply type your 
comment in the box located at the bottom of the screen; to +1 the photo, 
tap the +1 icon in the top right of your screen.
When you press the Option menu icon (Menu on iOS devices), several 
options appear (Figure 9.14):
•
Set as profile photo. Allows you to set the current photo as your 
Google+ profile photo. This option is only visible when looking at your 
own images.
•
Set as wallpaper. Allows you to set the current image as your mobile 
device’s wallpaper. This option is only visible when looking at your own 
images.
•
Refresh. Allows you to refresh the photo to showcase the latest photo 
data and interactions involving the image.
•
Delete photo. Allows you to remove an image from Google+. This 
option is only visible when looking at your own images.

195
+9  •  Google+ on the Go 
Figure 9.12 The Photos section 
displays thumbnail previews of 
all of your image albums in a 
seamless stream. Scroll down 
the screen to see more of your 
albums.
Figure 9.13 The view of an 
individual photo from within the 
Photos section allows you to view 
the statistics of those who have 
interacted with it as well as add a 
comment to the image.
Utilizing the Instant Upload Feature
The Instant Upload feature on the Google+ mobile app allows you to automati-
cally upload your photos and videos directly to Google+ right after they are cap-
tured. They are placed in a private album, allowing you to choose which images 
or videos you want to share and to whom when you are ready.
To enable Instant Upload:
1. Press the Option menu (Menu on iOS devices).
2. Select Enable Instant Upload.
Once enabled, all photos and videos taken with your mobile device are 
uploaded to the “From your phone” album on Google+. They are visible only 
to you unless you choose to share them from a web browser or your Google+ 
mobile application.
Figure 9.14 The number of 
options available to you is dic-
tated by whether the photo was 
uploaded by you or not.

Google+ for Photographers
196
•
Send feedback. Allows you to send in feedback relating to the 
Google+ mobile application.
•
Report abuse. Allows you to report the current image as abuse for 
sexual or explicit content as well as spam. You will not see this option if 
you are looking at your own image.
•
Help. Allows you to access the Help system for the Photos section of 
the Google+ mobile application.
Profile 
In the Profile section of the Google+ mobile app are three main 
tabs that allow you to view the content you have published, pho-
tos you have uploaded, and the profile information you listed on 
your Google+ profile from your desktop web browser:
•
Posts. In the Posts tab (Figure 9.15) you can see an endless stream of 
all the content you have published on Google+. You can interact with 
your posts just as you can in the Stream section of the Google+ mobile 
app. A long press with your finger on a post will bring up a menu, 
allowing you to +1, share, or delete your post; a single finger tap will 
bring only that post into view.
Figure 9.15 In the Posts section 
you can view all of your recent 
posts to Google+.
Figure 9.16 In the About section 
you can view your entire Google+ 
Profile page.
Figure 9.17 In the Photos 
section you can view all of the 
images you have uploaded to 
Google+.

197
+9  •  Google+ on the Go 
•
About. The About section (Figure 9.16) lists the information you filled 
out on your Google+ profile when you first signed up for the network. 
Although you cannot edit this information from the Google+ mobile 
app, you can change your profile photo by tapping your thumbnail 
located in the top left of your screen. You’ll then have the ability to take 
a new photo with your mobile device’s camera, choose a photo from 
your mobile device’s photo gallery, or view the other profile photos you 
have used in the past.
•
Photos. The Photos section (Figure 9.17) displays the various albums 
you have set up on your Google+ account. Tap an album to see the 
photographs inside. Tap again on a specific photo you want to look at 
more closely, and the photo will appear in a near full-screen view. By 
pressing the Option menu icon (on Android devices), you’ll see the 
same options shown in Figure 9.14.
Circles 
The Circles section of the Google+ mobile app allows you to 
maintain a fairly high level of control over your Google+ Circles. 
The main page is broken down into two tabs, Circles and People.
People. The People tab displays everyone you have circled on Google+ 
(Figure 9.18). The individuals are listed in alphabetical order and have the 
names of the circles they are in displayed below their name. At the top of 
the screen is the “Find & invite people” button, which allows you to find 
and connect with other people on Google+. It first displays a suggested 
list of people for you to circle, but by pressing the magnifying glass in the 
top-right corner of your screen, you can search for individuals manually.
Circles. The Circles tab displays all of the circles you have created for your 
Google+ account in alphabetical order (Figure 9.19). If you want to create 
a new circle, simply tap the Create New Circle button at the very bottom 
of your screen.
If you tap one of these circles, a new screen appears that acts as a filter for 
that specific circle: 
•
People. The People tab (Figure 9.20) allows you to view all of the indi-
viduals and pages that you have added to the currently selected circle. 
By using a long finger press on a specific profile, you’ll have the option 
of removing that profile from the circle. 

Google+ for Photographers
198
At the bottom of the screen is an Add People button that allows you 
to add individuals and pages to the circle you are currently in. In the 
top right of the screen are two icons. The icon that looks like a pen 
and paper outline allows you to create a new post that will be shared 
with only the currently selected circle. The dialogue box with the + sign 
allows you to invite the entire circle to a group text chat via the Mes-
senger feature on the Google+ mobile app.
•
Posts. The Posts tab (Figure 9.21) allows you to view content that was 
published from only the selected circle.
•
Photos. The Photos tab (Figure 9.22) offers a stream of 50 image 
thumbnails of the most recent photos uploaded only by those in the 
selected circle.
Figure 9.18 The People tab in 
the main Circle section displays 
everyone you have added to 
your Google+ Circles. It also 
allows you to add and invite new 
people to your circles.
Figure 9.19 The Circles tab 
displays all of the circles you 
have created on Google+ in 
alphabetical order, making it 
easy to find the circle you want 
to interact with.
Figure 9.20 The People tab 
allows you to view, interact 
with, and remove any Google+ 
profile that is inside the currently 
selected circle.

199
+9  •  Google+ on the Go 
Messenger
Messenger is a group text chat feature that is unique to the 
Google+ mobile app (Figure 9.23) and is not currently available 
on the desktop Web version of Google+. It allows you to easily 
host an online conversation with multiple individuals from all over 
the world. 
To access Messenger, tap the Messenger icon on your home screen. A 
screen appears that displays all of the Messenger group conversations that 
you are currently in or have been invited to. To begin 
or to continue interacting with one of these group 
chats, simply tap the chat in question. When it comes 
to controlling these group chats, you have multiple 
options (Figure 9.24) available to you at the top of 
your conversation screen and in the Option menu:
Start a Hangout. Tap the icon that looks like a movie 
camera at the top of your screen to initiate a Google+ 
hangout and invite everyone inside the current Mes-
senger chat.
Figure 9.21 The Posts tab 
allows you to view all content 
published only by individuals in 
the currently selected circle.
Figure 9.22 The Photos tab 
displays photos that have been 
uploaded from individuals only 
in the currently selected circle.
Figure 9.23 In Messenger you 
can not only initiate group text 
chats with people, but you can 
start a Google+ hangout with 
those you are chatting with.
Colby’s Quick Tips
The Google+ Messenger feature is a 
phenomenal tool to help you collabo-
rate on projects or plan a photography 
trip with a group of friends. All of the 
chat logs can be saved, and everyone 
can chat in real time to discuss impor-
tant aspects of an upcoming trip, such 
as whose responsibility it is to bring 
the tent.

Google+ for Photographers
200
Add People. Tap the icon that looks like a dialogue box with a + symbol if 
you want to add more people to the Messenger chat.
•
Option menu. Tap the Option menu icon to view more options:
•
Edit name. If you created the group chat, you have the ability to 
edit the name of the Messenger chat.
•
Mute. Use this option if you don’t want to receive message notifica-
tions from a specified conversation.
•
Leave. When you leave a chat, you’ll no longer receive messages 
from that conversation and won’t be able to access or view the his-
tory of the conversation unless you are invited back. 
•
Hide. When you hide a conversation, you remove the chat listing 
from your main Messenger stream. If you start a conversation with 
that person again, you can pick up where you left off. This is only 
possible with a one-on-one conversation.
To start your own conversation, tap the icon in the top of the main Messen-
ger screen that looks like a dialogue box with a + sign. The “New conver-
sation” screen appears. Simply type the name, email address, or circle that 
you want to send a chat invite to (Figure 9.25). When you are ready, type 
your message in the box located at the bottom of the screen where you 
see the words “Type a message.”
Figure 9.24 You 
have multiple 
options when it 
comes to interact-
ing with a Messen-
ger group chat.

201
+9  •  Google+ on the Go 
Also from within a Messenger conversation, you can share a photo already 
on your phone or take one right there and then (Figure 9.26).
To share photos, just follow these steps.
1. Tap the Camera icon located in the bottom left of your screen.
2. Decide if you want to take a new photo or choose a photo from your 
mobile device.
3. When you’ve selected the photo you want to share, tap the Choose 
button (Figure 9.27).
Colby’s Quick Tips
Because of Google’s restrictions on 
the number of people you can notify 
in a single post on Google+, you can 
only send a Messenger chat request to 
a maximum of 100 people initially. A 
circle that contains over 100 individuals 
will not work.
Figure 9.25 You can choose the 
name of a Google+ circle or an 
individual when selecting who 
you want to invite to a Messen-
ger conversation.
Figure 9.27 After you have 
selected the image you want to 
share, just tap Choose to share 
the photo with everyone in the 
Messenger chat.
Figure 9.26 It only takes a few 
simple steps to share a photo 
in a Messenger conversation.

Google+ for Photographers
202
60
44
51
Jacob James: 
What Google+ Means to You
As a young photographer based in Stoke-on-Trent, 
United Kingdom, I have a passion for black-and-
white landscape and documentary portraiture. 
Currently, I am looking to expand my work into the 
NGO sector so that my images can hopefully make 
a difference to those less fortunate. My photo-
graphy is inspired greatly by the incredible work of 
Steve McCurry, Ansel Adams, and Chris Rainier.
Website: http://jacobjamesphotography.co.uk
Google+: https://plus.google.com/ 
110426489614941682595 
Essay
By nature, photography connects people. 
Whether that is in the offices of Wall Street or 
the streets of Mumbai, one photograph can bring 
people together. Throughout the last century, 
images and photographs have transformed the 
lives of nearly every person on the planet. Pho-
tographs have been credited for changing laws, 
stopping wars, increasing aid funding, and many 
more amazing feats. 
Google+ is rapidly transforming into an incred-
ible platform to bring photographers worldwide 
together to discuss and debate subjects that 
matter. It is not always just about their work. I’ve 
seen some extraordinary debates on political and 
technology topics as well. As a platform, Google+ 
allows photographers to gain inspiration, critique, 
advice, and new friends along the way. Google+ 
has opened new pathways and opportunities I 
could have only dreamt about 12 months ago. 
It has also spawned some amazing projects and 
organizations that have started to make a differ-
ence to the world already. 
The key ingredient to Google+ is the community; 
the people on Google+ are what make it what 
it is. Google has given us a near blank canvas to 
create a social network ourselves, and as creative 
people, we have relished that. It does not force us 
into doing things a certain way like other sites do; 
we have all shared the task of creating an excit-
ing, creative, inspirational, and worldwide com-
munity where everybody, no matter who they are, 
can contribute and learn.

203
+9  •  Google+ on the Go 
Hangouts 
Although there is currently no dedicated icon on the home screen 
for hangouts on the Google+ mobile app, you still have the ability 
to both join and start a hangout. 
To join a hangout. As you scroll through your stream via your Google+ 
mobile app, you’ll see a post that has a blue button marked “Join hangout” 
(Figure 9.28). When you tap that button, a screen appears that allows you 
to adjust the position of your cell phone to make sure you are in the best 
light to be visible to others in the hangout before officially entering the 
hangout. When you are ready, tap the “Join hangout” button to join.
To start a hangout. To start a hangout, you must be inside the Messen-
ger feature of the Google+ mobile application. Once you have started or 
joined a Messenger conversation with at least one other individual, you’ll 
notice an icon at the top of the screen that looks like a movie camera. 
When you tap that icon, you’ll launch a hangout and automatically invite 
everyone in the current conversation. Note that you are still limited to only 
a total of ten individuals inside a hangout, so the first ten people to join 
the hangout will be allowed to participate.
When you are in a hangout, you’ll notice thumbnail images of the other 
hangout participants at the top of your screen, and your live camera will 
be shown at the bottom (Figure 9.29). If you tap one of those thumbnails, 
a small menu appears containing four options:
Google+ Messenger Settings
As fun as the Google+ Messenger feature is in the Google+ mobile app, you 
probably do not want to accept a chat invite from just anyone on Google+.  
To adjust your Google+ mobile app settings, complete the following steps.
1. Tap the Option button on an Android device (Menu on iOS).
2. Tap the Settings button.
3. Scroll down to the section titled Messenger Notifications.
4. Tap “Who can message you.”
Here you’ll have three options to choose from:
•
Anyone. Includes everyone on Google+
•
Your circles. Includes anyone that you have circled on Google+
•
Extended circles. Includes everyone in your Google+ circles as well as  
everyone in their circles

Google+ for Photographers
204
•
Profile. This option takes you to the person’s Google+ profile while you 
remain in the mobile hangout.
•
Pin Video. This option pins the main video screen on this individual. 
With no one “pinned,” the Google+ mobile app will try to automatically 
change the focus of the main screen onto who is speaking at that time.
•
Mute. This option mutes the selected individual.
•
Block. This option is the same as the Block feature in Google+. By 
blocking the person, you will no longer see or hear the individual and 
the person will be added to your Google+ blocked list, effectively cut-
ting off all communication.
At the bottom of the main Hangout screen are four icons that allow you to 
control your experience in the Google+ mobile hangout. From left to right, 
you’ll see:
•
Mute Audio. This option mutes your own audio.
•
Mute Video. This option mutes your video, covering it with a blank 
black screen.
•
Switch Cameras. Most cell photos have front- and back-facing cameras. 
Enabling this feature switches the camera you want to be in use for the 
hangout.
•
Exit Hangout. This option completely removes you from the Google+ 
mobile hangout.
Figure 9.28 Pressing the “Join hangout” button 
allows you to jump into any hangout you come 
across in your streams on the Google+ mobile 
application.
Figure 9.29 Jump-
ing into a Google+ 
hangout from your 
mobile device is a 
great way to stay 
connected with 
your followers. I’ve 
hosted hangouts 
from my cell phone 
while shooting a 
sunset in the moun-
tains of Colorado.

205
+9  •  Google+ on the Go 
The Value of Staying Connected
I’ll be the first to admit that there are times when I truly enjoy my soli-
tude. No smart phones. No email. No Photoshop. Just the beauty of this 
planet, my camera gear, and me. As a landscape, travel, and humanitarian 
photographer who works well off the grid at times, I am used to working 
in environments with no electricity, Internet, or even clean drinking water. 
However, even in these situations, I always plan ahead, figuring out new 
and creative ways to stay engaged with those who follow my photography 
work (Figure 9.30).
Much like life, social networking and marketing are 
dynamic and always changing. On Google+ alone, 
well over 100 million people connect, share, and post 
various types of content. As mentioned in Chapter 2, 
not only are original and creative ideas vitally impor-
tant to building a brand and a following, but so is 
consistency. In the digital world, taking a break for a 
week can have a lasting impact. To stay relevant, you 
have to consistently push out content that keeps your 
followers intrigued. Although maintaining that interest 
on the road is certainly challenging, it offers a great 
opportunity to take your followers with you.
Figure 9.30 When 
I’m working in a 
region such as the 
Himalayas, I have 
to plan ahead 
when it comes to 
documenting my 
trip, especially 
because electricity 
is scarce. I often 
carry a solar panel, 
a satellite phone, 
and a GPS tracking 
device, which allow 
me to send short 
communications 
back home and 
give my followers 
the ability to follow 
my GPS coordi-
nates in real time.
Colby’s Quick Tips
Along with consistency, original and 
creative ideas are worth their weight in 
gold on social networks. It is difficult to 
stand out if you are constantly doing 
the same things as everyone else. 
Think outside the box and come up 
with unique ways to keep your follow-
ers engaged. 

Google+ for Photographers
206
Taking Your Followers Behind the Scenes
Let’s face it; the idea of being a photographer is very romanticized. Often, 
people think that my life consists purely of traveling around the world and 
documenting exotic people and places. In reality, there is almost always a 
lot more to an image than just the final result. People want to know that 
backstory. They want to know the process. 
Although not everyone might have experienced a stomach virus because of 
tainted meat while on a photo trip or camped out for six days in snow and 
rain while waiting for the right light in Southern Patagonia, there is always 
a story to tell. For example, while taking a hike through your local state 
park, you might want to take notes on the challenges you faced when try-
ing to photograph the wildlife in the area and how you overcame them. 
The Google+ mobile application provides you with multiple opportunities 
to share content and connect with Google+ users. You can send in trip 
reports, comment and interact with followers, and use the GPS radio on 
your phone to pinpoint your locations while you are on the move.
This “extra” content helps your followers develop a deeper connection 
with you and your work. People like to feel involved, so tell your story!
Engaging in Mobile Hangouts
As discussed in Chapter 8, Google+ hangouts are one of the most unique 
and compelling aspects of Google+. Having the ability to video confer-
ence with up to nine other individuals (ten in all) from all over the globe 
is a great feature that allows you to connect with people in a much more 
intimate way than you can on any other network. However, just because 
you are away from your computer, doesn’t mean that you have to miss all 
the fun.
As mentioned earlier, with the Google+ mobile app 
for both iOS and Android devices, you have the abil-
ity to join any hangout in progress as well as start 
your own hangouts through the Messenger feature. 
I’ve had people jump in my Google+ hangouts from 
a train, in a car, and while walking around their neigh-
borhood. As long as you have a solid 3G connection, 
it should make for a very pleasant experience.
Colby’s Quick Tips
Although you can only start your own 
Google+ hangout within the Google+ 
Messenger feature on a mobile device, 
there is a workaround if you have a 
laptop. If your cell phone allows for 
tethering, you can connect your cell 
phone to your laptop to give it Inter-
net access. I’ve hosted many Google+ 
hangouts from my laptop while up in 
the mountains in locations with 3G cell 
service.

207
+9  •  Google+ on the Go 
Behind-the-scenes Images
Photographers often are so focused on the art 
they are attempting to create that they forget to 
document the process. I always make sure that 
I have my pocket-sized point and shoot camera 
or my cell phone easily accessible when working 
in the field. These portable cameras take pretty 
good images because of the advancements in 
technology, and they are quick to operate and 
easy to store away.
One of my favorite behind-the-scenes images 
is of my camera setup. While I am shooting, I’ll 
often leave on the LCD on the back of my main 
camera to display one of the images I recently 
captured. This allows the viewer to see what I 
saw as I was capturing a scene (Figure 9.31).
Figure 9.31 When photographing Patagonia in southern Argentina, I was able to take this image of 
my camera setup as I captured the sunrise one morning. Instead of having to wait months before I had 
time to process the image, I was able to share this image with my followers not long after I took it, 
allowing them to come along with me on my adventure.

Google+ for Photographers
208
67
63
Elia Locardi:  
A Photographer’s Perspective
Armed with his camera, tripod, and no doubt 
a giant cup of coffee, Elia Locardi traverses the 
globe full time looking for interesting photo-
graphic opportunities and the stories that go 
along with capturing them. With each photograph, 
his goal is to share his vision with others so they 
can experience these places the way he does, 
full of color and emotion, depth, and texture. He 
hopes to inspire people to travel, to visit these 
beautiful locations, and to fall in love with the 
beauty of the world.
Website: http://blamethemonkey.com 
Google+: https://plus.google.com/u/0/ 
112957708071337353347/posts
Q As a travel photographer, why do you feel 
it is important to stay connected while on the 
road? 
Well, after flying over 220,000 miles in 2011, it 
would be easy to just disconnect from everyone 
and live in my own little jet-lagged bubble. With 
this type of rigorous travel schedule and a busi-
ness to run, staying connected is one of the big-
gest challenges I face. Because I’m nearly always 
on the road, it can prove difficult at times depend-
ing on the country I’m in and the availability of 
a reliable Internet connection. But it’s extremely 
important to me, and my business, to stay in close 
contact with all of my clients, online followers, and 
friends. Above all, I want them to know that I’m 
always available, even though I might be 10,000 
miles away. This means responding to their ques-
tions, comments, and mentions; interacting on 
posts by others; and maintaining a connection 
with the online community, no matter where I am 
in the world.
Q Using the Google+ mobile app, how do you 
stay engaged?
Although I spend a lot of my time in different 
locations around the world, much of it’s spent 
traveling between them. Often, with short lay-
overs, I don’t have much time available to get 
work done online, so I can’t always pull out my 
laptop to respond to messages. With these brief 
windows of time, I have to be a social media ninja, 
using the Google+ mobile app for my iPhone to 
stay in contact. When time is tight, it is the sharp-
est weapon in the ninja arsenal. It allows me to 
quickly make and reply to comments and men-
tions, check out the posts of people I’m following, 
and to simply maintain contact with the online 
Google+ community.

209
+9  •  Google+ on the Go 
91
44
Q What are some of your favorite Google+ 
mobile app features?
I’m consistently impressed with the responsive-
ness of the Google+ mobile app. The Notifica-
tions menu updates extremely fast, giving me 
the opportunity to keep up with the interactions 
on my posts in real time. With a quick scroll and 
a tap, I can easily reply to all of the comments, 
questions, and interactions.
The other key feature lies in its simplicity. 
Although it’s feature-rich, there are no compli-
cated menus to navigate. Everything is right there 
for you, making the Google+ mobile app feel very 
intuitive. I can easily get the job done with a lim-
ited amount of time, which is an absolute must for 
my crazy life on the go.
Q What piece of advice do you have for photo­
graphers just getting started with Google+?
Don’t ever feel like it’s too late to start. I know it 
can be a little intimidating when you see some of 
the photographers with large followings. Keep in 
mind that the one thing they all have in common 
is that they all began by creating a Google+ pro-
file and uploading their photos.
Take the first step by fully developing your 
Google+ profile and populating your photo galler-
ies with your best images. This is your first point 
of contact with the Google+ community, so make 
sure that it accurately represents you and your 
photography style.
Take time to interact and build connections. 
Google+ is an online community, and like any 
community, you will find you gain connections by 
being connected. So be a participant, respond to 
comments and mentions, and stay engaged in the 
community around you.

Google+ for Photographers
210
66
80
Mark Waslick: 
What Google+ Means to You
Mark Waslick is a Vermont-based photographer 
who focuses primarily on landscapes and nature. 
Whether capturing grand landscapes or subtle 
details, his photography portrays a passion for the 
outdoors that began at a young age. Although 
New England is home, he travels whenever the 
opportunity presents itself to discover what the 
world has to offer.
Website: http://mwwphotography.500px.com/#/0 
Google+: https://plus.google.com/ 
u/0/113944846007907559686 
Essay
Google+ is an extraordinary community for photo-
graphers, but I can only describe what it is to me. 
I’m a relative newcomer to both photography and 
social networks, so when I first created a minimal 
Google+ profile, I was equally unsure of my art 
and my place in Google+. I only hoped to become 
a better photographer, and Google+ was where 
the best photographers were sharing their work 
and their ideas. What I soon found, however, was 
much more. Here was a community of wildly cre-
ative and passionate artists who were effusive in 
their support and generosity. Their passion was 
inspirational. Surrounded by this incredible work 
and supportive mentors, my own photography 
improved, not at a crawl as it had been, but by 
leaps and bounds. I began to share a few of my 
photographs and was honestly surprised when 
they attracted a few comments. I started to share 
with increasing frequency, not for the comments 
or the +1’s, but because I found that it completed 
the creative process for me. Google+ gave me 
the outlet that I needed. Nowhere else can one 
find the equality in which established, successful 
artists literally share the same page as flounder-
ing  novices—and they are all welcome. Once 
you realize this, it sets you free. I know it did for 
me. Rather than Google+ being an extraordinary 
community for photographers, I’ve found that 
Google+ has become an extraordinary community 
because of the photographers.
I continue to be inspired by what I find on 
Google+, and it pushes me. Not a day goes by 
that I don’t find inspiration in the raw beauty and 
humanity that appears in my stream. I discover 
where I want to take my photography and how I 
might get there. And that’s exciting!

211
Index
C
Camera feature, Google+ mobile, 
191
Chat feature. See also Messenger 
feature
Hangouts, 172
joining with Google Chat, 184
Hangouts with Extras, Group 
Chat, 176
Circles feature, 9–10, 12
connections, 81
creating, 80–84
definition, 76–77
Extended Circles, 90, 122
filters, 77–78, 192–193
Google+ mobile, 192–193, 
197–199
limits, 81, 88
organizing, 77–78, 82, 94
potential types, 84
privacy controls, 48–49, 57, 
69–70, 122–126
profiles
Profile information, 51
removing with Circles page, 
86–87
removing with Profiles page, 
87
Public Circles, 89–90, 122
renaming, 84–85
reordering, 85–86
setup guidelines, 79
sharing, 88
social relationships, 63
Cohen, Dave, 18–19
comments
disabling, 125–126
Google+ mobile, 193–195, 
208–209
posting, 97–98
reporting spam, 112
community managers
Google+, 17
Google+ mobile, 21
“Contributor to” section, Profiles, 
53–54
copyright of photographs, 16–17
Creative Kit, 153–154
Index
A
About tab
Google+, 56–57
Google+ mobile, 197
account information. See also
Profile; sign-up process
navigation bar menu, 67–68
Additional Profile Information 
page, 44
aesthetics
importance of, 10–11
layout and design, 11–12
album organization
Google+ mobile, 194–195
image covers, 157–159
moving photos between 
albums, 151–153
renaming, 155–156
reordering display of, 159–161
Android, Google+ mobile, 188, 
203, 206
B
backstories, 120
behind-the-scenes view, 
206–207
original and creative content, 
130–131, 138
“Best New Technology Podcast” 
TWiT Photo, 100
Blame The Monkey website, 208
Block feature
from hangouts, 115, 204
from posts, 114–115
from profiles, 113–114
results of, 113
boldface text, 98, 121
brands/branding for 
photographers
content’s importance, 27–29
creating, 26–27
engaging others, 31–32
focus on others, 29, 31
sharing personal info, 30
curators, 143
D
Daily Photography Themes, 139, 
141–142
Dell, Michael, 167–168
Di Fruscia, Patrick, 56, 144–145
E
email/messages, 51
Extended Circles, 90, 122
F
Facebook versus Google+, 4–6, 
11
feedback buttons
Google+, 23
Google+ mobile, 191, 196
filters
for circles, 192–193
in searches, 106–107
for streams, 94
500px versus Google+, 4–6
Flickr versus Google+, 4–6, 11
G
Gallery feature, Google+ mobile, 
191
The Giving Lens page, 46
Gmail, “Search Plus Your World” 
initiative, 7
Google+
+1 button, 8
interacting with content, 
58–59
recommending posts in 
Streams, 102
aesthetics
importance of, 10–11
layout and design, 11–12
community managers, 17, 21
core concepts, 6
Counter website, 81
Creative Kit, 153–154

Google+ for Photographers
212
basics, 180–181
changing social marketing, 
167–168, 180
Hangouts with Extras
features, 177–179
joining, 184–185
layout, 176
starting, 182, 184
Hartman, Grayson, 139
hashtags, 109–110
Daily Photography Themes, 
139, 141–142
HDR photography, 35–36, 167
I
Ignore feature, 115
from Circles, 116–117
from Incoming streams,  
116–117
through Notifications, 116
Images from Posts photo albums, 
122
Instant Upload feature, 121, 131, 
195
interest networks
definition, 5–6
versus social networks, 4–6
iOS and iPhone, Google+ mobile, 
188, 203, 206
IPTC (International Press 
Telecommunications Council), 
17
J
James, Jacob, 202
Jarvie, Scott, 35, 82–83, 90
K
keywords, 7
Klimek, Jarek, 143
Koloskov, Alex, 162–163
L
Leslie, Eric, 141–142
Locardi, Elia, 35, 208–209
locations/GPS
filters, 106–107
Google+ mobile, 190–192
sharing, 121–122
Google Chat
community manager, 21
joining Hangouts, 184–185
Google Gmail, “Search Plus Your 
World” initiative, 7–8
Google Maps, 21
snippets, 124
Google Offers, snippets, 124
Google Picasa Web Albums, 
album organization
image covers, 157–159
moving photos between 
albums, 151–153
reordering display of, 159–161
Google Product Search, 20
snippets, 124
GPS locations
filters, 106–107
Google+, posts, 121–122
Google+ mobile, 190–192
Gramann, Katherine, 21
Group/As website, 81
Gundotra, Vic, 21
H
Hall, Catherine, 30, 100–101
hands-on approach, 17
community managers, 17, 21
employee interactions, 21–22
user feedback, 23
Hangouts feature, 8–9
blocking/muting users, 171, 
204
changing social marketing, 
167–168
community manager, 21
creative uses, 169
Google+ mobile, 203–204, 
206
importance, 166–167
joining, 203–204
from Notification box, 184–
185
from posts in streams, 103, 
184–185
through Google Chat, 185
layout, 170–171
personal connections, 64
settings, 173
starting, 203–204
with Hang Out button, 182
from Streams, 103, 183
tabs, 172–173
Hangouts On Air
curators, 143
Daily Photography Themes, 
139, 141–142
evolution, 20
versus Facebook, Twitter, 
Flickr, and 500px, 4–6, 11
feedback buttons, 23
hands-on approach, 17
community managers, 17, 21
employee interactions, 21–22
user feedback, 23
interactions
+1 button, 58–59
backstories, 120, 130–131, 
138
behind-the-scenes view, 
206–207
controlling, 9–10, 125–126
with Google employees, 
21–22
increasing, 135, 137–138
social, 8–10
interest networks
definition, 5–6
versus social networks, 4–6
navigation bar
account information menu, 
67–68
icons, 66
logos, 65
networking, 22–23
Pages
changing settings, 72–73
managers, 73
versus user profiles, 46–47
photographers
brands/branding, 26–32
rights of, 13–14
photography, largest 
community, 6
photo walks, 22–23
product integration, 68, 124
role of, 6
search focus, 6–8
“Search Plus Your World” 
initiative, 7
sign-up process, 40–41
Additional Profile Information 
page, 44
Suggested User List page, 
43–44
Suggestions page, 42
TOS (Terms of Service) 
Agreement, 14–15
Google Books, snippets, 124

213
Index
focus on others, 29, 31
sharing personal info, 30
compression, 11–12
copyrights, 16–17
Creative Kit, 153–154
Daily Photography Themes, 
139, 141–142
display size, 12–13, 128, 130, 
163
editing, 153–154
metadata, 16–17
organizing, 132
albums, image covers, 157–
159
albums, moving photos 
between, 151–153
albums, renaming, 155–156
albums, reordering display of, 
159–161
image descriptions,  
148–150
moving photos between 
albums, 151–153
photo walks, 22–23
Plus Extract, 143
uploading/sharing
backstories, 120, 130–131, 
138, 206–207
file sizes, 163
Instant Upload feature, 121, 
131, 195
from phones, 121, 131–132, 
195
from Photos page, 128–133
from previously uploaded 
images, 133
from Profiles, 134–135
Photography By Varina website, 
60
Photos page, 12
community manager, 21–22
core feature, 63–64
displaying album covers, 159
Google+ mobile, 194–196
Profile tab, 57–59
settings
Google+, 71–72
Google+ mobiles, 191
uploading/sharing photos 
from, 128–133
photo walks, 22–23
Picasa Web Albums, album 
organization
image covers, 157–159
muting, 104
tagging, 99
O
onOne Software, 36
organizing albums/photos
albums
image covers, 157–159
renaming, 155–156
reordering display of, 159–161
Google+ mobile, 194–195
photos, moving between 
albums, 151–153
P
Pages
changing settings, 72–73
managers, 73
versus user profiles, 46–47
Patel, Jay, 32, 60–61, 120
Patel, Varina, 32, 60–61
Perfect Photo Suite editing 
software, 36
Phillips, Chip, 31
Photo Extract website, 143
Photographer of the Day, 31
photographers
rights, 13–14
copyrights, 16–17
TOS (Terms of Service) 
Agreement, 14–15
social marketing
business strategies, 34–35
planning, 34
quality versus quantity of 
followers, 33–34
photographers’ perspectives
Cohen, Dave, 18–19
Di Fruscia, Patrick, 144–145
Hall, Catherine, 100–101
Jarvie, Scott, 82–83
Koloskov, Alex, 162–163
Locardi, Elia, 208–209
Matiash, Brian, 36–37
Patel, Jay, 60–61
Patel, Varina, 60–61
Ratcliff, Trey, 174–175
photographs/photography
brands
content’s importance, 27–29
creating, 26–27
engaging others, 31–32
M
Maps, Google, 21
snippets, 124
Matiash, Brian, 28, 36–37
Messenger feature. See also Chat 
feature
Hangouts, 203, 206
options, 199–201
settings, 191, 203
metadata, 16–17
mobile application, Google+
Circles, 197–198
community manager, 21
Hangouts, 203–204, 206
home screen
Notification box, 189–190, 
209
Options menu, 190–191
Search, 188–189
Instant Upload feature, 121, 
131, 195
Messenger
Hangouts, 203, 206
options, 199–201
settings, 191, 203
Photos, 194–196
platforms, 188
staying connected
behind-the-scenes 
documentation, 206–207
hangouts, 206
value of, 205, 208
Streams, 191–193
Musk, Daria, 167–168
N
navigation bars. See also 
Notification box; Search box; 
Share box
Google+
account information menu, 
67–68
icons, 66
logos, 65
Google+ mobile, 189–192
networking and photo walks, 22
Notification box
Google+ mobile, 189–191, 
209
hangouts, joining, 184–185
navigation bar, 67, 70–71
posts
circles, 122

Google+ for Photographers
214
Optimization), 7
Share box
navigation bar, 67–68
posts in Streams, 98–99, 
121–123
Shaw, Mike, 137
sign-up process, 40–41
Additional Profile Information 
page, 44
Suggested User List page, 
43–44
Suggestions page, 42
SmugMug website, 167
snippets, 124
social networks
definition, 4–5
versus interest networks, 4
spam
deleting automatically, 112
reporting, 110
comments, 112
Google+ accounts, 111
posts, 111
Stein, Toby, 21
Streams feature, 62
Google+ mobile, 191–193
Hangouts, starting/joining, 
103, 184–185, 203–204
Hangouts On Air live streams, 
180
Hangouts with Extras
features, 177–179
joining, 184–185
layout, 176
starting, 182, 184
how streams work, 94–96
posts
comments, 97–98, 125–126
controlling interactions with, 
125–126
creating, 121–123
disabling comments, 125–126
editing, 123, 125
formatting text, 98, 121
Google+ mobile, 190–191
joining Daily Photography 
Themes, 139, 141–142
locking, 125–126
muting, 103–104
“Photos from posts” albums, 
159–161
recommending with +1 
button, 102
Ripples, 126–127
left sidebar, 50–51
right sidebar, 52–54
scrapbook images, 52
links from Photo Plus website, 
143
versus Pages, 46–47
privacy controls, 48–49, 57, 
69–70
“Profile photos” albums,  
159–161
tabs
+1, 58–59
About, 56–57
Photos, 57–59
Posts, 54–55
Videos, 58–59
Tagline, 45
uploading/sharing photos 
from, 134–135
Public Circles, 89–90, 122
publishing content. See 
photographs/photography, 
uploading/sharing; posts
R
Ratcliff, Trey, 27–28, 163, 167, 
174–175
“Recommended links” section, 
Profiles, 54
Recommended Users website, 81
registration of photographs, 16
Ripples, 126–127
Rose, Brian, 21–22
Russell, Michael, 141
S
Schweighardt, Melaine, 91
Search box, 66
Google+
filters, 106–107
hashtags, 109–110
saving searches, 101, 108–109
Trends, 107
using, 105–106
Google+ mobile, 188–189
search engine, Google’s 
leadership, 6–8
Search Engine Optimization 
(SEO), 7
“Search Plus Your World” initiative, 
7–8
SEO (Search Engine 
moving photos between 
albums, 151–153
reordering display of, 159–161
platforms, Google + mobile, 188
+1 button
Google+, 8
interacting with content, 
58–59
recommending posts in 
Streams, 102
Google+ mobile, 194
Plus Extract, 143
posts, 54–55
comments
creating, 97–98
disabling, 125–126
controlling interactions with, 
125–126
creating
Google+, 121–123
Google+ mobile, 190–191
editing, 123, 125
formatting text, 98, 121
joining Daily Photography 
Themes, 139, 141–142
locking, 125–126
muting, 103–104
“Photos from posts” albums, 
159–161
recommending with +1 
button, 102
Ripples, 126–127
scheduling, 140–141
sharing, 67–68, 98–99, 120–
123
starting/joining Hangouts, 103
tagging in, 98–99
tracking, 126–127
photo views, 157
priority controls, streams, 96
privacy controls
Google+
Circles, 48–49
Profiles, 57, 69–70
sharing posts, 122–126
Google+ mobile, 191
Profile page, 45, 51
Additional Profile Information 
page, 44
Circles
adding Profiles, 80–81
removing Profiles from, 86–87
Google+ mobile, 196–197
layout
image, 49–50

215
Index
“Search Plus Your World” 
initiative, 7
scheduling, 140–141
sharing, 67–68, 98–99, 121–
123
tagging in, 98–99
tracking, 126–127, 157
strikethrough text, 98, 121
Stuck In Customs website, 27, 
167, 174
Suggested User List page, 43–44
Suggestions page, 42
T
text formatting in posts, 98, 121
TOS (Terms of Service) 
Agreement
Google+, 14–15
Google+ mobile, 191
Trends, 107
TWiT Photo, 100–101
Twitter versus Google+, 4–6
Type of Content filter, 106
U
underscored text, 98, 121
U.S. Copyright Office, 16
user feedback, 23
V
video conferencing, Hangouts, 
9, 167
videos, 58–59
compression for hangouts, 
173
uploading, 136
Villalobos, Natalie, 21
W
Web App, Google+ mobile, 188
Welcome page, 5
“What’s hot” link, 108
Y
YouTube
Hangouts, sharing videos, 172
Hangouts On Air feature, 
180–181

